THE
I ST

O R

O F

R

V L. IL
H

Y
A

M

E

I C

A.

THE
I S T

0

R

V

O F
M

E
WILLIAM

R

I C

ROBERTSON, D.D,
PRINCIPAL of the University of EDINBURGH, and HISTORIOGRAPHER

to his MAJESTY for SCOTLAND.
VOLUME THE SECOND.

D U B L IN:
Printed for Mcffrs. PRICE,WH ITESTONE, W. WATSON, R. CROSS, CORCORAN,

SLEAT.R, CAMBERLAINI:, POTTS, J. HOEY, U'II.LIAMS, 1.. LYNCH,

M IHAY, S. WrsoN, T. STEWART, W'. COI.I.ES, W. WILSON,

MONCRIEFI1, ARMITAGI, HALLIIEAD, WA1.KIER, ESISHAW

FLIN, BURNET, FAUL.KNER, JENKIN, BEATTY, Gll.BERT,

VALLANCE, WOGAN, E. CROSS, MILLS, GRUJI.InER,

R. STLWART, WHITE, M'KIEN.Y, and MAGCE,

M DCC LXXVII.

H
A

By

A.

'1 , 'L _

,

_

_J *

' __..~ '
)

H1W1/ O

_sru

._-i Ji __W

IT/

\\

' S\/^ _

^<<^,^^ ^^
(2

iiS" "~'" "' '

000

C)
1 'I 17

- -

# BOOK V.

T I E
I S T

0

R Y

F
A

M

E

R

IC

A.

B O O K

W I E N Grijalva returned to Cuba, he found the arma-
ment cftined to attempt the conquefl of that rich country
which he had difcovcred, almost complete. Not only ambi-
tion, but avarice, had urged Velasquez to haftcn his prepa-
rations; and having fiich a profpcdt of gratifying b.Ithl, !i
had advan:ced confidcrable ums out of his private t;rtL;nc t,-
v.rn-ds defraying the cxpcnce. At the fame tiim, Ih c'.rtclt
his ilfluciicc as governor, in engaging the miit (di:T ;ii;ili
pcrfons in the colony to undertake the fcrvic . At tiii
\vi;,: tll fipirit of the Spanish nation was a(lv nturou; t c.-
cJF;, :t n ;u,I!r of fl iiers, eagcr to embark in i ; v (1cii; ' t-
tcLpri', I )on :;;c:ired. But it was not so cly t l ind a p 'ril;-
q; li'i^l t,) t ik:; the command in an explceitio o ib InwvI! :.i-

rl;tmia; and t chiiractcr of Vl.ifqeiiC, wh,) lad t'; I
of o n ;i j'., ' rc.lttly icrceafcd tili difficulty of tleC t .i.

., "; C)OT 1. I.
H

B 0 0 K

V.

1518.

Preparations
of \ 'chl;lji ' .
for i:,v: dir:
NeLv; Spr't n.
T V i.. II.

B

7 :

.
, u

n o K Though of most aspiring ambition, and not deflitute of talcn.s

V. -
-/ ,for government, lie possessed neither such courage, nor fich
'5'tS vigour and aivity of mind, as to undertake in person the con-

dud of the armament which he was preparing. In this emba;r-
raffing situation, lie formed the chimerical scheme not only of at-
chieving great exploits by a deputy, but of securing to himself
the glory of conquefls which were to be made by another. In
the execution of this plan, he fondly aimed at rcconciling con-
traditions. He was solicitous to chufe a commander of intrenid
resolution, and of superior abilities, because he knew tfc to
be rcquiiitc in order to ensure success; but, at the fime time,
fiom the jealousy natural to little minds, hie wised him to b.'
of a spirit so tame and obfcquious, as to be entirely dependant
on his will. But when he came to apply those ideas in form-
ing an opinion concerning the several officers who occurred to
his thoughts as worthy of being entrusted with the command,
he soon perceived that it was impofible to find such incom-
patible qualities united in one characSer. Such as were diftin-
guifhed for courage and talents, were too high-fpirited to be
passive instruments in his hand. Those who appeared more
gentle and tractable, were deflitute of capacity, and unequal to
the charge. This augmented his perplexity and his fears. He
deliberated long, and with much solicitude, and was fiill waver-
ing in his choice, when Amador de Lares, the royal treasurer
in Cuba, and Andres Duero, his own fecrctary, the two per-
sons in whom he chiefly confided, were encouraged by this ir-
resolution to propose a new candidate, and supported their re-
commcndation with such assiduity and address, that, no less
fatally for Velasquez than happily for their country, it proved
successful ".

1) B. Diaz, c. r9. Gomara Cron, c. 7. Iicrrcra, dec z. lib. iii. c. I.

THE
2

Tunr man whom they pointd out to him was Fcrnnndo 13 0\( K

Cortes. I-Ie was born at Medellin, a finall town i.i Efrema- .--
clura, in the year one thousand four hundred and eighty-fvy, ie. pp;irl
and descended fiom a family of nobl! blood, Lut of v-ry -

i '

derate fortune. Being originally destined by his parents to te
fludy of law, as the most likely method of bettering his con-
dition, he was lent early to the university of Salamanca, wh:r.
1h imbibed some tinture of learning. But he was soon dif-
gufled with an acadcmic life, which did not suit his ardent and
reflcfs genius, and retired to Medellin, where he gave hirnfel
up entirely to ative sports and martial excrcifes. At this pe-
riod of life, he was so impetuous, so overbearing, and f diili-
pated, that his father was glal to cmply with his inclination,
and fend him abroad as an adventurer in arms. There were
in that age two conspicuous theatres, on which such of the
Spanifl youth as courted military glory might display tlicir va-
lour; one in Italy, under the command of the Great Captain;
the other in the New world. Cortes preferred the former,
but was prevented by indisposition from embarking with a re-
inforcemcnt of troops sent to Naples. Upon this disappoint-
msnt he turned his views towards America, whither he w-as
allured by the profp'cS of the advantages whicll he might de-
rive from the patronage of Ovando', the governor of Hifpa-
niola, who was his kinfinan. When he landed at St. Domingo
in one thousand five hundred and four, his reception was such
as equalled his mofi fnguine hopes, and he was employed by
the governor in fevcral honourable and lucrative tfations.
Thcfc, howcvcr, did not satisfy his ambition; and in the year
one thousand five hundred and eleven, he obtained permnilion
to accompany Diego Velafqucz in his expedition to Cuba. In

c See NO' I'; 11.

B th

B 0 K this service he distinguished himself so much, that, notwith-
,, tflanding some violent contefis with Vclafquez, occafione by

'J'8. trivial events, unw' rthy of remembrance, he was at lcngtli

taken into favour, and received an ample conceflion of landi
and of Indians, the recompence usually betowsed upon adven-
turers in the New W\orld

'troucli Cortes had not hitherto aed in high cormanl,

he had displayed such qualities in several fccnes of diffi-ulty
and danger, as raised universal expedation, and turned the eyes
of his countrymen towards him, as one capable of performing
great things. The turbulence of youth, as soon as he foundl
objeAs and occupations suited to the ardour of his mind, gra-
dually subsided, and fettled into a habit of regular indcatigable
ativity. The impetuosity of his temper, when he came to ad
with his equals, insensibly abated, by being kept under re-
firaint, and mellowed into a cordial oldierly frankness. These
qualities were accompanied with calm prudence in concerting
his schemes, with persevering vigour in executing them, and
with what is peculiar to superior genius, the art of gaining the
confidence and governing the minds of men. To all which
were added the inferior accoinpliflimcnts that strike the vulgar,
and command their refpdc; a graceful person, a winning as-
pet, extraordinary address in martial exercises, and a confli-
tution of such vigour as to be capable of enduring any fatigue.

As soon as Cortes was mentioned to Velatfucz by his two

confidents, he flattered himself that he had at length found
what he liad hitherto fought in vain, a man with talents for
command, but not an objcdt ofjcaloufy. Neither the rank nor

'I Goin!a:; Cron. c. 1, 2, 3.

the
4

the fortune of Cortes, as he imagined, were such that ie coald
afDire at independence. He had reason to believe, that by his
o-n rcadinefs to ury ancient animoities in oblivion, as weil
as his liberaiity Li conferriing, everal recent favour:, he had al-
readv gained the good-.-i of Cortes, and hoped, by this new
ansd url-c:pci2d mark of confidence, that he might attach lim
fr CvCr to l;is ii:az.re fl.

CORrES receiving his coinmifion with the -warmecl exprcf-

sions of rcfldct and gratitude to the governor, immediately
crected his ftaindard before his ow-n house, appeared in a mili-
tary drcfs, and aftumcd all the ciifigns of his new dignity.
Hiis utmofl influence and ativity wcre cxerted in persuading
many of his friends to engage in the fervicc, and in urging
forward the preparations for the voyage. All his own fuinds,
tog.:t',cr witl wha:t money lie could raise by mortgaging his
land: and Indians, were expended in purchasing military flores
and provisions, or in upplying the wants of such of his officers
as were unable to equip themnfelves in a manner suited to their
rank c. Inoffensive, and even laudable as this conduct was,
his disappointcd competitors were malicious enough to give it a
turn to his disadvantage: They represented him as aiming al-
reatdy, with little difguifc, at cflablifhing an independent au-
thority over his troops, and endeavouring to secure their
rc)fpe, or love by his oflentatious and interested liberality.
They reminded Vclafquez of his former diffcnfions wvitll the
man in whom he now reposed .o much confidence, and fore-
told that Cortes would be more apt to avail himfell of the
power, which he was inconsiderately putting in his hands, tc

s Scc NOTE III.

Sorn hcnn ,- c S
*J~ *!o t is ot~

th

i b11 3

GU jbs 2 .
avOnge

3 (9) (

V
1~r-- .J'

5

r o K avene pas t iliiuries, than to requite late obligations. Thefct

infinualicnll!; mace fc ih imprcilon upon the suspicious mind of
'15'. Velafcucz, that Cortes soon observed forne f.mptoms or a

growii l alienation and difiruit in his behaviour, and was ad-
viscd by his friends, Lares and Duero, to haften his departure,
before thef should become so confirmed, as to break ot with
open violence. Fully sensible of tis danger, lie urige. forward
his preparations with such rapidit., that he fit fail from St.
Jago de Cuba on the eighteenth of November, Vlafquez ac-
companying him to the flore, and taking leave of iiii with an
appearance of perfed fricndflhip and confidence, thoughl he had
fecretl given it in charge to ome of his officers, to keep a
watchful ee upon every part of their commander's conduca .

Fnd2cavours CORTES proceeded to Trinidad, a small settlement on the
hiYls s fame fide of the island, where he was joined by several ad-
crnlmifiion, venturers, and received a supply of provisions and military

stores, of which his flock was fiill very incomplete. He had
hardly left St. Jago when the jealousy which had been work-
ing in the breaif of Velasquez grew so violent that it was im-
possible to suppress it. The armament was no longer under
his own eve and direction; and he felt that as his power over
it ceased, that of Cortes became more absolute. Imagination
now aggravated every circumflance, which had formerly ex-
cited suspicion: the rivals of Cortes induflrioufly threw in re-
fletions which increased his fears; and with no less art tlan
malice they called filpcrftition to their aid, employing the prc-
didions of an arologer in order to complete the alarm. All
there, by their united operation, produced the desired effcr .

' Comara Cron. c. . B. Diaz. c, 2o.

Velaf(luiz

Velasquez repented bttcrly of his own imprulcence, in ha\.i:., 1 0 K
committed a trust of so murlc importance to a prlon vhvofc
fide!ity npapearcd so doubtful, and hafiily dfipatched infrutions 's8
to Trinid:d, empo-.ering Vcriduo, the chicf magifirate there,
to deprive Cortes of his commiflion. But Cortes hlad alreaky
irni, 1fich! pro cfs ill gr.inl, the eftccii and confidcnce of hli
troops, that, finding o'liccrs as well as fildicrs equally zealous
to fih3lnort Iis authority, he soothed or intimidated Vcrdugo,
and v;as permnitted to depart from Trinidad without molefla-
tion.

Fio!Mr Trinidad Cortes failed for Havana, in order to raise an to Iv
more fl.licrs, and to complete the victualling of his fleet. 1 h.: ;i

,a r i:t.

There fcveral persons of diinlliion entered into the service,
and en-ac-ed to supply what provisions were still wanting; but
as it ¥v's ncccnihry to jallow them tome time for performing
whalt lthey had promicd, Velfquez, sensible that he olught no
longer to rely on a man of whom he had so openly difcovcred
his diftrur, avi!cd himfclf of the interval, which this un-
avoida ble delay affordcd, in order to make one attempt more to
wrefl tih cmmand out of the hands of Cortes. I-c loudly
complained of Vcrdugo's conducl, accusing him cither of
chilildi] facility, or of manifcf treachery, in fufrcring Cortes
to cfcape from Trinidad. Anxious to guard againfi a second
iillippoittment, h sint a person of confidence to the ilava-
na, with peremptory injun-tions to Pedro Barba, his licute-
nant-governor in that colony, instantly t arrest Cortes, to
fend him prifoncr to St. Jago under a firong guard, and to
countermand the departure of the armament until lie flould
receive farther orders: he wrote likewise to the principal ofli-
cers, requiring them to afift Barba in executing what he had

given

7

given him in charge. But before the arrival of his messenger,
a Franciscan friar of St. Jago had secretly conveyed an account
of this interesting tranfaation to Bartholomew de Olmedo, a
monk of the fame order, who acted as chaplain to the expedi-
tion.

CORTES, forewarned of the danger, had time to take pre-

cautions for his own safety. His first flcp was to find tome
pretext for removing from Havana Diego de Ordaz, an offi-
cer of great merit, but in whom, on account of his known
attachment to Velasquez, he could not confide in this trying
and delicate jundure. He gave him the command of a vessel,
destined to take on board some provisions in a finall harbour
beyond Cape Antonio and thus made sure of his absence,
without eeming to fufped his fidelity. When he was gone,
Cortes no longer concealed the intentions of Velasquez from
his troops; and as officers and soldiers were equally impatient
to fct out on an expedition, in preparing for which most of
them had expended all their fortune, they expressed their afto-
nifhment and indignation at that illiberal jealousy, to which
the governor was about to sacrifice, not only the honour of their
general, but all their sanguine hopes of glory and wealth.
With one voice they intreated that he would not abandon the
important flation to which he had such a good title. They
conjured him not to deprive them of a leader whom they fol-
lowed with such well founded confidence, and offered to shed
the last drop of their blood in maintaining his authority. Cortes
was cafily induced to comply with what he so ardently desired.
-Ie swore that he would never desert fldicrs who had given
lim fich a fi;nal proof of their attachmcnt, and promiscd in-
{1:,!itl t-, conc',a tem to that rich country, whiLh had been

so

13 0 0 K

(urcs de-
lCmIs 1h1s

corljilltias IS
p L.1,l.titions.
8

9
so long the object of their thoughts and wishes. This decla- B o K

V.

ration was received with transports of military applause, accom- _
panied with threats and imprecations against all who should '518.
presume to call in question the jurifdition of their general, or
to obftrut the execution of his designs.

EVERY thing was now ready for their departure: but The amout

though this expedition was the united effort of the Spanish
power in Cuba; though every settlement had contributed its
quota of men and provisions; though the governor had laid
out considerable fums, and each adventurer had exhausted his
flock, or firained his credit, the poverty of the preparations
was such as must aflonifh the present age, and bore, indeed, no
resemblance to an armament destined for the conquefi of a
great empire. The fleet consisted of eleven vessels, the largest
of a hundred tons, which was dignified with the name of Ad-
miral, three of seventy or eighty tons, and the reft small open
barks. On board of these were fix hundred and seventeen men;
of which five hundred and eight belonged to the land service,
and a hundred and nine were seamen or artificers. The fol-
diers were divided into eleven companies, according to the
number of the flips; to each of which Cortes appointed a cap-
tain, and committed to him the command of the vcffel while
at tea, and of the men when on shore g. As the use of firc-
arms among the nations of Europe was hitherto confined to a
few battalions of regularly disciplined infantry, only thirteen
soldiers were armed with muskets, thirty-two were cross-bow-
men, and the rt had swords and fpcars. Infiead of the usual
lefenfive armour, which must have been cumbcrfome in a hot

i See NOTE IV.
VoL. II.

C

climate.

climate, they wore jackets, quilted with cotton, which expe-
rience had taught the Spaniards to be a sufficient protection
againfi the weapons of the Americans. They had only sixteen
horses, ten small field pieces, and four falconets h.

WITH this slender and ill-provided train did Cortes set fail,

to make war upon a monarch whose dominions were more ex-
tensive than all the kingdoms subjed to the Spanish crown.
As religious enthusiasm always mingled with the spirit of ad-
venture in the New World, and, by a combination still more
firange, united with avarice, in prompting the Spaniards to all
their ente prises, a large cross was displayed in their standards,
with this inscription, Let us fJllow the cross; for under this
sign we Jhall conquer.

So powerfully were Cortes and his followers animated with

both these paflions, that, no less eager to plunder the opulent
country whither they were bound, than zealous to propagate
the Christian faith among its inhabitants, they set out, not with
the solicitude natural to men going upon dangerous service,
but with that confidence which arises from security of success,
and certainty of the divine protection.

Touches at As Cortes had determined to touch at every place which Gri-
ozumel jalva had visited, he fleered directly towards the island of Co-

zumel; there he had the good fortune to redeem Jerome de
Aguilar, a Spaniard, who had been eight years a prisoner among
the Indians. This man was perfectly acquainted with a dia-
led of their language, underflood through a large extent of

i1 B. Diaz c. 19.

country,
BOOK

V.

1518.

Feb 1o, 519.
His depar-
tule from
Cuba. IO

country, and poffefling besides a considerable fliare of prudence
and saga ity, proved extremely useful as an interpreter. From
Cozumel, Cortes proceeded to the river of Tabasco, in hopes
of a reception as friendly as Grijalva had met with there, and
of finding gold in the fame abundance; but the disposition of
the natives, from ome unknown cause, was totally changed.
After repeated endeavours to conciliate their good-will, he was
conltrained to have recourse to violence. Though the forces
of the enemy were numerous, and advanced with extraordinary
courage, they were routed, with great slaughter, in fcvcral
fucceflive actions. The los which they sustained, and flill
more the astonishment and terror excited by the deftruftivc
effedt of the fire-arms, and the dreadful appearance of the
horses, humbled their fierce spirits, and induced them to sue
for peace. They acknowledged the king of Caflile as their
sovereign, and granted Cortes a supply of provisions, with a
present of cotton garments, ome gold, and twenty female
slaves'.

CoRTEs continued his course to the weflward, keeping as

near the fiore as pofible, in order to obfcrve the country
but could difcovcr no proper place for landing, until he arrived
at St. Juan de Uluak. As he entered this harbour, a large ca-
noe, full of people, among whom were two who seemed to be
persons of diflindion, approached his flip, with signs of
peace and amity. They came on board without fear or dif-
trust, and addrcffcd him in a most rcfpeful mnitnler, but in
a language altogether unknown to Aguilar. Cortes was in
the utmost perplexity and distress, at an event of which he

i See NOTE V.
- B. DL)'z. c. 31-36. Gornara Cron. c. 18-23. Herrcra, dec. 2. lib. ivc. c. , &.

C ., inftanty

BOOK

V.

1519.
March 4.

and at Tli-
bafco.

Arrives at St.
Juan de
Ulul.
April z.

B O O K instantly foresaw all the consequences, and already felt te he-

V.
V. fitation and uncertainty with which he hould carry on the
'5'9 great schemes which he meditated, if, in his tranfxdions wit

the natives, he must depend entirely upon such an imperfect,
ambiguous, and conjectural mode of communication, as the
use of signs. But he did not remain long in this embarrafiin
situation: a fortunate accident extricated him, when his own
Sagacity could have contributed little towards his relief. One of
the female slaves, whom he had received from the cazique of
Tabasco, happened to be present at the first interview between
Cortes and his new guests. She perceived his diltrefs, as well
as the confusion of Aguilar; and as flhe perfedly understood
the Mexican language, he explained what they said in the
Yucatan tongue, with which Aguilar was acquainted. This
woman, known afterwards by the name of Donna Marina, and
who makes a conspicuous figure in the hiflory of the New
World, where great revolutions were brought about by finall
causes and inconsiderable infiruments, was born in one of the
provinces of the Mexican empire. Having been carried off a
captive by ome hoflile party, after a variety of adventures he
fell into the hands of the Tabafcans, and had resided long
enough among them to acquire their language, without losing
the use of her own. Though it was both tedious and trouble-
some to converse by the intervention of two different interpret-
ers, Cortes was so highly pleased with having discovered this
method of carrying on some intercourse with the people of a
country into which he was determined to penetrate, that in
the transports of his joy he confidercd it as a visible interposition
of Providence in his favour'.

B. Diaz. c. 37, 38, 39. Gomara Cron, c. 25, 26. Hcrrcra, dec. 2. lib. v, c. 4.

HE
12

HE now learned, that the two persons whom he had re-

ceived on board of his ship were deputies from Pilpatoe and
Tcutile the one governor of that province under a great mo-
narch, whom they called MIontezuma, and the other the com-
mander of his forces there, and that they were ent to inquire
what his intentions were in visiting their coafi, and to offer him
what afliflance he might need, in order to continue his voyage.
Cortes, firuck with the appearance of those people, as well as
the tenor of the mefage, aflured them, in refpedful terms,
that lie approached their country with most friendly senti-
ments, and came to propose matters of great importance to the
welfare of their prince and his kingdom, which he would unfold
more fully, in person, to the governor and the general. Next
morning, without waiting for any answer, he landed his
troops, his horses and artillery; and having chosen proper
groun1, began to erca huts for his men, and to fortify his
camp. The natives, infiead of opposing the entrance of those
fatal guess into their country, assisted them in all their opera-
tions, with an alacrity of which they had ere long good reason
to repent.

NEXT day, Pilpatoe and Tcutilc entered the Spanish ca1mp

with a numerous retinue; and Cortes confidering them as the
ministers of a great monarch, entitled to a degree of attention
very different fronm that which the Spaniards were accuflomed
to pay to the petty Caziques, with whom they had intercourse,
received them with much formal ceremony. He informed
them, that he came as ambafador from Don Carlos of Auftrii,
king of Cartile, the greatest monarch of the eafr, and was in-
trulled with propositions of such moment, that lie could impart
them to none but the emperor Montezuma himfclf; and there-

fore

B1 00 cl

V.

I C (j.

1 ;

Li 00P
hc Nit. Y i ar .

I3

IT

U 0o K fore required them to conduct him, withlout loss of time, into
,....~.~ the preftnce of their mailer. The Mexican officers could not

'5"'; conceal their uneafincfs at a requcfl, which they knew to be

difagrecable, and which, they foresaw, might prove extremely
cmbarraffing to their sovereign, whofc mind had been filled
with many disquieting apprehensions, ever since the former
appearance of the Spaniards on his coaits. But before they
attempted to difluade Cortes from infilting on this demand,
they endeavoured to conciliate his goad-will, by entreating
him to accept of certain presents, which, as humble slaves of
Montczuma, they laid at his feet. These were introduced with
great parade, and confilled of fine cotton cloth, of plumes of
various colours ; and of ornaments of gold and silver to a con-
fiderable value; the workmanship of which appeared to be as
curious as the materials were rich. The display of these pro-
duced an effeit very different from what the Mexicans intcn ed.
Inflead of satisfying, it increased the avidity of the Spaniards,
and rendered them so eager and impatient to become malecrs of
a country which abounded with such precious produdtions, that
Cortes could hardly liften with patience to the argumcnts
whiich Pilpatoc and Tclutile employed to dissuade him from i-
fiting the capital, and in a haughty determined tone he infifcd
on his denand, of being admitted to a personal audience of their
sovereign. During this interview, some painters, in the train
of tc Mexican chiefs, had been diligently employed in deli-
neating, upon white cotton cloths, figures of the Hlips, t h ,rs. s,
the artillery, the foldicrs, and whatever clf aLtralctl tlcir
eyes, as singular. When Cortcs obfcrvcd tis, and was in-
formed that thcfc picturcs were to be fcnt to Montczullma, in
order to convey to him a more lively idea of the firan-c and
wonderful objcds now presented to their view, than any words

coul(l

15

could cmmunicate, he refolvel to render the rcpr,'ciitatiol o

) K

flill more animated and interefiing, by exhibiting such a sec- _-
tacle as mi2git give both them and their monarch an aiful i- I' '"
pression of the extraordinary prowess of his followers, and tle
irrefifible force of their arms. The trumpets, by his order
founded an alarm; the troops, in a moment, formed in order,
of battle, the infantry performed such martial exercises as were
beil filited to display the efFect of their different weapons; the
horse, in various evolutions, gave a fpecimcn of their agility
and fir;ngth ; the artil!cry, pointed towards the thick woods
which surroundcd the camp, made dreadful havoc among the
trees. The Mexicans looked on with that silent amazement,
which is natural when the mind is firuck with objects, which
are oth awful and above its comprehenflon. But, at the
cxplofion of the cannon, many of them fled, some fell to the
grcun., and all were so much confounded at the fight of men
whose power so nearly resembled that of the Gods, that Cortes
found it difficult to compose and rc-affure them. The painters
had now many new fibjeds on which to excrcife their art, and
they put their fancy on the firetch in order to invent figures
and charaers to reprefcnt the extraordinary things which they
had seen.

MESSENGERS were immediately dispatchcd to Montezuma X .s!:.-.;

with those piEures, and a full account of every thing that had witzu o1
passed since the arrival of the Spaniards, and by them Cortes
sent a present of some European curiositics to Montezuma,
which, though of no great value, he believed would be accept-
able on account of their novelty. The Mexican monarchs, in
order to obtain early information of every occurrence in all the
corners of their vafi empire, had introduced a refinement in

police.

B o o K police, unknown, at that time, in Europe. They had couriers
~__ poited at proper flations along the principal roads, and as

' ' 9. these were trained to agility by a regular education, and relieved

one another at moderate distances, they conveyed intelligence
with surprising rapidity. Though the capital in which Mon-
tezuma resided was above a hundred and eighty miles from St.
Juan de Ulua, Cortes's presents were carried thither, and an
answer to his demands was received in a few days. The fame
officers who had hitherto treated with the Spaniards, were em-
ployed to deliver this answer; but as they knew how repug-
nant the determination of their mailer was to all the schemes
and wishes of the Spanish commander, they would not venture
to make it known until they had previously endeavoured to
Hisprefents. soothe and mollify him. For this purpose, they renewed the

negociation by introducing a train of a hundred Indians, loaded
with presents ent to him by Montezuma. The magnificence
of these was such as became a great monarch, and far exceedd
any idea which the Spaniards had hitherto formed of his wealth.
They were placed upon mats spread on the ground, in such
order as shewed them to the greatest advantage. Cortes
and his officers viewed, with admiration, the various manufac-
tures of the country, cotton stuffs so fine, and of such delicate
texture as to resemble silk; picures of animals, trees, and
other natural objects formed with feathers of different colours,
disposed and mingled with such skill and elegance, as to rival
the works of the pencil in truth and beauty of imitation.
But what chiefly attracted their eyes, were two large plates of
a circular form, one of massive gold representing the fun, the
other of silver, an emblem of the moon . Thcfc were accom-

" See NOTE VI.

panied

panied with bracelets, collars, rings, and other trinkets of gold; o\p K
and that nothing might be wanting which could give the Spa- t->
niards a complete idea of what the country afforded, with some ' '9
boxes filled with pearls, precious flones, and grains of gold
unwrought, as they had been found in the mines or rivers.
Cortes received all these with an appearance of profound vene-
ration for the monarch by whom they were bestowed. But Foil).;, ',r
\when te Mexicans, presuming upon this, informed him that p.o:ch hiii
their mafler, though he desired him to accept of what he had capi
sent as a token of his regard for the prince whom lie rcprc-
sentcd, would not give his confnt that foreign troops flould
approach nearer to his capital, or even allow them to continue
longer in his dominions, Cortes declared, in a manner more
resolute and peremptory than formerly, that he must insist on
his firfi demand, as he could not, without dilonour, return to
lhis own sovereign, until he was admitted into the prefc.ce of
the prince whom he was appointed to visit in his name. The
MIexicans, astonished at feeing any man dare to oppofc that
will, which they were accustomed to confider as supreme aid
irrcfiliblc, yet afraid of precipitating their country into an
opcn rupture with such formidable enemies, prevailed wit]l
Cortes to promise, that he would not move from his prcfent
camp, until the return of a messenger, whom they sent to
Montezuma for farther infirutions "

TnE firmnces with which Cortes adhered to his original S:-':!'

propof.l mhould, naturally, have brought the negociation be- p;c:r :tr!i.t
twcen imn and Montezuma to a fpcedy iue, as it seemcd to 1''
Lhave the Mexican monarch no choice, but cither to receive hlimn

B13. Dinz. c. 3(, Goinara Cron. c 27. Hcrrcra, dec. 2. lib. v c 5.6.

D
Vo7L. 11.

. il

with confidence as a friend, or to oppose him opcely as an
enemy. The latter was what might have been cxeqcld fri-,n
a haughty prince in possession of cxtenfive powcr. The MvIexi-
can empire, at this period, was at a pitch of grandeur to which
no society ever attained in so short a period. Though it had
fubfilled only a hundred and thirty years, its doinilion cxten;!-
ed from the North to the South Sea, over territories fi'iclling
above five hundred leagues from eafl to wcll, and m rc than
two hundred from north to south, comprehending provinccs
not inferior in fertility, population, and opulence, to any in
the torrid zone. The people were warlike and cntcrprifing ;
the authority of the monarch unbounded, and his revenues
considerable. If, with the forces which might have been fud-
denly aembled in such an empire, Montezuma had fallen upon
the Spaniards while encamped on a barren ul healthy coal,
unsupported by any ally, without a place of retreat, and dfii-
tute of provisions, it is impossible, even with all the advantages
of their filperior discipline and arms, that they could have flood
the shock, and they must either have perished in fich an une-
qual contest, or have abandoned the enterprise.

As the power of Montezuma enabled him to take this spirited

part, his own dispositions seened naturally to prompt him to it.
Of all the princes who had swayed the Mexican sceptre, he was
the mofl haughty, the most violent, and the most impatient of
controul. His subjects looked up to him with awe, and his ene-
mies with terror. The former he governed with unexampled
rigour, but they were impressed with filch an opinion of his ca-
pacity, as commanded their refped; and by many vicdorics over
the latter, he had spread far the dread of his arms, and had add-
ed several considerable provinces to his dominions. But though

his
1l 0 0 K

V.

1519.

Charater of
the monarch.

his talents might be suited to the tranfadions of a fiate so im-
perfetly polished as the Mexican empire, and sufficient to con-
dud them while in their accustomed course, they were altoge-
ther inadequate to a conjundure so extraordinary, and did not
qualify him either to judge with the discernment, or to ad
with the decision, rcquifite in such a trying emergence.

BOOK

V.

1519

FROMr the moment that the Spaniards appeared on his coast, HIp'; ne)lC,
lih discovered symptoms of timidity and embarrassment. In- uponthe ar-

rival of the

stead of taking such resolutions as the consciousness of his own Spaniards.
power, or the memory of his former exploits, might have in-
spired, lie deliberated with an anxiety and hcfitation which
did not escape the notice of his meanest courtiers. The per-
plexity and discomposure of Montezuma's mind upon this oc-
cafion, as well as the general dismay of his fubjeds, was not
owing wholly to the impreflion which the Spaniards had made
by the novelty of their appearance and the terror of their arms;
its origin may be traced up to a more remote source. There
was an opinion, if we may believe the earliest and most authen-
tic Spaniih hiflorians, almost universal among the Americans,
that some dreadful calamity was impending over their heads,
from a race of formidable invaders who should come from re-
gions towards the rising fun, to over-run and desolate their
country. Whether this disquieting apprehension flowed from
the memory of ome natural calamity which had afflided that
p':trt of the globe, and impressed the minds of the inhabitants
with fuperritious fears and forebodings, or whether it was an
imagination accidentally fuggeflcd by the aflonifllment which
the fir't fight of a new race of men occasioned, it is impoflible
to determine. But as the Mexicans were more prone to siper-
f'iti3n than any people in the New World, they were more

D 2 deepily

9
(

BOOK

V.

1519.

Continues to
!.'Cgocatc.

Anxiety .nd
: pprehenfions
;f the Spa-
niards.

deeply affieted with the appearance of the Spaniards, whom
their credulity instantly represented as the infiruments cefiined
to bring about that fatal revolution which they dreaded. Un-
der those circumfiances, it ceafcs to be incredible that a handful
of adventurers should alarm the monarch of a great empire and
all Ilis subjes '.

NOT WITHIIST ANDING the influence of tills imnpreiT!n, when

the messenger arrived from the Spanish camp with an account,
thlt Cortes, adhering to his original demand, rcfu.ed to obey
the order enjoining him to leave the country, Montezuma
aiFumed some degree of resolution, and in a transport of rage
natural to a fierce prince, unaccustomed to meet with any oppo-
fition to his will, he threatened to sacrifice those presumptuous
firangers to his gods. But his doubts and fears quickly re-
turned, and instead of issuing orders to carry his threats into
execution, he again called his ministers to confer and offtr
their advice. Feeble and temporizing measures will always be
the result when men assemble to deliberate in a situation where
they ought to a. The Mexican council took no effectual
measure for expelling such troublesome intruders, and were fa-
tisfied with ifuing a more positive injunction, requiring them
to leave the country; but this they preposterously accompanied
with a present of such value, as proved a fresh inducement to
remain there.

MEANWHILE, the Spaniards were not without folicitudc or

a variety of sentiments, in deliberating concerning their o.-wn
future condut. From what they had already fecn, many of

° Cortes Rclatione Seconda, p. Ramus. iii. 234, 235. Hcrrcra, dec. 2. lib. iii. c. .
lib. v. c. II, lib. vii. c. 6. Goiniaa Cron. c. 66 92. 144.

them

them formed such extravagant ideas concerning the opulence 13 0oo K
of the country, that, dcfpifing danger or hardhipi, when -
ti:ey hnd in view treasures which appeared to be in cxhlu. ''
ible, they were eager to attempt the conqucfr. Others, etii-
mating the power of the Mexican empire b its wealth, and
cnumerating the various proofs which liad occurred of its being
Undcr a well regulated adminifration, contended that it would
be an a of tice wilder fr-cnzy to attack such a fiate with a fnall
body of men, in want of provisions, unconnected with any
ally, and already enfeebled by the diseases peculiar to the cli-
mate, and the loss of several of their number '. Cortes secretly
applauded the advocates for bold measures, and cherished their
romantic hopes, as such ideas corresponded with his own, and
favourcd the execution of the schemes which he had formed.
From the time that the suspicions of Velasquez broke out with Schemes of

of' Corte.

open vi:lcnce in his attempt to deprive him of the authority
whilich h ad conferred, he saw the necessity of diffolvin a
connction which would obfirud and embarrass all his opera-
tions, and watched for a proper opportunity of coming to a
final rupture with him. Having this in view, he had laboured,
by every art, to secure the esteem and affecion of his foldicrs.
With his abilities for command, it was easy to gain their
cfleem; and his followers were quickly satisfied that they might
rely, with perfca confidence, on the conduct and courage of
their leader. Nor was it more difficult to acquire their assec-
tion. Among adventurers, nearly of the fame rank, and fcrv-
ing at their own expence, the dignity of command did not
elevate a general above mingling with those who aed un-
der him. Cortes availed himfclf of this freedom of intcr-
course, to insinuate himfclf into their favour, and by his affable

I' 13 Diaz. c. 40.

mIanners,

OK i n.an::', by well-timed ads of liberality to some, by infpir-
,----j .n; aill with vat hlopcs, and by allowing them to trade pri-

:.) v.>tly vith te natives ', Ie attiached the greater part of his

i;ld c:s so irmly to himfilf, that they almost forgot that the
ari:n.mcnt had b:en fitted out by the authority, and at the ex-
pInce, of another.

' :.I'-Ni DUINc thocf intrigucs, Teutile arrived with the present
j;_l';j'i'. j . fr3om Montczuma, and, together with it, delivered the ultimate

order of that monarch to depart instantly out of his dominions;
;n!d whc!i Cortes, infiead of complying, renewed his rcqucft of
an audiincc, the Mexican turne fIrom him abruptly, and quit-
ted the camp with looks and gestures which strongly exprefed
;is surprise and resentment. Next morning, none of the na-
tivcs, who uscd to frequent the camp in great numSers, in or-
dcr to barter with the soldiers, and bring in provisions, ap-
pearcd. All friendly correfpondcnce seemed now to be at an
ind, and it was expected every moment that hostilities would
commence. This, though an event that might have been fore-
fcen, cccafioned a sudden confiernation amcng the Spaniards,
which emboldened the adherents of Velasquez not only to mur-
mur and cabal against their general, but to appoint one of their
number to remonstrate openly against his imprudence in at-
tempting the conquefi of a mighty empire with such inadequate
force, and to urge the necessity of returning to Cuba, in order
to refit the fleet and augment the army. Dicgo de Ordaz, one
of his principal officers, whom the malcontents charged with
this commission, delivered it with a foldicry freedom and blunt-
ness, auring him that he spoke the sentiments of the whole

i Sec NOTE VII.

army.

army. Cortes listened to him without any appenranc of ero- B 0 K
tion; and as he well knew the temper and wifes of his fol- t.-^
diers, and foresaw how they would receive a propofiticn fatal '5'
at once to all the splendid hopes and schemes which they ad
been forming with such complacency, he carried his diTimula-
tion so far as to fccm to relinquish his own mcafures in com-
pliance with the rcqueft of Ordaz, and ii'ued orders that the
army should be in readiness next day to reimbark for Cu-
ba. As soon as this was known, the disappointed adventurers
exclaimed and threatened; the emissaries of Cortes minglin,
with them, inflamed their rage; the ferment became ,eneral;
the whole camp was almoR in open mutiny; all demandina
with eagerness to fee their commander. Cortes was not flo\
in appearing; when, with one voice, they cxprefcTd their afn-
nifhment and indignation at the orders which t')c;- Ir:d r-
ceived. It was unworthy, thev cried, of the Ciltilin c ;e -n
to e daunted at the firt afFedt of danger, and infamoi!s t, fvl
before any enemy appeared. For their parts, they wcrc dcter-
mined not to relinquish an enterprise, that had hitherto been
successful, and which tended lb visibly to spread the knowlc;e:e
of true religion, and to advance the glory and interefi of ti:ir
country. Happy under his command, they would follow himT
with alacrity through every danger, in qucft of those fcttlc-
ments and treasures which he had so long held out to their
view; but if le chose rather to return to Cuba, and tamely
give up all his hopes of diftinion and opulence to an envious
rival, they would infiantly chufe another general to conduet
them in that path of glory which he had not spirit to enter.

CORTES, delighted with their ardour, took no offence at th
boldness with which it was uttered. The sentiments were what

lhe

23

r, o 0 K he himself had inspired, and the warmth of expression satisfied

V., him that his soldiers had imbibed them thoroughly. He as-
1; 9. fed6ed, however, to be surprised at what he heard, declaring

that his orders to prepare for embarking were issued from a per-
suasion that this was agreeable to his troops; that, from defe-
rence to what he had been informed was their inclination, he
had sacrificed his own private opinion, which was firmly bent
on eflablifhing immediately a settlement on the sea-coast, and
then on endeavouring to penetrate into the interior part of the
country; that now he was convinced of his error; and as he
perceived that they were animated with the generous spirit
which breathed in every true Spaniard, he would rcfiume, with
frcfh ardour, his original plan of operation, and doubted not
to condul them, in the career of vidory, to such independent
fortunes as their valour merited. Upon this declaration, shouts
ofap,.laufe testified the excess of their joy. The measure feiemed
to be taken with unanimous conent; such as secretly con-
demnned it, being obliged to join in the acclamations, partly to
conceal their difaffedion from the general, and partly to avoid
the im-utation of cowardice fiom their fellow-foldiers .

1', kliit1. ; WITHOUT allowing his men time to cool or to rcfle, Cortes
t',rml of ct il * 1 *
uvrinmjct. lct about carrying his design into execution. In order to

give a; beginning to a colony, he assembled the principal pcr-
sons in his army, and by their fuirages clcde: a council and
nmai{rate:s, in whom the government was to be vefied. As
incii naturally transplant the inflitutions and forms of the
mlotlhr-counltry into their new fcttlelcnt,, this was framed
upon tc mn:dcl of a Spaniflh corporation. The magifiratcs
wc:c ('ifinguillhcd by the fame names and enfigs of office,

r I D c,.. C 40. :.

4I0. Icrrcrin , dec. 2. ' v c.
v c , -.

an d
24

and were to exercise a similar jurifdition. All the persons ; o o K
chosen were mofi firmly devoted to Cortes, and the infirument
of their election was framed in the king's name, without any 's59
mention of their dependance on Velasquez. The two prin-
ciples of avarice and enthusiasm, which prompted the Spaniards
to all their enterprises in the New World, seem to have con-
curred in fuggefling the name which Cortes beflowed on his
intended settlement. HeI called it, Villa rica de /a vera Ciruz
that is, The rich town of the true Cross.

Tir firfi meeting of the new council was distinguished by a ReiJls Ii;

tranfacion of great moment. As soon as it assembled, Cortes co"",1'i',,,,
applied for leave to enter; and approaching with many marks
of profound refped, which added dignity to the tribunal, and
set an example of reverence for its authority, he began a long
harangue, in which, with much art, and in terms extremely
flattering to persons just entering upon their new funtion, he
observed, that as the supreme jurifdidion over the colony which
they had planted was now vested in this court, he confidered
them as clothed with the authority and representing the person
of their fovercign; that accordingly he would communicate to
them what he deemed essential to the public fifcty, with the
fame dutiful fidelity as if he were addrcfing his royal mafler;
that the security of a colony fettled in a great empire, whose
sovereign had already discovered his hofille intentions, depended
upon arms, and the efficacy of these upon the fuibordination
and difciplinc preservcd among the troops; that his right to
commandl wvas derived from a commiflmcn granted by the go-
vernor of C(Iba; and as that had been long since revoked, the
lawfullncfs of his jurifdidion might well be questioned; that he

VOL. II. E iccmc.d

seemcd to a upon a defetive, or even a dubious title; nor
could they trufl an army which might dispute the powers of its
general, at a juncdure when it ought implicitly to ob-y his
orders; that, moved by these considerations, he now resigned
all his authority to them, that they, having both right to chufc,
and power to confer full jurifdidion, might appoint one, ill
the king's name, to command the army in its future opera-
tions ; and as for his own part, such was his zeal for the service
in which they were engaged, that he would most cheerfully
takec up a pike with the fame hind that laid down tle general's
truncheon, and convince his fellow-foldicrs, that though ac-
cuflomcd to command, he had not forgotten how to obey.
Ilaving fini.fled his dicourfe, he laid the commillion from Ve-
lafquez upon the table, and, after kiSling his truncheon, de-
livered it to the chief magifrate, and withdrew.

THE deliberations of the council were not long, as Cortes

had concerted this important Ineafure with his confidents, and
had prepared the other members, with great address, for the
part which he wiflled them to take. Ilis resignation was ac-
cepted; and as the uninterrupted tenour of their prosperity
under his condud afforded the most satisfying evidence of his
abilities for command, they, by their unanimous suffrage,
clected him chief justice of the colony, and captain-general of
its army, and appointed his commission to be made out in the
king's name, with most ample powers, which were to continue
in force until the royal pleasure should be farther known.
That this deed might not be deemed the machination of a
junto, the council called together the troops, and acquainted
them with what had been refolvccl. The soldiers, with eager

a l)pl;ufe,
1 0 O K

V.

1519.

ard is cl-fren
chief j ulice
and captain-
general.
:6

applause, ratified their choice; the air rcfoundcd with the
name of Cortes, and all vowed to fled their blood in support
of his authority.

CORTES having now brought his intrigucs to the desired

iffuce, and shaken off his mortifying depcndancc on the gover-
nor of Cuba, accepted of the commifion, which vcfged in him
fupremejutrifdidion, civil as well as military, over the colony,
with many professions of rcfped to the council, and gratitude
to the army. Together with his new command, he aumed
greater dignity, and began to exercise more extensive powers.
Formerly he had felt himself to be only the deputy of a fubjct;
now he aed as the representative of his sovereign. The ad-
herents of Vclafquez, fully aware of what would be the effect
of this change in his situation, could no longer continue filcnt
and passive fpedators of his ations. They exclaimed openly
against the proceedings of the council as illegal, and against
those of the army as mutinous. Cortes, inflantly percciving
the necessity of giving a timely check to such seditious difcouirfr
by some vigorous measure, arrested Ordaz, Efcudero, and Vc-
lafquez de Leon, the ringlcaders of this faction, and Fcnt thlcm
priioners aboard the fleet, loaded with chains. Their dclpend-
ants, aftonifled and overawcd, remained quiet; and Cortes.
more dfirous to reclaim than to punifil hils lri-incrs, w-lo
were oficers of great mcrit, courted their fieicnfhip with fuc',
afiduity and a-idres, that the reconciliation w ;; pcrifly c :-
dial; and, on the mofl trying occasions, ncithcr their c;i:-
inceion with the governor of Cuba, nor the memor.ly of t.c
indignity with which they had been treated, tcmpted thc to
fwvcrv'e fiom an inviolable attachment to his intcrcl '. In tirh

I. ~ ;i r - ~ 43. ( Li ar: C 1oii. c. 3 0 , 3 1. 1 1 k r1 ; i, L!c c . 2 i vx. c. --

. -7
13 0 0 1

V.

I 519.

AfFertshis ait-
thority v0I
viJ r.

3 o o K as well as his other negociations at this critical conjuncdure,
,.--.,-- which decided with refped to his future fame and fortune,

'519 Cortes owed much of his success to the Mexican gold, which

he distributed with a liberal hand both among his friends and
his opponents'

His friend- CORTES, having thus rendered the union between hinfclf
flip courted
hy the ZeiL- and his army indissoluble by those common acds of disobedience,
poallans. thought he might now venture to quit the camp in which he

had hitherto remained, and advance into the country. To
this he was encouraged by an event no lets fortunate than fca-
fonable. Some Indians having approached his camp in a myfte-
rious manner, were introduced into his presence. lie found
that they were ent with a proffer of friendship firom the ca-
zique of Zempoalla, a considerable town at no great ditfance;
and from their answers to a variety of quefiions which he put
to them, according to his usual practice in every interview with
the people of the country, he gathered, that their mafler,
though fubjedt to the Mexican empire, was impatient of the
yoke, and filled with such dread and hatred of Montezuma,
that nothing could be more acceptable to him than any profped
of deliverance from the oppreflfion under which he groaned.
On hearing this, a ray of light and hope broke in upon the
mind of Cortes. He saw that the great empire which he in-
tended to attack was not united, nor its sovereign beloved. He
'concluded, that the causes of difaffedion could not be confined
to one province, but that in other corners there muff be mal-
contents, so weary of fubjedion, or so dcfirous of change, as
to be ready to follow the flandard of any proteEtor. Full of
those ideas, on which he began to form a fchcme, that time,

13. Diaz. . c. 4.

and
28

and more perfed information concerning the slate cf the coun- u 0v °
try, enabled him to mature, he gave a motl gracious rcccption -~
to the Zempoallans, and promised soon to visit their caziquc ' 'i

IN order to perform this promifc, it was not necclTary to vary r.:rc'ie t;

the route which lie had already fixed for his march. Some of-
ficers, whom he had employed to survey the coafl, having dif-
covered a village named ()liabillan, about forty miles to te
northward, vvhich, both on account of the fcrtility of the foil,
and commodiousness of the harbour, fecmcd to be a more pro-
per station for a settlement than that where he was encamped,
Cortes determined to remove thither. Zempoalla lay in his
way, where the cazique received him in the manner which he
had reason to expet t with gifts and carcfTes, like a man soli-
citous to gain his good-will; with refpcEt approaching almoflt
to ador:tion, like one who looked up to him as a deliverer.
From him he learned many particulars with refped to the cha-
rader of Montezuma, and the circumfiances which rendered
his dominion odious. He was a tyrant, as the cazique told him
with tears, haughty, cruel, and suspicious; who treated his
own filbjccs with arrogance, ruined the conquered provinces
by exccfive xaaions, and often tore their sons and daughters
fi-o them by violence ; the former, to be offered as victims to
his gods; the latter, to be reservcd as concubincs for himself or
favourites. Cortes, in reply to him, artfully insinuatcd, that
one great object of the Spani'rds in visiting a country so remote
from their own, was to rcdrefs grievances, and to relieve the
oppressed; and having encouraged him to hope for this inter-
position in due timc, he continued his march to QOliabiflan.

u B. Diz. c. .1 i. GoiitraCron. c. .

TlIL

Tin spot which his officers had recommended as a proper

situation, appeared to him to be so well chosen, that he imme-
diately marked out ground for a town. The houses to be ereated
were only huts; but there were to be surrounded with fortifi-
cations, of sufficient strength to resist the assaults of an Indian
army. As the finishing of those fortifications was essential to
the existence of a colony, and of no less importance in prose-
cuting the designs which the leader and his followers medi-
tated, both in order to fccure a place of retreat, and to preserve
their communication with the fca, every man in the army,
officers as well as soldiers, put his hand to the work, Cortes
himfclf setting them an example of activity and perseverance in
labour. The Indians of Zcmpoalla and QOuiabiflan lent their
aid ; and this petty flation, the parent of so many mighty fct-
tlemcnts, was soon in a fiatc of defence ".

WIIILE engaged in this ncceflhry work, Cortes had several

interviews with the caziques of Zempoalla and Ouiabiflan ; and
availing himnfelf of their wonder and astonishment at the new
objets which they daily beheld, he gradually inspired them
with fuchl an high opinion of the Spaniards, as beings of a fu-
pcrior order, and irrcfifiible in arms, that, relying on their
protccion, they ventured t insult the Mexican power, at the
very name of which they were accustomed to tremble. Some
of Montezuma's officcrs having appeared to levy the usual tri-
bute, and to demand a certain number of human victims, as an
expiation for their guilt in prcrifming to hold intercourse with
those firangers whom the emperor had commanded to leave his
dominions, inflead of obeying the order, they made them pri-

13. Diaz. c. 45, 4G. 48. Gonmara Cron. . 2, )3. 37. I -cncra, tcc. 2. lib. v.
c. , 9.

foners.

"0
B 0 0 K.

v.

1519.

Concludi. a
lo m 11 :l ]-I

! i ii!v itl
. \ k c iC-

foners, treated them with great indignity, and, as tl.ir fuce--
flition was no less barbarous than that of tle Mexicans, they
threatened to sacrifice them to their gods. From thi. las' dan-
ger they were delivcred by tile interposition of Cortes, vw )
manifcficd the utmost horror at the mention of fuicli a (ied.
The two caziqucs having now been pufied to an at of fucli
open rebellion, as left them ro hope of fafcty but in attaching
themrfclvc inviolably to t!ec Spaniards, they soon comp!ctcd
their union with them, by formally acknowledging thc:if£lvcs
to be vaiEls of the amlc monarch. Their example w:is fol-
lowed by the Totonaques, a fierce :cople who inhalited the
mountainous part of the country. They willingly ful-jciQc,
themfclvcs to the crown of Catiile, and offercd to accompany
Cortes, with all their forces, in his miarch towards 1cxico .

Cox r rs lhad now been above three months in New S.!ain ;

and though tlhis period had not been diftinuifhld by martial
cntcrllrifs, cvcry moment had been employed in opcrations,
which, tlhough lcs fpleni, w-ere more impcrtant. Ey hiis
addrcfi in conl.hicing hi3 intrigues with his own army, as well
;s his l facity in carrying on his nceociations with the natives,
he had already lid the foundations of his future fulcces. Blu

lwhatever confidence le miglht place in the plan which he had
formed, le could not lut perceive, that as his title to com-
mand w.as derived from a doubtful authority, he held it by a
precarious tenure. The injuries which Vclafquc lihad received,
were fucl as would naturally prompt him to apply for rcdrefs
to their common fovercign; and such a representation miglht
be given of his conduct, thalt lie had rcafon to apprehend, not
only that he might be degracd from his present rank, but fuil-

Y . Diaz. c. .17. oiaraCi'l. 35, 36. 1Icrrcra, dIcc. . li .
. c. , , l.

i: .l ,
1

31
I () ) 1I

i ,,

!zx.v lt
1.i )

r o o 1. jecded to punishment. Before he began his march, it was ne-

ceffary to take the most effetual precautions against this im-
95 1 pending danger. With this view, he persuaded the magistrates

of his colony to address a letter to the king, containing a long
account of their own services; a pompous description of the
country which they had discovered; its riches, the number of
its inhabitants, their civilization and arts; a view of the pro-
grefs which they had already made, in annexing several exten-
five provinces of it to the crown of Catile, and of the fchcmes
which they had formed, as well as the hopes which they enter-
tained, of reducing the whole to fubjedion; and last of all, they
gave a minute detail of the motives which had induced them
to renounce all connction with Vclafquez, to fettle a colony
dependant upon the crown alone, and to veit the supreme
power, civil as well as military, in the hands of Cortes; hum-
bly requefling their sovereign to ratify what they had done by
his royal authority. Cortes himself wrote in a similar strain;
and as he knew that the Spanilh court, accustomed to the ex-
aggerated representations of every new country by its disco-
vcrcr, would give little credit to their splendid accounts of New
Spain, if they were not accompanied with such a fpecimcn of
what it contained, as would excite an ligh idea of its opulence,
lie solicitcd his foldicrs to relinquish what they might claim
as their part of the trcafurcs which had hitherto been collected,
in order that tle whllole might be fcnt to the king. Such was
the afccndant which he had acquired over their minds, and fucl
their own romantic cxpeclations of future wealth, that an
army of indigent and rapacious adventurers was capable of this

renereous effort, and offered to their fovercign the richest pre-
flnt that liad hitherto been tranfilittcd from the New World:.

' S::c NOTE V111.

Portocarrero

Portocarrero and Montejo, the chief magistrates of the colony, B 0 o K
were appointed to carry this present to Castile, with express \,
orders not to touch at Cuba in their paflage thither . '3
.i

WHILE a vessel was preparing for their departure, an un- ^x c'n'ircy

aainl Cor-

expeced event occasioned a general alarm. Some soldiers and te.
tailors, secretly attached to Vclafquez, or intimidated at the
profped of the dangers unavoidable in attempting to penetrate
into the heart of a great empire with such unequal force, formed
the design of seizing one of the brigantines, and making their
escape to Cuba, in order to give the governor fucl intelligence
as might enable him to intercept the sip which was to carry
the treasure and dispatches to Spain. This conspiracy, though
formed by persons of low rank, was conducted with profound
secrecy; but at the moment when every thing was ready for
execution, they were betrayed by one of their affociatcs.

THOUGHI the good fortune of Cortes interposed so ea- He dferoys

fonably on this occasion, the detection of this conspiracy filled
his mind with most disquieting apprehensions, and prompted
him to execute a scheme which he had long revolved. He
perceived that the spirit of disaffection fill lurked among
his troops; that though hitherto checked by the uniform
success of his fchcmes, or kept down by the hand of au-
thority, various events might occur which would encourage
and call it forth. He observed, that many of his men, weary
of the fatigue of service, longed to revisit their settlements
in Cuba; and that upon any appearance of extraordinary
danger, or any revcrfe of fortune, it would be impoflible
to restrain them from returning thithcr. He was sensible

a 13. Diaz. c. 5. Coniara Cion. c. 40.
VOL. II.

F

that

B o o that his forces, already too feeble, could bear no diminution,

and that a very small defection of his followers would oblige
1'59 him to abandon the enterprise. After ruminating, often, and

with much solicitude, upon those particulars, he saw no hope
of success, but in utting off all possibility of retreat, and re-
ducing his men to the necessity of adopting the fame rcfolution
with which he himself was animated, either to conquer or to
perish. With this view, he determined to destroy his fleet;
but as he durst not venture to execute such a bold resolution by
his single authority, he laboured to bring his soldiers to adopt
his ideas with refped to the propriety of this measure. His
addrcfs in accomplishing this was not inferior to the arduous
occasion in which it was employed. He persuaded some, that
the ships had suffered so much by having been long at sea, as
to be altogether unfit for service; to others he pointed out
what a seasonable reinforcement of strength they would derive
from the junction of an hundred men, now unprofitably em-
ployed as ailors; and to all he represented the necessity of
fixing their eyes and wishes upon what was before them, with-
out allowing the idea of a retreat once to enter their thoughts.
With universal content the ships were drawn ashore, and after
stripping them of their fails, rigging, iron-works, and what-
ever else might be of use, they were broke in pieces. Thus,
from an effort of magnanimity, to which there is nothing pa-
rallel in history, five hundred men voluntarily consented to be
shut up in a hoflile country, filled with powerful and unknown
nations; and having precluded every means of escape, left
themfclves without any resource but their own valour and per-
feverancc '.

b Rclat. di Cortes. Raniuf. iii. 225. B. Diaz. c. 57, 58. -lIcr""l, Jcc. 2. lib. V.
C. 14.

NOTHING
+ +

NOTHING now retarded Cortes; the alacrity of his troops

and the disposition of his allies were equally favourable. All
the advantages, however, derived from the latter, though pro-
cured by much assiduity and address, were well-nigh loft in a
moment by an indiscreet sally of religious zeal, which, on
many occasions, precipitated Cortes into ations inconsistent
with the prudence that distinguishes his character. Though
hitherto he had neither time nor opportunity to explain to the
natives the errors of their own superstition, or to inftrut them
in the principles of the Chriflian faith, he commanded his fol-
diers to overturn the altars and to destroy the idols in the chief
temple of Zempoalla, and in their place to ered a crucifix and
an image of the Virgin Mary. The people beheld this with
astonishment and horror; the priefis excited them to arms;
but such was the authority of Cortes, and so great the afccndant
which the Spaniards had acquired, that the commotion was ap-
peased without bloodshed, and concord perfedly re-established .

CORTES began his march from Zempoalla on the sixteenth

of Augufi, with five hundred men, fifteen horse, and fix field-
pieces. The reft of his troops, consisting chiefly of such as
from age or infirmity were less fit for aive service, he left as
a garrison in Villa Rica, under the command of Efcalante, an
officer of merit, and warmly attached to his interest. The
cazique of Zempoalla supplied him with provisions, and with
two hundred of thlofe Indians called Tiemies, whose office, in
a country where tame animals were unknown, was to carry
burdens, and perform all servile labour. They were a great
relief to the Spanifi foldicrs, who hitherto had been obliged,

'
. Diaz. c. 4, 42. I-Icrrern, dec. 2. lib. v C. 3, 4.

F 2

BOO

V.

1A,'

Advances i,,-
to th; Ccun-
try.
10Ot

B OO K not only to carry their own baggage, but to drag along the

V.\ artillery by main force. He offered likewise a considerable body
1519. of his troops, but Cortes was satisfied with four hundred; tak-

ing care, however, to chute persons of such note as might prove
hostages for the fidelity of their master. Nothing memorable
happened in his progress, until he arrived on the confines of
Tlafcala. The inhabitants of that province, a warlike people,
were implacable enemies of the Mexicans, and had been united
in an ancient alliance with the caziques of Zempoalla. Though
less civilized than the fubjeds of Montezuma, they were ad-
vanced in improvement far beyond the rude nations of Ame-
rica, whose manners we have described. They had made con-
fiderable progress in agriculture; they dwelt in large towns;
they were not firangers to some species of commerce; and in
the imperfec accounts of their institutions and laws, transmitted
to us by the early Spanish writers, we discern traces both of
distributive justice and of criminal jurifdidion, in their interior
police. But frill, as the degree of their civilization was incom-
plete, and as they depended for subsistence not on agriculture
alone, but trusted for it, in a great measure, to hunting, they
retained many of the qualities natural to men in this slate.
Like them, they were fierce and revengeful; like them, too,
they were high-fpirited and independant. In confcquence of
the former, they were involved in perpetual hostilities, and
had but a slender and occasional intercourse with neighbouring
states. The latter inspired them with such detestation of fervi-
tude, that they not only refused to sloop to a foreign yoke, and
maintained an obstinate and fucccfsful contcft in defence of their
liberty against the superior power of the Mexican empire, but
they guarded with equal solicitude against domestic tyranny ;

and
36

and disdaining to acknowledge any master, they lived under
the mild and limited jurifdidion of a council eleCted by their
several tribes.

CORTES, though he had received information concerning the

martial cllarater of this people, flattered himself that his pro-
feflions of delivering the opprefled from the tyranny of Mon-
tezuma, their enmity to the Mexicans, and the example of
their ancient allies the Zempoallans, might induce them to
grant him a friendly reception. In order to difpofc them to
this, four Zempoallans of great eminence were sent ambaffa-
dors, to request, in his name and in that of their cazique, that
they would permit the Spaniards to pass through the territories
of Tlafcala in their way to Mexico. But instead of the favour-
able answer which was expeced, the Tlafcalans fcized the am-
baffadors, and, without any regard to their public character,
made preparations for sacrificing them to their gods. At the
fame time, they assembled their troops, in order to oppose those
unknown invaders, if they should attempt to make their passage
good by force of arms. Various motives concurred in pre:ipi-
tating the Tlafcalans into this resolution. A fierce people, shut
up within its own narrow precincs, and little accufiorned to any
intercourse with foreigners, is apt to confider every firanger as
an enemy, and is easily excited to arms. They concluded, from
Cortes's proposal of visiting Montezuma in his capital, that,
notwith anding all his profefions, he courted the friendflhip of
a monarch whom they both hated and feared. The imprudent
zeal of Cortes in violating the temples in Zempoalla, filled tie
TlafcL!uans ith horror; and as they were no lcfs attnchcd to
their filprfPitien than the other nations of New Sp::i:l, !;'cv
were impatient to avenge their injured gods, and to cclquie! 'Ic

merit
g

37
13B 00 K

V.

1519.

H:s wr with
thi Tlafca-
lalns.

D1 0 0 K merit of offering up to them as vicirns those impious men,
<...- who had dared to profane their altars; the Spaniards, from
1519. the smallness of their number, were objecs of their contempt;

they had not yet measured their own strength with theirs, and
had no idea of the superiority which they derived from their
arms and discipline.

Aug. 30. CORTES, after waiting ome days, in vain, for the return
Succels of it.

of his ambassadors, advanced into the Tlafcalan territories. As
the resolutions of people who delight in war are executed with
no less pronptitude than they are formed, he found troops in
the field ready to oppose him. They attacked him with great
intrepidity, and in the first encounter, wounded some of the
Spaniards, and killed two horses; a loss, in thei. ituation, of
great moment, because it was irreparable. From this specimen
of the courage of his new enemies, Cortes saw the neceflity of
proceeding with caution. His army marched in clefe or'er;
he chose the stations where he halted with attention, and for-
tified every camp with extraordinary care. During fourteen
days he was exposed to almost uninterrupted assaults; the Tlaf-
calans advancing with numerous armies, and renewing the at-
tack in various forms, with a degree of valour and perseverance
to which the Spaniards had seen nothing parallel in the New
World. The Spanish hiflorians describe those successive battles
with great pomp, and enter into a minute detail of particulars,
mingling many exaggerated and incredible circumstances' with
those which are real and marvellous. But no power of words
can render the recital of a combat interesting, where there is no
equality of danger; and when the narrative closes with an ac-

d See NOTE IX.

count

count of thousands slain on the one fide, while not a single per- B K

V.

son falls on the other, the most laboured descriptions of the c- -
previous disposition of the troops, or of the various viciflitudes '5'9..
in the engagement, command no attention.

THERE are some circumfiances, however, in this war, which S3me singular

circullulances

are memorable and merit notice, as they throw light upon the in it.
character both of the people of New Spain, and of their con-
querors. Though the Tlafcalans brought into the field such vail
armies as appear sufficient to have overwhclmed the Spaniards,
they were never able to make any imprcffion upon their small
battalion. Singular as this may fccm, it is not inexplicable.
The Tlafcalans, though ad.lided to war, were, like all unpo-
lifhed nations, firangers to military order and difcilline, and
loft all the advantage which they might have derived from their
numbers, and the impetuosity of their attack, by their conflant
solicitude to carry off the dead and wounded. This point of
honour, founded on a sentiment of tenderness natural to the
human mind, and strengthened by anxiety to preserve the bo-
dies of their countrymen from being devoured by their enemies,
was universal among the people of New Spain. Attention to
this pious office occupied them, even during the heat of com-
bat', broke their union, and diminished the force of the im-
pression which they might have made by a joint effort.

NOT only was their superiority in number of little avail, but

the imperfection of their military weapons rendered their va-
lour in a great measure inoffensive. After three battles, and
many flkirmifhes and afihults, not one Spaniard was killed in

' B, Diaz. c, 65.

the

39

B o o K the field. Arrows and spears, headed with flint or the bones

v. of fishes, stakes hardened in the fire, and wooden swords,
s5'9' though deftrudive weapons among naked Indians, were easily

turned aside by the Spanish bucklers, and could hardly pene-
trate the eJalaupiles, or quilted jackets which the soldiers wore.
The Tlafcalans advanced boldly to the charge, and often fought
hand to hand. Many of the Spaniards were wounded, though
all slightly, which cannot be imputed to any want of courage
in their enemies, but to the defect of the arms with which they
assailed them.

NOTWITHSTANDING the fury with which the Tlafcalans at-

tacked the Spaniards, they seem to have conducted their
hostilities with rome degree of barbarous generosity. They
gave the Spaniards warning of their hoflile intentions, and as
they knew that they wanted provisions, and imagined, per-
haps, like the other Americans, that they had left their own
country because it did not afford them subsistence, they ent to
their camp a large supply of poultry and maize, desiring them
to eat plentifully, because they scorned to attack an enem , en-
feebled by hunger, and it would be an affront to their Gods to
offer them famished vitims, as well as disagreeable to them-
selves to feed on such emaciated prey '

WHEN they were taught, by the first encounter with their

new enemies, that it was not easy to execute this threat; when
they perceived, in the subsequent cngagements, that notwith-
tfanding all the efforts of their own valour, of which they had
a very high opinion, not one of the Spaniards was slain or

-Icrrera, dec. 2. lib. vi. c. 6. Gomara Cron. c. 47.

taken,
40

taken, they began to conceive them to be a superior order of 1 o o K
beings, againfi whom human power could ot avail. In this
extremity, they had recourse to their priests, requiring them 159'
to reveal the myflerious causes of such extraordinary events
and to declare what new means they should employ in order to
repulse those formidable invaders. The priests, after many fa-
crifices and incantations, delivered this response: That these
firangers were the offspring of the fun, procreated by his ani-
mating energy in the regions of the east; that, by day, while
cheriihed with the influence of his parental beams, they were
invincible; but by night, when his reviving heat was with-
drawn, their vigour declined and faded like the herbs in the
field, and they dwindled down into mortal men . Theories
less plausible have gained credit with more enlightened nations,
and have influenced their conduct. In consequence of this, the
Tlafcalans, with the implicit confidence of men who fancy
tlemfelves to be under the guidance of Heaven, aed in con-
tradicion to one of their most established maxims in war, and
ventured to attack the enemy in the night-time, in hopes of
destroying them wihen enfeebled and firprifcd. But Cortes
had more vigilance and difcernnient than to be deceived by the
rude stratagems of an Indian army. The centinels at his out-
pofis, observing some extraordinary movement among the Tlaf-
calans, gave the alarm. In a moment the troops were under
arms, and sallying out, dispersed the party with great flaugh-
ter, without allowing them to approach the camp. Convinced,
by fad experience, that their priests had deluded them, and
satisfied that they attempted in vain, either to deceive or to
vanquish their enemies, the fiercencfs of the Tlafcalans abated,
and they began to incline seriously to peace.

g 1 I )i.tz c. 66.
VOL. II.

G

..
-

4r

B O 0 K THEY were at a los, however, in what manner to address

V. the flrangers, what idea to form of their character, and whe-
is . thcr to confider them as beings of a gentle or of a malevolent

The Ir fcl' -
l.,.s dipoJcd nature. There were circumfiances in their conduct which
tI, pace. seemed to favour each opinion. On the one hand, as the

Spaniards conflantly dismissed the prisoners whom they took,
not only without injury, but often with presents of Eu-
ropean toys, and renewed their offers of peace after every vic-
tory; this lenity amazed people accufomned to the exterminat-
ing system of war known in America, and who sacrificed and
devoured without mercy all the captives taken in battle, and
disposed them to entertain favourable fcntiments of their huma-
nity. But, on the other hand, as Cortes had seized fifty of
their countrymen who brought provisions to his camp, and
fuippofing them to be spies, had cut off their hands " this
bloody fpedacle, added to the terror occasioned by the fire-
arms and horses, filled them with dreadful impressions of their
ferocity . Accordingly, this uncertainty was apparent in their
mode of addressing the Spaniards. "If, said they, you are
divinities of a cruel and savage nature, we present to you five
slaves, that you may drink their blood and eat their flesh. If
you are mild deities, accept an offering of incense and varie-
gated plumes. If you are men, here is meat, and bread and
fruit, to nourish you ." The peace, which both parties now de-
Concludcd. fired with equal ardour, was oon concluded. The Tlafcalans

yielded themselves as vaffas to the crown of Caflile, and en-
gaged to allift Cortes in all his future operations. He took the
republic under his protection, and promised to defend their
persons and possessions from injury or violence.

L Cortes Rclat. Ramus. ii. 228. C. Gornara Cron. c. 48. i See NOTE X.
! B. Diaz. c. 70. Goinara Cron. c. 47. Herrcra, dec 2. lib vi. c. 7.

THIS

THIS treaty was concluded at a seasonable juncture fr the

Spaniards. The fatigue of service among a miall body of men,
surrounded by such a multitude of enemies, was incredible.
Half the army was on duty every night, and even they whose
turn it was to reft, slept always upon their arms, that they
might be ready to run to their posts on a moment's warning.
Many of them were wounded, a good number, and among
these Cortes himself, laboured under the difiemper peculiar
to the climate, and fevcral had died since they fct out
from Vera Cruz. Notwithstanding the supplies which
they received from the Tlafcalans, they were often in w.nt
of provisions, and so deflitute of the neccffaries molt re-
quifitc in dangerous service; that they had no salve to drcfs
their wounds, but what was compared with the fat of the In-
dians whom they had slain '. Worn out with fu.h intolerable
toil and hardships, many of the soldiers began to murmur,
and when they reflected on the multitude and boldness of their
enemies, more were ready to despair. It rcquircd the utmost
exertion of Cortes's authority and addrcfs to check this spirit of
despondency in its progress, and to reanimate his followvers with
their wonted sense of their own superiority over the enemics
with whom they had to cotcnd '. The fubmislion of the Tlaf-
calans, and their own triumphant entry into the capital city,
where they were received with the reverence paid to beings of
a superior order, banished, at once, from the minds of the
Spaniards all memory of past sufferings, difp)cllcd every anxi-
ous thought with rcfped to their future operations, and fully
satisfied them that there was not now any power in America
able to withstand their arms ".

1 B. Diaz c. 62. 65.
Goinara Cron. c. 51.

"l Cortes Rclat. Ranulf. iii. 229. B. Diaz . 6c . .
Cortes Rclat. Ramnuf. iii. 230. 13. Diaz, c. 72.

G 2 CoR rE

BOOK

1v519

Advantages
ol'it to the
Spaniards.

4-+

CORTES remained twenty days in Tlafcala, in order to allow

his troops a short interval of repose after such hard fervicc.
During that time, he was employed in tranfadions and inqui-
ries of great moment with refpet to his fture schemes. In
his daily conferences with the Tlafcalan chiefs, he received in-
formation concerning every particular relative to the slate of the
Mexican empire, or to the qualities of its fovcreign, which
could be of use in regulating his conduct, whethecr he flould
be obliged to a as a friend or as an enemy. As he found
that the antipathy of his new allies to the Mexican nation was
no less implacable than had been represented, and perceived
what benefit he might derive from the aid of fucll powerful
confederates, he employed all his powers of insinuation in order
to gain their confidence. Nor was any extraordinary exertion
of these necessary. The Tlafcalans, with the levity of mind
natural to unpoliihed men, were, of their own accord, disposed
to run from the extreme of hatred to that of fondness. Every
thing in the appearance and conduct of their guests, was to them
matter of wonder °. They gazed at whatever the Spaniards did
with admiration, and fancying them to be of heavenly origin,
were eager not only to comply with their demands, but to an-
ticipate their wishes. They offered, accordingly, to accom-
pany Cortes in his march to Mexico, with all the forces of the
republic, under the command of their most experienced cap-
tains.

BUT, after bellowing so much pains on cementing this

union, all the beneficial fruits of it were on the point of being
loft, by a new cffufion of that intemperate zeal with which

* See NOTE XT.

Cortcs
BOOK

V.

1 5 1 9.

Cortes fclIci-
tous to ain
their conti-
den ce.

Which lie
had alimoft
loft by his
ra ll 7eal.

Cortes was animated, no less than the other adventurers of the i o o 1
age. They all confidered themselves as instruments emplyed
by Heaven to propagate the Christian faitl; and the lss tlly ')
were qualified either by their knowledge or morals for fch a
funcion, they were more eager to discharge it. The profound
veneration of the Tlafcalans for the Spaniards, having encou-
raged Cortes to explain to ome of their chiefs the doctrines of
the Christian religion, and to infifi that they hould abandon
their own fuperfiitions, and embrace the faith of their new
friends, they, according to an idea universal among barbarous
nations, readily acknowledged the truth and excellence of what
he taught; but contended, that the Tellls of Tlafcala were di-
vinities no less than the God in whom the Spaniards believed;
and as that Being was intitled to their homage, so tlly were
bound to revere the fame powers which their aneccors had
woriipped. Cortes continued, nevcrtlelefs, to urge his de-
mand in a tone of authority, mingling threats with his argu-
ments, until the Tlafealans could bear it no longer, and con-
jured him never to mention this again, left the Gods hould
avenge on their heads the guilt of having litened to such a
proposition. Cortes, aflonifhed and enraged at their obflinacy,
prepared to execute by force what he could not accomplish by
pcrfuafion, and was going to overturn their altars, and cafi
down their idols with the fame violent hand as at Zempoalla,
if father Bartholemew de Olmedo, chaplain to the expedition,
had not checked his inconsiderate impetuosity. He rcprelented
the imprudence of such an attempt in 1a rge city newly re-
conciled, and filled with people no less fuperflitious than war-
like; he declared that the proceiinig at Zempoalla had alwa.'s
appeared to him precipitate and unjufi; tlat religion was not
to be proipagated by the sword, or infidels to lbe colncltc(d y

\'iolcnlcc ;

45

46
1 o 0 K violence; that other weapons were to be employed in this mi-

x,.
v nifiry, patient infirudion must enlighten the underfianding,
sl59. and pious example captivate the heart, before men could be

induced to abandon error and embrace the truth . Amidst
scenes, where a narrow-minded bigotry appears in such close
union with oppression and cruelty, sentiments so liberal and
humane, sooth the mind with unexpeCed pleasure; and at a
time, when the rights of conscience were little undertfood in
the Christian world, and the idea of toleration unknown, one
is astonished to find a Spanifl monk of the sixteenth century
among the first advocates against persecution, and in behalf of
religious liberty. The remonftranccs of an ecclefiaflic no less
rcfpedable for wisdom than virtue, had their proper weight
with Cortes. He left the Tlafcalans in the undifluibcd exer-
cife of their own rites, requiring only that they should desist
from their horrid practice of offering human vidtims in fa-
crifice.

Advances to CORT ES, as soon as his troops were fit for service, resolved
Cholula. to continue his march towards Mexico, notwithflanding the

earners diffuafivcs of the Tlafcalans, wlio reprecfnted his de-
firudion as unavoidable, if he put hinifelf in the power of a
prince so faithless and cruel as Montezuma. As he was ac-
companied by fix thousand Tlafcallns, he had now the com-
0o. r3 mand of forces which resembled a rcgular army. They di-

rceed tleir course towards Cholula ; Montczuma, who had at
length consented to admit the Spaniards into his pretence, hav-
ing informed Cortes, that he had given orders for his fiiendly
reception there. Cholula was a confilcrablc town, and though
only five lcagues distant from Tlafcala, wa:r formerly an indc-

r '. Dia . c. 77. p 51 . c. f<3 p. 6i.

pcndent

47

pendent state, but had been lately fubjc&edl to the Mcxican
empire. This was confidered by all the peolle of New Spain
as a holy place, the fantuary and chief feat of their gods, to
which pilgrims resorted from cvcry province, and a greater
number of human vitims were offered in its principal temple
than even in that of Mexico . Montezuma fems to have in-
vited the Spaniards thither, either from some fupcrftitious hope
that the gods would not susser this sacred mansion to be defiled,
without pouring down their wrath upon those impious firangers,
who ventured to insult their power in the place of its peculiar
rcfidence, or from a belief that he himself might there attempt
to cut them off with more certain success, under the immediate
proteEtion of his divinities.

CORTES had been warned by the Tlafcalans, before he set

out on his march, to keep a watchful eye over the Cholulans.
He himelf, though received into the town with much seeming
recpect and cordiality, observed several circumfiances in their
conduct which excited suspicion. Two of the Tlafcalans, who
were encamped at some diflance from the town, as the Cho-
lulans refused to admit their ancient enemies within its pre-
cints, having found means to enter in disguise, acquainted
Cortes, that they ofrvcd the women and clildren of the prin-
cipal citizens retiring in great hurry every nigilt; and that fix
children had been sacrificcd in the chief temple, a rite which
indicated the execution of ome warlike enterprise to be ap-
proaching. At the ftme time, Marina the interpreter received
information from an Indian woman of diflintion, whose con-
fidence fle had gained, that the dcftru-ion of her friends was

q Torqucmiada Monar. Ind. i. z28, 2Sz. ii. 291. Goinara Cin. . 61. Ilcru.ii,
dec. 2, lib. vii. c. 2.

concerted

B 00V

1.

1 3 .

The icritv
0h 1-is] plo-e-
du;e tleie.

B 0 0 K concerted; that a body of Mexican troops lay concealed near
----,.- the town; that ome of the itreets were barricaded, and in
1519. others pits or deep trenches were dug, and slightly covered

over, as traps into which the horfc might fall; that sones and
missive weapons were collected on the tops of the temples,
with which to overwhelm the infantry ; that the fatal hour was
now at hand, and their ruin unavoidable. Cortes, alarmed at
this concurring evidence, secretly arrested three of the chief
priests, and extorted from them a confession that confirmed the
intelligence which he had received. As not a moment was to
be loft, he instantly resolved to prevent his enemies, and to in-
flicd on them such dreadful vengeance as might strike Monte-
zuma and his fubjets with terror. For this purpose, the Spa-
niards and Zempoallans were drawn up in a large court, which
had been allotted for their quarters near the centre of the town;
the Tlafcalans had orders to advance; the magiilratcs, and fe-
veral of the chief citizens, were sent for under various pretexts,
and seized. On a signal given, the troops rushed out, and fell
upon the multitude, destitute of leaders, and so much afto-
nifhed, that the weapons dropped from their hands, and they
flood motionlcfs, and incapable of defence. While the Spa-
niards pressed them in front, the Tlafcalans attacked them in
the rear. The fireets were filled with bloodshed and death.
The temples, which afforded a retreat to the priefis and some
of the leading men, were set on fire, and they perished in the
flames. This scene of horror continued two days; during
which, the wretched inhtbitants fufTerecl all that the deflrudive
rage of the Spaniards, or the implacable revenge of their Indian
allies, could infliC. At length the carnage ceafel, after the
slaughter of fix thousand Cholulans, without the lots of a ingle
Spaniard. Cortes then rleafed the magistrates, and reproach-

ing
48

ing them bitterly for their intended treachery, declared, that
as justice was now appeased, he forgave the offence, but re-
quired them to recall the citizens who had fled, and re-eftl;lifh
order in the town. Such was the ascendant which the Spa-
niards had acquired over this superstitious race of men, and
so deeply were they impressed with an opinion of their superior
discernment, as well as power, that, in obedience to this com-
mand, the city was in a few days filled again with people, who,
amidst the ruins of their sacred buildings, yielded refpeQful
service to men whose hands were slained with the blood of their
relations and fellow-citizens '.

FROM Cholula, Cortes advanced diretly towards Mexico,

which was only twenty leagues distant. In every place through
which he pafged, he was received as a person pofleffled of fui-
cicnt power to deliver the empire from the oppression under
which it groaned; and the caziques or governors, with the un-
reserved confidence reposed in superior beings, communicated
to him all the grievances which they felt under the tyrannical
government of Montezuma. When Cortes firfl observed the
feeds of difcontcnt in the remote provinces of the empire, a ray
of hope broke in upon his mind; but when he difcovcred such
symptoms of alienation from their monarch near the feat of go-
vernment, he concluded that the vital parts of the conflitution
were affected, and conceived the mos sanguine expectations of
overturning a flatc whose natural frength was thus divided and
impaired. While those reflections encouraged the general to
perfifl in his arduous undertaking, the soldiers were no less
animated by obfcrvations more obvious to their capacity. In

' Cortes Rclat. Ramus. iii. 231. B. Diaz. c. 83. Gomara Cron. c. 64. I-lrrer.
dcc. 2. lib. vii . c1,2. See NOTE XII.

VOL. II. H defendineg

B 0 -,

V.

1i519

CA. 29.

Advances to-
wadsN; Mexi-
co.

49

descending from the mountains of Chalco, across which the
road lay, the vait plain of Mexico opened gradually to their
view. When they firit beheld this profpet, one of the most
striking and beautiful on the face of the earth; when they ob-
served fertile and cultivated fields, ftrctching farther than the
eye could reach; when they saw a lake refemlbling thc sea in ex-
tent, cncompaffed with large towns, and discovered the capital
city rising upon an island in the middle, adorned with its temples
and turrets; the scene so far exceeded their imagination, that
some believed the fanciful descriptions of romance were realized,
and that its enchanted palaces and gilded domes were presented
to tleir fight; others could hardly pcrfuadc thcmselvcs that
this wonderful spectacle was any thing more than a dream .
As they advanced, their doubts were removed, but their amaec-
ment increased. They were now fully satisfied that the coun-
try was rich beyond any conception which they had formed of
it, and flattered themselves, that at length tlhey should obtain an
ample recompence for all their ferviccs and sufferings.

No enemy had yet appeared to oppose their progress, though

several circumstances occurred wh!ich led them to fufpeat that
rome design was formed to surprise and cut them off. Many
messengers arrived successively from Montezuma, permitting
them one day to advance, requiring theml on the next to retire,
as his hopes or fears alternately prevailed; and so wonderful
was this infatuation, which seems to be unaccountable on any
supposition but that of a fupcrftitious dread of the Spaniards, as
beings of a fupcrior naturc, that Cortcs was almost at the gates
of the capital, before the monarch had determined whether to
receive him as a friend, or to oppose him as an enemy. But as no

* Sc NOT XIIl.

sign

B 00 K
BOOK

V.

1519.

First view of
it.

The irrclblu-
tion of Mon-
tczunla.

5o

i gn of open hoffility appeared, the Spaniards, without -regarding
the flutuations of Montezuma's fntiments, conti:-uc: their
march along the canfeway which led to Mexico through the lake,
with great circum pediorn and the flricfL difciplinr,,though with-
out fceming to fufpcca the prince whom they were about to visit.

WHEN they drew ncar the city, abcut a thousand pcrfons,

who appeared to be of diiiniion, came forth to meet them,
adorned with plumes, and clad in mantles of fine cotton. Each
of these, in his order, passed by Cortes, and salutcd him ac-
cording to the mode dccmid imoflt refpcclful arid fubrniffive in
their country. They announccd the approach of Montezuma
hIimcflf, and soon after his harbingcrs came in fight. Tihre
appeared first two hundred persons in an uniform dress, with
large plumes of feathers, alike in falhion, marching two and
two, in cccp filcnce, barefo)ted, with their cyes fincd on the
ground. These were followed by a compa)n of higher ran!,
in their most showy apparel, in he midst of .llom was Mon-
tezuima, in a chair or litter richly ornamcnted with gold, and
feathers of various colours. Four of his principal favouritcs
carnicd him on their shoulders, others fnpporLcd a canopy of
curious worlkmanfhip over his head. Bcfore him marched
thire of icrs with rods of gold in their Ihands, whlicll they
lifted up on high at certain intervals, and at that signal all
the people bowed their heads, and hid tleir faces, as unwor-
thy to look on o great a monarch. Whien lie drew near,
Cortes difiiiountd, advancing towards him with officious hafie,
and in a rcfpctfull posture. At the fame time Montczuma:
alighted from his chair, and leaning on the arms of. two of his
near relations, approached with a flow and Pfately pace, his
attendants covering the fireet with cotton cloths, that lie might

I 2 not

5r
13 0 0 K

V.

1 19.

viev.* .'Ia tace
Sp,.'1:ni F 5

B O O K not touch the ground. Cortes accofled him with profound

V.
VL--- reverence, after the European fashion. He returned the fa-
'519 lutation, according to the mode of his country, by touching

the earth with his hand, and then kissing it. This ceremony,
the customary expression of reverence from inferiors towards
those who were above them in rank, appeared such amazing
condescension in a proud monarch, who scarcely deigned to
confider the reft of mankind as of the fame species with himself,
that all his fubjets firmly believed those persons, before whom
he humbled himself in this manner, to be omething more than
human. Accordingly, as they marched through the crowd,
the Spaniards frequently, and with much fatisfaEion, heard
themselves denominated Teules, or divinities. Nothing mate-
rial passed in this first interview. Montezuma condued Cortes
to the quarters which he had prepared for his reception, and
immediately took leave of him, with a politeness not unworthy
of a court more refined. " You are now," fays he, ' with
your brothers, in your own house refresh yourselves after
your fatigue, and be happy until I return '." The place allot-
ted to the Spaniards for their lodging was a house built by the
father of Montezuma. It was surrounded by a flone-wall, with
towers at proper distances, which served for defence as well as
for ornament, and its apartments and courts were so large as
to accommodate both the Spaniards and their Indian allies.
The first care of Cortes was to take precautions for his security,
by planting the artillery so as to command the different avenues
which led to it, by appointing a large division of his troops to
be always on guard, and by posting centinels at proper Rations,
with injunctions to observe the fame vigilant discipline as if they
were within fight of an enemy's camp.

Corts Rclat. Ramn. iii. 232-235. B. Diaz. C. 83-88. Gomara Cron. c. 64,
65. Herrera, dec. 2, lib. vii. c. 3, 4, 5.

IN
52

IN the evening Montezuma returned to visit his guefis with B K

. .. . V.

the fame pomp as in their first interview, and brought prefcnts t.-
of such value, not only to Cortes and to his officers, but even to H-is, ia of
the pri lte men, as proved the liberality of the monarch to be the Spaniards.
suitable to the opulence of his kingdom. A long conference en-
sued, n which Cortes learned what was the opinion of Monte-
zuim'n with relped to the Spaniards. It was an established tradi-
tion, he told him, among the Mexicans, that their ancestors came
originally from a remote region, and conquered the provinces
now subjet to his dominion ; that after tey were fettled there,
the great captain who conducted this colony returned to his own
country, promising, that at ome future period his descendants
fhculd visit them, assume the government, and reform their con-
flitutlon and laws; that, from what he had heard and seen of
Cortes and his followers, he was convinced that they were the
very persons \whose appearance their traditions and prophecies
taught them to expect; that accordingly he had received them,
not as firangers, but as relations of the fame blood and paren-
tage, and desired that they might confider themfelvcs as masters
in his dominionsj for both himself and his fubjeds should be
ready to comply with their will, and even to prevent their
wilhes. Cortes made a reply in his usual stile with refpe to
the dignity and power of his sovereign, and his intention in
fending him into that country; artfully endeavouring so to
frame his discourse, that it might coincide as much as poflible
with the idea which Montezuma had formed concerning the
origin of the Spaniards. Next morning, Cortes and ome of
his principal attendants were admitted to a public audience of
the emperor. The three subsequent days were employed in
viewing the city; the appearance of which, so far fupcrior in
the order of its buildings and the number of its inhabitants to

any

53

s-' 0 K any place the Spaniards had beheld in America, and yet so little

V.
,- .. resembling the firucure of an European city, filled them with
'5' 9 surprise and admiration.

MEXICO, 'enlucbtitlanl, as it was ancicntlv called by the

natives, is situated in a large pin, cnvironed by mountains
of such height, that, though within the torrid zone, the tm-
perature of its climate is mild and healthful. All the moiflure
which descends from the high grounds is collected in several
lakes, the two largest of which, of about ninety miles in cir-
cuit, communicate with each other. The waters of the one
arc fresh, those of the others brackifl. On the banks of the
latter, and on ome small islands adjoining to them, the capital
of Montczuma's empire was built. The access to the city was
by artificial causeways or fireets, f)rmed of flones and earth,
about thirty feet in breadth. As the waters of the lake, dur-
ing the rainy season, overflowed the flat country, tlhee cause-
ways were of considerable length. That of Tacuba on the
weft extended a mile and a half; that of Tezeuco on the north-
weft three miles; that of Cuoyacan towards the south fix
miles. On the east there was no causeway, and the city could
be approached only by canoes ". In each of tlefe causeways
were openings, at proper intervals, through which the waters
flowed; and over thcee beams of timber were laid, which,
being covered with earth, the causeway or fircct had every-
where an uniform appearance. As the approaches to the city
were singular, its confiruaion was remarkable. Not only the
temples of their gods, but the lioufes belonging to the monarch,
and to pcrfons of diflincdion, were of such dimensions, that,
in comparison with any other buildings which had bcen dif-

F. To;ribio MS.

covered
54

covered in America, they might be termed magnificent. The B 0o K
habitations of the common people were mean, rcfumblir,: t;'c c_--
huts of other Indians. But they were all placed in a rclular '5'
manner, on the banks of the canals which pafled throuLh the
city, in some of its diltrils, or on the fiJcs of tle fircts wliihk
interfccled it in other quartcrs. In fevcril places were large
openings or squares, one of wilich, allotted for the great
market, is fid to have been so pacious, that forty or fifty
thousand persons carried on traffic there. In this city, the
pride of the New World, and the noblest monument of the
industry and art of man, while unacquainted with the use of
iron, and deflitute of aid fiom any dmefiic animal, the Spa-
niards, who are mofl moderate in their computations, reckon
that there were at cafi sixty thousand inhabitants .

BUTr ho)-. muich i)-cr the novelty of thof objecQs migllt T:;er C,-

gs roul :a-

a.nus2 or aftonifl tlh Spaniards, they felt the utmost solicitude ioai.
with refpcad to their own situation. From a concurrence of
circumstances, n.) lets unexpeded than favourable to their pro-
grecs, they had been allowed to penetrate into the heart of a
powerful kingdom, and were now lodged in its capital,
without having once met with open opposition from its mo-
narch. The Tlafcalans,howcver, had carncfily diifuaded them
from placing such confidence in Montezuma as to enter a (ity
of such a peculiar situation as Mcxico, where that prince w'ou!d
have them at mercy, fllut up as it were in a fnarc, from which
it was impofflile to escape. They ffurcd hIin that the ' Lxi-
can priefis had, in name of the Gods, c-'unfllCe theilr i'vc-
reign to admit the Spaniards into the cap i, that lie n' '.ji

Cortes !Rc.,r. R:1 l iii. ) . L t (!c'!- gran c;ri (dc xico, p)'r ,i ; ..i
b1!omno dcl CJIlrlc . Rlnii. ibiil,. . . 1 l-l rcra, dcc. 2, lib. vii . i .:

",it1

S5

cut them off there at one blow with perfeCt. security . They
now perceived, too plainly, that the apprehensions of their al-
lies were not destitute of foundation; that, by breaking the
bridges placed at certain intervals on the causeways, or by de-
stroying part of the causeways themselves, their retreat would be
rendered impracicable, and they muff remain cooped up in the
centre of a hoflile city, surrounded by multitudes sufficient to
overwhelm them, and without a possibility of receiving aid
from their allies. Montezuma had, indeed, received them with
distinguished refped. But ought they to reckon upon this as
real, or to confider it as feigned? Even if it were sincere,
could they promise on its continuance ? Their safety depended
upon the will of a monarch in whole attachment they had no
reason to confide; and an order flowing from his caprice, or a
word uttered by him in passion, might decide irrevocably con-
cerning their fate z.

THESE reflections, so obvious as to occur to the meanest

soldier, did not escape the vigilant sagacity of their general.
Before he set out from Cholula, Cortes had received advice
from Villa Rica', that Qualpopoca, one of the Mexican ge-
nerals on the frontiers, having assembled an army in order to
attack ome of the people whom the Spaniards had encouraged
to throw off the Mexican yoke, Efcalante had marched out with
part of the garrison to support his allies; that an engagement
had ensued, in which, though the Spaniards were vicorious,
Efcalante, with seven of his men, had been mortally wounded,
his horse killed, and one Spaniard had been surrounded by the
enemy and taken alive; that the head of this unfortunate cap-

Y B. Diaz. c. 85, 86.

Ibid. c. 94.

a Cortes Relat. Ram. iii. 235. C.

tive,
BOOK

V.

1519.

Solicitude
and perplex-
ity of Coites.

tive, after being carried in triumph to different cities, in order B o o ]K
to convince the people that their invaders were not immortal,
had been ent to Mexico ''. Cortes, though alarmed with this .
intelligence, as an indication of Montezuma's hoflile intentions,
had continued his march. But as oon as he entered Mexico,
he became sensible, that, from an excess of confidence in the fu-
perior valour and discipline of his troops, as well as from the
disadvantage of having nothing to guide him in an unknown
country, but the defective intelligence which he received froin
people with whom his mode of communication was very im-
perfet, he had puffed forward into a situation, where it was dif-
ficult to continue, and from which it was dangerous to retire.
Disgrace, and perhaps ruin, was the certain consequence of at-
tempting the latter. The success of his enterprise depended
upon supporting the high opinion which the people of New
Spain had formed with refped to the irrefiflible power of his
arms. Upon the first symptom of timidity on his part, their
veneration would cease, and Montezuma, whom fear alone re-
strained at present, would let loose upon him the whole force
of his empire. At the fame time, he knew that the counte-
nance of his own overeign was to be obtain :d only by a ferics
of victories, and that nothing but the merit of extraordinary
success could screen his conduct from the censure of irregularity.
From all these considerations, it was neceffiry to maintain his
flation, and to extricate himself out of the difficulties in which
one bold ftcp had involved him, by venturing upon another
fill bolder. The situation was trying, but his mind was equal
to it; and after revolving the matter with deep attention, he
fixed upon a plan no less extraordinary than daring. He deter-

b B. Diaz, c. 93, 94. I-errera, dec. 2. lib. viii. c. I.
VOL. II.

I

mined

E o o i. mined to fcize Montezuma in his palace, and to carrv him as a
,Be_ prifoncr to the Spanish quarters. From the fuperflitious venera-

' '9. tion of the Mexicans for the person of their monarch, as well as

Rcfolvcs to
icize Miontc- their implicit ubmiflion to his will, he hoped, by having :.io.i-

";' tezuma in his power, to acquire the supreme diredivn of their

affairs; or at leart, with such a sacrcd pledge in his hands, he
made no doubt of being fecurc from any ef-ort of their vio-
lence.

i;s nianncr THIS he immediately proposed to his officers. The timid
l.Xecuti1 flartled at a measure so audacious, and raised objections. The

more intelligent and resolute, conscious that it was the only
rcfource in which there appeared any profped of safety, warmly
approved of it, and brought over their companions so cordially
to the fame opinion, that it was agreed instantly to make the
attempt. At his usual hour of visiting Montezuma, Cortes
went to the palace, accompanied by Alvarado, Saudoval, Lugo,
Velasquez de Leon, and Davila, five of his principal officers,
and as many trusty soldiers. Thirty chosen men followed, not
in regular order, but sauntering at ome diflance, as if they
had no objec but curiosity; finall parties were posted at proper
intervals, in all the streets leading from the Spanish quarters to
the court; and the remainder of his troops, with the Tlafcalan
allies, were under arms, ready to ally out on the firit alarm.
Cortes and his attendants were admitted without suspicion; the
Mexicans retiring, as usual, out of refpet. He addressed the
monarch in a tone very different from that which he had cm-
ployed in former conferences, reproaching him bitterly as the
author of the violent assault made upon the Spaniards by one of
his officers, and demanded public reparation for the loss which
he had fuflained by the death of ome of his companions, as

well
5s

59

well as for the insult offered to the great prince whose ervants o K
they were. Montezuma, confounded at this unexpected accu-
fation, and changing colour either from cnfcioufinefs of guilt, '5,9-
or from feeling the indignity with which he was treated, as-
ferted his own innocence with great earnefinefs, and, as a proof
of it, gave orders instantly to bring Qualpopoca and his accom-
plices prisoners to Mexico. Cortes replied, with seeming com-
plaifance, that a declaration so refpeetable left no doubt remain-
ing in his own mind, but that fomcthing more was requisite to
satisfy his followers, who would never be convinced that Mon-
tezuma did not harbour hostile intentions against them, unless,
as an evidence of his confidence and attachment, he removed
from his own palace, and took up his rcfidence in the Spanifl
quarters, where he should be served and honoured as became
a great monarch. The first mention of so strange a proposal
bereaved Montezuma of speech, and almost of motion. At
length, indignation gave him utterance, and he haughtily an-
fwered, " That persons of his rank were not accuflomed volun-
tarily to give up themselves as prifoncrs, and were he mean
enough to do so, his fubjeds would not permit such an affront
to be offered to their overeign." Cortes, unwilling to en plv
force, endeavourcd alternately to soothe and to intimidate him.
The altercation became warm; and having continued abovt
three hours, Velasquez de Lcon, an impetuous and gallant
young man, exclaimed with impatience, " Why waste more
time in vain ? Let us either seize him inflantly, or flab him to
the heart." Tho threatening voice and fierce gestures with
which these words were uttered, firuck Montezcuma. The Spa-
niards, he was fcnfible, had now proceeded so far, as left him:
no hope that they would rccede. Ilis own danger was immi-

1 2 ncnt,

nent, the necessity unavoidable. He saw both, and abandon-
ing hinifelf to his fate, complied with their request.

His officers were called. He communicated to them his re-

solution. Though astonished and afflited, they presumed not
to queflion the will of their maftcr, but carried him in silent
pomp, all bathed in tears, to the Spanifl quarters. When it was
known that the strangers were conveying away the emperor,
the people broke out into the wildest transports of grief and
rage, threatening the Spaniards with immediate deftruCion, as
the punishment justly due to their impious audacity. But as
soon as Montezuma appeared with a eeming gaiety of counte-
nance, and waved his hand, the tumult was hushed ; and upon
his declaring it to be of his own choice that he went to reside
for ome time among his new friends, the multitude, taught to
revere every intimation of their sovereign's pleasure, quietly
dispersed c.

THUS was a powerful prince seized by a few strangers, in

the midst of his capital, at noon-day, and carried off as a pri-
soner without opposition or bloodshed. History contains no-
thing parallel to this event, either with refped to the temerity
of the attempt, or the success of the execution; and were not
all the circumfiances of this extraordinary tranfation authenti-
cated by the most unquefionablz evidence, they would appear
lo wild and extravagant, as to go far beyond the bounds of that
verisimilitude which must be prcfervcd even in fititious narra-
tions.

t B. Diaz. c. 95. Gomara Cron. c. 83. Cortes Rclat. Rain. iii. p. 235, 236.
kleriera, dec. 2. lib. viii, c. 2, 3.

MONT EZUMA
BOOK

V.

1519.

Montczuina
c.rried to the
Spanifl quar-
ters. 6o

MONTEZUMA was received in the Spanish quarters with all

the ceremonious refpcd which Cortes had promised. He was
attended by his own domeflics, and served with his usual state.
His principal officers had free access to him, and he carried on
all the funEqions of government as if he had been at perfed
liberty. The Spaniards, however, watched him with all the
Scrupulous vigilance natutral in guarding such an important
prize d, endeavouring, at the Efmc time, to sooth and reconcile
him to his situation, by every external demonstration of regard
and attachment. But fi-om captive princes the hour of humi-
liation and suffering is never far diflant. QOualpopoca, his son,
and five of the principal officers who served under him, were
brought prisoners to the capital, in consequence of the orders
which Montezuma had issued The emperor gave them up to
Cortes, that he might inquire into the nature of their crime,
and determine their punishment. They were formally tried
by a Spanish court-martial; and though they had ated no
other part than what became loyal ubjets and brave men, in
obeying the orders of their lawful sovereign, and in opposing
the invaders of their country, they were condemned to be burnt
alive. The execution of such atrocious deeds is seldom long
suspended. The unhappy vidtims were instantly led forth.
The pile on which they were laid, was composed of the weapons
colleced in the royal magazine for the public defence. An
innumerable multitude of Mexicans beheld, in silent aflonifh-
ment, the double insult offered to the majesty of their empire;
an officer of diftindtion committed to the flames by the autho-
rity of firangers, for having done what he owed in duty to his
natural sovereign; and the arus provided by the foresight of

d See NOTE XIV.

their

0 0

V.
RccvcA

r .21 1p.

l,.-iih ii 's:.

S11hj (Etcd tc.
Ci l2 irit1ig-
niic2.

Dec. .

B o K their anceflors for avenging such wrongs, consumed before

their eyes.
1519.

Bur these were not the most shocking indignities which

they had to bear. Cortes, convinced that QOialpopoca would
not have ventured to attack Efcalante without orders from
his malter, was not satisfied with infliCting vengeance on
the inflrument employed in committing that crime, while the
author of it escaped with impunity. Just before QOlalpopoca
was led out to susser, Cortes entered the apartment of Monte-
zuma, followed by some of his officers, and a soldier carrying
a pair of fetters; and approaching the monarch with a lern
countenance, told him, that as the persons who were now to
undergo the punishment which they merited, had charged
him as the cause of the outrage committed, it was necessary
that he likewise fliould make atonement for that guilt; then
turning away abruptly, without waiting for a reply, com-
manded the soldiers to clap the fetters on his legs. The orders
were instantly executed. The disconsolate monarch, trained
up with an idea that his person was sacred and inviolable, and
confidering this profanation of it as the prelude of immediate
death, broke out into loud lamentations and complaints. His
attendants, speechless with horror, fell at his feet, bathing
them with their tears ; and bearing up the fetters in their hands,
endeavoured with officious tendcrnefs to lighten their pressure.
Nor did their grief and despondency abate, until Cortes re-
turned from the execution with a cheerful countenance, and
ordered the fetters to be taken off. As Montezuma's spirits
had funk with unmanly dejection, they now rose into indecent
joy, and, with an unbccoming transition, he passed at once

from
62

3'

from the angui.h of despair to transports of gratitude and fond- 13 oo 1
ncfs towards his deiivercrs.

IN those tranfadions, as reprefcnted by the Spanifi hifio- Re :cr.,of

Corret: con-

rians, we f.irch in vain for the qualities which diitinguifh duct.
other parts of Cortes's conduct. To usurp a jurifdiaion which
could not belong to a flrangcr, who assumed no higher cha-
rater thia ; .,at of an abaflador from a foreign prince, and,
under colour of it, to inflict a capital punishment on men whose
conduct entitled them to esteem, appears an at of barbarous
cruelty. To put the monarch of a great kingdom in irons,
and, after such ignominious treatment, suddenly to release him,
seems to be a display of power no lets inconsiderate than wan-
ton. According to their representation, no account can be
given either of the one acion or the other, but that Cortes, in-
toxicated with success, and presuming on the ascendant which-
he had acquired over the minds of the Mexicans, thought no-
thing too boll for him to undertake, or too dangerous to exe-
cute. But, in one view, these proceedings, however repug-
nant to justice and humanity, may have flowed from that artful
policy which regulated every part of Cortes's behaviour. The
Mexicans had conceived the Spaniards to be an order of beings
superior to men. It was of the utmost consequence to cherish
this illusion, and to keep up the veneration it inspired. Cortes.
wishcd that shedding the blood of a Spaniard should be deemed
the most heinous of all crimes; and nothing appeared better
calculated to establish this opinion, than to condemn the firit
Mexicans who had ventured to commit it, to a cruel death,
and to oblige their monarch himfelfto fubmnit to a mortifying
indignity, as an expiation for being accessary to their guilt c.

See NOT E XV.

1[ Bil

TuE rigour with which Cortes punished the unhappy per-

sons who first presumed to lay violent hands upon his followers,
seems accordingly to have made all the impression that he de-
fired. The spirit of Montezuma was not only overawed, but
subdued. During fix months that Cortes remained in Mexico,
the monarch continued in the Spaiifh quarters, with an ap-
pearance of as entire fatisfadion and tranquillity, as if he had
resided there not from constraint, but through choice. His
ministers and officers attended him as usual. He took cog-
nizance of all affairs; every order was iflued in his name.
The external aspet of government appearing the fame, and
all its ancient forms being scrupulously observed, the people
were so little sensible of any change, that they obeyed theman-
dates of their monarch with the fame submissive reverence as
ever. Such was the dread which both Montezuma and his
fubjets had of the Spaniards, or such the veneration in which
they held them, that no attempt was made to deliver their
sovereign from confinement; and though Cortes, relying on
this ascendant which he had acquired over their minds, permit-
ted him not only to visit his temples, but to make hunting ex-
curfions beyond the lake, a guard of a few Spaniards carried
with it such terror as to intimidate the multitude, and secure
the captive monarch

THUS, by the fortunate temerity of Cortes in seizing Mon-

tezuma, the Spaniards at once secured to themselves more exten-
five authority in the Mexican empire than it was possible to
have acquired in a long course of time by open force; and
they exercised more absolute sway in the name of another than
they could have done in their own. The arts of polished

f Cortes Rclat. p. 236. E. B. Diaz. c, 97, 98, 99.

nations
BOOK

V.

1519.

The power
which Cortes
acquired.

5 o,
64

nations in fubjealing such as are less improvei, have been nearly
the fame in every period. The fyflem of screening a foreign
usurpation, under the fiandion of authority derived from the
natural rulers of a country, the device of employing the ma-
giftrates and forms already eflablifhed as infiruments to intro-
duce a new dominion, of which we are apt to boast as sublime
refinements in policy peculiar to the present age, were inven-
tions of a more carly period, and had been tried with fucctcf
in the Weft, long before they were praflifed in the East.

CORTES availed himifelfto the utmost of the powcr which

he poffiiced by this mecans. ice sent some Spaniards, whom
lie judged best qualified for such commifions, into different
parts of the empire, accompanied by pcrfons of dirtindion,
whom Montezuma appointed to attend them both as guides
and protectors. They visitcd most of the provinces, viewed
their foil and produCtions, surveyed with particular care the
diftricEs which yielded gold or silver, pitched upon several
places as proper stations for future colonies, and endeavoured
to prepare the minds of the people for submitting to the Spaniili
yoke. While they were thus employed, Cortes, in the nalme
ani by the authority of fMlontezuma, degraded fme of the prin-
cipal officers in the empire, whose abilities or independent spirit
excited his jealousy, and fubflituted in their place persons lcs
capable or more obfcquious.

ONE tiing still was wanting to complete his fccurity. Ic

wifiicd to have fich command of the hike as inisht enfilre a rc-
freat, if either from levity or difgtif, the Mexicans should take
;rms al·iilt Iiim,i and break down the bridges or caurcsvrvls.
This, too, lis o-n addrelfs, and the facility of Montezumn, cn-

VUL.. II. K a!lW'd

65
13 C C lK

V.

I 2
11172 'J; .: he

B o K abled him to accomplish. Having frequently entertained his

V.

.-^- prisoner with pompous accounts of the European marine and art
1520. of navigation, he awakened his curiosity to fee those moving

palaces that made their way through the water without oars.
Under pretext of gratifying this desire, Cortes persuaded him to
appoint some of his fubjeds to fetch part of the naval flores de-
posited at Vera Cruz to Mexico, and to employ others in cutting
down and preparing timber. With their affiflance, the Spanish
carpenters oon completed two brigantines, which afforded a fri-
volous amusement to the monarch, and were confidered by Cor-
tes as a certain resource, if he should be obliged to retire.

AMontezuma ENCOURAGED by so many instances of the monarch's tame
acknow-
ledges hin- fubmiflion to his will, Cortes ventured to put it to a proof till
of Spaaal more trying. He urged Montezuma to acknowledge himself

a vassal of the king of Castile, to hold his crown of him as fu-
perior, and to subjed his dominions to the payment of an
annual tribute. With this requisition, the last and moif hum-
bling that can be made to one possessed of sovereign authority,
Montezuma was so obsequious as to comply. He called together
the chief men of his empire, and in a solemn harangue, remind-
ing them of the traditions and prophecies which led them to ex-
pet the arrival of a people sprung from the fame flock with
themselves, in order to take possession of the supreme power, he
declared his belief that the Spaniards were this promised race;
that therefore he recognized the right of their monarch to govern
the Mexican empire, would lay his crown at his feet, and obey
him as a tributary. While uttering there words, Montezuma
discovered how deeply he was affected in making such a facri-
fice. Tears and groans frequently interrupted his discourse.
Overawed and broken as his spirit was, it still retained such a

fcnlc
66

sense of dignity, as to feel that pang which pierces the heart
of princes when constrained to resign independent power. The
first mention of fich a resolution firuck the assembly dumb with
astonishment. This was followed by a fullen murmur of for-
row mingled with indignation, which indicated ome violent
eruption of rage to be near at hand. This Cortes foresaw,
and seasonably interposed to prevent it, by declaring that his
mafler had no intention to deprive Montezuma of the royal
dignity, or to make any innovation upon the constitution and
laws of the Mexican empire. This assurance, added to their
dread of the Spanish power, and to the authority of their mo-
narch's example, extorted a reluctant content from the assem-
bly . The at of submission and homage was executed with
all the formalities which the Spaniards were pleated to pre-
scribe h.

MONTEZUMA, at the desire of Cortes, accompanied this pro-

feflion of fealty and homage with a magnificent present to his
new fovcreign and, after his example, his fubjeds brought in
very liberal contributions, The Spaniards now collecled all the
trcafurc lwhich had been either voluntarily beflowed upon them
at dififrent times by Montezuma, or had been extorted from his
people under various pretexts; and having melted the gold and
filvcr, the value of these, without including jewels and ornaments
of various kinds, which were preserved on account of their cu-
rious workmanship, amounted to fix hundred thousand pesos.
The foldicrs were impatient to have it divided, and Cortes com-
plid w itll their dcfire. A fifth of the whole was first set apart
as the tax due to the king. Another fifth was allotted to Cortes,

r Sce NOT'f .X\'. ' Cortes Rclat. 23S. D. B. Diaz. c. lo0. Goitar:
Cron c. 92. llcrrcra, dec. 2. lib. x. c. 4.

K 2

n.,

BOOK

V.

1520

The amount
of the trea-
sure cc!lrcfte.l
lby the Spa-
nirJs.

Division of t,
and the dl i f-
content it c-
cafionlc.!.

67

B o o as commander in chief. The fulms advanced by Vclafqu:z, by

V.

Cortes, and by some of the officers, towards defraying the cx-
i 20o pence of fitting out the armament, vwere then dedu.lc:. The

remainder was divided among the army, including the ganrifGn
of Vera Cruz, in proportion to their different ranks. After o
many defalcat:ons, the share of a private man did not xceed a
hundred pesos. This fum fell so far below their fanguinc cxpcc-
tations, that some soldiers rejeced it with scorn, and others
murmured so loudly at this cruel disappointment of their hopes,
that it required all the address of Cortes, and no fimall exertion
of his liberality, to appease them. The complaints of the army
were not altogether deflitute of foundation. As the crown had
contributed nothing towards the equipment or fuccc.' of the
armament, it was not without regret that the soldiers bcheld it
fwccp away to great a proportion of the treafurc purchased by
their blood and toil. What fell to the share of their general
appeared, according to the ideas of wealth in the fi:teenth cen-
tury, an enormous umn. Some of Cortes's favourites lac fe-
cretly appropriated to their own use several ornaments of gold,
which neither paid the royal fifth, nor were brought into ac-
count as part of the common rfock. It was, however, so ma-
nifeftly the interest of Cortes at this period to make a large
remittance to the king, that it is highly probable thofc conceal-
ments were not of great confcquencc.

itao,:. M;. ,V TH r total fum amassed by the Spaniards bears no proportion
gold W:iS

1,u1 i fch to the ideas which might be formed, either by reflceting on the
iI .n- deferiptions given by historians of the ancient splendour of

Mexico, or by confidering the produdtions of its mines in
modern times. But, among the ancient Mexicans, gold and
filvcr were not the flandards by which the worth of other

commodities
68

commodities was estimated; and destitute of the artificial value B
derived from this circumfiance, were no farther in requefir than
as they furnifted materials for ornaments and trinkets. These '-'1"
were eitlier confccrated to the gods in their temples, or were
worn as marks of dillindion by their princes and some of their
mofi eminent chiefs. As the consumption of the precious me-
tals was inconfidcrable, the demand for them was not such as
to put either the ingenuity or induliry of the Meicans on the
fitrtch, in order to augmen1 t thLeir lo re. Thvy wcre alto cther
unacquainted with the art of wcrkin, the rich; mincs v ith which
their country abounded. What gold they had was gnthercd in
the beds of rivers, native, and ripened into a pure metallic
slate '. The

. utmofi cffort of their labour in search of it was to

v;-il tlhe earth carried down by torrents from the mountains,
and to pick out the grains of gol which subsided; and even
this fimpll: opertion, according to the report of the pcrions
wh,:;i Cortes appointed to survey the provinces where there
was a p-rofppeR of finding mines, they performed very unfkil-
fully . From all those causes, the whole mas of gold in pof-
feflion of the Mexicans was not great. As silver is rarely found
pure, and their art was too rude to condud the process for re-
fining it in a proper manner, the quantity of this metal was
fill lcfs considerable '. Thus, though the Spaniards had ex-
erted all the power which they possesscd in Mexico, and often
with indecent rapacity, in order to gratify their predominant
pallion, and though Montezuma had fondly exhaufled his itores,
in hopes of satiating their tirft for gold, the produLl of both,
which probably included a great part of the bullion in the em-
pire, did not rife in value above what las been mentioned "

Coltes ,Icl:t p. z,6 F B. Di.iz. c. 1oz, o03. Goiiin:a Cron. c. yo.

.

B .
D . 103. 1 Hcrrcr:, dcc. 2. lib. ix. . 4. "Seec NOTE XVil.

BuT1

69

G °0 K BUT however pliant Montezuma might be in other matters,

V.

.--v--. with refpec to one point he was inflexible. Though Cortes
,lon't52;ia often urged him, with the importunate zeal of a misilonary,

inlcx.i to renounce his false gods, and to embrace the Christian faith,
to rligion. he aways rejected the proposition with horror. Superstition,

among the Mexicans, was formed into such a regular and com-
Flete system, that its inflitutions naturally took fail hold of the
mind; and while the rude tribes in other parts of America were
easily induced to relinquish a few notions and rites, so loose
and arbitrary as hardly to merit the name of a public religion,
the Mexicans adhered tenaciously to their mode of worship,
which, however barbarous, was accompanied with such order
and solemnity as to render it the objec of veneration. Cortes,
finding all his attempts ineffectual to shake the constancy of
Montezuma, was so much enraged at his obstinacy, that in a
transport of zeal he led out his soldiers to throw down the
idols in the great temple by force. But the priests taking arms
in defence of their altars, and the people crowding with great
ardour to fipport them, Cortes's prudence overruled his zeal,
and induced him to defifi from his rash attempt, after diflodg-
ing the idols from one of the fhrines,and placing in their fiead
an image of the Virgin Mary ".

Schemes of FROM that moment the Mexicans, who had permitted the
the Mexicans
to delioy the imprisonment of their overeign, and suffered the'exaCtions of
Spaniars. firangers without a struggle, began to meditate how they

might expel or defiroy the Spaniards, and thought themselves
called upon to avenge their insulted deities. The priefis and
leading men held frequent consultations with Montezuma for

" Sec NOTE XVIII.

this
7°

this purpose. But as it might prove fatal to the captive mo- B 0o K
narch to attempt either the one or the other by violence, he -
was willing to try more gentle means. Having called Cortes , 520'
into his prefei:ce, he observed that now, as all the purposes of his
embassy were fully accomplished, the gods had declared their
will, and the people signified their desire, that he and his follow-
ers flould infiantly depart out of the empire. With this he re-
quired them to comply, or unavoidable defrucion would fall
suddenly on their heads. The tenor of this unexpetced rcqui-
fition, as well as the determined tone in which it was uttered,
left Cortes no room to doubt that it was the result of some deep
scheme concerted between Montezuma and his fubjeds. He
quickly perceived that he might derive more advantage from a
seeming compliance with the monarch's inclination, than from
an ill-timed attempt to change or to oppose it, and rcplied, with
great composure, that he had already begun to prepare for re-
turning to his own country but as he had destroyed the vessels
in which he arrived, ome time was requisite for building other
ships. This appeared reasonable. A number of Mexicans
were sent to Vera Cruz to cut down timber, and ome Spanish
carpenters were appointed to superintend the work. Cortes
flattered himself that, during this interval, he might either find
means to avert the threatened danger, or receive such reinforce-
ments as would enable him to despise it.

ALMOST nine months were elapsed since Portocarrero and Anxiet), and

Montejo had failed with his dispatches to Spain; and he daily dgr o°t
expecded their return with a confirmation of his authority from
the king. Without this, his condition was insecure and pre-
carious, and after all the great things which he had done, it
might be his doom to bear the name and susser the punifhmcent

of

71

of a traitor. Rapid and extensive as his progress had been, he
could not hope to complete the reduction of a great empire with
so frnall a bdy of men, which by this time the diseases of the
climate had considerably thinned; nor could he apply for re-
cruits to the Spanish settlements in the islands until he received
the royal approbation of his proceedings.

WHILEr he remained in this cruel ftuation, anxious about

what was part, uncertain with refpea to the future, and, by
the late declaration of Montezuma, oppressed with a new addi-
tion of cares, a Mexican courier arrived with an account of
some hips having appeared on the coast. Cortes, with fond
credulity, imagining that his messengers were returned from
Spain, and that the completion of all his wishes and hopes was
at hand, imparted the glad tidings to his companions, who re-
ceived them with transports of mutual gratulation. Their joy
was not of long continuance. A courier from Sandoval, whom
Cortes had appointed to succeed Efcalante in command at Vera
Cruz, brought certain information that the armament was fitted
out by Velasquez, governor of Cuba, and, inflead of bringing
the aid which they expected, threatened them with immediate
defiruaion.

THE motives which prompted Velafqucz to this violent mca-

sure are obvious. From the circumstances of Cortcs's depar-
ture, it was impossible not to fufped his intention of throwing
off all dependence upon him. His negleting to tranfnit any
account of his operations to Cuba, strengthened this fiifpicion,
which wai at l;fi confirmed, beyond doubt, by the indiscretion
of the officcrs whom Cortes sent to Spain. They, from some
motive, which is not clearly cxplained by the contemporary

hitforians,
BOOK

V7.

I ~ 20.

01 a, Ilt:W 1r-
niamIn~ ,

s\!d o by
\c aii u 'a.
72

hiflorians, touched at the island of Cuba, contrary to the per- B K
emptory orders of their general . By this means Velasquez -
not only learned that Cortes and his followers, after formally 'S2°
renouncing all connection with him, had established an inde-
pendent colony in New Spain, and were soliciting the king to
confirm their proceedings by his authority; but he obtained
particular information concerning the opulence of the country,
the valuable presents which Cortes had received, and the invit-
ing prospects of success that opened to his view. Every pffion
which can agitate an ambitious mind; hame, at having bcen
so grossly over-reachcd; indignation, at being betrayed by the
man whom he had feleded as the object of his favour and con-
fidence; grief, for having wafted his fortune to aggrandize an
enemy; and dcfpair of recovering so fair an opportunity of efta-
blifhing his fame and extending his power, now raged in the
bosom of Velasquez. All these, with united force, excited him
to make an extraordinary effort in order to be avenged on the
author of his wrongs, and to wrefi from him his usurped autho-
rity and conquests. Nor did he want the appearance of a good
title to juflify such an attempt. The agent whom he fnt to
Spain with an account of Grijalva's voyage, had met with
mofl favourable reception; and from the lfecirncis which he
produced, such high expectations were formed concerning the
opulence of New Spain, that Vclafqucz was authorised to pro-
fecute the discovery of the country, and app)inted governor of
it during life, with morc'cxtentive power and privileges than
had been granted to any adventurer from tle time of Colum-
bus . Elated by this diftinguifing mark of favour, and
warranted to confider Cortes not only as intruding upon his

o B Diaz, c. 54, 55. ITclerrr, dec. 2. lib. . 14. Go la:ra Chion. c. 9c .

He-rrera, dec. 2. li). ii. c 1i.
VOL. II. L jurifcliqion,

73

BOOK

V.

I 520.

Under the
command of
Narvaez.

'Ihe proceed-
ings of Nar-
vaez.

April.

jurisdiction, but as disobedient to the royal mandate, he deter-
mind to vindicate his own rights and the honour of his fove-
reign by force of arms '. His ardour in carrying on his pre-
parations was filch as might have been expeded from the vio-
lence of the passions with which he was animated; and in a
short time an armament was completed, consisting of eighteen
ships, which had on board fourscore horsemen, eight hun-
dred foot soldiers, of which eighty were musketeers, and a
hundred and twenty cross-bow men, together with a train of
twelve pieces of cannon. As Velasquez's experience of the
fatal consequence of committing to another what he ought to
have executed himself, had not rendered him more enterprif-
ing, he vested the command of this formidable body, which,
in the infancy of the Spanish power in America, merits the
appellation of an army, in Pamphilo de Narvaez, with initruc-
tions to seize Cortes and his principal officers, to fend them pri-
foners to him, and then to complete the discovery and conquest
of the country in his name.

AFTER a prosperous voyage, Narvaez landed his men with-

out opposition near St. Juan de Ullua. Three foldicrs, whom
Cortes had ent to search for mines in that diftria, immediately
joined him. By this accident, he not only received information
concerning the progress and situation of Cortes, but as there
soldiers had made ome progress in the knowledge of the Mexi-
can language, he acquired interpreters, by whose means he
was enabled to hold ome intercourse with the people of the
country. But, according to the low cunning of deserters, they
framed their intelligence with more attention to what they
thought would be agreeable, than to what they knew to be true;

See NOTE XIX.

and
7+

and represented the situation of Cortes to be so dcfperate, and
the difaffedion of his followers to be so general, as increased
the natural presumption and confidence of Narvaez. His fiit
operation, however, might have taught him not to rely on
their partial accounts. Having ent to summon the governor
of Vera Cruz to surrender, Guevara, a priest whom he employ-
ed in that fcrvice, made the requisition with such insolence,
that Sandoval, an officer of high spirit, and zealously attached
to Cortes, instead of complying with his demands, seized him
and his attendants, and sent them in chains to Mexico.

CORTES received them not like enemies, but as friends, and

condemning the severity of Sandoval, set them immediately at
liberty. By this well-timed clemency, seconded by caresses and
presents, he gained their confidence, and drew from them such
particulars concerning the force and intentions of Narva-z, as
gave him a view of the impending danger in its full extent.
He had not to contend now with half-naked Indians, no match
for him in war, and still more inferior in the arts of policy,
but to take the field againfi an army in courage and martial
discipline equal to his own, in number far superior, aing un-
der the fanion of royal authority, and commanded by an
officer of know-n bravery. He was informed that Narvaez,
more solicitous to gratify the refcntment of Velafqucz, than at-
tentive to the honour or interest of his country, had be.gun his
intercourse with the natives, by representing him and his so!-
lowers as fugitives and outlaws, guilty of rebellion against th.ir
own sovereign, and of injuflice in invading the Mexican emi-
pire, and had declared to them that his sole objed in vifitiin
the country was to punish the Spaniards, and to rescue them
from oppreflion. He soon perceived that the falm unfavour-

I, 2 able

B 0 K

I 5ZO
Cortr, deepis

75

able representations had been convey-ci t; Monteuma, and
that Narvaez had found means to assure him, that as the conduEt
of those who kept him under refiraint was highly (lifpleafi '.i to
the king his master, he had it in charge not only to rescue an
injured monarch from confinement, but to reinflate him in
the poffeiion of his ancient power and independence. Ani-
mated with this profpedt of being et free from fubjCtion to
strangers, the provinces began openly to revolt from Cortes,
aind to regard Narvaez as a deliverer no less able than willing
to save them. Montezuma himself kept up a secret intercourfc
with the new commander, and seemed to court him as a person
superior in power and dignity to those Spaniards whom he had
hitherto revered as the first of men '.

Sucii were the various afpeds of danger and difficulty which

presented themselves to the view of Cortes. No situation can
be conceived more trying to the capacity and firmness of a ge-
neral, or where the choice of the plan which ought to be adopt-
ed was more difficult. If he should wait the approach of Nar-
vaez in Mexico, defirution seemed to be unavoidable; for
while the Spaniards pressed him from without, the inhabitants,
whose turbulent spirit he could hardly restrain with all his
authority and attention, would eagerly lay hold on such a fa-
vourable opportunity of avenging all their wrongs. If he should
abandon the capital, fct the captive monarch at liberty, and
march out to meet the enemy, he muff at once forego the fruits
of all his toils and victories, and relinquifl advantages which
could not be recovered without extraordinary efforts, and infi-
nite danger. If, inflead of employing force, he should have

' Sve NOTE XX.

rccourfe
BOOK

V.

I520.

}{is 'cliber.-
tions conce:n-
ing his own
conduCt.
76

77

recourfc to conciliating measures, and attempt an accommo-
dation with Narvaez; the natural haughtiness of that officer,
augmented by confcioufincs of his refcnt superiority, sorbad
him to cherish any fanguinc hope of success. After revolving
every scheme with deep attention, Cortes fixed upon that which,
in exccution was moil hazardous, but, if fuccefsfil, would
prove molt beneficial to his country; and with the dcifive in-
trepidity, f!'itcd to defpcrate situations, determined to make
one bold effort for vidory, under every disadvantage, rather
thn sacrifice his own conquests and the Spanish interef in
Mexico.

BUT though he foresaw that the contef mufi be terminated

finally by arms, it would have been not only indecent, but
criminal, to have marched against his countrymen, without at-
tempting to adjust matters by an amicable negociation. In this
service he employcd Olmedo, his chaplain, to whole character
the function was well suitcd, and who poiffffed, besides, such
prudence and addrcfs as qualified him to carry on the secret
intrigues in which Cortes placed his chief confidence. Nar-
vacz rejedced, with scorn, every scheme of accommodation that
Olmedo proposed, and was with difficulty restrained from lay-
ing violent hands on him and his attendants. He met, how-
ever, with a more favourable reception among his followers, to
many of whom he delivered letters, either from Cortes or his
officers, their ancient friends and companions. Cortes artfully
accompanied these with prefcnts of rings, chains of gold, and
other trinkets of value, which inspircd those needy adventurers
with high ideas of the vealth that he had acquired, and with
envy of their good fortune who were engaged in his service.
Some, from hopes of becoming sharers in those rich foils, -

ciared

0 ) K
V.

AI 2.<.

soslowcrs of
Narva c.

B o o K cared for an immediate accommodation with Cortes. Others,

V. from public spirit, laboured to prevent a civil war, which,
1520. whatever party should prevail, must shake, and perhaps sub-

vert the Spanish power, in a country where it was so imper-
fetly eflablifhed. Narvaez disregarded both, and by a public
proclamation denounced Cortes and his adherents rebels and
enemies to their country. Cortes, it is probable, was not much
surprised at the untradable arrogance of Narvaez; and, after
having given such a proof of his own pacific disposition as might
justify his recourse to other means, he determined to advance
towards an enemy whom he had laboured in vain to appease.

Marches a- HE left a hundred and fifty men in the capital, under the
gainIt him.

Mgay.l" command of Pedro de Alvarado, an officer of difiinguifhed cou-

rage, for whom the Mexicans had conceived a singular degree
of refpet. To the cuflody of this slender garrison he commit-
ted a great city, with all the wealth he had amassed, and, what
was still of greater importance, the person of the imprisoned mo-
narch. His utmost art was employed in concealing from Mon-
tezuma the real causes of his march. He laboured to persuade
him, that the firangers who had lately arrived were his friends
and fcllow-fubjeds; and that, after a short interview with
them, they would depart together, and return to their own
country. The captive prince, unable to comprehend the de-
signs of the Spaniards, or to recol cile what he now heard with
the declarations of Narvaez, and afraid to discover any symptom
of suspicion or diflruft of Cortes, promiscd to remain quietly
in the Spanifi quarters, and to cultivate the fame friendflip
with Alvarado which he had uniformly maintained with him.
Cortes, with seeming confidence in this promise, but relying
principally upon the injunctions which he had given Alvarado

to
78

to guard his prifoncr with the moit scrupulous vigilance, fct
out from Mexico.

His strength, even after it was reinforced by the juncion of

Sandoval and the garrison of Vera Cruz, did not exceed two
hundred and fifty men. As he hoped for success chiefly from
the rapidity of his motions, his troops were not encumbered
citl]er with baggage or artillery. But as he dreaded extremely
the imprcffion which the enemy might make with their cavalry,
he had provided againit this danger with the foresight ad fa-
gacity which diflinguiih a great commander. Iaving observed
that the Indians in the province of Chinantla used spears of ex-
traordinary length and force, he armed his soldiers with there,
and accuitomcd them to that deep and compact arrangement
which the use of this formidable weapon, the belt perhaps that
ever was invented for defence, enabled them to assume.

WITH this small hut firm battalion, Cortes advanced towards
Zempoalla, of which Narvaez had taken possession. During
his march, he made repeated attempts towards some accommo-
dation with his opponent. But Narvaez requiring that Cortes
and his followers hould inflantly recognize his title to be go-
vernor of New Spain, in virtue of the powers which he derived
from Velasquez, and Cortes refuing to submit to any autho-
rity which was not founded on a commiflion from the emperor
himself, under whose immediate protection he and his adhe-
rents had placed their infant colony, all thefc attempts proved
fruitless. The intercourfc, hovcver, which this occasioned
betv/cn the twe, partics, proved of no finall advantage to Corts,
as it afforded him ;n opportunity of gaining some of Narvacez's
oflicers by liberal prefcnts, of softening others by a feiblncec

of

)
I 0 0 K

V.

1520.

Nu liber of
his toops.

Condnues to
negocdic ,iS
lie adianccd.

of moderation, and of dazzling all by the appearance of wealth
among his troops, most of his soldiers having converted their
llare of the Mexican gold into chains, bracelets, and other or-
naments, which they displayed with military oflentation. Nar-
vaez and a little junto of his creatures excepted, all the army
leaned towards an accommodation with their countrymen.
This discovery of their inclination irritated his violent temper
almost to madness. In a transport of rage he set a price upon
the head of Cortes, and of his principal officers; and having
learned that he was now advanced within a league of Zem-
poalla with his small body of men, he confidered this as an
insult which merited immediate chastisement, and marched out
with all his troops to offer him battle.

BUr Cortes was a leader of greater abilities and experience

than to fight an enemy so far superior in number, and so much
better appointed, on equal ground. Having taken his flation
on the opposite bank of the river de Canoas, where he knew
that he could not be attacked, he beheld the approach of the
enemy without concern, and disregarded this vain bravade.
It was then the beginning of the wet season', and the rain had
poured down, during a great part of the day, with the violence
peculiar to the torrid zone. The followers of Narvaez, unac-
customed to the hardships of military service, murmured so
much at being thus fruitlessly exposed, that, from their unfol-
dier-like impatience, as well as his own contempt of his ad-
verfary, their general permitted them to retire to Zempoalla.
The very circumfiance which induced them to quit the field,
encouraged Cortes to form a fchcme, by which he hoped at
onc2 to terminate the war. IHe observed, that his hardy vetc-

1 Ilackluyt, vol iii. 467. Dc Let DrTcr. lnd Occi 221.

rans,
BOOK

V.

I520.

Attacl:s Nar-
vaez in the
night. 80

rans, though flanding under the torrents, which continued to B o I;
fall, without a ingle tent or any flielter whatsoever to covcr v
them, were so far from repining at hardships that were beconm '20
familiar to them, that they were still fresh and alert for fervicc.
He foresaw that the enemy would naturally give thcmfclves up
to repose after their fatigue, and that, judging of the conduct
of others by their own effeminacy, they would deem themfclves
perfectly fccure at a season so unfit for ation. He rolved,
therefore, to fall upon them in the dead of night, when the
furprile and terror of this unexpLccl attack might more than
coinpenfate the inferiority of his numl-crs. Hi-s soldiers, fcn-
fible that no resource remained but in some defpcratc effort of
courage, approved of the mcafure with such warmth, that
Cortes, in a military oration which he addressed to them before
they began their march, was more solicitous to temper than to
inflame their ardour. He divided them into three parties.
At the head of the first he placed Sandoval; cntrufting tils gal-
lant officer with the most dangerous and important service, that
of seizing the enemy's artillery, which was planted before the
principal tower of the temple, where Narvaez had fixed his
head-quarters. Chrifloval de Olid commanded the second, with
orders to assault the tower, and lay hold on the general. Cortes
hiinfelf conducted the third and smallest division, which was to
ad as a body of reserve, and to support the other two as there
flould be occasion. Having passed the river de Canoas, which
was much swelled with the rains, not without difficulty, the
water reaching almoit to their chins, they advanced in profound
silence, without beat of drum, or found of any warlike inftru-
mcnt; each man armed with his sword, his dagger, and his
Chinantlan spear. Narvaez, rcmifs in proportion to his fecu--
rity, had pofied only two centinels to watch the motions of an

VOL. 11. M cnemv

81

B o K enemy whom he had such good cause to dread. One of these

V., was seized by the advanced guard of Cortes's troops, the other
1520. made his escape, and hurrying to the town with all the pre-

cipitation of fear and zeal, gave such timely notice of the
enemy's approach, that there was full leisure to have prep.ircd
for their reception. But, through the arrogance and infatua-
tion of Narvaez, this important interval was loft. He imputel
this alarm to the cowardice of the centinel, and treated with
derision the idea of being attacked by forces so unequal to his
own. Th2 shouts of Cortes's soldiers, rufliing on to the assault,
convinced him at lift, that the danger which he dcfpifcd was
real. The rapidity with which they advanced was such, that
only one cannon could be fired, before Sandoval's party closed
with the enemy, drove them from their guns, and began to
force their way up the fleps of the tower. Narvaez, no less
brave in aion than presumptuous in conclut, armed himself
in hafe, and by his voice and example animated his men to the
combat. Olid advanced to fuflain his companions; and Cortes
himself, rushing to the front, conducLed and added new vigour
to the attack. The compad order in which this firall body
presscd on, and the impenetrable front which they presented
.,. .,,- with their long spears, bore down all opposition before it. They

. 1 had now reached the gate, and were struggling to bur it open,

when a soldier having set fire to the reeds with which the tower
was covered, compelled Narvaez to sally out. In the first en-
counter he was wounded in the eye with a spear, ard falling to
the ground, was dragged down the tfeps and in a moment clapt
in fetters. The cry of vitory resounded among the troops of
Cortes. Those who had sallied out with their leader now main-
tained the conflit feebly, or began to surrender. Among the re-
mainder of his soldiers, flationcd in two smaller towers of the

temple,
82

temple, terror and confifioni prevailed. The darkness was so great,
that they could not diftingiifhl between their friends and foes.
Their own artillery was pointed againfl them. Wherever they
turned their eyes, they beheld lights gleaming through the ob-
fcurity of night, which, though proceeding only fiom a variety
of thining infeds, that abound in moist and sultry climates,
their affrighted imaginations reprcfented as numerous bands of
mufkctecrs advancing with kindled matches to the attack. As-
ter a short refillance, the soldiers compelled their officers to
capitulate, and before morning all laid dovwvn their arms, and
iubmitted quietly to thvir conquerors.

ThIS complete vid-',r proved more acc-ptable, as it was

gained almost without bloodflied, only two soldiers being killed
on the fide of Cortes, and two officers, with fifteen private men,
of the adverse faction. Cortes treated the vanquified not like
enemies, but as countrymen and friends, and ofiFred either to
fend them back directly to Cuba, or to take them into his service,
as partners in his fortune, on equal terms with his own soldiers.
This latter proposition, fcconded by a seasonable distribution cf
tobne presents from Cortes, and liberal promises of more, cpcned
profpeds so agreeable to the romantic cxpecations which had
induced them to engage in this service, that all, a few partizans
of Narvaez excepted, closed with it, and vied with eadl other
in professions of fidelity and attachment to a general whose re-
cent success had given them such a flriking proof of his abili-
ties for command. Thus, by a series of events no lcfs fortu-
nate than uncommon, Cortes not only fecapcd from perdition
which seened inevitable, but, when he had lcaft reason to cx-
pe&t it, was placed at the head of a thousand Spaniards, reai
to follow wherever he should lead them. Whoever rflcd.,

M4 ?< :'uon

'T.e i7.C of

di1:s vict'.y.
IO O 1;

V
] -2,:

84
BOOK

V.

J520.

Th cMexI cans
take arms
aainft the
Spanliards.

HISTORY OF AMERICA.

upon the facility with which this viaory was obtained, or con-
fiders with what sudden and unanimous transition the followers
of Narvaez ranged themselves under the standard of his rival,
will be apt to ascribe both events as much o the intrigues as
to the arms of Cortes, and cannot but fufpet that the ruin of
Narvaez was occasioned, no less by the treachery of his own
followers, than by the valour of his enemy .

BUT, in one point, the prudent conduct and good fortune

of Cortes were equally conspicuous. If, by the rapidity of his
operations after he began his march, he lha: not brought mat-
ters to such a speedy ifTue, even this dccifive viftory would
have come too late to have saved his companions whom he left
in Mexico. A few days after the difcomfiturc of Narvaez, a
courier arrived with an account that the Mexicans had taken
arms, and having seized and destroyed the two brigantines, which
he had built in order to secure the command of the lale, had
attacked the Spaniards in their quarters, had killed several of
them and wounded more, had reduced to ashes their magazine
of provisions, and carried on hostilities with such fury, that,
though Alvarado and his men defended themselves with un-
daunted resolution, they must either be soon cut off by famine,
or fink under the multitude of their enemies. This revolt was
excited by motives which rendered it flill more alarming. On
the departure of Cortes for Zempoalla, the Mexicans flattered
themfelvcs, that the long-expected opportunity of refioring
their sovereign to liberty, and of vindicating their country from
the odious dominion of firangers, was at length arrived; that
while the forces of their opprerfors were divided, and the arms

" Cortes Rclat. 242. D. B. Diaz, c. o.-; H:. I-crrera, dec. z. lib, ix. c. 18,

.c. GoinaraC .

.
Con c. 7, &c.

of

of one party turned against the other, they might triumph v ith B 0 0 K
greater facility over both. Consultations were held, and fchcmes ---~
formed with this intention. The Spaniards in Mexico, con- 5
fcious of their own feebleness, fufpecded and dreaded those
machinations. Alvarado, though a gallant officer, possessed
neither that extent of capacity, nor dignity of manners, by
whlich Cortes had acquired such an ascendant over the minds of
tie Mexicans, as never allowed them to form a just eflimate of
his weakness or of their own strength. Alvarado knew no mode
of supporting his authority but force. Instead of employing
address to disconcert the plans or to tooth the spirits of the
Mexicans, he waited the return of one of their solemn festivals,
when the principal persons in the empire were dancing, ac-
cording to cutfom, in the court of the great temple; he seized
all the avenues which led to it, and, allured partly by the rich
ornaments which they wore in honour of their gods, and partly
by the facility of cutting off at once the authors of that con-
fpiracy which he dreaded, he fell upon them, unarmed and
unfufpicious of any danger, and massacred a great number,
none ecaping but such as made their way over the battlements
of the temple. An aion so cruel and treacherous filled not
only the city, but the whole empire, with indignation and rage.
All called aloud for vengeance; and regardless of the fafcty of
their monarch, whose life was at the mercy of the Spaniards, or
of their own danger in assaulting an enemy who had been so
long the objed of their terror, they committed all those ads of
violence of which Cortes received an account.

To him the danger appeared so imminent, as to admit nci- I-e m,.rchls

back to he

ther of deliberation nor delay. He set out instantly with all c..'pitl
his forces, and returned from Zempoalla with no less rap;dity

than

B 0 K than he had advanced thither. At Tlafcala he was joined by

c~,~ two thousand chosen warriors. On entering the Mexican ter-
1520. ritories, he found that difaffedion to the Spaniards was not

confined to the capital. The principal inhabitants had deserted
the towns through which he paTsed ; no person of note appear-
ing to meet him with the usual rcfpet; no provision was made
for the fubfiflence of his troops; and though he was permittcd
to advance without opposition, the solitude and silence which
reigned in every place, and the horror with which the people
avoided all intcrcourfe with him, difcovcrcd a deep-rooted an-
tipathy, that excited the most jufi alarm. But, iplacable as
the enmity of the Mexicans was, they were so unacquainted
with the science of war, that they knew not how to take the
proper measures, either for their own safety or the deftruadion
of the Spaniards. UninfruLted by their former error in ad-
mitting a formidable enemy into their capital, inflead of break-
ing down the causeways and bridges, by which they might have
inclosed Alvarado and his party, and have effectually fcopt the
June 24. career of Cortes, they again suffered him to march into the city

without molcflation, and to take quiet pofTeifion of his anci-
cnt flation.

1improper THE transports of joy with which Alvarado and hils soldiers
c0:. r
°1 received their companions cannot be expresscd. Both parties

were so much elated, the one with their seasonable deliverance,
and the other with the great exploits which they had atchicved,
that this intoxication of success seems to have so far reached
Cortcs, hlimrclf, that he behaved on this occasion neither with
his usual sagacity nor attention. He not only negledced to visit
Montezuma, but embittered the insult by cxprcflions full of
contempt for tllat unfortunate prince and his people. The

forces
86

forces of which he had now the command, appeared to him o B o K

V.

irrefiflible, that he might assume an higer tone, and lay aside
the mask of moderation, under which he had hitherto concealed ',20.
his designs. Some Mexicans, who underflood the Spanish lan-
guage, heard the contemptuous words which Cortcs uttered,
and reporting themn to their countr-men, kindled their rage
anew. They were now convinced that the intentions of the
general wcre equally bloody with those of Alvarado, and that
his original purpose in visiting their country, had not been, as
he pretended, to court the alliance of their fovercign, but to at-
tempt the conqucft of his dominions. They resumcd their arms The violent
with the additional fury which this discovery inspired, attacked th. lixi-
a confidcrable body of Spaniards who were marching towards """
the great fquarc in which the public market was held, and
compelled them to retire with some loss. Embolcdened by this
fucccfs, and dclighted to find that their oppressors were not in-
vincible, they advanced next clay with extraordinary martial
pomp to aault the Spaniards in their quarters. Their number
was formidable, and their undaunted courage still more so.
Though the artillery pointed againfI their numerous battalions,
croudcd together in narrow fireets, fwcpt off multitudes at every
difh;largec; thoulgh every blow of the Spanish weapons fell
with mortal efcrte upon their naked bodies, the impctuofity of
the assault did not abate. Fresh men ruffed forward to occupy
the places of the slain, and meeting with the fcme fate, were
fuccccdcd by others no less intrepid and eager on vcngeancc.
The utmofl cfforts of Cortes's abilities and experience, seconded
by the difciilincd valour of his troops, were hardly fufiicicnt
to defend their fortifications, into which the enemy were m.rce
?han once on thec point of forcing their way.

CO .T 'S

87

CORTES beheld, with wonder, the implacable ferocity of a

people, who seemed at first to submit tamely to the yoke, and
had continued so long paflive under it. The soldiers of Nar-
vaez, who fondly imagined that they followed Cortes to share
in the spoils of a conquered empire, were aonifhed to find
that they were involved in a dangerous war, with an enemy
whole vigour was fiill unbroken, and loudly execrated their
own weakness, in giving such easy credit to the delusive pro-
mises of their new leader x. But surprise and complaints were
of no avail. Some immediate and extraordinary effort was re-
quifite to extricate themselves out of their present situation. As
soon as the approach of evening induced the Mexicans to retire,
in compliance with their national custom of ceasing from hofti-
lities with the setting fun, Cortes began to prepare for a sally,
with such a considerable force, as might either drive the enemy
out of the city, or compel them to lifien to terms of accommo-
dation.

HE conducted, in person, the troops destined for this im-

portant service. Every invention known in the European art
of war, as well as every precaution, suggested by his long ac-
quaintance with the Indian mode of fighting, were employed to
ensure success. But he found an enemy prepared and deter-
mined to oppose him. The force of the Mexicans was greatly
augmented by fresh troops, which poured in continually from
the country, and their animosity was in no degree abated.
They were led by their nobles, inflamed by the exhortations of
their priefis, and fought in the defence of their temples and fami-
lies, under the eye of their gods, and in preecnce of their wives

X B. Diaz. c. .26.

and

88
BOOK

V.

520.

Diffiefs of
the Spaniards.

Cortes at-
tacks them
without fuc-
ccfs

and children. Notwithstanding their numbers, and enthufi- B 0 V K
aftic contempt of danger and death, wherever the Spaniards L _-
could close with them, the superiority of their discipline and 1520.
arms obliged them to give way. But in narrow fireets, and
where many of the bridges of communication were broken
down, they could seldom come to a fair rencounter, and theSpa-
niards, as they advanced, were exposed to howers of arrows
and flones from the tops of the houses. After a day of incef-
sant exertion, though vast numbers of the Mexicans fell, and
part of the city was burnt, the Spaniards, weary with the
slaughter, and harassed by multitudes which successively reliev-
ed each other, were obliged at length to retire, with the morti-
fication of having accomplished nothing so decisive as to com-
penfate the unusual calamity of twelve soldiers killed, and above
ixty wounded. Another ally, made with greater force, was
not more effectual, and in it the general himself was wounded
in the hand.

-CORTES now perceived, too late, the fatal error into which Montezuma

he had been betrayed by his own contempt of the Mexicans,
and was satisfied that he could neither maintain his present fla-
tion in the centre of an hostile city, nor retire from it without
the most imminent danger. One resource fiill remained, to
try what effed the interposition of Montezuma might have to
sooth or overawe his fubjeds. When the Mexicans approached
next morning to renew the assault, that unfortunate prince, at
the mercy of the Spaniards, and reduced to the fad neceflity of
becoming the infirument of his own disgrace, and of the fla-
very of his people Y, advanced to the battlements in his royal

Y See NOTE XXI.
VOL. II.

89

robes,
N

9°
B O O K robes, and with all the pomp in which he used to appear on

V. solemn occasions. At fight of their sovereign, whom they had
520. long been accuflomed to honour, and alniof to revere as a god,

the weapons dropt from their hands, every tongue was silent,
all bowed their heads, and many prostrated themselves on the
ground. Montezuma addressed them with every argument
that could mitigate their rage, or persuade them to cease from
hostilities. When he ended his discourse, a fullen murmur of
disapprobation run through the crowd; to this ucceeded re-
proaches and threats; and their fury rising in a moment above
every restraint of decency or refped, flights of arrows and vol-
leys of flones poured in so violently upon the ramparts, that
before the Spaniil soldiers, appointed to cover Montezuma
with their bucklers, had time to lift them in his defence, two
arrows wounded the unhappy monarch, and the blow of a stone
on his temple firuck him to the ground. On feeing him fall,
the Mexicans were so much astonished, that, with a transition
not uncommon in popular tumults, they passed in a moment
from one extreme to the other, remorse succeeded to insult, and
they fled with horror, as if the vengeance of HIeaven were pur-
suing the crime which they had committed. The Spaniards,
without moleflation, carried Montezuma to his apartments,
and Cortes hastened thither to console him under his misfortune.
But the unhappy monarch now perceived how low he was funk;
and the haughty spirit which seemed to have been so long ex-
tind, returning, he scorned to survive this last humiliation, and
to protract an ignominious life, not only as the prisoner and
tool of his enemies, but as the objec of contempt or detefla-
tion among his falbjets. In a transport of rage he tore the
bandages from his wounds, and refused, with such obflinacy,
to take any nourishment, that he soon ended his wretched days,

rej.eding

rejeting with disdain all the solicitations of the Spaniards to B o 0 K
embrace the Christian faith. .

1520.

UPON the death of Montezuma, Cortes having loft all hope New -cn-

of bringing the Mexicans to any accommodation, saw no pro- Pi
fpeE of safety but in attempting a retreat, and began to prepare
for it. But a sudden motion of the Mexicans engaged him in
new conflits. They took possession of a high tower in the
great temple which overlooked the Spanish quarters, and plac-
ing there a garrison of their principal warriors, not a Spaniard
could fiir without being exposed to their misfile weapons.
From this post it was necessary to dislodge them at any rifl,
and Juan de Efcobar, with a numerous detachment of chofeli
soldiers, was ordered to make the attack. But Efcobar, though
a gallant officer, and at the head of troops accustomed to con-
quer, and who now fought under the eyes of their country-
men, was thrice repulsed. Cortes, sensible that not only the
reputation but the safety of his army depended on the success
of this assault, ordered a buckler to be tied to his arm, as he
could not manage it with his wounded hand, and rushed with
his drawn sword into the thickest of the combatants. Encou-
raged by the presence of their general, the Spaniards returned to
the charge with such vigour, that they gradually forced their
way up the steps, and drove the Mexicans to the platform at
the top of the tower. There a dreadful carnage began, when
two young Mexicans of high rank, observing Cortes as he ani-
mated his soldiers by his voice and example, resolved to facri-
fice their own lives in order to cut off the author of all the
calamities which desolated their country. They approached
him in a supplicant poifure, as if they had intended to lay
down their arms, and seizing him in a moment, hurried him

N 2 towards

91

BOOK

V.

1 20.

The Spani-
ards abandon
the city.

towards the battlements, over which they threw themselves
headlong, in hopes of dragging him along to be dashed in.
pieces by the fame fall. But Cortes, by his firength and agility,
broke lose from their grasp, and the gallant youths perished
in this generous, though unsuccessful, attempt to save their
country. As oon as the Spaniards became malters of the
tower, they set fire to it, and, without farther moleflation,
continued the preparations. for their retreat

THIS became the more necessary, as the Mexicans were f6

much astonished at the last effort of the Spanish valour, that
they began to change their whole fyfiem of hostility, and in-
stead of inceifant attacks, endeavoured, by barricading the
streets, and breaking down the causeways, to cut off the com-
munication of the Spaniards. with the continent, and thus to
flarve an enemy whom they could not subdue. The first point
to be determined, was, whether they should march out openly
in the face of day, when they could discern every danger, and
fee how to regulate their own motions, as well as how to resist
the assaults of the enemy; or whether they should endeavour
to retire secretly in the night. The latter was preferred, partly
from hopes that their national fuperflition would refirain the
Mexicans from venturing to attack them in the night, and
partly from their own fond belief in the predictions of a pri-
vate soldier, who, having acquired universal credit by a fmat-
tering of learning, and his pretensions to atrology, boldly as-
fured them of success, if they made their retreat in this man-
ner. They began to move, towards midnight, in three divi-
sions. Sandoval led the van; Pedro Alvarado, and Velasquez
de Leon, had the conduct of the rar; and Cortes commanded
in the centre, where he placed the prisoners, among whom

were
92

were a son and two daughters of Montezuma, together with
several Mexicans of difiinaion, the artillery, the baggage, and
a portable bridge of timber, intended to be laid over the
breaches in the causeway. They marched in profound silence
along the causeway which led to Tacuba, because it was shorter
than any of the reft, and, lying most remote from the road to--
wards Tlafcala and the ea coast, had been left more entire by
the Mexicans. They reachel the firfi breach in it without
molestation, hoping that their retreat was undiscovered.

BUT the Mexicans, unperceived, had not. only watched all

their motions with attention, but had made proper dispositions
for a mofi formidable attack. While the Spaniards were intent
upon placing their bridges in the breach, and occupied in con-
dudting their horses and artillery along it, they were suddenly
alarmed with the tremendous found of warlike infiruments,
and a general shout from an innumerable multitude of enemies;
the lake was covered with canoes; flights of arrows, and showers
of stones poured in upon them from every quarter; the Mexi-
cans running forward to the charge with fearless impetuosity,
as if they hoped in that moment to be avenged for all their
wrongs. Unfortunately the wooden-bridge, by the weight of
the artillery, was wedged so fart into the stones and mud, that
it was impossible to remove it. Dismayed at this accident, the
Spaniards advanced with precipitation towards the second
breach. The Mexicans hemmed them in on every fide, and
though they d(cfcnded themfclves with their usual courage, vet
crouded together as they were on a narrow causeway, their dif-
cipline and military kill were of little avail, nor did the obfcu-
rity of the night permit them to derive great advantage from
their fire-arms, or the fupcriority of their other weapons. All

Mexico

BOOK

V.

1520.

Attacked by
the Mlexican::;

93

B o o K Mcxic o was now in arms and so cager were the people on the de-

firudion of their oppressors, that they who were not near enough
520 to annoy them in person, impatient of the delay, pressed forward

with such ardour, as drove on their countrymen in the front with
irrefiflible violence. Fresh warriors instantly filled the place of
such as fell. The Spaniards, weary with slaughter, and un-
able to sustain the weight of the torrent that poured in upon
them, began to give way. In a moment the confusion was
univcrfal horse and foot, officers and soldiers, friends and
enemies, were mingled together; and while all fought, and
many fell, they could hardly diitinguifh from what hand the
blow came.

Their '.ir- CORTES, with about a hundred foot soldiers and a few horse,
aft:rs, forced his way over the two remaining breaches in the cause-

way, the bodies of the dead serving to fill up the chasms, and
reached the main land. Having formed them as soon as they
arrived, he returned with such as were yet capable of service,
to afift his friends in their retreat, and to encourage them, by
his presence and example, to persevere in the efforts requisite
to effect it. He met with part of his soldiers, who had broke
through the enemy, but found many more overwhelmed by
the multitude of their aggressors, or pcrifling in the lake; and
heard the piteous lamentation of others, whom the Mexicans,
having taken alive, were carrying off in triumph to be facri-
siced to the god of war. Before day, all who had escaped as-
fcmblcd at Tacuba. But when the morning dawned, and dif-
covered to the view of Cortes his fhattcred battalion, reduced to
less than half its number, the survivors dcjcted, and most of
them covered with wounds, the thoughts of what they had
suffered, and the remembrance of so many faithful friends and

gallant

gallant followers, who had fallen in that night of sorrow , B O

o)

pierced his foul with such anguish, that while he was forming
their ranks, and iuing ome necessary orders, his soldiers ob- '52o
served the tears trickling from his eyes, and remarked, with
much fatisfadion, that while attentive to the duties of a genc-
ral, he was not insensible to the feelings of a man.

IN this fatal retreat many officers of diflincdion peribhcd , and ofn.

and among there Velasquez de Leon, who having forsaken the
party of his kinsman, tile governor of Cuba, to follow the for-
tune of his companions, was, on that account, as well as for
his superior merit, refpeted by them as the second person in
the army. All the artillery, ammunition, and baggage, were
loft; the greater part of the horses, and above two thousand
Tlafcalans, were killed, and only a very small portion of the
treasure which they had amassed was saved. This, which had
been always their chief object, proved now a great cause of their
calamity; for many of the soldiers having so overloaded them-
selves with bars of gold as rendered them unfit for aion, and
retarded their flight, fell, ignominiously, the vioims of their
own inconsiderate avarice. Amidst so many disasters, it was
some consolation to find that Aguilar and Marina, whose func-
tion as interpreters was of such essential importance, had made
their escape .

TaiE first care of Cortes was to find fomc hiclter for his Diflic.:lti,.

treat ot I,

wearied troops; for as the Mexicans infefIed them on every s,:,i:',ll
fide, and the people of Tacuba began to take arms, he could

z oche Trie is the name by which it is ill diftinguiflcd in New Spain.
a See N O T E XXII, b Cortca Rclat. p. 248. 13. Diaz, c. z18.
Gomara Cron. c. o09. Herrcra, dec. 2. lib. x. c. 11, 2.

not

95

B O O K not continue in his prercnt station. He direted his march to-

V.
.--- wards the rising ground, and having fortunately discovered a
20- temple situated on an eminence, took pofeffion of it. There

he found not only the fheltcr for which he wished, but, what
was no less wanted, ome provisions to refiefh his men; and
though the enemy did not intermit their attacks throughout the
day, they were with little difficulty prevented from making any
impreflion. During this time Cortes was engaged in deep con-
fultation with his officers, concerning the route which they
ought to take in their retreat. They were now on the weft
fide of the lake. Tlafcala, the only place where they could
hope for a friendly reception, lay about fixty-four miles to the
eail of Mexico'; so that they were obliged to go round the
north end of the lake before they could fall into the road which
led thither. A Tlafcalan soldier undertook to be their guide,
and conducted them through a country in rome places marshy,
in others mountainous, in all ill-cultivated and thinly peopled.
They marched for fix days with little respite, and under conti-
nual alarms, numerous bodies of the Mexicans hovering around
them, ometimes harassing them at a distance with their misfile
weapons, and ometimes attacking them closely in front, in
rear, in flank, with great boldness, as they now knew that they
were not invincible. Nor were the fatigue and danger of those
incessant conflits the worst evils to which they were exposed.
As the barren country through which they pased afforded hard-
ly any provisions, they were reduced to feed on berries, roots,
and the flalks of green maize; and at the very time that famine
was depressing their spirits and wafling their strength, their
situation required the most vigorous and unremitting exertions
of courage and activity. Amidst those complicated difireffes,

c Villa Scgnor Tcatro Americano, lib. ii. c. 1 i.

one
96

one circumfiance supported and animated the Spaniards. Their 1, c, () ;
commander fuifained this fad rvcrfc of fortunie with unlhakcn ---.,-~
magnanimity. His prefcncc of mind never forsook him; his '':'
sagacity foresaw every event, and his viiilancc provided for it.
He was foremofl in evcry danger, and cndurcd every lhardiflhip

ith chcerfulncfs. The difficulties with which he was fur-

rounded fecmed to call forth new talecnts; and his fi:diecr,
thou ji dlef lairi g ti:nfclvcs, cot inucd to follow him wvi:h
iiicrcaiing confidence in Is ailities.

O0: the sixth dav tlhey reaclhd Otumlla, not far from the road l: '; ,

betwcen Mcxico and ' licala. E:y ext norl tlcy he-
g.n to advance twarls it, flving parties of the enemy fiill
hain on their rear; and amidst tlic infiu'ts with which they
accompanied their hofliitics, Mvarilna rcmlirkcd tlhat tcy oftce
exclaimed with cxultation, " Go on, robhcrs; g) to te ;:Lce
where you fiall quilkly mcct t}e vcngcance lIdc to your
crimes." Tlc mcaning c t!iis t-e! t tl:e Spaniar',rs did int co,:-
prliend, until thl'y reahel d tle fmmnit of an cemincc.: beore
thcm. Tlhere a fprcios valley opened to tcir view\, cover
litl a v;afi aim_,, exten:.i.g as far s ll.c Cy (o1l',d r.i: ,.
Tlec Mexicans, w.,lile ithl one body of t!.tir lroops tji.y i,a-
rall'dc the Spaniards in' their retreat, liad affeml,;ed tllcir pi;:-i
cipal force on lic other fide of the lake;. and nlar, ll ill,; il);;-
the road whi1h lcd d(ircdlly to Tl;tfcl;t, poll(l it i tlie l)1;lii
of Otumta, through wliclI lt]ey knew Cortes iul j)::S. A t
the fiAht of this incredibllc mullitude, xlliib tIl) y could fur-
vc' ait once froim tile rising groundl, tile SpI!li;irdls were a;fio--
nilihd, and even the blcfi Ixbe'gan to e r(';ir. But (Crte,
without allowin, leIifure for tlheir fears to acqui:'e ircngltll i'
rcflcdoion, after warning them briefly that no iltInllaiv e iov\

VOL. II. O ri;,;:. I

'.i7

B O O K remained but to conquer or to die, led them inltantly to the

a_ . charge. The Mexicans waited their approach with unusual forti-
'520. tude. Such, however, was the superiority of the Spanish difci-

pline and arms, that the imprefilon of this small body was irre-
fifible; and whichever way its force was direced, it penetrated
and dispersed the most numerous battalions. But while these
gave way in one quarter, new combatants advanced from an-
other, and the Spaniards, though successful in every attack,
were ready to fink under those repeated efforts, without feeing
any end of their toil, or any hope of vicory. At that time
Cortes observed the great standard of the empire, which was
carried before the Mexican general, advancing; and fortunately
recollecting to have heard, that on the fate of it depended the
event of every battle, he assembled a few of his bravest officers,
whose horses were still capable of service, and placing himself
at their head, pushed forward towards the flandard with an
impetuosity which bore down every thing before it. A chosen
body of nobles, who guarded the standard, made ome refilt-
ance, but were oon broken. Cortes, with a stroke of his
lance, wounded the Mexican general, and threw him to the
ground. One of his followers alighting, put an end to his life,
and laid hold of the imperial fiandard. The moment that their
leader fell, and the standard, towards which all directed their
eyes, disappeared, an universal panic struck the Mexicans, and,
as if the bond which held them together had been dissolved,
every ensign was lowered, each soldier threw away his wea-
pons, and all fled with precipitation to the mountains. The
Spaniards, unable to pursue them far, returned to collet the
spoils of the field, which were so valuable as to be ome com-
penfation for the wealth which they had loft in Mexico; for in
the enemy's army were most of their principal warriors, dressed

out
98

out in their richefi ornaments, as if they had been marching to
aflured vicory. Next day, to their great joy, they entered
the Tlafcalan territories ".

BUT, amidfl their fatisfadion in having got beyond the pre-

cind6s of an hostile country, they could not look forward with-
out solicitude, as they were still uncertain what reception they
might meet with from allies, to whom they returned in a con-
dition very different from that in which they had lately set out
from their dominions. Happily for them, the enmity of the
Tlafcalans to the Mexican name was so inveterate, their desire
to avenge the death of their countrymen so vehement, and
the ascendant which Cortes had acquired over the chiefs of the
republic so complete, that, far from entertaining a thought of
taking any advantage of the difireffed situation in which they
beheld the Spaniards, they received them with a tenderness and
cordiality which quickly dissipated all their suspicions.

SOME interval of tranquillity and indulgence was now abfo-

lutely necessary; not only that the Spaniards might give atten-
tion to the cure of their wounds, which had been too long
neglected, but in order to recruit their strength, exhausted by
such a long fucceflion of fatigue and hardships. During this,
Cortes learned that he and his companions were not the only
Spaniards who had felt the effects of the Mexican enmity. A
considerable detachment, which was marching from Zempoalla
towards the capital, had been cut off by the people of Tepeaca.
A smaller party, returning from Tlafcala to Vera Cruz, with the

d Cortes Relat. p. 219. B. Diaz, c. 128. Gomara Cron. c. I o. Herrera, dec. 2.
lib. zc. c. 2, 13.

0 z share

BOO K

V.

I 52O.
July 8.

R ception of
the Spaniardj
in ''lafcala.

New delibe-
rations of
Cortes.

99

B O It share of the Mexican gold allotted to the garri'on, had been

surprised and destroyed in the mountains. At a juncurc when
X' 20. the life of every Spaniard was of importance, such loffcs were

deeply flt. The fclicmes which Cortes was medilating ren-
dered them peculiarly afflictivc to him. While his enemies,
and even many of his own followers, confidered the difaficrs
whijch had bfallen him as fatal to the progress of his arms,
and imagined that nothing now remained but speedily to
abandon a country which he had invaded with unequal force,
his mind, as eminent for perseverance as for entcrprife, was
flill bent on accomplifiing his original purpose, of subjed-
ing the Mexican empire to the crown (;f Castile. Severe and
unexpected as the check was whic h he had received, it did
not appear to him sufficient reason for relinquishing the con-
quefis which he had alredy made, or against resuming his
operations with better hopes of fuccers. The colony at Vera
Cruz was not only safe, but had remained unmolested. The
people of Zempoalla and the adjacent difirids had discovercd
no symptoms of defection. The Tlafcalans continued faithful
to their alliance. On their martial spirit, easily rouzed to
arms, and inflamed with implacable hatred of the Mexicans,
he depended for powerful aid. He had fill the command of
a body of Spaniards, equal in number to that with which he
had opened his way into the centre of the empire, and had
taken possession of the capital; so that with the benefit of
greater experience, as well as more perfect knowledge of the
country, he did not dcfpair of quickly recovering all that he
had been deprived of by untoward events.

Th.- IL ,trc3 FULL of this idea, he courted the Tlafcalan chiefs with such
hbCe tuk. attention, and difiributed among them so liberally the rich spoils

of
I00

of Qtrimnbh. tbit hr w-as secure of obtaining whatecr hc fhculd
r(c]uire (f the r,_upbli:. He drew a fiall filpply of ammu!i-
lii, aid t;.o or tlhrce field-picces, from his flores at Vcra
Cr .. I-I> 'ifpatche.! an officer of confidence with four ships
of .; v;,,icz s flct to Hispaniola and Jamaica, to eng age adven-
tur.:. , .ild to prcllh!c liorfes, gunpowder, and oth,cr miiitary

o;- .s. As lie 1knew that it would be vin to attempt the re-
duction of Mexico, unless he could secure the commandl of the
lake, h gave orders to prepare in the mountains of Tlafcala
materials for l uilding twIlvc brigantines, so as they might be
carried tither in pieces ready to be put together. and launched
v. hen lie flool in need of their service .

BuEr while, with provident attention, he was taking those

n ccf iiry fieps towards the execution of his measures, an ob-
ftacle arose in a quarter where it was least expected, but most
formidable. The spirit of discontent and mutiny broke out in
his own army. Many of Narvaez's followers were planters
rather than foliiers, and had accompanied him to New Spain
with fanguinc hopes of obtaining fettlemcnts, and little inclina-
tion to engage in the har.iflips and dangers ('f war. s the
fame motives had induced them to enter into their new engage-
ments with Cortes. they no. sooner became acqluaiL;tc d with the
nature of the service, than they bitterly repented of their choice.
Such of ihem as had the good fortune to survive the perilous
advcinturb: l in -lwhici thir own imprudence had involved them,
happj i!m having m.idc t 'eir escape, trembled at the thoulihts
of biit, cxic(-d a ercc d tij:e to similar calamities. As foo;t
as thei: ,ii:overcd the i;ntcniionl of Cortes, they began feccrtly

(0 0 K

V.

5 J0.

1320.

Fit c)1 his
troops.
to

IOI
1: Coi ti:; I~l;, p. 25, ~. GummaRI: Cio. .

B 0 O K to murmur and cabal, and waxing gradually more audacious,

V. a__ they, in a body, offered a remonfirance to their general against
5 20- the imprudence of attacking a powerful empire with his hattered

forces, and formally required him to lead them back directly
to Cuba. Though Cortes, long pradifed in the arts of com-
mand, employed arguments, entreaties, and presents, to con-
vince or to ooth them; though his own soldiers, animated with
the spirit of their leader, warmly seconded his endeavours; he
found their fears too violent and deep-rooted to be removed,
and the utmof he could effed was to prevail with them to defer
their departure for ome time, on a promise that he would, at
a more proper juncure, dismiss such as should desire it.

Means he THAT the malcontents might have no leisure to brood over
revive their the causes of their difaffedion, he resolved inflantly to call
confidence. forth his troops into acion. He proposed to chastise the people

of Tepeaca for the outrage which they had committed and as
the detachment which they had cut off happened to be com-
posed mofily of soldiers who had served under Narvaez, their
companions, from the desire of vengeance, engaged more wil-
August. lingly in this war. He took the command in person, accom-

panied by a numerous body of Tlafcalans, and in the space of
a few weeks, after various encounters, with great slaughter of
the Tepeacans, reduced that province to fubjedion. During
several months, while he waited for the supplies of men and
ammunition which he expeted, and was carrying on his pre-
parations for conftruding the brigantines, he kept his troops
confiantly employed in various expeditions against the adjacent
provinces, all of which were conduded with an uniform tenour
of success. By these, his men became again accustomed to vic-
tory, and resumed their wonted sense of superiority the Mexi-

can
102

can power was weakened; the Tlafcalan warriors acquired the
habit of aing in conjunction with the Spaniards; and the
chiefs of the republic delighted to fee their country enriched
with the spoils of all the people around them, and astonished
every day with fresh discoveries of the irrefiflible prowess of
their allies, declined no effort requisite to support them.

ALL those preparatory arrangements, however, though the

most prudent and efficacious which the situation of Cortes al-
lowed him to make, would have been of little avail, without a
reinforcement of Spaniflh soldiers. Of this. he was so deeply
sensible, that it was the chief object of his thoughts and wishes;
and yet his only profped of obtaining it, from the return of the
officer whom he had ent to the isles to solicit aid, was both
distant and uncertain. But what neither his own sagacity nor
power could have procured, he owed to a series of fortunate
and unforeseen incidents. The governor of Cuba, to whom the
success of Narvaez appeared an event of infallible certainty,
having ent two small ships after him with new inftrutions
and a supply of men and military flores, the officer whom
Cortes had appointed to command on the coast, artfully decoy-
ed them into the harbour of Vera Cruz, seized the vessels, and
easily persuaded the soldiers to follow the flandard of a more
able leader than him whom they were destined to join . Soon
after, three hips of more considerable force came into the har-
bour separately. These belonged to an armament fitted out by
Francisco de Garay, governor of Jamaica, who, being possessed
with the rage of discovery and conquest which animated every
Spaniard fettled in America, had long aimed at intruding into

f B. Diaz, c. 131.

some

BOOK

V.

1520.

Strengthened
by several re-
inforcelnents.

103

B o o some diftriot of New Spain, and dividing with Cortes the glory

.--.- and gain of annexing that empire to the crown of Castile.
20 They unadvisedly made their attempt on the northern pro-

vinces, where the country was poor and the people fierce and
warlike; and, after a cruel fiucceifion of difaftcrs, famine com-
pelled them to venture into Vera Cruz, and c:fl themfclves
ctoe)cr zS. upon the mercy of their countrymen. Their fidelity was not

proof againfl the splendid hopes and promises which had fe-
duced other adventurers, and, as if the spirit of revolt had been
contagious in New Spain, they likew-ise abandoned the master
whom they were bound to serve, and inliflcd under Cortes .
Nor was it America alone that furnilhed such uncxpe.Sed aid.
A hip arrived from Spain, freighted by some private merchants
with military stores, in hopes of a profitable market in a coun-
try, the fame of whose opulence began to spread over Europe.
Cortes eagerly purchased a cargo which to him was invaluable,
and the crew, following the general example, joined him at
Tlafcala "

FROM those various quarters, the army of Cortes was aug-

mented with an hundred and eighty men, and twcnty horls.
a rcinforcement too inconfidrablc to ploduce any consequence
which would entitle it to have been mcntioned in the hifiory
of other parts of the globe. But in that of America, where
great revolutions were brought about by causes which fcemed
to bear no proportion to their effTcs, such fiall events rife
into importance, because they were fuflicient to decide with
rcfpct to the fate of kingdoms, Nor is it the least remarkable
inflance of the singular felicity conspicuous in any paifagcs

Cortes Rcl.i. 53, F. B. Diaz., c. 133. h Ibid c. 136.

of
104

of Cortes's fory, that the two persons chiefly infirumental in
furnishing him with those seasonable supplies should be an
avowed enemy who aimed at his defirudion, and an envious
rival who wished to supplant him.

BOOK

V.

I 520
THE first effect of the juntion with his new followers was Nnmbhr o,

Ilija brc.

to enable him to dismiss such of Narvaez's soldiers as remained
with reluctance in his service. After their departure, he flill
mustered five hundred and fifty infantry, of which fourscore
were armed with muskets or cross-bows, forty horsemen, and
a train of nine field-pices '. At the head of these, accompa-
nied by ten thousand Tlafcalans and other friendly Indians,
Cortes began his march towards Mexico, on the twenty-eighth
of December, fix months after his fatal retreat from that
city k.

NOR did he advance to attack an enemy unprepared to re-
ceive him. Upon the death of Montezuma, the Mexican chiefs,
in whom the right of electing the emperor was vefied, had in-
flantly raised his brother Quetlavaca to the throne. His avowed
and inveterate enmity to the Spaniards, would have been fuffi-
cient to gain their suffrages, although he had been les diftin-
guifhed for courage and capacity. He had an immediate op-
portunity of shewing that he was worthy of their choice, by
conducting, in person, those fierce attacks which compelled the
Spaniards to abandon his capital; and as soon as their retreat
afforded him any respite from aion, he took measures for
preventing their return to Mexico, with prudence equal to the
spirit which he had displayed in driving them out of it. As

Prepar.tions
of the Mexi-
cans for thiir
defence.
i Cortes Relat. 255, E.

k Relat. 256, A. B. Diaz, c. 137.

P

oj05

from
VOL. II.

B OO K from the vicinity of Tlafcala he could not be unacquainted -ith

v.

the motions a d intentions of Cartes, he observed the fitrm that
1520. was gathering, and began early to provide against it. He re-

paired what the Spaniards had ruined in the city, and strength-
ened it with such new fortifications as the kill of his fubjeds
was capable of ereding. Beside filling his magazines with the
usual weapons of war, he gave diredcion to make long spears,
headed with the swords and daggers taken from the Spaniards,
in order to annoy the cavalry. He summoned the people in
every province of the empire to take arms againfi their oppref-
fors; and as an encouragement to exert themselves with vigour,
he promised them exemption from all the taxes which his pre-
deceffors had imposed . But what he laboured with the greatest
earnefinefs was, to deprive the Spaniards of the advantages which
they derived from the friendship of the Tlafcalans, by endea-
vouring to persuade that people to renounce all connection with
men who were not only avowed enemies of the go :s whom they
worshipped, but who would not fail to subjeE them at lfit to
the fame yoke, which they were now inconsiderately lending
their aid to inipofe upon others. These representations, no less
striking than Well-founded, were urged so forcibly by his am-
baffadors, that it required all the address of Cortes to prevent
their making a dangerous impression '".

BUT while Quetlavaca was arranging his plan of defence,

with a degree of foresight uncommon in an American, his
(lays were cut short by the small-pox. This distemper, which
raged at that time in New Spain with fatal malignity, was

Cortes Relat. p. 253, E. 254, A. B. Diaz, c. 40. m B. Diaz, c. 129.
!kLrcra, dec. 2, lib, x. c. 14. 19.

unknown
io6

unknown in that quarter of the globe, until it was intro- B 0 K
duced by the Europeans, and may be reckoned among the <-v
greatest calamities brought upon them by their invaders. ';
In his stead the Mexicans raised to the throne Guatimozin,
nephew and fon-in-law of Montezuma, a young man of such
high reputation for abilities and valour, that in this dangerous
crisis, his countrymen, with one voice, called him to the fu-
preme command".

As oon as Cortes entered the enemy's territories, he disco- c' 2'

C-ltcs I!-

vcred various preparations to obstruct his progress. But his v.lices to
troops forced their way with little difficulty, and took poffcfion Rord:
of Tezeuco, the second city of the empire, situated on the
banks of the lake, about twenty miles from Mexico°. Here
he determined to establish his head-quarters, as the most pro-
per flation for launching his brigantines, as well as for making
his approaches to the capital. In order to render his residence
there more secure, he deposed the cazique or chief, who was at
the head of that community, under pretext of ome defee in
his title, and fubfiituted in his place a person whom a fation of
the nobles pointed out as the right heir of that dignity. At-
tached to him by this benefit, the new cazique and his ahc-
rents servcd the Spaniards with inviolable fidelity P.

As the confrrution of the brigantines advancel slowly undler Hs..i-
the unskilful hands of folliers and Indians, whom Cortes was ,',.,
obliged to employ in affifling three or four carpenters vh-
happened fortunately to be in his service, and as he had not
yet received the reinforcement which he expeced from Hifpa-

B . Diaz, c. 130. ° Villa Segnor Theatro Amcricano, i. 156. P Cor:e
Rclat. 256, &c. 13. Diaz, c. 137. GomaraCron. c. z21. Herrera, dc. 3. c. .

P niola,

107

B 0 K niola, he was not in a condition to turn his arms directly

V.

against the capital. To have attacked a city so populous, so
1521. well prepared for defence, and in a situation of such peculiar

strength, must have exposed his troops to inevitable deftruc-
tion. Three months elapsed before the materials for conftrud-
ing the brigantines were finished, and before he heard any
thing with refped to the success of his negociation in His-
paniola. This, however, was not a season of inaction to
Cortes. He attacked successively several of the towns situated
around the lake; and though all the Mexican power was ex-
erted to obfiruct his operations, he either compelled them to
submit to the Spanish crown, or reduced them to ruins. Other
towns he endeavoured to conciliate by more gentle means; and
though he could not hold any intercourse with the inhabitants
but by the intervention of interpreters, yet, under all the dif-
advantage of that tedious and imperfect mode of communica-
tion, he had acquired such thorough knowledge of the fate of
the country, as well as of the dispositions of the people, that
he conducted his negociations and intrigues with afionifhing
dexterity and success. Most of the cities adjacent to Mexico were
originally the capitals of fmrall independent itates; and ome of
them having been but lately annexed to the Mexican empire,
fill retained the remembrance of their ancient liberty, and bore
with impatience the rigorous yoke of their new mailers.
Cortes having early obfcrved symptoms of their difaffeCion,
availed himself of this knowledge to gain their confidence and
friendship. By offering, with confidence, to deliver them from
the odious dominion of the Mexicans, and by liberal promises
of more indulgent treatment, if they would unite with him
againfi their oppressors, he prevailed on the people of several
considerable diifriCts not only to acknowledge the king of Caflile

as
Io8

as their sovereign, but to supply the Spanish camp with pro- B OO K
visions, and to flrengthen his army with auxiliary troops. V
Guatimozin, on the first appearance of defection among his '521'
fubjeds, exerted himself with vigour to prevent or to punish
their revolt; but in spite of his efforts, the spirit continued to
spread. The Spaniards gradually acquired new allies; and with
deep concern he beheld Cortes arming against his empire those
very hands which ought to have been active in its defence,
and ready to advance against the capital at the head of a nu-
merous body of his own fubjedts q

WHILE, by those various methods, Cortes was gradually

circumscribing the Mexican power, within such narrow limits
that his profped of overturning it seemed neither to be uncer-
tain nor remote, all his schemes were well nigh defeated, by a
conspiracy no less unexpected than dangerous. The soldiers of
Narvaez had never united perfectly with the original compa-
nions of Cortes, nor did they enter into his measures with the
fame cordial zeal. Upon every occasion that required any ex-
traordinary effort of courage or of patience, their spirits were
apt to fink; and now, on a near view of what they had to en-
counter, in attempting to reduce a city so inacceflible as Mexico,
and defended by a numerous army, the resolution even of
those among them who had adhered to Cortes, when he was
deserted by their associates, began to fail. Their fears led
them to presumptuous and unfoldier-like difcufions concerning
the propriety of their general's measures, and the improbability
of their success. From these they proceeded to censure and
invectives, and at last began to deliberate how they might pro-

t Cortesl clat. 256-260. B. Diaz, c. 137-140. Gomara Cron. c. 122. 123.
Hcrrera, dec. 3. lib, i. c. , 2.

,ite

ro9

B o o K vide for their own safety, of which they deemed their cornm-

-^^ mander to be totally negligent. Antonio Villefagna, a private
1521- soldier, but bold, intriguing, and strongly attached to Velasquez,

artfully fomented this growing spirit of disaffection. His quar-
ters became the rendezvous of the malcontents, where, after
many consultations, they could discover no method of checking
Cortes in his career, but by assassinating him and his most con-
fiderable officers, and conferring the command upon ome per-
son who would relinquish his wild plans, and adopt measures
more confifent with the general security. Despair inspired them
with courage. The hour for perpetrating the crime, the per-
sons whom they destined as victims, the officers to succeed
them in command, were all named; and the conspirators signed
an association, by which they bound themselves with most so-
lemn oaths to mutual fidelity. But on the evening before the
appointed day, one of Cortes's ancient followers, who had
been educed into the conspiracy, touched with compunction
at the imminent danger of a man whom he had long been
accustomed to revere, or struck with horror at his own
treachery, went privately to his general, and revealed to him
all that he knew. Cortes, though deeply alarmed, discerned at
once what conduct was proper in a situation so critical. He
repaired instantly to Villefcgna's quarters, accompanied by
some of his most trufly officers. The astonishment and con-
fusion of the man at this unexpected visit anticipated the con-
fefilon of his guilt. While his attendants seized him, Cortes
snatched from his bosom a paper containing the association,
signed by the conspirators. Impatient to know how far the de-
fetion extended, he retired to read it, and found there names
which filled him with surprise and sorrow. But, aware how
dangerous a ftrid scrutiny might prove at such a junture, he

confined
1 10I

confined his juicial iquir:cs to Viilfragna :al-;e. As the B K

V.

proofs cf his guilt were ma"ifcl, he was conld.:inned after a
short trial, and next morning h was fccn haning before the '521.
door of the house in which he had loiged. Cortes called his
troops together, and having explained to them the atrocious
purpose of the conspirators, as well as the justice of the punih-
ment inflidel on Villefagna, he added, with an appearance of
fatisfadion, that he was entirely ignorant with refped to all
the circumstances of this dark tranfadion, as the traitor, when
arrested, had suddenly torn and swallowed a paper, which pro-
bably contained an account of it, and under the severest tor-
tures possessed such constancy as to conceal the names of his
accomplices. This artful declaration restored tranquillity to
many a breast that was throbbing, while he spoke, with con-
fcioufiiefs of guilt and dread of detedion; and by this prudent
moderation, Cortes had the advantage of having discovered
and of being able to observe such of his followers as were dif-
asseted; while they, flattering themselves that their past crime
was unknown, endeavoured to avert any suspicion of it, by re-
doubling their activity and zeal in his service'.

CORTES did not allow them leisure to ruminate on what had Hisfingulr

preparations

happened; and as the most effectual means of preventing the for building
return of a mutinous spirit, he determined to call forth his brigantins.
troops immediately to aion. Fortunately, a proper occasion
for this occurred without his eeming to court it. He received
intelligence, that the materials for building the brigantines were
at length completely finished, and waited only for a body of
Spaniards to condut them to Tczeuco. The command of this

r Coitea Relat. 283, C. B. Dia7, c. 146 Herrera, dec. 3. lib. i. c. .

convoy,

I II

B 0 0 K convoy, consisting of two hundred foot soldiers, fifteen horse-

V.

men, and two field-pieces, he gave to Sandoval, who, by the
152 . vigilance, aivity, and courage which he manifested on every

occasion, was growing daily in his confidence, and in the efli-
mation of his fellow-foldiers. The service was no less singular
than important; the beams, the planks, the mails, the cordage,
the fails, the iron-work, and all the infinite variety of articles
requisite for the conftrudion of thirteen brigantines, were to
be carried sixty miles over land, through a mountainous coun-
try, by people who were unacquainted with the ministry of
domestic animals, or the aid of machines to facilitate any work
of labour. The Tlafcalans furnished eight thousand 'Tamenes,
an inferior order of men deflined for servile talks, to carry the
materials on their houlders, and appointed fifteen thousand
warriors to accompany and defend them. Sandoval made the
disposition for their progress with great propriety, placing the
'Tamenes in the centre, one body of warriors in the front,
another in the rear, with considerable parties to cover the flanks.
To each of these he joined some Spaniards, not only to affifl
them in danger, but to accustom them to regularity and sub-
ordination. A body so numerous, and so much encumbered,
advanced leisurely, but in excellent order; and in ome places,
where it was confined by the woods or mountains, the line of
march extended above fix miles. Parties of Mexicans frequently
appeared hovering around them on the high grounds; but per-
ceiving no profpe& of success in attacking an enemy continually
on his guard, and prepared to receive them, they did not ven-
ture to molest him; and Sandoval had the glory of conduaing
safely to Tezeuco a convoy on which all the future operations
of his countrymen depended s.

a Cortes Rclat. 260, C. E. B. Diaz, c. 140.

THIS
112

THEls was followed by another event of no less moment. Four B o 1

V.

ships arrived at Vcra Cruz from Hispaniola, with two hundred
soldiers, eighty horses, two battering cannon, and a confi- ;,:ec,1.
derable supply of ammunition and arms '. Elevated with ob- L- reinl-
serving that all his preparatory schemes, either for recruiting
his own army, or impairing the force of the enemy, had now
produced their full effct, Cortes, impatient to begin the siege
in form, hastened the launching of the brigantines. To faci-
litate this, he had employed a vait number of Indians, for two
months, in deepening the small rivulet which runs by Tezeuco
into the lake, and in forming it into a canal near two miles in
length ; and though the Mexicans, aware of his intentions, as
well as of the danger which threatened them, endeavoured fre-
quently to interrupt the labourers, or to burn the brigantines,
the work was at last completed . On the twenty-eighth of April, Thl brig.in-

tines aunch-

all the Spaniflh troops, together with auxiliary Indians, were ed.
drawn up on the banks of the canal; and with extraordinary mi-
litary pomp, heightened and rendered more solemn by the cele-
bration of the most sacred rites of religion, the brigantines, were
launched. As they fell down the canal in order, Father Olmedo
blessed them, and gave each its name. Every eye followed them
with wonder and hope, until they entered the lake, when they
hoifled their fails, and bore away before the wind. A general
shout of joy was raised; all admiring that bold inventive genius,
which, by means so extraordinary that their fucccfs almost ex-
ceeded belief, had acquired the command of a fleet, without

1 Cortes Rclat. z59, F. 262, D. Gomara Cron. c. 129.
" Sec NO T E XXIII. x B. Diaz, c. 4o.
VOL. II.

%

t 1 he

B 0 O K the aid of which Mexico would have continued to set the Spa-

V. _v-^. nifh power and arms at defiance Y.

1521.

Difpofioons CORTES determined to attack the city from three different
for the iege. quarters; from Tezeuco on the east fide of the lake, from Ta-

cuba on the weft, and from Cuyocan towards the south. Those
towns were fituatedon the principal causeways which led to the
capital, and intended for their defence. He appointed Sandoval
to command in the first, Pedro de Alvarado in the second, and
Chriftoval de Olid in the third; allotting to each a numerous
body of Indian auxiliaries, together with an equal division of
Spaniards, who, by the junction of the troops from Hispaniola,
amounted now to eighty-fix horsemen, and eight hundred and
eighteen foot soldiers of whom a hundred and eighteen were
armed with muskets or cross-bows. Their train of artillery con-
fited of three battering cannon, and fifteen field-pieces z. He
reserved for himfdf, as the station of greatest importance and
danger, the condut of the brigantines, each armed with one of
his small cannon, and manned with twenty-five Spaniards.
,May 1o. As Alvarado and Olid proceeded towards the posts assigned

them, they broke down the .aqueduCts which the ingenuity of
the Mexicans had erected for conveying water into the capital,
and by the distress to which this reduced the inhabitants, gave
a beginning to the calamities which they were destined to fs-
ser . Alvarado and Olid found the towns, of which they were
ordered to take poffflion, deserted by their inhabitants, who

Y Cortes Relat. 266, C. Herrera, dec. 3. lib. i. c. 5. Gomara Cron. c. 129.
z Cortes Relat. 266, C. a Cortes Relat. 267, B. B. Diaz, c. 150.
Herrera, dec. 3. lib. i. c. 13.

had
II4

had fled for safety to the capital, where Guatimozin had col- B o o i;
leded the chief force of his empire, as there alone he could ,
hope to make a successful fland against the formidable enemies s'21.
who were approaching to assault him.

THE first effort of the Mexicans was to defiroy the fleet of Mexicans at-

tack the bri-

brigantines, the fatal effects of whose operations they foresaw gantires
and dreaded. Though the brigantines, after all the labour
and merit of Cortes in forming them, were of inconfider-
able bulk, rudely conftruaed, and manned chiefly with land-
men, hardly possessed of skill enough to conduct them, they
mufft have been objects of terror to a people unacquainted
with any navigation but that of their lake, and possessed of no
vessel larger than a canoe. Neceflity, however, urged Guati-
mozin to hazard the attack; and hoping to supply by numbers
what he wanted in force, he assembled such a multitude of
canoes as covered the face of the lake. They rowed on boldly to
the charge, while the brigantines, retarded by a dead calm, could
scarcely advance to meet them. But as the enemy drew near, Repulsed.
a breeze suddenly sprung up; in a moment the fails were
spread, and the brigantines with irresistible impetuosity, broke
through their feeble opponents, overset many canoes, and dif-
fipated the whole armament with such slaughter, as convinced
the Mexicans, that the progress of the Europeans in knowledge
and arts rendered their superiority greater on this new element
than they had hitherto found it by land b.

FROM that time Cortes remained master of the lake; and the Singular plan

brigantines not only preserved a communication between the cth'e iege.n

b Cortes Relat. 267, C. B. Diaz, c. 0o. Gomara Cron. c. 131. Herrera, dec. 3.
lib. i. c. 17.

Q Spaniards

1 1 ;

: C' . K Spaniards in their different flations, though at considerable di'-
< A-.d~ tancc from each other, but were employed to cover the cause-

5'21. ways on each fide, and keep off the canoes, when they at-

tempted to annoy the troops as they advanced towards the city.
He formed the brigantines in three divisions, allotting one to
each flatioh, with orders to second the operations of the officer
who commanded there. From all the three itations he pushed
on the attack againfi the city with equal vigour; but in a man-
ner so very different from that whereby sieges arc conducted in
regular war, that he himself seems afraid that it would appear
no less improper than singular, to persons unacquainted with
his ituation . Each morning his troops assaulted the barri-
cades which the enemy had erewted on the causeways, forced
their way over the trenches which they had dug, and through,
the canals where the bridges were broken down, and endea-
voured to penetrate into the heart of the city, in hopes of ob-
taining ome decisive advantage, which might force the enemy
to surrender, and terminate the war at once; but when the
obstinate valour of the Mexicans rendered the efforts of the day
ineffectual, the Spaniards retired in the evening to their former
quarters. Thus their toil and danger were, in ome measure,
continually renewed; the Mexicans repairing in the night what
the Spaniards had defiroyed through the day, and recovering
the pofls from which they had driven them. But necessity
prcfcribed this flow and untoward mode of operation. The
number of his troops was so small, that Cortes durfi not, with
a handful of men, attempt to make a lodgment in a city where
he might be surrounded and annoyed by such a multitude of
enemies. The remembrance of what he already suffered
by the ill-iudgcd confidence with which he had ventured into

' Cortes Rclat. 270. F.

such
I 6

such a dangerous situation, was fill fresh in his mind. The
Spaniards, exhausted with fatigue, were unable to guard the
various posts which they daily gained; and though their camp
was filled with Indian auxiliaries, they durst not devolve this
charge upon them, because they were so little accustomed to
discipline, that no confidence could be placed in their vigilance.
Befidcs this, Cortcs was extremely solicitous to preserve the city
as much as pjffible from being deflroyed, both as he deflined it
to be the capital of his conquests, and wished that it might re-
main as a monument of his glory. From all there confidcra-
tions, he adhered obfiinatcly, for a month after the siege was
opened, to the fyflem which he had adopted. The Mexicans, in
their own defence, displayed valour which was hardly inferior
to that with which the Spaniards attacked them. On land, on
water, by night and by day, one furious conflict succeeded to
another. Several Spaniards were killed, more wounded, and
all were ready to fink under the toils of unintermitting service,
which were rendered more intolerable by the injuries of the
season, the periodical rains being now set in with their usual
violence .

ASTONISH-ED and disconcerted with the length and difficul-

ties of the siege, Cortes determined to make one great effort to
get poffefion of the city before he relinquishcd the plan which
he had hitherto followed, and had recourse to any other mode
of attack. With this view, he lent inflrudions to Alvarado
and Sandoval to advance with their divisions to a general assault,
and took the command in person of that posted on the causeway
of Cuyocan. Animated by his presence, and the expeclation
of some dccifive event, the Spaniards pushed forward with irrc-

d B. D:az, c. 151.

fiflible

EB 0 K

V.

I Rzi.

I.rdcSvouis
to rake r!'e
city hly ftui.

July 3.

II7

B 0 K fifiible impetuosity. They broke through one barricade after an-

V.
i-v_, other, forced their way over the ditches and canals, and having

'52' entered the city, gained ground incessantly, in spite of the mul-

titude and ferocity of their opponents. Cortes, though de-
lighted with the rapidity of his progress, did not forget that he
might still find it necessary to retreat; and in order to secure it,
appointed Julian de Alderete, a captain of chief note in the
troops which he had received from Hispaniola, to fill up the
canals and gaps in the' causeway as the main body advanced.
That officer, deeming it inglorious to be thus employed, while
his companions were in the heat of aion and the career of
vicory, neglected the important charge committed to him, and
hurried on inconsiderately to mingle with the combatants. The
Mexicans, whose military attention and skill were daily im-
proving, no sooner observed this, than they carried an account
of it to their monarch.
Repulsed, GUATIMOZIN infiantly discerned the consequences of the

error which the Spaniards had committed, and, with admi-
rable presence of mind, prepared to take advantage of it.
He commanded the troops posted in the front to flacken their
efforts, in order to allure the Spaniards to push forward, while
he dispatched a large body of chosen warriors through different
streets, some by land, and others by water, towards the great
breach in the causeway, which had been left open. On a fig-
nal which he gave, the priests in the principal temple firuck
the great drum consecrated to the god of war. No sooner did
the Mexicans hear its doleful solemn found, calculated to in-
spire them with contempt of death and enthusiastic ardour, than
they ruflled upon the enemy with frantic rage. The Spaniards,
unable to resist men urged on no less by religious fury than

hope

hope of success, began to retire, at first leisurely, and with a B 0 0 K

V.

good countcnance; but as the enemy pressed on, and their own -
impatience to escape increased, the terror and confusion became 152s1
so general, that when they arrived at the gap in the causeway,
Spaniards ad Tlafcalans, horsemen and infantry, plunged in
promiscuously, while the Mexicans rushed upon them fiercely
from every fide, their light canoes carrying them through hoals
which the brigantines could not approach. In vain did Cortes
attempt to flop and rally his flying troops; fear rendered them
regardless of his intreaties or commands. Finding all his en-
deavours to renew the combat fruitless, his next care was to
save ome of those who had thrown themselves into the water;
but while thus employed, with more attention to their situation
than to his own, fix Mexican captains suddenly laid hold of withconfi-

derable loss.

him, and were hurrying him off in triumph; and though two
of his officers rescued him at the expence of their own lives,
he received several dangerous wounds before he could break
loose. Above sixty Spaniards perished in the rout; and what
rendered the disaster more aflicting, forty of these fell alive
into the hands of an enemy never known to hew mercy to a
captive c.

THE approach of night, though it delivered the dejeded Tlhoe who

Spaniards from the attacks of the enemy, ushered in, what was faer iked
hardly less grievous, the noise of their barbarous triumph, and the god of
of the horrid feflival with which they celebrated their vi'tory.
Every quarter of the city was illuminated; the great temple
{hone with such peculiar splendour, that the Spaniards could
plainly fee the people in motion, and the pricfts busy in haften-

c Cortes Rclat. p. 273. B. Diaz, c. 152. Gomara Cron. c. 38. IHrrcra, dec. 3.
lib . C. c. 2o.

ing

Ii9

B0OOK

V.

1 521,

Ncm scenc
and eiforts of
tile N'cxicnns.

ing the preparations for the death of the prisoners. Through
the gloom they fancied that they discerned their companions
by the whiteness of their kins, as they were stript naked and
compelled to dance before the image of the god to whom they
were to be offered. They heard the flrieks of those who were
sacrificed, and thought that they could diftinguifil cach unhappy
victim, by the well-known found of his voice. Imagination
added to what they really saw or heard, and augmented its
horror. The most unfeeling melted into tears of compassion,
and the flouteft heart trembled at the dreadful fpedacle which
they beheld f.

CORTES, who, betides all that he felt in common with his
soldiers, was oppressed with the additional load of anxious re-
fledtions natural to a general on such an unexpected calamity,
could not, like them, relieve his mind by giving vent to its
anguish. He was obliged to aume an air of tranquillity, in
order to revive the spirit and hopes of his followers. The junc-
ture, indeed, required an extraordinary exertion of fortitude.
The Mexicans, elated with their vitory, allied out next morn-
ing to attack him in his quarters. But they did not rely on the
efforts of their own arms alone. They ent the heads of the
Spaniards whom they had sacrificed to the leading men in the
adjacent provinces, and assured them that the god of war, ap-
peased by the blood of their invaders, which had been iled so
plentifully on his altars, had declared, with an audible voice,
that in eight days time those hated enemies should be finally
dectroycd, and peace and prosperity re-eflablifhed in the em-
pire.

Sec NOTE XXIV.

A PRE-
120

A PREDICTION uttered with such confidence, and in terms B O 0 K

so void of ambiguity, gained universal credit among a people - -
prone to fuperfition. The zeal of the provinces, which had corid'

Cortes de-

already declared againit the Spaniards, augmented, and several, fcrted by
which had hitherto remained inactive, took arms with cnthufi- Indian all.
afiic ardour to execute the decrees of the gods. The Indian
auxiliaries who had joined Cortes, accuflomed to venerate the
fame deities with the Mexicans, and to receive the responses of
their priefis with the fame implicit faith, abandoned the Spa-
niards as a race of men devoted to certain deftrudion. Even
the fidelity of the Tlafcalans was haken, and the Spanifi
troops were left almost alone in their fiations. Cortes finding
that he attempted in vain to dispel the superstitious fears of his
confederates by argument, took advantage, from the impru-
dence of those who had framed the prophecy, in fixing its ac-
complifhment so near at hand, to give them a firiking dcmon-
firation of its falsity. He suspended all military operations
during the period marked out by the oracle. Under cover of
the brigantines which kept the enemy at a difiancc, his troops
lay in safety, and the fatal term expired without anydifafter.

His allies, aflamed of their own credulity, returned to their lie rins

station. Other tribes, judging that the gods, who had now de- lir f
ceived the Mexicans, had decreed finally to withdraw their
protetion from them, joined his flandard; and fch was the
levity of a simple people, moved by every flight imprcflion,
that, in a short time after such a general defection of his con-
fedcrates, Cortes saw himself, if we may believe his own ac-
count, at the head of a hundred and fifty thousand Indinis.

t B. Diaz, c. 53. Gomn ra Cron. c. i,.

)', (li
VOL. II.

121
R

B 0 0 K Even with such a numerous army, he found it necessary to

< - adopt a new and more wary system of operation. Instead of
an, adt a renewing his attempts to become mafler of the city at once, by
new fylJcit such bold but dangerous efforts of valour as he had already
of attack.

tried, he made his advances gradually, and with every possible
precaution againfl exposing his men to any calamity similar to
that which they fiill bewailed. As the Spaniards pushed for-
ward, the Indians regularly repaired the causeways behind
them. As oon as they got poffeflion of any part of the town,
the houses were instantly levelled with the ground. Day by
day, the Mexicans, forced to retire as their enemies gained
ground, were hemmed in within more narro- limits. Guati-
mozin, though unable to flop the career of the enemy, conti-
nued to defend his capital with obstinate resolution, and dif-
puted every inch of ground. But the Spaniards, having not
only varied their mode of attack, but, by orders of Cortes,
having changed the weapons with which they fought, were
again armed with the long Chinantlan spears, which they had
employed with such success against Narvaez, and, by the firm
array in which this enabled them to range themselves, they
repelled, with little danger, the loose assault of the Mexicans:
incredible numbers of them fell in the conflicts which they
renewed every day '. While war wafted without, famine be-
gan to consume them within the city. The Spanish brigan-
tines, having the entire command of the lake, rendered it im-
possible to receive any flipply of provisions by water. The vast
number of his Indian auxiliaries enabled Cortes to fliut up the
avenues to the city by land. The stores which Guatimozin had
laid up were exhausted, by the multitudes which crouded into

Cortes Rclat. 275, C. 276, F. 1. Diaz, c. 153.

the
122

the capital, to defend their overeign and the temples of their 3 0 0 K
gods. Not only the people, but persons of the highest rank, i--
felt the utmost distresses of want. What they fuffcred brought ' 5'
on infectious and mortal difitepers, the last calamity that visits
besieged cities, and which filled up the mcafure of their woes .

BUT, under the pressure of so many and such various evils, Courage and

conflancy of

the spirit of Guatimozin remained firm and unfubducd. He Guatinlozin
rejeded, with scorn, every overture of peace from Cortes, and
disdaining the idea of submitting to the oppressors of his coun-
try, determined not to survive its ruin. The Spaniards conti- July 27
nued their progress. At length all the three divisions pene-
trated into the great square in the centre of the city, and made
a iecure lodgmcnt there. Three-fourths of the city were now
reduced, and laid in ruins. The remaining quarter was so
closely pressed, that it could not long withfiand assailants who
attacked it from their new flation with superior advantage, and
more assured expectation of success. The Mexican nobles,
solicitous to save the life of a monarch whom they revered, pre-
vailed on Guatimozin to retire from a place where refilance was
now vain, that he might rouze the more distant provinces of the
empire to arms, and maintain there a more successful firuggle
with the public enemy. In order to facilitate the execution of
this measure, they endeavoured to amuse Cortes with overtures
of submission, that, while his attention was employed in adjust-
ing the articles of pacification, Guatimozin might escape unper-
ceived. But they made this attempt upon a leader of greater
sagacity and difccrnment than to be deceived by their arts.
Cortes fufpeaing their intention, and aware of what moment

Cortes Relat. 276, E. 277, F. B. Diaz, 155. Gomnra Cron. c. 141.

R it

B O O K it was to defeat it, appointed Sandoval, the officer on whose

.v. vigilance he could mofi perfectly rely, to take the command of
521. the brigantines, with firit injunctions to watch every motion

of the enemy. Sandoval, attentive to the charge, observing
some large canoes crouded with people rowing across the
lake with extraordinary rapidity, nflantly gave the signal to
chace. Garcia Holguin, who commanded the fleetest brigan-
tine, oon overtook them, and was preparing to fire on the
foremost canoe, which seemed to carry rome person whom all

He is taken the reft followed and obeyed. At once the rowers dropt their
prisoner. oars, and all on board, throwing down their arms, conjured

him with cries and tears to forbear, as the emperor was there.
Holguin eagerly seized his prize, and Guatimozin, with a dig-
nified composure, gave himself up into his hands, requefling
only that no insult might be offered to the empress or his chil-
dren. When conduCted to Cortes, he appeared neither with
the fullen fierceness of a barbarian, nor with the dtjedion of a
Supplicant. " I have done," said he, addressing himself to the
Spanish general, " what became a monarch. I have defended
my people to the last extremity. Nothing now remains but to
die. Take this dagger," laying his hand on one which Cortes
wore, " plant it in my breast, and put an end to a life which
can no longer be of use k."

Aug. 3. As soon as the fate of their sovereign was known, the refiflance

The city
tl'en." of the Mexicans ceased; and Cortes took possession of that finall

part of the capital which yet remained undeftroyed. Thus termi-
nated the siege of Mexico, the most memorable event in the con-
quest of America. It continued feventy-five days, hardly one 6f

k Cortes Rclat. 279. B. Diaz, c. 156. Gomara Cron. c. 142. Herrcra, dec. 3.
lib. ii. c. 7.

which
24

which passed without ome extraordinary effort of one party in B K
the attack, or of the other in the defence of a city, on the fate of
which both knew that the fortune of the empire depended. As 1521.
the firug le here was more obstinate, it was likewise more equal,
than any between the inhabitants of the Old and New Worlds.
The great abilities of Guatimozin, the number of his troops,
the peculiar situation of his capital, so far counterbalanced the
fupcorioty of the Spaniards in arms and discipline, that they
must have relinquiihed the enterprise, if they had trufled for
success to themselves alone. But Mexico was overturned by
the jealousy of neighbours who dreaded its power, and by
the revolt of fubjedts impatient to shake off its yoke. By
their effecdual aid, Cortes was enabled to accomplish what,
without such support, he would hardly have ventured to at-
tempt. How much soever this account of the reduscion of
Mexico may dctracd, on the one hand, from the marvellous
relations of ome Spanish writers, by acfribing that to imple
and obvious causes which they attribute to the romantic valour
of their countrymen, it adds, on the other, to the merit and
abilities of Cortes, who, under every disadvantage, acquir-
ed such an ascendant over unknown nations, as to render
them infiruments towards carrying his schemes into execu-
tion '.

THE exultation of the Spaniards, on accomplishing this slirlln,,co

arduous enterprize, was at firit excessive. But this was quickly ) .dbit;-
damped by the cruel difappointmcnt of thofc fnguine hopes, poiltrlln:e' o.

the Span-

which had animated them amidst so many hardships and dan- ards.
gers. Inflead of the inexhaustible wealth which they expected

See NOTE XXV.

from

125

B O 0 i from becoming masters of Montezuma's treasures, and the or-

V. <-_ naments of so many temples, their rapaciousness could colled
'521. only an inconsiderable booty amidst ruins and desolation'.

Guatimozin, aware of his impending fate, had ordered what
remained of the riches amassed by his ancestors to be thrown
into the lake. The Indian auxiliaries, while the Spaniards
were engaged in confli with the enemy, had carried off the
most valuable part of the spoil. The fum to be divided among
the conquerors was so small, that many of them disdained to
accept of the pittance which fell to their share, and all mur-
mured and exclaimed; ome, against Cortes and his confidents,
whom they fufpeded of having secretly appropriated to their
own use, a large portion of the riches which should have been
brought into the common stock; others, against Guatimozin,
whom they accused of obfiinacy, in refuting to discover the
place where he had hidden his treasure.
Guatiinozin ARGUMENTS, entreaties, and promises, were employed in

order to ooth them, but with so little effed, that Cortes, from
solicitude to check this growing spirit of discontent, gave way
to a deed which slained the glory of all his great adions.
Without regarding the former dignity of Gu*Ltimozin, or feel-
ing any reverence for those virtues which he had displayed, he
fubjeded the unhappy monarch, together with his chief favou-
rite, to torture, in order to force from them a discovery of the
royal treasures, which it was supposed they had concealed.
Guatimozin bore whatever the refined cruelty of his tormentors
could inflit, with the invincible fortitude of an American
warrior. I-is fellow-fufferer, overcome by the violence of the

I The g and fi'ver, according to Cortes, amounted only to 120,000 pcfos, Relat.
2So, A. a fa f.r i;.iol to tlha which the Sp niards had foLrerly divided in Mexico.

anguish,
126

anguish, turned a dejetdd eye towards his masser, which
seemed to implore his permiflion to reveal all that he knew.
But the high-fpirited prince, darting on him a look of autho-
rity mingled with scorn, checked his weakncfs by aking, " Am
I now reposing on a bed of flowers?" Overawed by the re-
proach, he persevered in his dutiful flence, and expired. Cor-
tes, ahamed of a scene so horrid, rescued the royal vidtin from
the hands of his torturers, and prolonged a life reserved for
new indignities and sufferings .

THE fte of the capital, as both parties had foreseen, decided

that of the empire. The provinces ubmitted one after another
to the conquerors. Small detachments of Spaniards marching
through them without interruption, penetrated, in different
quarters, to the great Southern Ocean, which, according to the
i Jeas c'f Columbus, they imagined would open a hort as well
as easy pffage to the East Indies, and secure to the crown of
Castile all the envied wealth of those fertile regions"; and the
aerive mind of Cortes began already to form schemes for at-
tempting this important discovery °.

HE did not know, that during the progress of his vicorious

arms in Mexico, the very scheme, of which he began to form
some idea, had been undertaken and accomplished. As this is
one of the most splendid events in the history of the Spanish
discoveries, and has been productive of effets peculiarly inte-
rcfing to those extensive provinces which Cortes had now sub-
jedted to the crown of Castile, the account of its rife and pro-
grefs merits a particular detail.

m B. Diaz, c. 157. Gomara Cion. c. 146. Herrera, dec. 3. lib. ii. c. 8. Tor-
quein. Mon. Ind. i. 574. CortesRclat. 280, D, &c. B. Diaz, c. 157.

0 Hcrrera, dec. 3. lib. ii. c. 17. Gomara Cron. c 149.

FERDINAND

OOK

V.

1 521.

All ite prG-
vin cF of he
einpire sub-
nilt.

Cortes forms
schemes of
new disco-
vcries,

XVhIch are
coniplered b.
M/lagcllan

127

B O O K FERDINAND MAGALHAENS, or Magellan, a Portuguese gen-

tleman of honourable birth, having served several years in the
1521. East Indies, with diflinguifhed valour, under the famous Albu-

querque, demanded the recompence which he thought due to his
services, with the boldness natural to a high-fpirited soldier.
But, for some reason which is not explained, both his general
and his fovercign rejected his suit with a disdainful coldness;
that was intolerable to a man conscious of what he had done,
and of what he deserved. In a transport of refentmcnt, he
formally renounced his allegiance to an ungrateful master, and
17. fled to the court of Castile, in hopes that there his worth would

be more justly estimated. He endeavoured to recommend him-
self by proposing to execute a scheme, the accompliffiment of
which, he knew, would wound the monarch, against whom he
was exasperated, in the most tender part. He revived Colum-
bus's original and favourite project, of discovering a paflag to
India by a weflerly course, and without encroaching on that
portion of the globe which was allotted to the Portuguese by
the line of demarcation. He founded his hopes of success on
the ideas of that great navigator, confirmed by many obferva-
tions, the result of his own naval experience, as well as that of
his countrymen, in their intercourse with the Eafl. The un-
dertaking, he acknowledged, was both arduous and expensive,
as it could not be attempted but with a squadron of considerable
force, and victualled for at least two years. Fortunately, he
applied to a minifier who was not apt to be deterred, either by
the boldness of a design, or the expence of carrying it into exe-
cution. Cardinal Ximcnes, who at that time direCted the affairs
of Spain, discerning at once what an increase of wealth and
glory would accrue to his country by the success of Magellan's
proposal, listened to it with a most favourable car. Charles V.

on
1 28

on his arrival in his Spanish dominions, entered into the mea- B 0OO K
sure with no less ardour, and orders were issued for equip- --v--
ping a proper squadron at the public charge, of which the iLZ'
command was given to Magellan, whom the king honoured
with the habit of St. Jago and the title of Captain GeneralP.

ON the tenth of August one thousand five hundred and nine- His voyagr

teen, Magellan failed from Seville with five ships, which,
according to the ideas of the age, were deemed to be of
considerable force, though the burden of the largest did not
exceed one hundred and twenty tons. The crews of the whole
amounted to two hundred and thirty-four men, among whom
were ome of the most kilful pilots in Spain, and several Por-
tuguefe ailors, in whose experience, as more extensive, Ma-
gellan placed still greater confidence. After touching at the
Canaries, he flood directly south towards the equinodtial line
along the coaftof America, but was so long retarded by tedious
calms, and spent so much time in searching every bay and inlet
for that communication with the Southern Ocean which he
wished to discover, that he did not reach the river De la Plata till
the twelfth of January. That spacious opening, through which ,5 2.
its vafi body of water pours into the Atlantic, allured him to
enter; but, after failing up it for some days, he concluded, from
the shallowness of the fiream and the freihnefs of the water, that
the wifled-for sTrait was not situated there, and continued his
course towards the south. On the thirty-firft of March he ar-
rived in the port of St. Julian, about forty-eight degrees south
of the line, where he resolved to winter. In this uncomfortable
station he loft one of his squadron, and the Spaniards filffcred

P Heirera, dec. 2. lib. ii. c. 19. lib. iv. c. 9. Gomara Hilt. c. 91.

VOL. II. S '
;

1 29

B K so much from the excessive rigour of the climate, that the crews

of three of his ships, headed by their officers, rose in open
mutiny, and insisted on relinquishing the visionary project of a
desperate adventurer, and returning directly to Spain. This
dangerous infurredion Magellan suppressed, by an effort of
courage no less prompt than intrepid, and inflicted exemplary
punifhrnent on the ringleaders. With the remainder of his
followers, overawed but not reconciled to his scheme, he con-
tinued his voyage towards the south, and at length discovered,
near the fifty-third degree of latitude, the mouth of a strait,
into which he entered, notwithltanding the murmurs and re-
monstrances of the people under his command. After failing
twenty days in that winding dangerous channel, to which he
gave his own name, and where one of his ships deserted
him, the great Southern Ocean opened to his view, and with
tears of joy he returned thanks to Heaven for having thus far
crowned his endeavours with success .

BuT he was fill at a greater distance than he imagined from

the objeEt of his wiflies. He failed during three months and
twenty days in an uniform direction towards the north-west,
without discovering land. In this voyage, the longest that had
ever been made in the unbounded ocean, he suffered incredible
distress. His flock of provisions was almost exhausted, the
-water became putrid, the men were reduced to the fhortefl al-
lowance with which it was possible to sustain life, and the
scurvy, the most dreadful of all the maladies with which sea-
faring people are afflided, began to fprcad among the crew.
One circumflance alone afforded them rome consolation; they
enjoyed an uninterrupted course of fair weather, with such fa-

s Herrern, dec. 2. lib. iv . o. lib. ix. c, 0o, &c. Gomara Hilt. c. 92. Piga-
fttta Viaggio ap. Ramus. ii. p. 352, &c,

vourable
130

vourable winds, that Magellan bestowed on that occan the 1name 0 0 °
of Pacific, which it itill retains. When reduced to such ex- ---
tremity that they must have funk under their sufferings, they 52
fell in with a cluster of finall but fertile islands, which afforded arch .
them refreshments in such abundance, that their health was
loon re-eflablifhed. From there isles, to which he gave the
name of De los Ladrones, he proceeded on his voyage, and oon
made a more important discovery of the islands now known by
the name of the Philippilzes. In one of these he got into an
unfortunate quarrel with the natives, who attacked him with a
numerous body of troops well armed; and while he fought at
the headof his men with his usual valour, he fell by the hands April ':
of those barbarians, together with several of his principal
officers.

THE expedition was prosecuted under other commanders.

After visiting many of the smaller isles scattered in the eastern
part of the Indian ocean, they touched at the great island of
Borneo, and at length landed in Tidore, one of the Moluccas, Nov. .
to the aflonifhment of the Portuguese, who could not compre-
hend how the Spaniards, by holding a westerly course, had arriv-
ed at that fcqueftered feat of their most valuable commerce,
which they themselves had discovered by failing in an opposite
direction. There, and in the adjacent isles, they found a peo-
ple acquainted with the benefits of extcnfive trade, and willing
to open an intercourse with a new nation. They took in a cargo
of the precious spices, which are the diflinguiflied production
of those islands, and with that, as well as with specimens of
the rich commodities yielded by the other countries which they
had visited, the J''tory, which, of the two flips that relmained
of the squadron, was most fit for a long voyage, fct fail for li.J 152Z.

S 2 Europe,

I 1
j

n ,o K Europe, under the command of Juan Sebastian del Cano. He
t- .j followed the course of the Portuguese by the Cape of Good

Hope, and, after many disasters and sufferings, he arrived at
St. Lucar on the seventh of September one thousand five hun-
dred and twenty-two, having failed round the globe in the
space of three years and twenty-eight days ".

TiIOUGH an untimely fate deprived Magellan of the fatiC-

fadion of accomplihing this great undertaking, his contem-
poraries, just to his memory and talents, ascribed to him not
only the glory of having formed the plan, but of having fur-
mounted almost every obflacle to the completion of it; and in
the present age his name is fill ranked among the highest in the
roll of eminent and successful navigators. The naval glory of
Spain now eclipscd that of every other nation, and by a singular
felicity she had the merit, in the course of a few years, of dif-
covering a new continent almost as large as that part of the
earth which was formerly known, and of ascertaining by ex-
perience the form and extent of the whole terraqueous globe.

Tn E Spaniards were not satisfied with the glory of having

first ncompaffed the earth; they expected to derive great com-
mercial advantages from this new and boldest effort of their
maritime kill. The men of cience among them contended,
that the spice islands, and several of the richest countries in the
East, were so situated as to belong of right to the crown of
Caflilc, in confecqucncc of the partition made by AlexanderVI.
The merchants, without attending to this difcuflion, engaged
eagerly in that lucrative and alluring commerce, which was

llerrera, dcc, . ib. i c. 3. 9. lib. iv. c. . Gomara Cron. c. 93, &c, Pigafetta
ap. Raniuf,. ii p. 61, tec.

now
132

now opened to them. The Portuguese, alarmed at the intru- B OV K
sion of such formidable rivals, remonfirated and negociated in
Europe, while in Asia they obftruded the trade of the Spaniards 15
by force of arms. Charles, not sufficiently instructed with re-
sped to the importance of this valuable branch of commerce,
or diftraded by the multiplicity of his schemes and operations,
did not afford his fubjeds proper protection. At lafi, the low
irate of his finances, exhausted by the efforts of his arms in
every part of Europe, together with the dread of adding a new
war with Portugal to those in which he was already engaged,
induced him to make over his claim of the Moluccas to the Por-
tuguefe for three hundred and fifty thousand ducats. He referv-
ed, however, to the crown of Castile the right of reviving its pre-
tensions on repayment of that fum; but other objecs engrossed
his attention and that of his successors, and Spain was finally
excluded from a branch of commerce in which it was engaging
with sanguine expectations of profitr.

THOUGH the trade with the Moluccas was relinquished,

the voyage of Magellan was followed by commercial effects of
great moment in Spain. Philip II. in the year one thousand
five hundred and fixty-four, reduced those islands which he
discovered in the Eastern Ocean to fubjedion, and eflablifhed
settlements there; between which and the kingdom of New
Spain a regular intercourse, the matter of which shall be ex-
plained in its proper place, is carried on. I return now to the
tranfadions in New Spain.

AT the time that Cortes was acquiring such vast territories An ordcr to
for his native country, and preparing the way for future con- CoI',tP,

Hcrrera, dec. . lib. vii. c. 5, &c. dec. iv. lib. v. c. 7, &c.

qucfls,

I33

B 0 0 K quefis, it was his singular fate not only to be destitute of any

V.
L----j-J commission or authority from the sovereign whom he was

*52. serving with such successful zeal, but to be regarded as an un-

dutiful and seditious subjea. By the influence of Fonseca,
bishop of Burgos, his conduct in auming the government of
New Spain was declared to be an irregular usurpation, in con-
tempt of the royal authority; and Chrifloval de Tapia received
a commiflion, impowering him to fuperfcde Cortes, to seize his
person, to confiscate his effects, to make a ftric' fc.utiny into
his proceedings, and to transmit the retult of his inquiries to
the council of the Indies, of which the biffop of Burgos was
president. A few weeks after the reduction of Mexico, Ta-
pia landed at Vera Cruz with the royal mandate to strip its
conqueror of his power, and to treat him as a criminal. But
Fonseca had chosen a very improper inltrument to wreak his
vengeance on Cortes. Tapia had neither the reputation nor
the talents that suited the high command to which he was ap-

-^'hich he pointed. Cortes, while he publicly expressed the most refpe1-
eludes.

ful veneration for the emperor's authority, secretly took mea-
fures to defeat the effet cf his cornmiffion; and having
involved Tapia and his followers in a multiplicity of negocia-
tions and conferences, in which he sometimes had recourse to
threats, but more frequently employed bribes and promises, he
at length prevailed on that weak man to abandon a province
which he was unworthy of governing '

Applies again BUT notwithflanding the fortunate dexterity with which he
1o the court,

15 22. 'ad celuded this blow, Cortes was so sensible of the precarious
Mly 5. tenure by which he held his power, that he dispatched depu-

1 Herrcda, dec. 3. lib. iii. c. 6. dcc. iv. c. i. Cort. Rclat. 281. E. B. Diaz.
c. 58.

tics
134

135

ties to Spain with a pompous account of the success of his arms,
with farther fpecinmens of the productions of the country, and
with rich pre ents to the emperor, as the earned of future con-
tributions from his new conquest; requefing, in rccompencc
for all his services, the approbation of his proceedings, and
that he might be entrusted with the government of those terri-
tories, which his conduct, and the valour of his followers, had
added to the crown of Castile. The juncture in which his de-
puties reached the court was favourable. The internal commo-
tions in Spain, which had disquieted the beginning of Charles's
reign were just appeared . The ministers had leisure to turn
their attention towards foreign affairs. The account of Cortes's
vicdories filled his countrymen with admiration. The extent
and value of his conquefis became the objed of vast and inte-
refling hopes. Whatever stain he might have contracted, by
the irregularity of the steps which he took in order to attain
power, was so fully effaced by the splendour and merit of the
great actions which this had enabled him to perform, that every
heart revolted at the thought of infliting any censure on a
man, whose services entitled him to the highest marks of dif-
tindion. The public voice declared warmly in favour of his
pretenions and Charles arriving in Spain about this time,
adopted the sentiments of his fiubjels with a youthfill ardour.
Notwithstanding the claims of Velifquez, and the partial repre-
fentations of the bishop of Burgos, he appointed Cortes captain
general and governor of New Spain, judging that no person
was so capable of maintaining the royal authority, or of efta-
blifhing good order both among his Spanithand Indian fubjcd;s,
as the commander whom the former would willingly obey,

BOOK

V.

1522.

root
r o -
NLW Spain.
:11;. of Charics V. vol. ii. b. iii.

;t 1il

B 0 K and the latter had long been accustomed to fear and to re-

v.

fpea x

15Z2.

His schemes EVEN before his jurifdition received this legal fanion,
and arrange-
rnents. Cortes ventured to exercise all the powers of a governor, and,

by various arrangements, endeavoured to render his conquest a
secure and beneficial acquisition to his country. He determin-
ed to establish the feat of government in its ancient flation,
and to raifc Mexico again from its ruins ; and having conceived
high ideas concerning the future grandeur of the fiate of which
he was laying the foundation, he began to rebuild its capital
on a plan which hath gradually formed the most magnificent
city in the New World. At the fame time, he employed fkil-
ful persons to search for mines in different parts of the coun-
try, and opened some which were found to be richer than any
which the Spaniards had hitherto discovered in America. He
detached his principal officers into the remote provinces, and
encouraged them to fettle there, not only by bestowing upon
them large tracts of land, but by granting them the fame do-
minion over the Indians, and the fame right to their service
which the Spaniards had assumed in the islands.

Infurrcaions IT was not, however, without difficulty that the Mexi-
of the Mex-
icans, and can empire could be entirely reduced into the form of a Spanish
criuel'y of th colony. Enraged and rendered desperate by oppreflion, the
Spaniards.

natives often forgot the superiority of their enemies, and run
to arms in defence of their liberties. In every contest, how-
ever, the European valour and discipline prevailed. But,

x Hcrrera, dec. 3. lib. iv. c. 3. Gomara Cron. 164, 165. B. Diaz, 167, 68.

fatally
136

fatally for the honour of their country, the Spaniards sullied B 0 0 K

V

the glory redounding from these repeated victories by their -v
mode of treating the vanquished people. After taking Guati- 1522
mozin, and becoming maRters of his capital, they supposed that
the king of Cafiile entered on possession of all the rights of the
captive monarch, and affected to confider every effort of the
Mexicans to assert their own independence, as the rebellion of
vassals againfi their sovereign, or the mutiny of slaves against
their mailer. Under the fandion of those ill-founded maxims,
they violated every right that should be held sacred between
hostile nations. After every infurredion, they reduced the com-
mon people in the provinces which they subdued, to the most hu-
miliating of all conditions, that of personal servitude. Their
chiefs, supposed to be more criminal,were punished with greater
severity, and put to death in the most ignominious or the mofi
excruciating form, that the insolence or the cruelty of their con-
querors could devise. In almost every province of the Mexican
empire, the progress of the Spanish arms is marked with blood,
and with deeds so atrocious as disgrace the enterprising valour
that conducted them to success. In the province of Panuco,
sixty caziques, or leaders, and four hundred nobles, were burnt
at one time. Nor was this shocking barbarity perpetrated in
any sudden rally of rage, or by a commander of inferior note.
It was the a of Sandoval, an officer whose name is entitled to
the second rank in the annals of New Spain, executed after a
solemn consultation with Cortes; and to complete the horror of
the scene, the children and relations of the wretched victims
were assembled, and compelled to be fpedators of their dying
agonies y. It seems hardly poflible to exceed in horror this
dreadful example of severity ; but it was followed by another,

Y Cortes Relat. 291, C. Gomara Cron. c. ,.

XVwhich
VOL. II.

T

B °0 K which affeded the Mexicans fill more sensibly, as it gave

V.

them a mofi feeling proof of their own degradation, and of the
finall regard that their haughty maiers retained for the ancient
dignity and splendour of their state. On a flight suspicion, con-
firmed by very imperfect evidence, that Guatimozin had form-
ed a scheme to hake off the yoke, and to excite his former
fubjeds to take arms, Cortes, without the formality of a trial,
ordered the unhappy monarch, together with the caziques of
Tezeuco and Tacuba, the two persons of greatest eminence in
the empire, to be hanged; and the Mexicans, with astonish-
ment and horror, beheld this ignominious punishment inflided
upon persons, to whom they were accustomed to look up
with reverence, hardly inferior to that which they paid to the
gods themfelvesz. The example of Cortes and his principal
officers, encouraged andjuftified persons of subordinate rank to
venture upon committing greater exceifes. Nuno de Guzman,
in particular, stained an illustrious name by deeds of peculiar
enormity and rigour, in various expeditions which he con-
duded .

ON E circumifance, however, saved the Mexicans from far-

ther consumption, perhaps from one as complete as that which
had depopulated the islands. The first conquerors did not at-
tempt to search for the precious metals in the bowels of the
earth. They were neither sufficiently wealthy to carry on the
expensive works, which are requisite for opening those deep
recesses where Nature has concealed the veins of gold and
filvcr, nor sufficiently skilful to perform the ingenious opera-
tions by which they arc separated from their rfpetive ores.

Gomara Cron. c. 170. B. Diaz. c. 177. Herrera, dec. 3. lib. viii. c.9. See
NOTE XXVI. * Herrcra, dec. 4 and 5. pafliri.

They
I38

They were satisfied with the more imple method, pradlifed by B o K

V.

the Indians, of waffing the earth carried down rivers and tor-
rents from the mountains, and collecting the grains of native 1522.
metal deposited there. The rich mines of New Spain, which
have poured forth their treasures with such profusion on every
quarteroftheglobe were notdifcovered for several years after the 1552, &c.
conquest b. By that time, a more orderly government and police
were introduced into the colony; experience, deri ved from former
errors, had suggested many useful and humane regulations for
the protection and preservation of the Indians; and though it
then became neceffaryto encreafe the number of those employed
in the mines, and they were engaged in a species of labour
more pernicious to the human constitution, they suffered less
hardhip or diminution than from the ill-judged, but less ex-
tensive, schemes of the firfi conquerors.

THIS extraordinary mortality among the Indians, difap-

pointed the hopes of their new mailers. Few eem to have
derived any considerable wealth from their ill-conduded
researches. According to the usual fate of firil fcttlers in new
colonies, it was their lot to encounter danger and to firuggle
with difficulties ; the fruits of their vitories and toils were re-
served for times of tranquillity, and reaped by fucceifors of
greater indufiry, but of inferior merit. The early historians
of America abound with accounts of the sufferings and of the
poverty of its conquerors'. In New Spain, their condition
was rendered more grievous by a peculiar arrangcment. When
Charles V. advanced Cortes to the government of that country,
he, at the fame time, appointed certain commilfioners to re-

b lHerrera, dec. 8. lib. x. c. zi. Cortes Rlat. 283. F. 1I, Diaz.. c. z29.

T 2

('cei ve:

B 0 0 K ceive and administer the royal revenue there, with independent

V.
.- i jurifdiaiona. These men, chosen from inferior Rations in

various departments of public bufmefs at Madrid, were so
much elevated with their promotion, that they thought they
were called to a& a part of the first consequence. But being
accustomed to the minute formalities of office, and having con-
traded the narrow ideas suited to the sphere in which they had
i,54. hitherto moved, they were astonished, on arriving in Mexico,

at the high authority which Cortes exercised, and could not
conceive that the mode of administration, in a country recently
fibdued and fettled, must be different from that which took
place in one where tranquillity and regular government had
been long established. In their letters, they represented Cortes
as an ambitious tyrant, who having usurped a jurifdiEion fupe-
rior to law, aspired at independence, and by his exorbitant
wealth and extensive influence, might accomplish those dif-
loyal schemes which he apparently meditated'. These infinu-
ations made such deep impression upon the Spanish ministers,
most of whom had been formed to business under the jealous
and rigid administration of Ferdinand, that, unmindful of all
Cortes's palt services, and regardless of what he was then sus-
fering in conducing that extraordinary expedition, in which
he advanced from the lake of Mexico to the western extremi-
ties of Honduras ', they infused the fame suspicions into the
mind of their malter, and prevailed on him to order a solemn
inquest to be made into his conduct, with powers to the licen-
115. ciate Ponce de Leon, entrusted with that commifion, to seize

his person, if he should find that expedient, and fend him pri-
soner to Spain ó.

· Herrera, dec. 3. lib. iv. c. 3. ' Id. dec. 3. lib. v. . 14.

See NOT E XXVII. F IIerrera, dec, 3. lib. viii. c. 14, 15.

THE
14o

THE sudden death of Ponce de Leon, a few days after his B o°v K

arrival in New Spain, prevented the execution of this commis- '-v
sion. But as the objed of his appointment was known, the S
mind of Cortes was deeply wounded with this unexpected re-
turn for services which far exceeded whatever any subjed of
Spain had rendered to his sovereign. He endeavoured, how-
ever, to maintain his flation, and to recover the confidence of
the court. But every person in office, who had arrived from
Spain since the conquest, was a spy upon his condua, and with
malicious ingenuity gave an unfavourable representation of all
his aaions. The apprehensions of Charles and his ministers
increased. A new coimiffion of inquiry was issued, with more xs8.
extensive powers, and various precautions were taken to pre-
vent or to punish him, if he should be so presumptuous as to
attempt what was inconsistent with the fidelity of a fubjedch.
Cortes beheld the approaching crisis of his fortune with all the
violent emotions natural to a haughty mind, conscious of high
desert, and receiving unworthy treatment. But though ome
of his desperate followers urged him to aert his own rights
against his ungrateful country, and, with a bold hand, to seize
that power which the courtiers meanly accused him of coveting',
he retained such felf-command, or was actuated with such fen-
timents of loyalty, as to reject their dangerous counsels, and to
chute the only course in which he could secure his own dignity,
without departing from his duty. He resolved not to expose
himself to the ignominy of a trial, in that country which had
been the scene of his triumphs; but, without waiting for the
arrival of his judges, to repair diredly to Castile, and commit

h Herrera, dec. 3. lib. viii. c. 1$. dec. 4. lib. ii . c . lib. iv. c. 9. o. B. Diaz,
c. 172. 196. Gomara Cron. c 166. 1 B. Diaz. c. 194.

himself

L4I

B o0 K himself and his cause to the justice and generosity of hi s so

V.
'--- vereign .
1528.

CORTES appeared in his native country with the splendour

that suited the conqueror of a mighty kingdom. He brought
with him a great part of his wealth, many jewels and orna-
ments of great value, several curious producions of the coun-
try ', and was attended by ome Mexicans of the firfi rank, as
well as by the most considerable of his own officers. His arri-
val in Spain removed at once every suspicion and fear that had
been entertained with refped to his intentions. The emperor,
having now nothing to apprehend from the designs of Cortes,
received him like a person whom consciousness of his own
innocence had brought into the pretence of his mailer, and who
was intitled, by the eminence of his services, to the highest
marks of diftindion and refped. The order of St. Jago, the
title of Marquis del Valle de Guaxaca, the grant of a vail ter-
ritory in New Spain, were successively bestowed upon him;
and as his manners were correc and elegant, although he had
passed the greater part of his life among rough adventurers, the
emperor admitted him to the fame familiar intercourse with
himself, that was enjoyed by noblemen of the firit rankm.

BUT, amidst those external proofs of regard, symptoms of

remaining distrust appeared. Though Cortes earnefily solicited
to be reinstated in the government of New Spain, Charles, too
sagacious to commit such an important charge to a man whom
he had once fufpeEted, peremptorilyrefufed to invert him again
with powers which he might find it impossible to controul.

k -Ierrcra, dec. 3, lib. iv. c. 8. See N O T E XXVIII.
" I-errera, dec. 3. lib. iv. c. . lib, vi. c. 4. B. Diaz c. 196. Gom. Cron.
c. 1i .'

Cortes,
142

Cortes, though dignified with new titles, returned to Mexico B K
with diminished authority. The military department, with <---
powers to attempt new discoveries, was left in his hands; but
the supreme direction of civil affairs was placed in a board called
The Audience of New Spain. At a subsequent period, when,
upon the increase of the colony, the exertion of authority more
united and extensive become necessary, Antonio de Mendoza,
a nobleman of high rank, was sent thither as Viceroy, to take
the government into his hands.

THIS division of power in New Spain proved, as was un-

avoidable, the source of perpetual dissention, which embittered
the life of Cortes, and thwarted all his schemes. As he had
now no opportunity to display his active talents but in attempt-
ing new discoveries, he formed various schemes for that purpose,
all of which bear impressions of a genius that delighted in what
was bold and splendid. He early entertained an idea, that,
either by iteering through the gulf of Florida along the east
coast of North America, some strait would be found that com-
municated with the western ocean; or that, by examining the
isthmus of Darien, some passage would be discovered between
the North and South Seas ". But having been disappointed in his
expectations with refped to both, he now confined his views to
such voyages of discovery as he could make from the ports of
New Spain in the South Sea. There he fitted out successively
several small squadrons, which either periflled in the attempt,
or returned without making any discovery of moment. Cortes,
weary of entrufling the conduCt of his operations to others,
took the command of a new armament in person, and, after 1536.

Cort. Rclat, Ram. iii.,a94, B.

enduring

I43

B 0 0 K enduring incredible hardships, and encountering dangers of

V.
'*-vr.. every species, he discovered the large peninsula of California,

and surveyed the greater part of the gulf which separates it
from New Spain. The discovery of a country of such extent
would have refleted credit on a common adventurer; but it
could add little new honour to the name of Cortes, nor satisfy
the sanguine expecations which he had formed . Disgusted
with ill success, to which he had not been accustomed, and
weary of contesting with adversaries to whom he confidered it
'540. as a disgrace to be opposed, he once more fought for redress in

his native country.

BuT his reception there was very different from that which

gratitude, and even decency, ought to have secured for him.
The merit of his ancient exploits was already, in a great mea-
-sure, forgotten, oar eclipsed by the fame of recent and more
valuable.coaquefts in another quarter of America. No service
of moment was now expected from a man of declining years,
and who began to 'be unfortunate. The emperor behaved to
him with cold civility; his ministers treated him, sometimes
with neglect, bometimes with insolence. His grievances re-
ceived no redress; his claims were urged without effet; and
after several years spent in fruitless application to ministers and
judges, an occupation the most irksome and mortifying to a
man of high spirit, who had moved in a sphere where he was
more accustomed to command than to solicit, Cortes ended his
days on the second of December one thousand five hundred and
forty-feven, in the fixty-fecond year of his age. His fate was

o Herrcra, dec. 5. lib. viii. c. 9, lo. dec. 8. lib. vi. c. 14. Venegas Hist. of Ca.
liforn, i. 125. Lorenzana Hist. p. 322, &c.

the
I44

the fame with that of all the persons who distinguished them- B K
selves in the discovery or conquest of the New World. Envied -
by his contemporaries, and ill requited by the court which he 536
served, he has been admired and celebrated by succeeding ages.
Which has formed the most just eflimate of his character, an
impartial consideration of his ations must determine.

VOL. II.

I45
U

THE

# BOOK VI.

THE
H I S T O R Y

O F
AM ERI C A.

BOOK VI.
FRO M the time that Nugnez de Balboa discovered the B o o K

VI.

great Southern Ocean, and received the first obscure hint con- v-
cerning the opulent countries with which it might open a corn- Schen5for
munication, the wiflles and schemes of every enterprising person dircovcring
in the colonies of Darien and Panama were turned towards the
wealth of those unknown regions, In an age when the spirit
of adventure was so arduous and vigorous, that large fortunes
were walled, and the most alarming dangers braved, in pursuit
of discoverics merely possible, the faintest ray of hope was fol-
lowed with eager expedation, and the slightest information was
sufficient to inspire such perfect confidence, as condudedmcn
to the molt arduous undertakings".

* See Note XXIX.

U2

i: ( i 1 D NG'; Y.

BOOK

VI.

1523.

Unsuccessful
for some
time.

Undertaken
by Pizarro,
Alr. gro, and
Luque.

1524.

ACCORDINGLY, several armaments were fitted out in order

to explore and take possession of the countries to the east of
Panama, but under the conduEt of leaders whose talents and re-
sources were unequal to the attempt b. As their excursions did
not extend beyond the limits of the province to which the Spa-
niards have given the name of Tierra Firme, a mountainous
region covered with woods, thinly inhabited, and extremely
unhealthy, they returned with dismal accounts concerning the
distresses to which they had been exposed, and the unpromising
aspea of the places which they had visited. Damped by these
tidings, the rage for discovery in that direction abated; and it
became the general opinion, that Balboa had founded visionary
hopes, on the tale of an ignorant Indian, ill underfiood, or
calculated to deceive.

BUT there were three persons fettled in Panama, on whom

the circumfiances which deterred others made so little impref-
sion, that, at the very moment when all confidered Balboa's
expectations of discovering a rich country, by fleering towards
the east, as chimerical, they resolved to attempt the execution
of his scheme. The names of those extraordinary men were
Francisco Pizarro, Diego de Almagro, and Hernando Luque.
Pizarro was the natural son of a gentleman of an honourable
family by a very low woman, and, according to the cruel fate
which often attends the offspring of unlawful love, had been so
totally negleded in his youth by the author of his birth, that he
seems to have destined him never to rife beyond the condition of
his mother. In consequence of this ungenerous idea, he set him,
when bordering on manhood, to keep hogs. But the aspiring

Calancha Coronica, p, 100.

mind
148

mind of young Pizarro disdaining that ignoble occupation, he B K
abruptly abandoned his charge, enlisted as a soldier, and after -v-
serving some years in Italy, embarked for America, which, by 5
opening such a boundless rage to aaive talents, allured every
adventurer whose fortune was not equal to his ambitious
thoughts. There, Pizarro early difiinguilhed himself. With
a temper of mind no less daring than the constitution of his
body was robust, he was foremost in every danger, patient
under the greatest hardships, and unfubdued by any fatigue.
Though so illiterate that he could not even read, he was soon
confidered as a man formed to command. Every operation
committed to his condud proved successful, as, by a happy but
rare conjunction, he united perseverance with ardour, and was
as cautious in executing, as he was bold in forming his plans.
By engaging early in acive life, without any resource but his
own talents and indufiry, and by depending on himself alone
in his firuggles to emerge from obfcuiity, he acquired such a
thorough knowledge of affairs, and of men, that he was fitted
to assume a superior part in conduaing the one, and in govern-
ing the otherc.

A LMAGRO had as littleto boast of his descent at Pizarro. The

one was a baitard, the other a foundling. Bred, like his com-
panion, in the camp, he yielded not to him in any of the fol-
dierly qualities of intrepid valour, indefatigable ativity, or
insurmountable confancy in enduring the hardships inseparable
from military fcrvicc in the New World. But in Almagro
tlefe virtues were accompanied with the openness, generosity.

c Hcrrcra, dec. i & 2, pafiri. (Icc. 4 lib. vi. c. 107. Goinara His. c. 14.4
Zaratc, lib. ir'. c- 9g

and

I49

B v0 K and candour natural to men whose profession is arms; in Pi-

VI k-^v--' zarro, they were united with the address, the craft, and the
I524

dissimulation of a politician, with the art of concealing his own
purposes, and with sagacity to penetrate into those of other
men.

HERNANDO DE LUQUE was an ecclesiastic, who ated both

as priest and schoolmaster at Panama, and, by means which
the contemporary writers have not described, had amassed riches
that inspired him with thoughts of rising to greater emi-

nence.

Terms ofi SUCH were the men destined to overturn one of the most ex-
their aisocia-
tion. tenfiveempires on the face of the earth. Their confederacy for this

purpose was authorised by Pedrarias, the governor of Panama.
Each engaged to employ his whole fortune in the adventure.
Pizarro, the least wealthy of the three, as he could not throw
so large a fum as his associates into the common flock, engaged
to take the department of greatest fatigue and danger, and to com-
mand in person the armament which was to gofirft upon discovery.
Almagro offered to condut the supplies of provisions and rein-
forcements of troops, of which Pizarro might stand in need.
Luque was to remain at Panama to negociate with the gover-
nor, and fiperintcnd whatever was carrying on for the general
intercft. As the spirit of enthusiasm uniformly accompanied
that of adventure in the New World, and by that strange union
both acquired an increase of force, this confederacy, formed by
ambition and avarice, was confirmed by the molt solemn at
of rcligion. Luquc cclebralcd mars, divided a consecrated holt
into trcc, and rcferving one part to himfclf, gave the other
two o his afociates, of which they partook and thus, in name

of
150

5

of the Prince of Peace, ratified a contraa of which plunder and
bloodshed were the objets d.

BOOK
B 0 0 K

V1.

1524.

THE attempt was begun with a force more suitcd to the Their first at-

humble condition of the three adventurers, than to the greatness tll"pt.
of the enterprise in which they were engaged. Pizarro set fail Nov. 14
from Panama with a tingle vessel, of small burden, and a hun-
dred and twelve men. But in that age, so little were the Spa-
niards acquainted with the peculiarities of climate in America,
that the time which Pizarro chose for his departure was the
moi improper in the whole year; theperiodical winds, which
were then set in, being direily adverse to the course which he
purposed to fleer . After beating about for seventy days, with
much danger and incessant fatigue, Pizarro's progress towards 1525.
the fouth-eafi was not greater than what a skilful navigator will
now make in as many hours. He touched at several places on
the coafi of Tierra Firme, but found every where the fame un-
inviting country which former adventurers haddefcribed; the
low grounds converted into swamps by the overflowing of
rivers; the higher, covered with impervious woods; few in-
habitants, and those fierce and hostile. Famine, fatigue, fre-
quent rencounters with the natives, and above all, the diftem-
pers of a moist, sultry climate, combined in wafting his llender
bard of followers. The undaunted resolution of their leader Attcn(:t
continued, howevcr, for some time, to fuflain their spirits, al- iuccii
though no sign had yet appeared of discovering those golden
regions to which he had promised to conduct them. At length,
he was obliged to abandon that inhospitable coast, and retire to

Hcrrerare, dec. 3. lib. vi. c 13. Zaratc, lib. i. c- i.
lib. ii. c. 8. Xcrcz. p. 179.

* I-!'rct r, dc. . '

Chuch ani!,

BOOK

VI.
1525.

Chuchama, opposite to the pearl islands, where he hoped to
receive a supply of provisions and troops from Panama.

BUT Almagro having failed from that port with seventy men,
flood direcly towards that part of the continent where he hoped
to meet with his associate. Not finding him there, he landed
his soldiers, who, in searching for their companions, underwent
the fame distresses, and were exposed to the fame dangers, which
had driven them out of the country. Repulsed at length by
the Indians in a sharp confliEt, in which their leader loft one
of his eyes by the wound of an arrow, they likewise were com-
pelled to reimbark. Chance led them tothe place of Pizarro's
retreat, where they found some consolation in recounting their
adventures, and comparing their sufferings. As Almagro had
June 24. advanced as far as the river St. Juan, in the province of Po-

payan, where both the country and inhabitants appeared with
a more promising afpeEt, that dawn of better fortune was
fufficientto determine such sanguine projeeors not to abandon
their scheme, notwithstanding all that they had suffered in
prosecuting it f.

They resume
the undertak-
ing.

ALMAGRO repaired to Panama, in hopes of recruiting their

shattered troops. But what he and Pizarro had suffered, gave
his countrymen such an unfavourable idea of the service, that it
was with difficulty he could levy fourscore men. Feeble as this
reinforcement was, they did not hesitate about resuming their
operations. After a long series of disasters and disappointments,
not inferior to those which they had already experienced, part
of the armament reached the Bay of St. Matthew, on the coast

-Tcrrera, dec. 3. lib. viii . c. , 2. See N 0 T E XXX.
G Zarntc, lib. i. c. i.

of
152

of Quito, and landing at Tacamcz, to the south of the river of
Emeraulds, they beheld a country inc-r: champaign and fertile
than any they had yet difcoveredin the Southern Ocean, the
natives clad in garments of woollen or cotton fluff, and adorned
with several trinkets of gold and silver.

BUT notwithstanding those favourable appearances, magni-

sied beyond the truth, both by the vanity of those who brought
the report from Tacamez, and by the fond imagination of
those who lifiened to them, Pizarro and Almagro durst not
venture to invade a country so populous with a handful of men,
enfeebled by fatigue and diseases. They retired to the small
island of Gallo, where Pizarro remained with part of the troops,
and his associate returned to Panama, in hopes of bringing
such a reinforcement, as might enable them to take poffelFion
of the opulent territories whose exiflence seemcd to be no longer
doubtful h.

BUT some of the adventurers, less enterprising, or less hardy

than their leaders, having secretly conveyed lamentable ac-
counts of their sufferings and losses to their friends at Panama,
Almagro met with an unfavourable reception fiom Pcdro de los
Rios, who had succeeded Pedrarias in the government of that
fettlencnt. After weighing the matter, witli that cold ccono-
mical prudence, which appears the first of all virtues to pcr-
sons l hose limited faculties are incapable of concciving or exc-
cuting- great deligns, he concluded an expedition, attended witl
fucli certain wafie of men, to be so detrimental to an infant
and feeble colony, that he not only prolilbited tle raiiing of

Vo .. II.

h Xcrcz. 18i. I-Icrrcra, dec, . ib. viii. c. Ij.

X

iiL \

BOOK

VI.

5 z6.

Pizarr r-
caP i by tilt
Pananzia.

53

new levies, but dispatched a vessel to bring home Pizarro and
his companions from the iflandofGallo. Almagro and Luque,
though deeply affced with these measures, which they could
not prevent and durst not oppose, found means of communicat-
ing their sentiments privately to Pizarro, and exhorted him
not to rclinquifh an enterprise which was the foundation of all
their hopes, and the only means of re-eflablifhing their repu-
tation and fortune, that were both on the decline. Pizarro's
mind, bent with inflexible obstinacy on all its purposes, needed
no incentive to persist in the scheme. He peremptorily refuf-
ed to obey the governor of Panama's orders, and employed all
his address and eloquence in persuading his men not to aban-
don him. But the incredible calamities to which they had
been exposed were frill so recent in their memories, and the
thoughts of revisiting their families and friends after a long
absence, rushed with such joy into their minds, tiat when
Pizarro drew a line upon the sand with his sword, permitting
such as wished to return home to pass over it, only thirteen of
all the daring veterans in his service had resolution to remain
with their commander i.

THnI small, but determined band, whose names the Spanish

historians record with deserved praise, as the persons to whose
persevering fortitude their country is indebted for the most va-
luable of all its American possessions, fixed their residence in
the island of Gorgona. This, as it was farther removed from
the coast than Gallo, and uninhabited, they confidered as a
more secure retreat, where, unmolested, they might wait for
supplics from Panama, which they trusted that the acivity of

lHerrcra, dec. 3. lib. x, c. 2, 3. Zarate, lib. i. c. 2. Xercz. 181. GomaraHilt.
c. Io9.

their
B VI 0

1526.

Perfilts in hlis
design. t54

their associates there would be able to procure. Almagro and B o0 K
Luque were not inattentive or cold solicitors, and their incesant '-,
importunity was seconded by the general voice of the colony,
which exclaimed loudly against the infamy of exposing
brave men, engaged in the public service, and chargeable
with no error but what flowed from an excess of zeal and
courage, to perish like the mofi odious criminals in a defart
island. Overcome by those intreaties and expoflulations, the
governor at last consented to fend a small vessel to their relief.
But that he might not seem to encourage Pizarro to any new
enterprise, he would not permit one land-man to embark on
board of it.

BY this time, Pizarro and his companions had remained Hardfllp.ilhe

live months in an island, infamous for the most unhealthy endured.
climate in that region of America k. During all this period,
their eyes were turned towards Panama, in hopes of succour
from their countrymen; but worn out at length with fruitless
expeeations, and dispirited with suffering hardships of which
they saw no end, they, in despair, came to a resolution of com-
mitting themselves to the ocean on a float, rather than con-
tinue in that detestable abode. But, on the arrival of the vessel
from Panama, they were transported with such joy, that all
their fuferings were forgotten. Their hopes revivcd, and, with
a rapid transition, not unnatural among men accultomed by
their mode of life to sudden vicissitudes of fortune, high con-
fidence succeeding to extreme dejedion, Pizarro easily induced
them to resume their former scheme with fresh ardour. Instead
of returning to Panama, they stood towards the fouth-caft, and,

k Sec N OE XXXI.

X 2 more:

155

B 0 0 K more fortunate in this than in any of their past efforts, they,

--'~ on the twentieth day after their departure from Gorgona, dif-
5z6.

Discovers covered the coast of Peru. After touching at ome places of
Peru. less note, they landed at Tumbez, a place of ome note, above

three degrees south of the line, difiinguifhed for its fiately tem-
ple, and a palace of the Izcas or overeigns of the country'.
There the Spaniards feafled their eyes with the first view of
the opulence and civilization of the Peruvian empire. They
beheld a country fully peopled, and cultivated with an ap-
pearance of regular induflry; the natives decently clothed,
and posseTsed of ingenuity so far surpassing the other inha-
bitants of the New World, as to have the use of tame.
domeflic animals. But what chiefly attrated their notice,
was such a show of gold and silver, not only in the orna-
ments of their persons and temples, but in several vessels
and utensils for common use, formed of the fame precious
metals, as left no room to doubt that they abounded with pro-
fusion in the country. Pizarro and his companions seemed
now to have attained to the completion of their mofi sanguine
hopes, and fancied that all their wishes and dreams of rich do-
mains, and inexhaustible treasures, would soon be realized.

Returns t B T with the slender force then under his command, Pizarro
l)anama. could only view the rich country of which he hoped hereafter to

obtain poffflion. He ranged, however, for ome time along
1527. the coast, maintaining every where a peaceable intercourse with

the natives, no less aftoniflled at their new visitants, than the
Spaniards were with the uniform appearance of opulence and
cultivation which they beheld. Having explored the country

t Calancha, p. 103
r56

as far as wa- rquifite to ascertain the importance of the dif-
covery, I'izarro procured from the inhabitants some of their
Llamas or tame cattle, to which the Spaniards gave the name of
sheep, some vessels of gold and silver, as well as some fpeci-
mens of their other works of ingenuity, and two young men,
whom he proposed to infiruc in the Castilian language, that
they might fervc as interpreters in the expedition which he me-
ditated. With these he arrived at Panama, towards tlh close
of the third year from the time of his departure thence". No
adventurer of the age suffered hardships or encouraged dangers
which equal those to which he was exposcd during this long
period. The patience with which he endured the one, and the
fortitude with which he surmounted the other, exceed what-
ever is recorded in the history of the New World, where so
many romantic displays of those virtues occur.

NEITHER the splendid relation that Pizarro gave of the in-

credible opulence of the country which he had difcovcred, nor
his bitter complaints on account of that unseasonable recall of
his forces, which had put it out of hispower to attempt mak-
ing any settlement there, could move the governor of Panama
to sw"erve fiom his former purpose. He frill contcnded: that the
colony was not in a condition to invade such a mighty empire,
and refuscd to authorise an expedition which lie foreEw would
be so alluring that it might ruin the province i-i which ie prc-.
fided, by an effort beyond its fircngth. I-ls coldncfs, howcver,
did not in any degree abate the rdour of the three affociatcs;
but they perceived that they could not carry their fchcme into
execution without the countenance of fupcrior autlority, ai;d

I-lericrn, (!c., 3. lib, . c. 3- 6 . 4, li. i. . -, .

. lib.
c. 10- 14. Z;ir:it , lib. i. c 2. Blcnzo -lHi. Novi OiLis, lib. iii c. .

mull l

I28

New 1r h is
cf the affo-
ciates.
13 O O K

V].
1527.

157

B 01 K must solicit their sovereign to grant that permission which they

VI.
-v-- could not extort from his delegate. With this view, after ad-
1528. justing among themselves that Pizarro should claim the flation

of Governor, Almagro that of lieutenant-governor, and Lu-
que the dignity of bishop in the country which they purposed
to conquer, they sent Pizarro as their agent to Spain, though
their fortunes were now so much exhausted by the repeated
efforts which they had made, that they found ome difficulty
in borrowing the small fum requisite towards equipping him
for the voyage".

Pi7arro sent PIZARRO loft no time in repairing to court, and, new as tle
to Spain to
Rcgociatc. cene might be to him, he appeared before the emperor with

the unembarrafled dignity of a man, conscious of what his ser-
vices merited; and he conducted his negociations with an in-
finuating dexterity of address, which could not have been
expected either from his education, or former habits of life.
His feeling description of his own sufferings, and his pompous
account of the country which he had discovered, confirmed by
the specimens of its productions which he exhibited, made such
an impression both on Charles and his ministers, that they not
only approved of the intended expedition, but seemed to be

'Ncgleas his interested in the success of its leader. Presuming on those dif-
;flLi.,1cs, positions in his favour, Pizarro paid little attention to the

intcrcft of his associates. As the prctcnfions of Luque did
not interfere with his own, he obtained for him, the eccle-
iiaftical dignity to which he afpirced. For Almagro, he claim-
cd only the command of the fortress which flould be creted
at Tumbcz. To himself he fccurcd whatever his boundless

"n -Irrcra, dec. 4. lib. iii. c. i. \ gn, 2. lilb. i. c. 14.

ambition
158

ambition could desire. He was appointed governor, captain
general, and adelantado of ail the country which he had dif-
covered, and hoped to conquer, with supreme authority, civil
as well as military; and a full right to all the privileges and
emoluments usually granted to adventurers in the New World.
His jurifdidion was declared to extend two hundred leagues
along the coast to the south of the river St. Jago, to be inde-
pendent of the governor of Panama; and he had power to
nominate all the officers who were to serve under him. In re-
turn for those concessions, which cost the court of Spain no-
thing, as the enjoyment of them depended upon the success of
his own efforts, Pizarro engaged to raise two hundred and fifty
men, and to provide the hips, arms, and warlike stores requi-
site towards fubjeeing, to the crown of Castile, the country of
which the government was allotted him.

INCONSIDERABLE as the body of men was, which Pizarro

had undertaken to raise, his funds andcredit were so low that
he could hardly complete half the number; and after obtain-
ing his patents from the crown, he was obliged to eal pri-
vately out of the port of Seville, in order to elude the scrutiny
of the officers who had it in charge to examine whether he had
fulfilled the stipulations in his contract . Before his departure,
however, he received ome supply of money from Cortes, who
having returned to Spain about this time, was willing to con-
tribute his aid towards enabling an ancient companion, with
whose talents and courage he was well acquainted, to begin a
career of glory similar to that which he himself had finished .

' Hcrrern, dec. 4, lib. vii. c. 9.

r Ibid. lib. vii. c. io.

159
BOOK

VI.

1528.
July 26.

and procures
the fuprenme
command to
hillflf.

Slender force
he was able
to raise.

1529
IHE

HE landed at Nombre de Dios, and marched across the

ifihmus to Panama, accompanied by his three brothers, Ferdi-
nand, Juan, and Gonzalo, of whom the first was born in law-
ful wedlock, the two latter, like himself, were of illegitimate
birth, and by Francisco de Alcantara, his rother's brother.
They were all in the prime of life, and of such abilities and
courage, as fitted them to take a distinguishcd part il his sub-
zfequent tranfadions.

ON his arrival at Panama, Pizarro found Almagro so much

cxafperated at the manner in which he had conduced his ne-
gociation, tlat he not only rcfufed to a any longer in concert
with a man by whose perfidy he had been excluded from the
power and honours to which he had a just claim, but laboured
to form a new association, in order to thwart or to rival his for-
mer confederate in his discoveries. Pizarro, however, had
more wisdom and address than to susser a rupture so fatal to all
his fchemcs, to become irreparable. By offering voluntari!y to
relinquish the office of adelantado, and promising to concur in
soliciting that title, with an independent government for Al-
magro, he gradually mitigated the rage of an open-hearted
soldier, which had been violent, but was not implacable. Lu-
quc, highly satisficd with having been successful in all his own
prctenfions, cordially seconded Pizarro's cndeavours. Arecon-
ciliation was cffeced; and the confederacy rcnewed on its ori-
gin.l terms, that the cnt(rprifc should be carried on at the
common xpcnce of the aociitcs, and tlle profits accruing
fro:n it foun. 1b;e equally divided among them.

9 HeIrrcra, I'cc. 4. lib. vii. c. 9. Zaratc, li),. . c. 3. Vcgn, 2. lib. i. c. 14'

EVEN
B 0 0 K

kVi.

11:; Icconci-
1 'iton r

i6o

EVEN after their re-union, and the utmost efforts of their B O K

VI.
interest, three small vessels, and a hundred and eighty soldiers,

1530.

thirty-fix of whom were horsemen, colnpofed the armament The'ir a-
which they were able to fit out. But the astonishing progress "lnt.
of the Spaniards in America had inspired them with such
ideas of their own Superiority, that Pizarro did not hesitate to
fail with this contemptible force to invade a great empire. Al- 153F.

F bruary.

magro was left at Panama, as formerly, to follow him with
what reinforcement of men he should be able to mufier. As the
season for embarking was properly chosen, and the course of
navigation between Panama and Peru was now better known,
Pizarro completed the voyage in thirteen days; though, by the
force of the winds and currents, he was carried above an hundred
leagues to the north of Tumbez, the place of his destination,
and obliged to land his troops in the bay of St. Matthew. Lands in
Without losing a moment, he began to advance towards the Perui
South, taking care, however, not to depart far from the sea-
shore, both that he might easily effect a jundion with the sup-
plies which he expected from Panama, and secure a retreat in
cafe of any disaster, by keeping as near as possible to his ships.
But as the country in several parts on the coast of Peru is bar-
ren, unhealthful, and thinly peopled; as the Spaniards had to
pass all the rivers near their mouth, where the body of water is
greatest; and as the imprudence of Pizarro, in attacking the na-
tives when he should have fludied to gain their confidence, had
forced them to abandon their habitations; famine, fatigue, and
diseases of various kinds, brought upon him and his followers
calamities hardly inferior to those which they had endured in
their former expedition. What they now experienced corre-
fponding so ill with the alluring description of the country gi ven
by Pizarro, that many began to reproach him, and every foldicr
must have become cold to the fcrvice, if, even in this unfertile

Vo L. II. Y rcg;io1

16r

B 0 K region of Peru, they had not met with ome appearances of

VI.

wealth and cultivation, which seemed to justify the report of

,3, '4 their leader. At length they reached the province of Coaque;
A 'pril 14.

and having surprised the principal settlement of the natives,
they seized there vessels and ornaments of gold and silver, to
the amount of thirty thousand pesos, with other booty of such
value, as dispelled all their doubts, and inspired the most de-
fponding with sanguine hopesr.

His measures PIZARRO himself was so much delighted with this rich
for obtaining
a reinforce- spoil, which he confidered as the first fruits of a land flowing
ment.

with treasure, that he instantly dispatched one of his hips to
Panama, with a large remittance to Almagro; and another to
Nicaragua, with a considerable fum to some persons of influence
in that province, in hopes of alluring adventurers, by this early
display of the wealth which he had acquired. Meanwhile, he
continued his march along the coast, and disdaining to employ
any means of reducing the natives but force, he attacked them
with such violence in their scattered habitations, as compelled -
them either to retire into the interior country, or to submit to
his yoke. This sudden appearance of invaders, whose afpedt
and manners were so firange, and whose power seemed to be
so irresistible, made the fame dreadful impression as in other
parts of America. Pizarro hardly met with refifiance until he
attacked the island of Puna in the bay of Guayquil. As that
was better peopled than the country through which he had
paifed, and its inhabitants fiercer and less civilized than those
of the continent, they defended themselves with such obfiinatc
valour, that Pizarro fpcnt fix nonths in reducing them to sub-
jetion. From Puna he proceeded to Tumbez, where the dif-

' Herrera, dec. 4. lib. vii. c, 9. lib. ii. c. i. Xcrcs, 82

tempers
162

tempers that raged among his men compelled him to remain
for three months,.

WHILE he was thus employed, he began to reap advantage

from his own attention, to spread the fame of his firfi success
at Coaque. Two different detachments arrived from Nica-
ragua, which, though neither exceeded thirty men, he con-
fidered as a reinforcement of great consequence to his feeble
band, especially as the one was under the command of Sebaf-
tian Benalcazar, and the other of Hernando Soto, officers not
inferior in merit and reputation to any who had served in
America. From Tumbez he proceeded to the river Piura, and,
in an advantageous itation near the mouth of it, he established
the firfi Spanish colony in Peru; to which he gave the name of
St. Michael.

BOOK

VI.

1532.

Receives
some, and
continues to
advance.

May 16.

As Pizarro continued to advance towards the centre of the

Peruvian empire, he gradually received more full information
concerning its extent and policy, as well as the situation of its
/ affairs at that juncture. Without some knowledge of these, he

could not have conducted his operations with propriety; and
without a suitable attention to these, it is impolfible to account
for the progress which the Spaniards had already made, or to
unfold the causes of their subsequent success.

AT the time when the Spaniards invaded Peru, the domi-

nions of its sovereigns extended in length, from north to south,
abovefifteenhundredmilesalongthe Pacific Ocean. Itsbreadth,
from eafi to weft, was much less considerable ; being uniformly

P. Sancho ap. Ramus iii. p. 371, F, Hcrrera, dec. 4. lib. vii . . 8. lib. ix c. .
Zaratc, lib. ii. c. 2, 3. Xres, p. 182, &c.

Y 2 bounded

State of the
Peruvian em-
pirc.

B O 0 K bounded by the vast ridge of the Andes, stretching from its one

VI.
-v-- extremity to the other. Peru, like the reft of the New World.

was originally pofieffed by small independent tribes, differing
from each other in manners, and in their forms of rude policy.
All, however, were so little civilized, that, if the traditions con-
cerning their mode of life, preserved among theirdefcendants,
deserve credit, they must be classed among the mot unimprov-
ed savages of America. Strangers to every species of cultiva-
tion or regular industry, without any fixed residence, and un-
acquainted with those sentiments and obligations which form
the first bonds of social union, they are said to have roamed
about nakedin the forests, with which the country was then
covered, more like wild beafis than like men. After they
had struggled for several ages with the hardships and calami-
ties which are inevitable in this barbarous state, and when no
circumstance seemed to indicate the approach of any uncom-
mon effort towards improvement, we are told that there ap-
peared, on the banks of the lake Titiaca, a man and woman of
majeflic form, and clothed in decent garments. They declar-
ed themselves to be the children of the Sun, sent by their be-
neficent parent, who beheld with pity the miseries of the
human race, to inftrud and to reclaim them. At their perfua-
sion, enforced by reverence for the divinity in whose name
they were supposed to speak, several of the dispersed savages
united together, and receiving their commands as heavenly in-
juntions, followed them to Cuzco, where they fettled, and
began to lay the foundations of a city.

MA N CO CAPAC and Mama Ocollo, for such were the names

of those extraordinary pcrfonagcs, having thus collectcd fomc
wandering tribes, formed that social union, which, by multi..
plying the dcfires, and uniting the efforts of the human flccics,

excitce
164

excites industry, and leads to improvement. Manco Capac B °0 K

VI.

inftrudiedthe men in agriculture, and other useful arts. Mama -
Ocollo taught the women to spin and to weave. By the labour '5 3z
of the one sex, fubfifience became less precarious; by that of
the other, life was rendered more comfortable. After securing
the objects of first ncceffity in an infant state, by providing
food, raimncnt, and habitations for the rude people of whom
he took charge, Manco Capac turned his attention towards
introducing such laws and policy as might perpetuate their
happincfs. By his inflitutions, which shall be more parti-
cularly explained hereafter, the various relations in private
life were eflablifllcd, and the duties resulting from them pre-
fcribed with such propriety, as gradually formed a barbarous
people to decency of manners. In public adminifration, the
functions of persons in authority were so precifcly defined, and
the subordination of those under their jurisdiCtion maintained
with such a teady hand, that the society in which he presided
soon assumed the afpe1 of a regular and well-governed ftatc.

Ti-ius, according to the Indian tradition, was founded the

empire of the nhcas or Lords of Peru. At first, its extent was
fiuall. The territory of Manco Capac did not reach above
eight leagues from Cuzco. But within its narrow prccincs,
he xercifcd abfoiute and uncontrolled aulthor-ity. His fuccef-
fors, as their dominions expanded, arrogated a imilar jurifdic-
tion over tcir fubjccs: :,i dcflpotilil of Asia was not more
complete. The Incas were *not only obeyed as monarchs, but
rceverdcl ias divinities. Their blood was lhcld to be ficrcd, and,
by prohibitilng intcrlmrlriatc s with the people, was never con-
Liminntcd by mi)xin w vithl liiat of any other race. The 5;ill.i
thus fcparatcd from the reft of the nation, w;; c il'ij:,iin ii'.;(!

I65

B OO K by peculiarities in dress and ornaments, which it was unlawful

VI. <^so- for others to assume. The monarch himself appeared with

532. ensigns of royalty reserved for him alone; and received from

his subjects marks of obsequious homage and refped, which
approached almost to adoration.

BU T, among the Peruvians, this unbounded power of their

monarchs is said to have been uniformly accompanied with at-
tention to the good of their fubjeEs. It was not the rage of
conquest, if we may believe the accounts of their countrymen,
that prompted the Incas to extend their dominions, but the
desire of diffusing the blessings of civilization, and the know-
ledge of the arts which they possessed, among the barbarous
people whom they reduced. During a succession of twelve
monarchs, it is said that not one deviated from this beneficent
character t.

WHEN the Spaniards first visited the coast of Peru, in

the year one thousand five hundred and twenty-fix, Huana
Capac, the twelfth monarch from the founder of the slate,
was feated on the throne. He is represented as a prince
diftinguiihed not only for the pacific virtues peculiar to
the race, but eminent for his martial talents. By his vic-
torious arms the kingdom of Qjito was fubjeded, a con-
quest of such extent and importance as almost doubled the
power of the Peruvian empire. He was fond of residing in
the capital of that valuable province, which he had added to
his dominions; and, notwithstanding the ancient and funda-
mental law of the monarchy against polluting the royal blood

Cieca de Leon, Chron. c. 44. Herrera, dec. 3. lib. x. c. 4. dec. 5. lib. iii. c. 17.

by
i66

by any foreign alliance, he married the daughter of the van- B 0 K

Vl.

quifhed monarch of Quito. She bore him a son named Ata- --
hualpa, whom, on his death at Quito, which seems to have hap- '3"'
pened about the year one thousand five hundred and twenty-
nine, he appointed his successor in that kingdom, leaving the
reft of his dominions to Huafcar, his eldcft son, by a mother of
the royal race. Greatly as the Peruvians revered the memory
of a monarch who had reigned with more reputation and fplcn-
dour than any of his predecessors, the destination of Huana
Capac concerning the fucceflion, appeared so repugnant to a
maxim coeval with the empire,and founded on authority deemed
sacred, that it was no sooner known at Cuzco than it excited ge-
neral difgufl. Encouraged bythofe sentiments of his fubjeds,
Huafcar required his brother to renounce the government of
Ouito, and to acknowledge him as his lawful superior. But it
had been the firfl care ofAtahualpa to gain a large body of troops
which had accompanied his father to Quito. These were the
flower of the Peruvian warriors, to whose valour Huana Ca-
pac had been indebted for all his vietories. Relying on t' ir
support, Atahualpa sirs eluded his brother's demand, and tn ?n
marched againfi himn in hostile array.

TnLus the ambition of two young men, the title of the one

founded on ancient usage, and that ofthe other asserted by the
veteran troops, involvcd Peru in civil war, a calamity, to which,
under a fuccciTron of virtulous princes, it had hitherto been
a nralngr. In fich a conlitet, the issue was obvious. The force
of arns triumphed over the authority of laws. Atahualpa re-
mained vitorious, and made a cruel use of his vidory. Con-
(ious of the tdcfi-c in his own title to the crown, he attcmpted
lo txtcrn:inate the royal race, by putting to death all the chil-
I,'cn of tic Srln dcfc ndcd friom M;anco Capac, whom he could

fciz.

167

BOOK

VI.

1532.

Favourable to
the progrers
of Pizarro.

He avails him-
self of it, and
advances,

seize either by force or stratagem. From a political motive,
the life of his unfortunate rival Huafcar, who had been taken
prisoner in the battle which decided the fate of the empire,
was saved for ome time, that, by issuing orders in his name,
the usurper might more easily etfablifh his own authority u.

WHEN Pizarro landed in the bay of St. Matthew, this civil

war raged between the two brothers in its greatest fury. Had
he made any hostile attempt in his former visit to Peru in the
year one thousand five hundred and twenty-feven, he must
then have encountered the force of a- powerful state,
united under a monarch, possessed of capacity and courage,
and unembarraffed with any care that could divert him
from opposing his progress. But at this time, the two compe-
titors, though they received early accounts of the arrival and
violent proceedings of the Spaniards, were so intent upon the
operations of a war, which they deemed more interesting,
that they paid no attention to the motions of an enemy, too
inconsiderable in number to excite any great alarm, and to
whose career it would be easy, as they imagined, to give a
check, when more at leisure.

BY this fortunate coincidence of events,whereof Pizarro could
have no foresight, and of which, from his defedive mode of in-
tercourfe with the people of the country, he remained long ig-
norant, he was permitted to carry on his operations unmolested,
and advanced to the centre of a great empire before one effort
of its power was exerted to flop his progress. During their pro-
grcfs, the Spaniards had acquired tonme imperfcdt knowledge of
this lirugglebctween the two contendingfacLions. Thefirftcom-

u Zarate, lib. i. c. 15. Vega, 1. lib. ix. c. 12. aRd 32-40. T-Icrrcrn, dec. 5.
lib. i. c. z. lib. iii. c. 17.

plete
i68

1 OU)
plete information, with refped to it, they received some mef- B I;

V1.

fengers whom Huafcar ent to Pizarro, in order to solicit his -
aid against Atahualpa, whom he represented as a rebel and an 3
ufurperu. Pizarro perceived at once the importance of this in-
telligence, and foresaw so clearly all the advantages which might
be derived from this divided slate of the kingdom which he had
invaded, that, without waiting for the reinforcement wvhich he
expeded from Panama, lie determined to push forward, while
inteffine discord put it out of the power of the Peruvians
to attack him with their whole force, and while, by taking
part, as circumstances should incline him, with one of tile
competitors, he might be enabled with greater ease to crush
both. Enterprising as the Spaniards of that age were in all
their operations against Americans, and distinguished as Pizarro
was among his countrymen for daring courage, we can hardly
suppose, that after having proceeded hitherto slowly, and with
much caution, he would have changed at once his fylfem of
operation, and have ventured upon a measure so hazardous,
without ome new motive or profpe&t to justify it.

As he was obliged to divide his troops, in order to leave a State of hi;s

garrison in St. Michael, sufficient to defend a flation of equal flCes
importance as a place of retreat in cafe of anydifafter, and as a
port for receiving aly supplies which flould come fi-om Panama,
he began his march with a very slender andill-accoutred train of
followers. They confifled offixty-two horfemcn , and a hun-
dred and two foot-foldiers, of whom twenty were armed with
cross-bows, and three with mufl,ets. He directed his course
towards Caxamalca, a small town at the difanc of twelve davo'

u Zarate, lib. ii. c. 'i. x se N0 'T E X.\ XII.

'7
VOL. II.

I11. 1'C)l

march fiom St. Michael, where Atahualpa was encamped with
a considerably body of troops. Before he had proceeded far,
an officer dispatched by the Inca met him with a valuable pre-
fcnt from that prince, accompanied with a proffer of his alliance,
and aurances of a friendly reception at Caxamalca. Pizarro,
according to the usual artifice of his countrymen in America,
pretended to come as the ambassador of a very powerful mo-
narch, and declared that he was now advancing with an inten-
tion to offer Atahualpa his aid against those enemies who dif-
puted his title to the throne Y

As the objed of the Spaniards in entering their country was

altogethcr incomprehensible to the Peruvians, they had formed
various conjectures concerning it, without being able to decide
whether they should confider their new guests as beings of a
superior nature, who had visited them from ome beneficent
motive, or as formidable avengers of their crimes, and enemies
to their repose and liberty. The continual professions of the
Spaniards, that they came to enlighten them with the know-
ledge of truth, and lead them in the way ofhappiness, favoured
the former opinion; the outrages which they committed, their
rapaciousness and cruelty, were awful confirmations of the latter,
While in this state of uncertainty, Pizarro's declaration of his
pacific intentions so far removed all the Inca's fears, that he
determined to give him a friendly reception. In consequence
of this resolution, the Spaniards were allowed to march in
tranquillity across the sandy desert between St. Michael and
Motnpc, where the most feeble effort of an enemy, added to
thie unavoidable diftrefTes which they suffered in pairing through

v IlIrrcr e, dec. v, lb. i. c. ,. Xercz, p 189.

thai

170
BOOK

VI

153z2

Ideas of the
Peruvians
concerning
their designs.

that comfortless region, mufr have proved fatal to them'. K °0 K
From Motupe they advanced towvards the mountains which cn-
compass the low country of Peru, and passed through a defile 15
so narrow and inacceffiblc, that a few men might have defended
it againit a numerous army. But here likewie, from the fame
inconsiderate credulity of the Inca, the Spaniards met with no
opposition, and took quiet poffelsion of a fort reted for the
security of that important station. As they now approached
near to Caxamalca, Atahualpa renewed his profeffionsof friend-
ihip; and as an evidence of his sincerity, sent them presents
of greater value than the former.

ON entering Caxamalca, Pizarro took poflefion of a largc Arriveat

Caxamaica.

court, on one fide of which was a house which the Spanish
historians call a palace of the Inca, and on the other a temple
of the Sun, the whole surrounded with a frong rampart or wall
of earth. When he had ported his troops in this advantageous
flation, he dispatched Hernando Soto, and his brother Ferdi-
nand, to the camp of Atahualpa, which was about a league
diflant from the town. He infiruted them to confirm the de-
claration which he had formerly made of his pacific disposition,
and to desire an interview with the Inca, that he miglit explain
more fully the intention of the Spaniards in visiting hi s country.
They were treated with all the refpcdful hospitality usual a-
mong thePeruvians in the reception of their mofi cordial friends,
and Atahualpa promised to visit the Spanith commander next
day in his quarters. The decent dcportment of the Peruvian
monarch, the order of his court, and the reverence with which
his subjes approached his pcrfon and obeycd his comnmands,
astonishcd those Spaniards, who had never met in America with

Sec NOTE XXXIII.

Z 2 '1nll

1

any thing more dignified than the petty cazique of a barbarous
tribe. But their eyes were still more powerfully attracted by
the vast profufionof wealth which they observed in the Inca's
camp. The rich ornaments worn by him and his attendants,
the vessels of gold and silver in which the repast offered to them
was served up, the multitude of utensils of every kind formed
of-thofe precious metals, opened profpedts far exceeding any
idea of opulence that a European of the sixteenth century could
form.

ON their return to Caxamalca, while their minds were yet

warm with admiration and desire of the wealth which they had
beheld, they gave such a description of it to their countrymen,
as confirmed Pizarro in a resolution which he had already taken.
Fromhis own observation of American manners during his long
service in the New World, as well as from the advantages which
Cortes had derived from seizing Montezuma, he knew of what
consequence it was to have the Inca in his power. For this
purpose, he formed a plan as daring as it was perfidious. Not-
withstanding the character he had assumed of an ambassador
from a powerful monarch, who courted an alliance with the
Inca, and in violation of the repeated offers which he had made
to him of his own friendship and assistance, he determined to
avail himself of the unfufpicious simplicity with which Ata-
hualpa relied on his professions, and to seize his person during
the interview to which he had invited him. He prepared for
the execution of his scheme with the fame deliberate arrange-
ment, and with as little compunction, as if it had refleced no
disgrace on himself or his country. He divided his cavalry into
three small squadrons, under the command of his brother Ser-
dinand, Soto, and Bcnalcazar; his infantry was formed in

one

1 2

0BOK

VI.

1532.

Perfidious
fchene of Pi-
zarro.

one body, except twenty of most tried courage, whom he kept
near his own person to support him in the dangerous service
which he reserved for himself; the artillery, consisting of two
field-pieces a and the crofs-bowmen, were placed opposite to
the avenue by which Atahualpa was to approach. All were
commanded to keep within the square, and not to move until
the signal for ation was given.

EARLY in the morning the Peruvian camp was all in moti-

on. But as Atahualpa was solicitous to appear with the great-
eft splendour and magnificence in his first interview with the
strangers, the preparations for this were so tedious, that the
day was far advanced before he began his march. Even then,
left the order of the proceflion hould be deranged, he moved
so slowly, that the Spaniards became impatient and apprehen-
five that ome suspicion of their intention might be the cause
of this delay. In order to remove this, Pizarro dispatchcd
one of his officers with fresh assurances of his friendly difpofi-
tion. At length the Inca approached. First of all appeared
four hundred men, in an uniform dress, as harbingers to clear
the way before him. He himself, fitting on a throne or couch,
adorned with plumes of various colours, and almost covered
with plates of gold and silver enriched with precious flones,
was carried on the houlders of his principal attendants. Be-
hind him came ome chief officers of his court, carried in the
fame manner. Several bands of fingers and dancers accompa-
nied this cavalcade; and the whole plain was covered with
troops, amounting to more than thirty thousand men.

a Xercz, p. 194.

As

Nov. 6.

Visited by the
Inca. BOOK

VI.
1532.

I 73

B 0 0 r As the Inca drew near the Spanish quarters, father Vincent

Vi.
,-'- Valverdc, chaplain to the expedition, advanced with a crucifix
1 532.

Strange ha- in one hand, and a breviary in the other, and in a long dif-
,Urv11 al course explained to him the doctrine of the creation, the fall
ve-dc. of Adam, the incarnation, the sufferings and refurredion of

Jcfus Chris, the appointment of St. Peter as God's vicegcrcnt
on earth, the transmission of his apostolic power by fuccef-
sion to the popes, the donation made to the king of Catile by
pope Alexander of all the regions in the New World. In con-
sequence of all tlis,he required Atahualpa to embrace the Chris-
tian faith, to acknowledge the supreme jurifdidion of the pope,
and to submit to the king of Castile as his lawful sovereign;
promising, if he complied instantly with this requisition, that
the Castilian monarch would protect his dominions, and permit
him to continue in the exercise of his royal authority; but if
he should impioully refute to obey this summons, he denounc-
ed war against him in his malter's name, and threatened him
with the most dreadful effects of his vengeance.

Reply of the THIS strange harangue, unfolding deep mysteries, and al-
1nca. luding to unknown fads, of which no power ofeloquence could

have conveyed at once a diflint idea to an American, was so
lamely translated by an unflilful interpreter, little acquainted
with the idiom of the Spanish tongue, and incapable of ex-
prefiing himself with propriety in the language of the Inca, that
its general tenor was altogether incomprehensible to Atahual-
pa. Some parts in it, of more obvious meaning, filled him
with aftonilhment and indignation. His reply, however, was
temperate. He began with observing, that he was lord of the
dominions over which he reigned by hereditary fuccefion;
and added, that he could not conceive how a foreign pricft

fliould
174

lhould pretend to dispose of territories which did not belong to B O v K
him; that if such a preposterous grant had been made, he, v-
who was the rightful possessor, refused to confirm it ; that he
had no inclination to renounce the religious inflitutions efla-
blifhed by his ancestors; nor would he forsake the service of
the Sun, the immortal divinity whom he and his people rever-
ed, in order to worflip the God of the Spaniards, who was sub-
jec to death; that with respect to other matters contained in
his discourse, as he had never heard of them before, and did not
now understand their meaning, he desired to know where he
had learned things so extraordinary. " In this book," an-
fwvered Valverde, reachingout to him his breviary. The Inca
opened it eagerly, and turning over the leaves, lifted it to his
ear: " This," fays he, " isfilent ; it tells me nothing;" and
threw it with disdain to the ground. The enraged monk, run-
ning towards his countrymen, cried out, " To arms, Chrifi-
ans, to arms; the word of God is insulted; avenge this profa-
nation on those impious dogs b."

PI ZARRO, who, during this long conference, had with dif- Pizarro at-

tacs the l'c-

ficulty rflrained his soldiers, eager to fcize the rich spoils of ruvliais.
which they had now so near a vicw, immediately gave the
signal of aftault. At once the martial music firuck up, the
cannon and inuflcts began to fire, the horfc sallicd out fiercely
to the charge, the infantry ruflhcd on sword in hand. The
Peruvians, afloniiflcd at the fcldenncfs of an attack which they
did not expc, and difinayed with the dcnrudtivc effcsis of the
fire-arms, and the irrcfiltiblc iprcffion of the cavalry, fled with
univcrfal conflcrnation on every fidc, without attempting
cither to annoy thcenemy, or to defend thcmfclvcs. Piz:rro,

, See NO'rT' XXXIV.

1t'

75

at the head of his chosen band, advanced diretly towards the
Inca; and though his nobles crowded around him with offici-
ous zeal, and fell in numbers at his feet, while they vied one
with another in sacrificing their own lives, that they might
cover the sacrcd person of their sovereign, the Spaniards oon
penetrated to the royal feat ; and Pizarro fcizing the Inca by
the arm, dragged him to the ground, and carried him as a
pri oner to his quarters. The fate of the monarch increased
the precipitate flight of his followers. The Spaniards pursued
them towards every quarter, and with deliberate and unrelent-
ing barbarity continued to slaughter wretched fugitives, who
never once offered at rcfiftance. The carnage did not cease
until the close of day. Above four thousand Peruvians were
killed. Not a tingle Spaniardfell, nor was one wounded but
Pizarro himself, whose hand was slightly hurt by one of his
own soldiers, while struggling eagerly to lay hold on the
Inca '

TilH plunder of the field was rich beyond any idea which the

Spaniards had yet formed concerning the wealth of Peru; and
they were so transported with the value of the acquisition, as
well as the greatnces of their fucccfs, that they passed the
night in the extravagant exultation natural to indigent adven-
turers on such an extraordinary change offortune.

AT first the captive monarch could hardly believe a calamity

which he so little cxpected to be real. But he oon felt all the
misery of his fate, and the dejcdion into which he funk was
in proportion to the height of grandeur from which he had
fallen. Pizarro, afraid of losing all the advantages which he

* Sec Note XXXV.

hopecd

Y53Z.

Rnd c the

Dejction of
the Inca.

176

hoped to derive from the pofFcffion of such a prisoner, la iollc (i n o 0 K
to console him with profecfions of kindncfs and rcfpct, tliat '- ~-
corrcfpondcd ill with his aions. By rcfiding among thc.Spa- '3
niards, the Inca quickly discovercd their ruling paifion, whi(l),
indeed, they were no-wise solicitous to conceal, andl by apply-
ing to tlat, made an attempt to recover his liberty. AHe offer- ll;r, ol
cd as a ransom what astonishcd the Spaniards, even after al l ll
they now knew concerning the opulence of his kingdom.
The apartment in which he was confined was twenty-two feet
in length and sixteen in breadth ; he undertook to fill it with
vessels of gold as high as he could reach. Pizarro closcd
eagerly with this tempting proposal, and a line was drawn
upon the walls of the chamber, to mark thc tfipulated hciglh
to which the trcafurc was to rife.

ATAHUALPA, transported with having obtained ome pro-

sped of liberty, took meafurc3 instantly for fulfilling his part
of the agreement, by fending messengers to Cuzco, Ouito,
and other places, where gold had been amafled in largefi quan-
tities, either for adorning the temples of their gods, or tle houfcs
of the Inca, to bring what was ncccffary for completing his ran-
fom direcly to Caxamalca. Though Atahualpa was now in the
cuflody of his enemies, yet so much were the Peruvians accuf-
tomcd to rcfped every mandate issued by their fovcrcign, that
his orders were executed with the greatelt alacrity. Soothed
with hopes of recovering his liberty by this means, tle fubjcds
of the Inca were afraid of endangering his life by forming any
other fchcme for his relief; and though the force of tile cmpiire
was still entire, no preparations were made, and no army aflei:-
,led, to avenge their owvn wrongs or those of their nlona. rctli '

V XtlcZ, 2oT,.

1/7

T)he
VO L. 11.

JA a

B VO K The Spaniards remained in Caxamalca tranquil and unmo-

----- lefted. Small detachments of their number marched into re-

153. mote provinces of the empire, and inflead of meeting with any

Tniar-dsfi opposition, were every where received with marks of the moit
diffe'rent pro- submissive refpeq e
v inces.

Almagroar- INCONSIDERABLE as those parties were, and desirous as Pi-
rives with a
reinforce- zarro might be to obtain ome knowledge of the interior itate
lsent. of the country, he could not have ventured upon any diminu-
December. tion of his main body, if he had not about this time received

an account of Almagro's having landed at St. Michael with
such a reinforcement as would almost double the number of his
followers f. The arrival of this long-expeded succour was not
more agreeable to the Spaniards, than alarming to the Inca.
He saw the power of his enemies increase and as he knew
neither the source whence they derived their supplies, nor the
means by which they were conveyed to Peru, he could not
foresee to what a height the inundation that poured in upon

1 5.3. his dominions might rife. While disquieted with such appre-

Huafcar put
to d eath. h nfions, he learned that some Spaniards, in their way to Cuzco,

had visited his brother Huafcar in the place wh'lere he kept him
confined, and that the captive prince had represented to them
the justice of his own cause, and as an inducement to espouse it,
had promiscd them a quantity of treasure vafily exceeding what
he had engaged to pay for his ransom. If the Spaniards should
lifktn to this proposal, he perceived his own defiruc ion to be
inevitable; and fufpeling that their insatiable thirfi for gold
would tempt them to lend a favourable car to it, he determined
to sacrifice his brother's life, that he might favc his own; and

Sec NOTE XXXVI. Xrcz, zo4. -lcrrera, dcc. 5. lib. iii. c. , 2.

his
78S

his orders for this purpose were executcd, like all his other B
commands, with scrupulous punctuality --

1 3 -

MEAN WHILE, Indians daily arrived at Caxamalca from :* T'.S' n

ferent parts of the kingdom, loaded with treasure. A great ,,liii, ,,'
part ofthe tfipulated quantity was now amassed, and Atahualpa i f oi.
assured the Spaniards, that the only thing which prevented the
whole from being brought in, was the rcinotcnefs of the pro-
vinces where it was deposited. But such vail piles of gold, pre-
sented continually to the view of needy soldiers, had so inflamed
their avarice, that it was impossible any longer to restrain their
impatience to obtain poTffefion of this rich booty. Orders were
given for melting down the whole, except ome pieces of cu-
rious fabric, reserved as a present for the emperor. After set-
ting apart the fifth due to the crown, and a hundred thousand
pesos as a donative to the soldiers which arrived with Almagro,
there remained one million five hundred and twenty-eight
thousand five-hundred pesos to Pizarro and his followers.
The festival of St. James, the patron faint of Spain, was the July,
day chosen for the partition of this vast fum; and the manner
of conducting it firongly marks that firange alliance of fana-
ticifin with avarice, which I have more than once had occasion
to point out as a striking feature in the character of the con-
querors of the New World. Though aemblcd to divide
the spoils of an innocent people, procured by deceit, extor-
tion, and cruelty, the tranfacd-ion began with a solemn invo-
cation of the name of God h1, as if they could have cxpected
the guidance of Heaven in distributing those wages of ini-
quity. In this division above eight thousand pesos, at that
time not inferior in value to as many pounds sterling in thl

t: Zarate, lib). ii. c. 6. C(omara His. c. m l . Hcrrcra, dc. S. lii, iii. c. .:
H1 IcrrelI, (Idec. lilb. iii. c. .

il' I

t' 1
A a ?

BOOK

VI.

1533.

The eteft of

;!,

'['he Inca de-
mands his
liberty in
vain.

present century, fell to the lhare of each horseman, and half
that fum to each foot soldier. Pizarro himself, and his officers,
received dividends in proportion to the dignity of their rank.

TH E R E is no example in hiflory of such a sudden acquisition

of wealth by military service, nor was ever a fum so great di-
vided among so small a number of soldiers. Many of them
having received a recompence for their services far beyond their
most sanguine hopes, were so impatient to retire from fatigue
and danger in order to spend the remainder of their days in their
native country, in ease and opulence, that they demanded their
discharge with clamorous importunity. Pizarro, sensible that
from such men he could exped neither enterprise in ation nor
fortitude in suffering, and persuaded that wherever they went,
the display of their riches would allure adventurers, less opulent
but more hardy, to his standard, granted their suit without re-
lulance, and permitted above sixty of them to accompany his
brother Ferdinand, whom he ent to Spain with an account of
his success, and the present destined for the emperor .

THE Spaniards having divided among them the treasure

amassed for the Inca's ransom, he insisted with them to fulfil
their promise of setting him at liberty. But nothing was far-
ther from Pizarro's thoughts. During his long service in the
New World, he had imbibed those ideas and maxims of his
fcllow-foldiers, which led them to confider its inhabitants as an
inferior race, neither worthy of the name, nor intitled to the
rights, of men. In his compat with Atahualpa, he had no
other objed than to amuse his captive with such a prospeCt of

1 Irrra, dec. 5. lib. iii. c. 4. Vega, p. z. lib. i. c. 38.

recovering
I80

recovering his liberty, as might induce him to lend all the aid
of his authority towards collecting the wealth of his kingdom.
Having now accomplished this, he no longer regarded his
plighted faith; and at the very time when the credulous prince
hoped to be replaced on his throne, he had secretly resolved to
bereave him of life. Many circumstances seem to have con-
curred in prompting him to this ation, the most criminal and
atrocious that stains the Spanish name, amidst all the deeds of
violence committed in carrying on the conquefi of the New
World.

THOUGH Pizarro had seized the Inca, in imitation of Cor-

tes's conducq towards the Mexican monarch, he did not possess
talents for carrying on the fame artful plan of policy. Deflitute
of the temper and address requisite for gaining the confidence
of his prisoner, he never reaped all the advantages which might
have been derived from being master of his person and authority.
Atahualpa was, indeed, a prince of greater abilities and dif-
cernment than Montezuma, and seems to have penetrated
more thoroughly into the character and intentions of the Spa-
niards. Mutual suspicion and diftrufi accordingly took place
between them. The fri attention with which it was necef-
fary to guard a captive of such importance, greatly increased
the fatigue of military duty. The utility of keeping him ap-
peared inconsiderable ; and Pizarro felt him as an incumber-
ance, from which he wished to be delivered 'i.

ALMAGRO and his followers had made a demand of an

equal hare in the Inca's ransom ; and though Pizarro had
bcflowed upon the private men the large gratuity which I

..,
Fl Herrera, dec. 5. lib. iii. c, 4.

have

BOOK
B 0 0 K

VI.

1533

He and tl:e
Spaniards
mutually ea-
Ious.

Alil.gro a;i
hlis {(lo.vels.
dci., l hi'.
lid .

I8r

have mentioned, and endeavoured to sooth their leader by pre-
sents of great value, they fill continued dissatisfied. They
were apprehensive, that as long as Atahualpa remained a
a prisoner, Pizarro's soldiers would apply whatever treasure
should be acquired, to make up what was wanting of the quan-
tity flipulated for his ransom, and under that pretext exclude
them from any part of it. They infified eagerly on putting
the Inca to death, that all the adventurers in Peru might there-
after be on an equal footing'.

PIZARRO himself began to be alarmed with accounts of
forces assembling in the remote provinces of the empire, and
fufpeded Atahualpa of having issued orders for that purpose.
These fears and suspicions were artfully increased by Philip-
pillo, one of the Indians whom Pizarro had carried off from
Tumbez in the year one thousand five hundred and twenty,
and whom he employed as an interpreter. The funcion which
he performed admitting this man to familiar intercourse with
the captive monarch, he presumed, notwithfianding the mean
ness of his birth, to raise his affecions to a Coya, or descendant
of the Sun, one of Atahualpa's wives; and feeing no profped
of gratifying that passion during the life of the monarch, he
endeavoured to fill the ears of the Spaniards with such accounts
of his secret designs and preparations, as might awaken their
jealousy and incite them to cut him of.

WI L E Almagro and his followers openly demanded the life

of the Inca, and Philippillo laboured to ruin him by private
machinations, that unhappy prince inadvertently contributed
to haften his own fate. During his confinement he had at-

Zaratc, lib. ii. c. 7. Vcga, p. 2. lib. i. c. 7 Herrera, dec. 5. lib. iii. c. 4.

tached

182
BOOK

VI.

'533-

Motives
which induc-
ed Pizarro to
conftnt.

tached himfelfwith peculiar affedion to Ferdinand Pizarro and n 0

o K

Hernando Soto; who, as they were persons of birth and edu- -v
cation superior to the rough adventurers with whom they 't'
served, were accuflomed to behave with more decency and at-
tention to the captive monarch. Soothed with this refped
from persons of such high rank, he delighted in their society;
but in the presence of the governor he was uneasy, and over-
awed. This dread soon came to be mingled with contempt.
Among all the European arts, wha-t he admired most was that
of reading and writing; and he long deliberated with himself,
whether he should regard it as a natural or acquired talent. In
order to determine this, he desired one of the soldiers, who
guarded him, to write the name of God on the nail of his thumb.
This he shewed successively to several Spaniards, asking its
meaning; and to his amazement, they all, without hesitation,
returned the fame answer. At length Pizarro entered; and on
presenting it to him, he blushed, and with some confusion was
obliged to acknowledge his ignorance. From that moment,
Atahualpa confidered him as a mean person, less inftruded
than his own soldiers; and he had not address enough to con-
ceal the sentiments with which this discovery inspired him. To
be the objec of a barbarian's scorn, not only mortified the pride
of Pizarro, but excited such resentment in his breast, as added
force to all the other considerations which prompted him to put
the Inca to death

Bu T in order to give some colour of jufiice to this violent is trial.

action, and that he blimfelf might be exempted from tanding
singly responsible for the commission of it, Pizarro resolved to

m I-lcrrela, decc. .

5 .
C. . c. . Veai, p. i. lib. i. c. 38.

try

i83

B 0 0 K try the Inca with all the formalities observed in the criminal

VI.
-~- courts of Spain. Pizarro himself, and Almagro, with two
T1'3. assistants, were appointed judges, with full power to acquit

or to condemn; an attorney-general was named to carry on
the prosecution in the king's name; counsellors were chosen to
aflift the prisoner in his defence; and clerks were ordained to
record h: proceedings of court. Before this strange tribunal,
a charge was exhibited fRill more amazing. It consisted of va-
rious articles; that Atahualpa, though a bastard, had difpoffeffed
the rightful owner of the throne, and usurped the regal power;
that he had put his brother and lawful sovereign to death ; that
he was an idolater, and had not only permitted, but commanded
the offering of human sacrifices; that he had a great number of
concubines; that since his imprisonment he had wafted and em-
bezzled the royal treasures, which now belonged of right to the
conquerors; that he had incited his fubjeds to take arms against
the Spaniards. On these heads of accusation, ome of which
are so ludicrous, others so absurd, that the effrontery of Pi-
zarro, in making them the foundation of a serious procedure,
is not less surprising than his injuflice, did the court go on to
try the fovercign of a great empire, over whom it had no
jurifdiQion. With refpea to each of the articles, witneffcs
were examined ; but as they delivered their evidence in their
native tongue, Philippillo had it in his power to give their
words whatever turn best suited his malevolent intentions. To
judges predetermined in their opinion, this evidence appeared
He is Ccn- fufiicicnt. They pronouncedAtahualpa guilty, and condemned

him to be burnt alive. Friar Valverde proftitutcd the authority
of his sacred funion to confirm this fntcncc, andl by his fig-
nature warranted it to be just. Aflonifhed at his fate, Ata-
hualpa cndeavoured to avert it by his tears, by promifcs, and

by
l c io4-

by entreaties, that he might be sent to Spain, where a monarch
would be the arbiter of his lot. But pity never touched the
unfeeling heart of Pizarro. He ordered him to be led inflantly
to execution; and what added to the bitterness of his last
moments, the fame monk who had just ratified his doom, of-
sered to console, and attempted to convert him. The most
powerful argument VaIverde employed to prevail with him to
embrace the Christian faith, was a promise of a mitigation in
his punishment. The dread of a cruel death extorted from the
trembling vidim a desire of receiving baptism. The ceremony
was performed; and Atahualpa, infiead of being burnt, was
Wrangled at the flake n.

HAPPILY for the credit of the Spanish nation, even among

the profligate adventurers which it sent forth to conquer and
desolate the New World, there were persons who retained some
tincture of the Castilian generosity and honour. Though, before
the trial of Atahualpa, Ferdinand Pizarro had set out for Spain,
and Soto was sent on a separate command at a distance from Cax-
amalca, this odious tranfadion was not carried on without cen-
sure and opposition. Several officers, and among those fomc of
the greatest reputation and most refpedable families in thc ser-
vice, not only remonstrated, but protested againfi this meafurc
of their general, as disgraceful to their country, as repugnant to
every maxim of equity, as a violation of public faith, and an
usurpation of jurifdidionover an independent monarch, to which
they had no title. But their endeavours were vain. Numbers,
and the opinion of such as held every thing to bc lawfiul which

"Zarate, lib. ii. c. 7. Xerez, p. Vega, p. 1 . lii. . 6. , G: 1
Hist. . 17. Herrcra, dec. 5. lib. iii. c .

VOL. II. B 1 lhev

BOOK

OK
VI.

1533.

and executed.

Several Spani-
ards protest
against it.

BOOK

\I.

1'533.

Diflolution of
government
and order ill
i'cnu.

they deemed advantageous, prevailed. History, however, re-.
cords even the unsuccessful exertions of virtue with applause;
and the Spanish writers, in relating events where the valour
of their nation is more conspicuous than its humanity, have
not failed to preserve the names of those who made this laudable
effort to save their country from the infamy of having perpe-
trated such a crime .

ON the death of Atahualpa, Pizarro invefied one of his sons

with the ensigns of royalty, hoping that a young man without
experience might prove a more paflive infirument in his hands,
than an ambitious monarch, who had been accustomed to inde-
pendent command. The people of Cuzco, and the adjacent
country, acknowledged Manco Capac, a brother of Huafcar,
as Inca P. But neither possessed the authority which belonged
to a sovereign of Peru. The violent convulsions into which
the empire had been thrown, first by the civil war between the
two brothers, and then by the invasion of the Spaniards, had
not only deranged the order of the Peruvian government, but
almost dissolved its frame. When they beheld their monarch
a captive in the power of firangers, and at last suffering an ig-
nominious death, the people in several provinces, as if they had
been set free from every restraint of law and decency, broke
out into the most licentious excelses q. So many descendants of
the Sun, after being treated with the utmost indignity, had been
cut off by Atahualpa, that not only their influence in the state
diminished with their number, but the accustomed reverence
for that sacred race sensibly decreased. In consequence of this

o Vega, p. I1. lib. i. c. 37. Xerez, i. 235. Hcrrera, dec. 5. lib. iii. c 5.
t Vega, p. I . lib. ii. c. 7. q Herrera, dec. 5. lib. ii. c. iz. lib. iii. c. 5.

{tate
I86

137

slate of things, ambitious men in different parts of the empire )

: i'

aspired to independent authority, and usurped jurifdidion to ' ----
which they had no title. The general who commanded for :
Atahualpa in Quito, seized the brother and, children of his
master, put them to a cruel death, and disclaiming any con-
nesion with either Inca, endeavoured to cftabliflh a fcparate
kingdom for himfelfr.

TI-IE Spaniards, with pleasure, beheld the spirit of discord P;z7.rroii-

vaice to

diffusing itself, and the vigour of government relaxing among Cuzo.
the Pcruvians. They confidered those disorders as symptoms
of a state hastening towards its dissolution. Pizarro no longer
hesitated to advance towards Cuzco, and he had received such
considerable reinforcements, that he could venture, with little
danger, to penetrate o far into the interior part of the country.
The account of the wealth acquired at Caxamalca, operated as
he had foreseen. No sooner did his brother Ferdinand, with
the officers and soldiers, to whom he had given their discharge
after the partition of the Inca's ransom, arrive at Panama,
and display their riches in the view of their astonished country-
men, than fame spread the account with such exaggeration
through all the Spanish settlements on the South Sea, that the
governors of Guatimala, Panama, and Nicaragua, could hard-
ly restrain the people under their jurifdidion, fiom abandon-
ing their poTfeffions, and crowding to that inexhaustible fourcc
of wealth which eemed to be opened in Peru . In spite of
every check and regulation, such numbers resorted thither,
that Pizarro began his march at the head of five hundred

r Zaratc, lib. ii. c. 8. Vega, p. i . lib. ii. . 3, 4.
' Gomara -it. c. 5. g,

p.

c. ,
. c. i. Hcrrera, dc. 5, lib. iii. c. ;.

b 2

1 1C11,

B 0 0 K men, after leaving a considerable garrison in St. Michael, under

VT.
--- ' the command of Benalcazar. The Peruvians had aembled
'533 fonie large bodies of troops to oppose his progress. Several

fierce encounters happened. But they terminated, like all the
adions in America; a few Spaniards were killed or wounded;
the natives were put to flight with incredible slaughter. At
length Pizarro forced his way to Cuzco, and took quiet pof-
fcffion of that capital. The riches found there, even after all
that the natives had carried off and concealed, either from a
superstitious veneration for the ornaments of their temples, or
out of hatred for their rapacious conquerors, exceeded in value
what had been received as Atahualpa's ransom. But as the
Spaniards were now accustomed to the wealth of the country,
and it came to be parcelled out among a greater number of ad-
venturers, this dividend did not excite the fame surprise either
from novelty, or the largeness of the fum that fell to the hare
of each individual .

DURING the march to Cuzco, the son of Atahualpa whom

Pizarro treated as Inca, died, and as the Spaniards substituted
no person in his place, the title of Manco Capac seems to have
been universally ecognizedu.

Quito con- WHILE his fellow-foldiers were thus employed, Benalcazar,
quered by governor of St. Michael, an able and enterprising officer, was
Banalcazar.

ashamed of remaining inactive, and impatient to have his name
distinguished among the discoverers and conquerors of the
New World. The seasonable arrival ofa fresh body of recruits
from Panama and Nicaragua, put it in his power to gratify

See NOT E XXXVII. ' Herrera, dec. 5. lib, v. c. z.

this
188

this passion. Leaving a sufficient force to protect the infant 1 0 O K
settlement entrusted to his care, he placed himself at the head »----
of the reft, and set out to attempt the reduction of Quito, 533.
where according to the report of the natives, Atahualpa had
left the greatest part of his treasure. Notwithstanding the
vail distance of that city from St. Michael, the difficulty of
marching through a mountainous country covered with woods,
and the frequent and fierce attacks of the best troops in Peru,
commanded by a kilful leader, the valour, good condut, and
perseverance of Benalcazar surmounted every obstacle, and
he entered Quito with his vidtorious troops. But they
met with a cruel mortification there. The natives, now ac-
quainted, to their sorrow, with the predominant passion of their
invaders, and knowing how to disappoint it, had carried off
all those treasures, the profped of which had prompted them
to undertake this arduous expedition, and had supported them
under all the dangers and hardships wherewith they had to
struggle in carrying it on .

BENALCAZAR was not the only Spanish leader who at- Alvarado's

expedition.

tacked the kingdom of Quito. The fame of its riches attracted
a more powerful enemy. Pedro de Alvarado, who had dif-
tinguifhed himself so eminently in the conquest of Mexico,
having obtained the government of Guatimala as a recompence
for his valour, oon became disguised with a life of uniform
tranquillity, and longed to be again engaged in the bufile of
military service. The glory and wealth acquired by the con-
querors of Peru heightened this passion, and gave it a deter-

x Zarate, 1ib. ii. c. 9. Vcga, p. . lib. ii. c. 9' Hcrrera, dec. 5 lib. iv. c. 11, 12.
lib. v. c. z, 3 lib. vi. c. 3.

mined
H 1 T R

189

Ov Kil mined dircdion. Believing, or pretending to believe, that the
vI.

kingdom of Quito did notlie within the limits of the province
allotted to Pizarro, he resolved to invade it. The high repu-
tation of the commander allured volunteers from every quarter.
He embarked with five hundred men, of whom above two hun-
dred were of such difiindion as to serve on horseback. He
landed at Puerto Viejo, and without sufficient knowledge of
the country, or proper guides to co.idud him, attempted to
march directly to Quito, by following the course of the river
Guayquil, and crossing the ridge of the Andes towards its
head. But in this route, one of the most impracticable in all
America, his troops endured such fatigue in forcing their way
through forests and marshes on the low grounds, and suffered
so much from excessive cold when they began to acend the
mountains, that before they reached the plain of Ouito, a fifth
part of the men and half of their horses died, and the reft were
so much dispirited and worn out, as to be almost unfit for ser-
vice Y. There they met with a body, not of Indians, but of
Spaniards, drawn up in hostile array against them, Pizarro,
having received an account of Alvarado's armament, had de-
tached Almagro with ome troops to oppose this formidable in-
vader of his jurifdidion; and these were joined by Benalcazar
and his victorious party. Alvarado, though surprised at the
fight of enemies whom he did not expect, advanced boldly to
the charge. But by the interposition of some moderate men
in each party, an amicable accommodation took place; and the
fatal period, whcn Spaniards fiufpended their conquefls to em-
bruc their hands in the blood of their countrymen, was post-
poncd a few years. Alvarado engaged to return to his go-

Y Sec NOTE XXXVIII.

verrment,
19o

vernment, upon Almagro's paying him a hundred thousand
pesos, to defray the expence of his armament. Molt of his
followers remained in the country ; and an expedition, which
threatened Pizarro and his colony with ruin, contributed to
augment its flrcngth z.

BY this time Ferdinand Pizarro had landed in Spain. The

immense quantities of gold and silver which he importeda,
filled the kingdom with no les aflonifhment than they had
excited in Panama and the adjacent provinces. Pizarro was
received by the emperor with the attention due to the bearer
of a present so rich as to exceed any idea which the Spaniards
had formed concerning the value of their acquisitions in Ame-
rica, even after they had been ten years mailers of Mexico. In
recompence of his brother's services, his authority was con-
firmed with new powers and privileges, and the addition of
seventy leagues, extending along the coast, to the southward of
the territory granted in his former patent. Almagro received
the honours which he had so long desired. The title of Adel-
antado, or governor, was conferred upon him, with jurifdicion
over two hundred leagues of country, itretching beyond the
southern limits of the province allotted to Pizarro. Ferdinand
himself did not go unrewarded. He was admitted into the
military order of St. Jago, a difiindtion always acceptable to a
Spanish gentleman; and oon set out on his return to Peru,
accompanied by many pcrfons of higher rank, than had yct
served in that country b.

Zarate, lib. 2. c. 10-13. Vega, p. 11. lib. ii. c. , 2. 9, &c. Gonnmra THi

c. 126, &c. Rencfal. I-lift. Guatinal. lil. iii. c. 6. I-T cra, dec . l,.
l i. . c. , 2. 7, 8

a Se NOTE XXXIX. b Zarate, lib. iii. c. 3. Veg-.I, p. . J ib. ii. C. 9,
IIcrrcra, dec. 5. lib. vi. . i. 3.

So M ;

I r,
COOK

VI.

'534.

Honourscon-
ferred or Pi-
zarro and A1-
magro.

BOOK

VI.

1534.

Beginning of
dissentions e-
tween Pizarro
and Almagro.

SOME account of his negociations reached Peru before he ar-

rived there himself. Almagro no sooner learned that he had
obtained the royal grant of an independent government, than,
pretending that Cuzco, the imperial residence of the Incas, lay
within its boundaries, he attempted to render himself mafler of
that important station. Juan and Gonzalez Pizarro prepared
to oppose him. Each of the contending parties was supported
by powerful adherents, and the dispute was on the point of
being terminated by the sword, when Francis Pizarro arrived
in the capital. The reconciliation between him and Almagro
had never been cordial. The treachery of Pizarro in engrossing
to himself all the honours and emoluments, which ought to
have been divided with his afrociate, was always present in
both their thoughts. The one, conscious of his own perfidy,
did not exped forgiveness; the other, feeling that he had been
deceived, was impatient to be avenged; and though avarice
and ambition had induced them not only to dissemble their fen-
timents, but even to at in concert while in pursuit of wealth
and power, no sooner did they obtain possession of these, than
the fame pafilons which had formed this temporary union,
gave rife to jealousy and discord. To each of them was at-
tached a finall band of interested dependents, who, with the
malicious art, peculiar to such men, heightened their fufpici-
ons, and magnified every appearance of offence. But with all
those feeds of enmity in their minds, and thus assiduously che-
rifhed, each was so thoroughly acquainted with the abilities and
courage of his rival, that they equally dreaded the consequences
of an open rupture. The fortunate arrival of Pizarro at Cuzco,
and the address mingled with firmness, which he manifested in
his expoflulations with Almagro and his partizans, averted that
evil for the prefcnt. A new reconciliation took place; the chief

article
1-92

ar i'. of which was, that Almagro should attempt tlh con- r 0 0 K
cljcl of Chili ; and if he did not find in that province an eia-
blil.nent adequate to his merit and expecations, Pizarro by
way of indemnification, should yield up to him a part of Peru. Ju"c
This new agreement was confirmed with the fame sacrcd so-
lemnitics as their first contract, and obfcrvcd with as little
fidelity .

SooN after he concluded this important tranfidion, Pizarro R'-,,,i,,

s [l I'Iz o.

marched back to the countries on the tea coast, and as he now
enjoyed an interval of tranquillity, undisturbed by ; ny enemy,
either Spanish or Indian, he applied himself with that perse-
vering ardour, which diftinguiihes his character, to introduce a
form of regular government, into the extensive provinces sub-
jed to his authority. Though ill qualified by his education to
enter into any disquisition concerning the principles of civil
policy, and little accuflomed by his former habits of life to
attend to its arrangements, his natural sagacity supplied the
want both of science and experience. He distributed the coun-
try into various difirids; he appointed proper magistrates to
preside in each; and eflablifhed regulations concerning thead-
ministration ofjuftice, the collection of the royal revenue, the
working of the mines, and the treatment of the Indians, ex-
tremely simple, but well calculated to promote the public
prosperity. But, though, for the present, he adapted his plan
to the infant slate of his colony, his apiring mind looked
forward to its future grandeur. He confidered hi!nfelf as lay- o,,,n(,lion
ing the foundation of a great empire, and deliberated long, of Li""a.
and with much solicitude, in what place he flould fix the feat

Znrntc, lib. ii. c. 13. Vcga, p. 1I. lib. ii. c. 19. Bcnzo, lib. iii. c. 6. Herrcra,
.icc. 5i. ii. ii. c, 8.

1 9
VOL. II.

Cc

of

B v0 K of government. Cuzco, the imperial city of the Incas, was

\-.-v_ = situated in a corner of the empire, about four hundred miles
534. from the sea, and much farther from Qpito, a province ofwhofe

value he had formed an high idea. No other settlement of the
Peruvians was so considerable as to merit the name of a town,
or to allure the Spaniards to fix their residence in it. But, in
marching through the country, Pizarro had been firuck with
the beauty and fertility of the valley of Rimac, one of the
most extensive and bet cultivated in Peru. There, on the banks
of a small river, of the fame name with the vale which it wa-
ters and enriches, at the distance of fix miles from Callao, the
most commodious harbour in the Pacific Ocean, he founded a
city which he destined to be the capital of his government.

1535. He gave it the name of Ciudad de los Reyes, either from the
January 8 circumfiance of having laid the firfl stone, at that season when

the church celebrates the fefiival of the Three Kings, or, as is
more probable, in honour of juanna and Charles, the fove-
reigns of Castile. This name it fiill retains among the Spani-
ards, in all legal and formal deeds; but it is better known to
foreigners by that of Lima, a corruption of the ancient appel-
lation of the valley, in which it is situated. Under his in-
fpedion, the buildings advanced with such rapidity, that it
soon assumed the form of a city, which, by a magnificent pa-
lace that he ere6ed for himself, and by the stately houses built
by several of his officers, gave, even in its infancy, ome indi-
cation of its subsequent grandeur d.

Almagro in- IN consequence of what had been agreed with Pizarro, Al-
vades Chili.

magro began his march towards Chili; and as he polTeffed in

d Herrera, dec. 5. lib. vi. c. 12. lib. vii, c. 13. Calancho Coronica, lib. i. c. 37
Uarnueuo, Lima fundada, ii. 294.

an.
194

an eminent degree the virtues most admired by foldicrs, bound- B O O K
lcfs liberality and fearless courage, his flandard was followed by v.
five hundred and seventy men, the greatest body of Europeans '535
that had hitherto been afembled in Peru. From impatience
to finish the expedition, or from that contempt of hardship and
danger acquired by all the Spaniards who had servcd long in
America, Almagro, inflead of advancing along the level coun-
try on the coast, chore to march across the mountains by a route
that was shorter indeed, but almost impracticable. In this at-
tempt his troops were exposed to every calamity which men
can susser, from fatigue, from famine, and from the rigour of
the climate in those elevated regions of the torrid zone, where
the degree of cold is hardly inferior to what is felt within the
polar circle. Many of them perished; and the survivors, when
they descended into the fertile plains of Chili, had new difficul-
ties to encounter. They found there a race of men very dif-
ferent from the people of Peru, intrepid, hardy, independent,
and in their bodily constitution, as well as vigour of spirit,
nearly resembling the warlike tribes in North America. Though
filled with wonder at the first appearance of the Spaniards, and
still more astonished at the operations of their cavalry and the
effecs of their fire-arms, the Chilefe soon recovered so far
from their surprise, as not only to defend themselves with ob-
flinacy, but to attack their new enemies with more determined
ficrcenefs than any American nation had hitherto discovered.
The Spaniards, however, continued to penetrate into the coun-
try, and collected some confidcrable quantities of gold; but
were so far from thinking of making any fettlcment amidfl
such formidable neighbours, that, in spite of all the expericnce
and valour of their leader, the final iffuc of the expedition ill
remained extremely dubious, when they were rccallcd from it

195

hy
Cc 2

B o0 K an unexpeded revolution in Peruc. The causes of this I shall

VI.
---~' endeavour to trace to their source.
'535.

An infurrec- So many adventurers had flocked to Peru from every Spa-
Pirufan nigh colony in America, and all with such high expetations of

accumulating independent fortunes at once, that, to men pof-
sessed with notions so extravagant, any mention of acquiring
wealth gradually, and by schemes of patient industry, would
have been not only a disappointment, but an insult. In order
to find occupation for men who could not with safety be allow-
ed to remain inactive, Pizarro encouraged ome of the most
distinguished officers who had lately joined him, to invade dif-
ferent provinces of the empire, which the Spaniards had not
hitherto visited. Several large bodies were formed for this
purpose; and about the time that Almagro set out for Chili,
Its rife they marched into remote difirids of the country. No sooner

did Manco Capac, the Inca, observe the inconsiderate security
of the Spaniards in thus dispersing their troops, and that only
a handful of men remained in Cuzco, under Juan and Gonza-
lez Pizarro, than he thought that the happy period was at
length come for vindicating his own rights, avenging the
wrongs of his country, and extirpating its oppressors. Though
ftritly watched by the Spaniards, who allowed him to reside in
the palace of his ancestors at Cuzco, he found means of corm-
municating his scheme to the persons who were entrusted with
the execution of it. Among people accustomed to revere their
fovcrcign as a divinity, every hint of his will carries the au-
thority of a command; and they themselves were now con-
vinced, by the daily incrcafe in the number of their invaders,

r Zarate, lib, iii. c. i. Gomara 1-litl. . 131. Vega, p. 2. lib. ii c. 20. Ovalle
Sift. de Chile, lib. iv. c. i, &c. -Hcrrera, dec 5. lib. vii. c. 9. lib. x. c. I, &c.

that
196

that the fond hopes which they had long entertained of their
voluntary departure were altogether vain. All perceived that
a vigorous effort of the whole nation was requisite to expel
them, and the preparations for it were carried on with the fe-
crecy and silence peculiar to Americans.

AFTER some unsuccessful attempts of the Inca to make his

escape, Ferdinand Pizarro happening to arrive at that time in
Cuzco, he obtained permission from him to attend a great fcfti-
val which was to be celebrated a few leagues from the capital.
Under pretext of that solemnity, the great men of the empire
were assembled. As soon as the Inca joined them, the ilandard
of war was erected; and in a short time all the fighting men,
from the confines of Quito to the frontier of Chili, were in
arms. Many Spaniards, living securely on the settlements al-
lotted them, were massacred. Several detachments, as they
marched carelessly through a country which seemed to be tame-
ly submissive to their dominion, were cut off to a man. An
army amounting (if we may believe the Spanish writers) to two
hundred thousand men, attacked Cuzco. which the three bro-
thers endeavoured to defend with only a hundred and fcvcnty
Spaniards. Another formidable body invefled Lima, and kept
the governor closely hut up. There was no longer any com-
munication between the tw-o cities; the numerous forces of
the Peruvians spreading over the country, intercepted every
meffengcr; and .as the parties in Cuzco and Lima wcrc equally
unacquaintcd with the fate of their countrymen, each boded
the worst concerning the other, and imagined that they thcm-
fclves wcre tle only pcrfns who had survived the gencral
cxtilnction of the Spanifli name in Pcru '.

,I Vcga P l i.

p. 2 .

lZ. c. 28., lib. ii. c. 3 Cicc'I de Lcun, c. 8z, (J;o rllt
Hit c. 13 . vrI-rcr>, dec. v. lib. viii. c, 5.

1·

BOOK

VI.

1535-
and progress.

1536.

I97

BOOK

VI.

1536.

Siege of Cuz-
co.

IT was at Cuzco, where the Inca commanded in person, that

the Peruvians made their chief effort. During nine months
they carried on the siege with incessant ardour, and in various
forms; and though they displayed not the fame undaunted fe-
rocity as the Mexican warriors, they conducted ome of their
operations in a manner which discovered greater sagacity, and a
genius more susceptible of improvement in the military art.
They not only observed the advantages which the Spaniards
derived from their difcipiine and their weapons, but they en-
deavoured to imitate the former, and turn the latter against
them. They armed a considerable body of their bravefi war-
riors with the swords, the spears, and bucklers, which they had
taken from the Spanish soldiers whom they had cut off in dif-
ferent parts of the country. These they endeavoured to mar-
fhal in that regular compad order, to which experience had
taught them that the Spaniards were indebted for their irrefifti-
ble force in action. Some appeared in the field with Spanish
muskets, and had acquired kill and resolution enough to use
them. A few of the boldest, among whom was the Inca himself,
were mounted on the horses which they had taken, and ad-
vanced briskly to the charge like Spanish cavaliers, with their
lances in the reft. It was more by their numbers, however, than
by those imperfed cefays to imitate European arts, and employ
European arms, that the Peruvians annoyed the Spaniards .
In spite of the valour, heightened by despair, with which the
three brothers defended Cuzco, Manco Capac recovered pof-
fefifon of one half of his capital; and before the Spaniards
could drive him out of it, they loft Juan Pizarro, the belt be-
loved of all the brothers, together with some other pcrfons of
note. Worn out with the fatigue of incecTant duty, diitreffed

See NOTE XL.

with
198

I99

with want of provisions, and despairing of being able any longer
to resist an enemy whose numbers daily increased, the foldicrs
became impatient to abandon Cuzco, in hopes either of joining
their countrymen, if any of them yet survived, or of forcing
their way to the sea, and finding ome means of escaping from
a country which had been so fatal to the Spanish name . While
they were brooding over those desponding thoughts, which
their officers laboured in vain todifpel, Almagro appeared fud-
denly in the neighbourhood of Cuzco.

THE accounts tranfiitted to Almagro concerning the general

infurrelion of the Peruvians, were such as would have induced
him, without hesitation, to relinquish the conquef of Chili, and
hafien to the aid of his countrymen. But in this resolution he
was confirmed by a motive less generous, but more interesting.
By the fame messenger who broughthim intelligence of the Inca's
revolt, he receivedthe royal patentcreatinghim governorof Chili,
and defining the limits of his jurifdiaion. Upon confidering the
tenor of it, he deemed it manifest beyond contradiction, that
Cuzco lay within the boundaries of his government, and he was
equally solicitous to prevent the Peruvians from recovering pof-
session of their capital, and to wrest it out of the hands of the
Pizarros. From impatience to accomplish both, he ventured to
return by a new route; and in marching through the sandy
plains of the coast, he suffered, from heat and drought, cala-
mities of a new fpccies, hardly inferior to those in which he
had been involved by cold and famine on the summits of the
Andes.

BOOK

VI.

1536.

Arrival ofAl-
magro,

and motive-
of his con-
dut.
1k.r era, cc. . lib. viii. C. .-

Hit'.

B 0 0 K His arrival at Cuzco was in a critical moment. The Spa-

---~ niards and Peruvians fixed their eyes upon him with equal so-

His operati- licitude. The former, as he did not fludy to conceal his pre-
ons, tensions, were at a loss whether'to welcome him as a deliverer,

or to take precautions against him as an enemy. The latter,
knowing the points in contest between him and his country-
men, flattered themselves that they had more to hope than to
dread from his operations. Almagro himfclf, unacquainted
with the detail of the events which had happened in his ab-
fence, and solicitous to learn the precise poflure of affairs,
advanced towards the capital lowly, and with great circum-
fpeCtion. Various negociations with both parties were ft on
foot. The Inca conduCted them on his part with much address.
At first he endeavoured to gain the friendship of Almagro;
and after many fruitless overtures, despairing of any cordial
union with a Spaniard, he attacked him by surprise with a nu-
merous body of chosen troops. But the Spanish discipline and
valour maintained their wonted superiority. The Peruvians
were repulsed with such slaughter, that a great part of their
army disperscd, and Almagro proceeded to the gates of Cuzco
without interruption.

Takes posses- TIIE Pizarros, as they had no longer to make head against the
lionofCuzco. Peruvians, dircaed all their attention towards their new enemy,

and took measures to obftrua his entry into the capital. Pru-
dence, however, restrained both parties for some time from
turning their arms against one another, while surrounded by
common enemies, who would rejoice in the mutual slaughter.
Different fchemcs of accommodation were proposcd. Each
cndeavoured to deceive the other, or to corrupt his followers.

The
200

The generous, open, affable temper of Almagro gained many
adherents of the Pizarros, who were disgustcd with their harsh
domineering manners. Encouraged by this defection, he ad-
vanced towards the city by night, surprised the centinels, or
was admitted by them, and inverting tle house where the two
brothers resided, compelled them, after an obfiinate defence,
to surrender at discretion. Almagro's claim ofjurifdicion over
Cuzco was universally acknowledged, and a form of admini-
niftration eflablifhed in his name'.

Two or three persons only were killed in this firfi ad of civil

hostility; but it was oon followed by scenes more bloody.
Francis Pizarro having dispersed the Peruvians who had in-
veiled Lima, and received ome considerable reinforcements
from Hispaniola and Nicaragua, ordered five hundred men,
under the command of Alonfo de Alvarado, to march to Cuzco,
in hopes of relieving his brothers, if they and their garrison
were not already cut off by the Peruvians. This body, which,
in the infancy of the Spanish power in America, mufi be
deemed a considerable force, advanced near to the capital before
they knew that they had any enemy more formidable than In-
dians to encounter. It was with altonifhment that they beheld
their countrymen pofied on the banks of the river Abancay to
oppose their progress. Almagro, however, wished rather to
gain than to conquer them, and by bribes and promises endea-
voured to seduce their leader. The fidelity of Alvarado re-
mained unfliaken; but his talents for war were not equal to
his virtue. Almagro amused him with various movements, of
which he did not comprehend the meaning, while a large de-

g Zarate, lib. iii. c. 4. Vcga, p. . lib. ii. c.

c , 31. Gonmara -ift. c. 134.
Herrcra, dec. 6. lib. ii. c, 1-5.

VOL. 1. D d t;cihmen

B 0 0 K

VI.

153

Civil war,
anti sirs fc-
cess of A\.lmt-
gro;

I>L i
; ,

201

B o0 K tachment of chosen soldiers passed the river by night, fell upon

VI.
vv^ his camp by surprise, broke his troops before they had time to
'537 form, and took him prisoner, together with his principal

officers h

hut does not BY the sudden route of this body, the contest between the
improve his f Al had known as
advantages. two rivals must have been decided, if Almagro had known as

well how to improve as how to gain a vidory. Rodrigo Or-
gognez, an officer of great abilities, who having served under
the constable Bourbon, when he led the imperial army toRome,
had been accustomed to bold and decisive counsels, advised him
inflantly to issue orders for putting to death Ferdinand and
Gonzola Pizarros, Alvarado, and a few other persons whom
he could not hope to gain, and to march directly with his vic-
torious troops to Lima, before the governor had time to pre-
pare for his defence. But Almagro, though he discerned at
once the utility of the counsel, and had courage to have
carried it into execution, fiffered himself to be influenced
by sentiments unlike those of a soldier of fortune grown
old in service, and by fcrdples which suited not the chief of
a party who had drawn his sword in civil war. Feelings of
humanity restrained him from hedding the blood of his op-
ponents ;and the dread of being deemed a rebel deterred him
from entering a province which the king had allotted to another.
Though he knew that arms must terminate the dispute between
him and Pizarro, and resolved not to hun that mode of deci-
sion, yet, with a timid delicacy preposterous at such a juncure,
he was so solicitous that his rival should be confidered as the

'1 Zarate, lib. iii. c. 6. Gom. Hilt. c. 138. Vega, p. 11. lib. ii. c. 33, 34. Hcr-
rera, dec. 6. lib. ii. c. 9.

aggressor,
202

239
aggressor, that he marched quietly back to Cuzco to wait his B 0 0 K

VI.
approach'. '-

5 37.

PIZARRO was still unacquainted with all the interesting Ditrefs

events that had happened near Cuzco. The account of Alma-
gro's return, of the los of the capital, of the death of one bro-
ther, of the imprisonment of the other two, and of the defeat
of Alvarado, were brought to him at once. Such a tide of
misfortunes almofi overwhelmed a spirit which had continued
firm and eret under the rudest shocks of adversity. But the
neceflity of attending to his own safety, as well as the desire of
revenge, preserved him from finking under it. He took mea-
fures for both with his wonted sagacity. As he had the corn- Hisarttd
mandofthe sea-coast, and expected considerable supplies both cordua
of men and of military stores, it was no less his interest to gain
time, and to avoid ation, than it was that of Almagro to pre-
cipitate operations, and bring the contest to a speedy issue. He
had recourse to arts which he had formerly pradifed with fuc-
cess, and Almagro was again weak enough to susser himself to
be ainufed with a profped of terminating their differences by
some amicable accommodation. By varying his overtures, and
shifting his ground as often as it suited his purpose, sometimes
seeming to yield every thing that his rival could desire, and
then retracing all that he had granted, Pizarro dexterously pro-
traCed the negociation to such a length, that though every day
was precious to Almagro, fveral months elapsed without coming
to any final agreement. While the attention of Almagro, and
of the officers with whom he consulted, was occupied in de-
teeting and eluding the fraudulent intentions of the governor,
Gonzalo Pizarro and Alvarado found means to corrupt the fol-

' Herrcra, cc. 6. lib. ii. c. Io, 11.

D d 2 diers

B 0 0 K diers to whose cufiody they were committed, and not only made
'----v -~ their escape themselves, but persuaded sixty of the men who

formerly guarded them to accompany their flight k. Fortune
having thus delivered one of his brothers, the governor scrupled
not at one a of perfidy more to procure the release of the
other. He proposed, that every point in controversy between
Almagro and himself should be submitted to the decision of their
sovereign; that until his award was known, each should retain
undiflurbed pofeflion of whatever part of the country he now
occupied; that Ferdinand Pizarro should be set at liberty, and
return inltantly to Spain, together with the officers, whom
Almagro purposed to fend thither to represent the justice of his
claims. Obvious as the design of Pizarro was in those propo-
fitions, and familiar as his artifices might now have been to his
opponent, Almagro, with a credulity approaching to infatua-
tion, relied on his sincerity, and concluded an agreement on
these terms'.

His prepara- THE moment that Ferdinand Pizarro recovered his liberty,
tions for war.

the governor, no longer fettered in his operations by anxiety
about his brother's life, threw off every disguise which his con-
cern for it had obliged him to assume. The treaty was for-
gotten; pacific and conciliating measures were no more men-
tioned; it was in the field, he openly declared, and not in the
cabinet; by arms, and not by negociation; that it must now be
determined who should be mailer of Peru. The rapidity of
his preparations suited such a decisive resolution. Seven hun-
S138. dred men were soon ready to march towards Cuzco. The com-

k Zarate, lib. iii c. 8. Herrera, dec. 6. lib. ii. c. 14.
J Herrera, dec. 6. lib. iii. c. 9. Zarate, lib. iii. c. 9. Gomara Hist . 140.
'Vega, p. . lib ii. c. 3.

mand
204

mand of these was given to his two brothers, in whom he B 0 0 K

Vi.

could perfedEly confide for the execution of his most violent --v--
schemes, as they were urged on not only by the enmity flow- '153
ing from family rivalfhip, but animated with the desire of
vengeance, excited by recolleaion of their recent disgrace and
sufferings. After an unsuccessful attempt to cross the moun-
tains in the dired road between Lima and Cuzco, they march-
ed towards the south along the coast as far as Nafca, and then
turning to the left, penetrated through the defiles in that branch
of the Andes which lay between them and the capital. Alma-
gro, inflead of hearkening to some of his officers, who advised
him to attempt the defence of those difficult passes, waited the
approach of the enemy in the plain of Cuzco. Two reasons
seem to have induced him to take this resolution. His followers
amounted hardly to five hundred, and he was afraid of weaken-
ing such a feeble body, by fending any detachment towards
the mountains. His cavalry far exceeded that of the adverse
party, both in number and discipline, and it was only in an
open country that he could avail himself of that advantage.

THE Pizarros advanced without any obftrudion, but what His army

arose from the nature of the desert and horrid regions through mrchles to
which they marched. As soon as they reached the plain, both
factions were equally impatient to bring this long-protraded
contest to an issue. Though countrymen and friends, the sub-
jeds of the fame sovereign, and each with the royal flandard
displayed; and though they beheld the mountains that fur-
rounded the plain in which they were drawn up covered with
a vast multitude of Indians, afembled to enjoy the fpedtacle of
their mutual carnage, and prepared to attack whatever party
remained matter of the field; so fell and implacable was the

rancour

B3 00 K rancour which had taken possession of every breast, that not

v1.
---J one pacific counsel, not a ingle overture towards accommoda-
538. tion proceeded from either fide. Unfortunately for Almagro,

he was so worn out with the fatigues of service, to which his
advanced age was unequal, that, at this crisis of his fate, he
could not exert his wonted activity; and he was obliged to
commit the leading of his troops to Orgognez, who, though
an officer of great merit, did not possess the fame ascendant
either over the spirit or affections of the soldiers, as the chief
whom they had longbeen accustomed to follow and revere.

April 26. THE conflict was fierce, and maintained by each party with
efeated, equal courage. On the fide of Almagro, were more veteran

soldiers, and a larger proportion of cavalry; but these were
counterbalanced by Pizarro's superiority in numbers, and by
two companies of well-difciplined musketeers, which, on re-
ceiving an account of the infurredion of the Indians, the em-
peror had sent from Spain m. As the use of fire-arms was not
frequent among the adventurers in America , hafily equipped
for service, at their own expence, this small band of soldiers,
regularly trained and armed, was a novelty in Peru, and de-
cided the fate of the day. Wherever it advanced, the weight
of a heavy and well-fuftained fire bore down horse and foot
before it; and Orgognez, while he endeavoured to rally and
animate his troops, having received a dangerous wound, the
rout became general. The barbarity of the conquerors stained
the glory which they acquired by this complete vitory. The
violence of civil rage hurried on rome to slaughter their country-
mcn with indiscriminate cruelty; the meanness of private re-
venge infiigated others to single out individuals as the objcds

" Icnrrera, dec. 6. lib. iii. c. 8. m Zaratc, lib. iii. c. 8.

of
2o6

of their vengeance. Orgognez and several officers ofdiflinEtion B O O K
were massacred in cold blood; above a hundred and forty fol-
diers fell in the field; a large proportion, where the number of 1538.
combatants was few, and the heat of the contest oon over.
Almagro, though o feeble that he could not bear the motion
of a horse, had insisted on being carried in a litter to an emi-
nence which overlooked the field of battle. From thence, in
the utmost agitation of mind, he viewed the various move-
ments of both parties, and at last beheld the total defeat of his
own troops, with all the passionate indignation of a veteran
leader long accuflomed to vidtory. He endeavoured to save and taken.
himself by flight, but was taken prisoner, and guarded with
the ftrideft vigilance .

THE Indians, instead of executing the resolution which they

had formed, retired quietly after the battle was over; and in
the history of the New World, there is not a more firiking in-
fiance of the wonderful ascendant which the Spaniards had
acquired over its inhabitants, than that after feeing one of the
contending parties ruined and dispersed, and the other weak-
ened and fatigued, they had not courage to fall upon their ene-
mies, when fortune presented an opportunity of attacking them
with such advantage P,

Cuzco was pillaged by the viLtorious troops, who found Newecxped.

lions.

there a considerable booty, consisting prtly of the gleanings of
the Indian treasures, and partly of the wealth amafled by their
antagonists from the spoils of Peru and Chili. But so far did

o Zaratc, lib. iii. c. il, 12. Vega, p. i . lib. ii. c. 36-38. IJerrcra, dec. .

,lib. iii. c. lo- i 2. ib. iv. c. i-6. r Zaratc, lib. iii. c. I1. Vega, p. II,
lib. ii. c. 38.

this,

207

BOOK

VI.
J558.

this, and whatever the bounty of their leader could add to it,
fall below the high ideas of the recompence which they con-
ceived to be due to their merit, that Ferdinand Pizarro, unable
to gratify such extravagant expectations, had recourse to the
fame expedient which his brother had employed on a similar
occasion, and endeavoured to find occupation for this turbulent
assuming spirit, in order to prevent it from breaking out into
open mutiny. With this view, he encouraged his most ac-
tive officers to attempt the discovery and reduction of various
provinces which had not hitherto submitted to the Spaniards.
To every standard ereded by the leaders who undertook any of
those new expeditions, volunteers resorted with the ardour and
hope peculiar to the age. Several of Almagro's soldiers joined
them; and thus Pizarro had the fatisfation of being delivered
both from the importunity of his discontented friends, and the
dread of his ancient enemies .

Almagro ALMAGRO himself remained for several months in custody,
tried, under all the anguish of fufpence. For although his doom was

determined by the Pizarros from the moment that he fell into
their hands, prudence constrained them to defer gratifying
their vengeance, until the fojdiers who had served under him,
as well as several of their own followers in whom they could not
perfeLly confide, had left Cuzco. As soon as they set out upon
their different expeditions, Almagro was impeached of treason,
condenned, formally tried, and condemned to die. The sentence astonished

him; and though he had often braved death with an undaunted
spirit in the field, its approach, under this ignominious form,
appalled him so much, that he had recourse to abjeLc fupplica-

q Zaratc, lib, iii. c. 2. Gom. His. c . l. Herrera, dec. 6. lib. iv. C. 7.

tions.
208

tions, unworthy of his former fame. He besought the Pi- B 0

o K

zarros to remember the ancient friendship between their brother
and him, and how much he had contributed to the success and 15
prosperity of their family; he reminded them of the humanity
with which, in opposition to the repeated remonfirances of his
own most attached friends, he had spared their lives when he had
them in his power; he conjured them to pity his age and infif-
mities, and to susser him to pass the wretched remainder of his
days in bewailing his crimes, and in making his peace with
Heaven. The intreaties, fays a Spanish historian, of a man so
much beloved, touched many an unfeeling heart, and drew tears
from many a hard eye. But the brothers remained inflexible.
As soon as Almagro knew his fate to be inevitable, he met it with
the dignity and fortitude of a veteran. He was firangled in andet to
prison, and afterwards publicly beheaded. He suffered in the
feventy-fifth year of his age, and left one son by an Indian wo-
man of Panama, whom, though at that time a prisoner in Li-
ma, he named as successor to his government,' pursuant to a
power which the emperor had granted him r.

As, during the civil dissensions of Peru, all intercourse with

Spain was suspended, the detail of the extraordinary tranfac-
tions there did not soon reach the court. Unfortunately for the
victorious facLion, the first intelligence was brought thither
by ome of Almagro's officers, who left the country upon the
ruin of their cause; and they related what had happened, with
every circumstance unfavourable to Pizarro and his brothers.
Their ambition, their breach of the molt solemn engagements,
their violence and cruelty, were painted with all the malignity

1539.

Deliberations
of the court
of Spain con-
cerning the
slate of Peru.

' Zarate, lib. iii. c. 12. Gom Hi, Hi. 14. Vega, p. . lib. ii. c. 3- Hcrrcra,
dec. 6. lib. iv. c, 9. lib. v. c. .

VOL. II. E e and

209

K and exaggeration of party hatred. Ferdinand Pizarro, who ar-
. rived soon after, and appeared in court with extraordinary

splendor, endeavoured to efface the impreflion which their ac-
cufations had made, and to juffify his brother and himself, by
representing Almagro as the aggressor. The emperor and his
ministers, though they could not pronounce which of the con-
tending factions was most criminal, clearly discerned the fatal
tendency of their dissensions. It was obvious, that while the
leaders, entrusted with the conduct of two infant colonies, em-
ployed the arms which should have been turned againfi the com-
mon enemy, in destroying one another, all attention to the public
good must cease; and there was reason to dread that the Indians
might improve the advantage which their disunion presented to
them, and extirpate both the vidors and the vanquished. But
the evil was more apparent than the remedy. Where the in-
formation which had been received was so defetive and fufpi-
cious, and the scene of action so remote, it was almofi impof-
fible to chalk out the line of condua that ought to be followed;
and before any plan that should be approved of in Spain could
be carried into execution, the situation of the parties, and the
circumstances of affairs, might alter so entirely as to render its
effects extremely pernicious.

a- oNOTHING therefore remained but to fend a person to Peru,
hn- veiled with extensive and discretionary power, who, after view-

ing deliberately the posture of affairs with his own eyes, and
enquiring upon the spot, into the condua of the different
leaders, should be authorised to establish the government in
that form which he deemed most conducive to the interest
of the parent slate, and the welfare of the colony. The
man feleded for this important charge was Chrifloval Vaca de

Cafiro,
BOO

VI.

1539.

Vaca de C
ftro fcnt tl
ther with
pie powers

2I0

Calfro, a judge in the court of royal audience at Valladolid; B 0 0 K

VI.

and his abilities, integrity, and firmness, jufified the choice. .--v--
His inftrueions, though ample, were not such as to fetter him '539
in his operations. According to the different afpe6 of affairs,
he had power to take upon him different characers. If he
found the governor fiill alive, he was to assume only the title
ofjudge, to maintain the appearance of acding in concert with
him, and to guard againit giving any just cause of offence to a
man who had merited so highly of his country. But if Pi-
zarro was dead, he was entrusted with a commilfion, that he
might then produce, by which he was appointed his successor
in the government of Peru. This attention to Pizarro, howe-
ver, seems to have flowed rather from dread of his power,
than from any approbation of his measures; for at the very
time that the court seemed so solicitous not to irritate him, his
brother Ferdinand was arrested at Madrid, and confined to a
prison, where he remained above twenty years'.

WHILE Vaca de Cafiro was preparing for his voyage, events of 1540.

great moment happened in Peru. The governor, confidering viaes Peru
himself, upon the death of Almagro, as the unrivalled possessor among his
of that valt empire, proceeded to parcel out its territories among
the conquerors; and had this division been made with any de-
gree of impartiality, the extent of country which he had to be-
flow was sufficient to have gratified his friends, and to have
gained his enemies. But Pizarro conduted this transaction not
with the equity and candour of a judge, attentive to discover
and to reward merit, but with the illiberal spirit of a party
leader. Large diftrits, in parts of the country most cultivated

Gomara H;ft. c 14z. Vega, p. l. lib. ii. c. 40. Herrera, dec. 6. lib. viii.
c. to, Ii. lib. x. c. i.

211
Ee 2

and

B O O K and populous, were set apart as his own property, or granted to

VI. cr~j his brothers, his adherents and favourites. To others, lots less
' 4° valuable and inviting were assigned. The followers of Alma-

gro, anlongft whom were many of the original adventurers, to
whose valour and perseverance Pizarro was indebted for his
success, were totally excluded from any portion in those lands,
towards the acquisition of which they had contributed so large-
ly. As the vanity of every individual et an immoderate value
upon his own services, and the idea of each, concerning the re-
compence due to them, rose gradually to a more exorbitant
height in proportion as their conquests extended, all who were
disappointed in their expectations exclaimed loudly against the
rapaciousness and partiality of the governor. The partisans
of Almagro murmured in secret, and meditated revenge t.

Progrefsof RAPID as the progress of the Spaniards in South America
the Spanif had been ince Pizarro landed in Peru, their avidity of do-
arms.

minion was not yet satisfied. The officers to whom Ferdinand
Pizzarro gave the command of different detachments, penetrated
into several new provinces, and though some of them were ex-
posed to great hardships in the cold and barren regions of the
Andes, and others fuffereddiftrefs not inferior amidfl the woods
and marshes of the plains, they made discoveries and conquefis
which extended their knowledge of the country as well as added
to their power. Pedro de Valdivia re-affumcd Almagro's
?cheme of invading Chili, and, notwithstanding the fortitude of
the natives in defending their poffeflions, made such progress
in the conquest of the country, that he founded the city of
St. Jago, and gave a beginning to the establishment of the Spa-

: Vc a, p. II, lib. iii. c, 2. Herrera, dec. 6, lib, viii. c. g.

nifli
2 1 2

nifh dominion there". But of all the enterprises undertaken
about this period, that of Gonzalo Pizarro was the most re-
markable. The governor, who seems to have resolved that no
person in Peru should possess any flation of diftinguilhed emi-
nence or authority but those of his own family, had deprived
Benalcazar, the conqueror of Quito, of his command in that
kingdom, and appointed his brother Gonzalo to take the go-
vernment of it. He inftruated him to attempt the discovery
and conquest of the country to the east of the Andes, which,
according to the information of the Indians, abounded with cin-
namon and other valuable spices. Gonzalo, not inferior to any
of his brothers in courage, and no less ambitious of acquiring
diftindion, eagerly engaged in this difficult service. He set out
from Quito at the head of three hundred and forty soldiers,
near one half of whom were horsemen, with four thousand In-
dians to carry their provisions. In forcing their way through
the defiles, or over the ridges of the Andes, excess of cold and
fatigue, to neither of which they were accustomed, proved fa-
tal to the greater part of the wretched attendants. The
Spaniards, though more robust, and inured to a variety of
climates, suffered considerably, and loft some men but when
they descended into the low country, their diitrefs increased
During two months it rained incessantly, .without any interval
of fair weather long enough to dry their cloaths . The vast
plains upon which they were now entering, either altogether
without inhabitants, or occupied by the rudest and least in-
duftrious tribes in the New World, yielded little subsistence.
They could not advance a ficp but as they cut a road through
woods, or made it through miarfhes. Such incessant toil, and

i Zarate, lib. iii. c. s3. Ovallc, lib, iL c. i, &c.

Zaratc, lib. iv. c. 2.

con ti nual

VI. VI.

1540

Remarkable
expedition ol
Gonzalo Pi-

zarro.

Hardfi ps
they endure.

2.r

j

B OO K continual scarcity of food, seem more than sufficient to have

VJ.
--- exhausted and dispirited any troops. But the fortitude and
'540. perseverance of the Spaniards in the sixteenth century were in-

superable. Allured by frequent but false accounts of rich coun-
tries before them, they persisted in tfruggling on, until they
reached the banks of the Coca or Napo, one of the large rivers
whose waters pour into the Maragnon, and contribute to its
grandeur. There, with infinite labour, they built a bark,
which they expected would prove of great utility, both in con-
veying them over rivers, in procuring provisions, and in ex-
ploring the country. This was manned with fifty soldiers,
under the command of Francis Orellana, the officer next in
rank to Pizarro. The itream carried them down with such
rapidity, that they were oon far a-head of their countrymen,
who followed slowly and with difficulty by land.
Deserted by AT this distance from his commander, Orellana, a young

man of an aspiring mind, began to fancy himself independent,
and, transported with the predominant passion of the age, he
formed the scheme ofdiftinguifhing himself as a discoverer, by
following the course of the Maragnon, until it joined the ocean,
and by surveying the vast regions through which it flows.
This scheme of Orellana's was as bold as it was treacherous.
For, if he be chargeable with the guilt of having violated his
duty to his commander, and with having abandoned his fellow-
soldiers in a pathless desert, where they had hardly any hopes of
success, or even of safety, but what were founded on the service
which they expected from the bark, his crime is, in some measure,
balanced by the glory of having ventured, upon a navigation of
near twothoufand leagues, through unknown nations, in a vessel
hastily conflruled with green timber, and by very unkilful

hands,
214

hands, without provisions, without a compass, or a pilot. But
his courage and alacrity supplied every defect. Committing
himself fearlessly to the guidance of the fiream, the Napo
bore him along to the south, until he reached the great channel
of the Maragnon. Turning with it towards the coast, he held
on his course in that direcion. He made frequent descents on
both fides of the river, Sometimes seizing by force of arms the
provisions of the fierce savages feated on its banks, and some-
times procuring a supply of food by a friendly intercourse with
more gentle tribes. After a long series of dangers, which he en-
countered with amazing fortitude, and of diftreifes which he
supported with no less magnanimity, he reached the ocean',
where new perils awaited him. These he likewise surmounted,
and got safe to the Spanish settlement in the island Cubagua;
from thence he failed to Spain. The vanity natural to travel-
lers who visit regions unknown to the reft of mankind, and
the art of an adventurer, solicitous to magnify his own merit,
concurred in prompting him to mingle an extraordinary pro-
portion of the marvellous in the narrative of his voyage. He
pretended to have discovered nations so rich, that the roofs of
their temples were covered with plates of gold; and described
a republic of women so warlike and powerful, as to have ex-
tended their dominion over a considerable trad of the fertile
plains which he had visited. Extravagant as those tales were,
they gave rife to an opinion, that a region abounding with gold,
distinguished by the name of El Dorado, and a community of
Amazons, were to be found in this part of the New World;
and such is the propensity of mankind to believe what is
wonderful, that it has been slowly, and with difficulty, that

See NOTE XLI.

rcafon

215
BOOK

VI.

1540.

Sails down the
Maragnon.

B 00 K reason and observation have exploded those fables. The voy-

VI.

age, however, even when itripped of every romantic embel-
1540. lifhment, deserves to be recorded, not only as one of the moit

memorable occurrences in that adventrous age, but as the firfl
event that led to any certain knowledge of those immense re-
gions that firetch eastward from the Andes to the ocean y.
Pizarro. No words can describe the consternation of Pizarro, when

he did not find the bark at the confluence of the Napo and
Maragnon, where he had ordered Orellana to wait for him.
He would not allow himself to fufpet that a man, whom he
had entrusted with such an important command, could be so
base and o unfeeling, as to desert him at such a jun6ture. But
imputing his absence from the place of rendezvous to some
unknown accident, he advanced above fifty leagues along the
banks of the Maragnon, expedting every moment to fee the
541.- bark appear with a supply of provisions. At length he came

up with an officer whom Orellana had left to perish in the
desert, because he had the courage to remonstrate againfi his
perfidy. From him he learned the extent of Orellana's crime;
and his followers perceived at once their own desperate fituati-
on, when deprived of their only resource. The spirit of the
flouteft hearted veteran funk within him, and all demanded to be
led back inflantly. Pizarro, though he afumed an appearance of
tranquillity, did not oppose their inclination. But he was now
twelve hundred miles from Quito; and in that long march the
Spaniards encountered hardships greater than those they had
endured in their progress outward, without the alluring hopes

Y Z ratc, lib. iv.-c: 4. Goniara Hi'st c. 86. Vega, p. ii. lib. iii. c. Herrera, dec.
6. lib. ix. c. 2,-5. Rodriguez El Maragnon y Anazionas, lib. i. c. 3.

which
216

which then oothed and animated them under their sufferings. B O O K
Hunger compelled them to feed on roots and berries, to eat all '
their dogs and horses, to devour the most loathsome reptiles, , ,1'
and even to gnaw the leather of their saddles and fword-belts.
Four thousand Indians, and two hundred and ten Spaniards, pe-
rifhed in this wild disastrous expedition, which continued
near two years; and as fifty men were aboard the bark with
Orellana, only fourscore got back to Quito. There were naked
like savages, and so emaciated with famine, or worn out with
fatigue, that they had more the appearance of fpedres than
of menz.

BUT, instead of returning to enjoy the repose which his con- Number f

m lcontents

dition required, Pizarro, on entering Quito, received accounts in Peru.
of a fatal event that threatened calamities more dreadful
to him, than those through which he had passed. From the
time that his brother made that partial division of his con-
quests which has been mentioned, the adherents of Almagro,
confidering themselves as proscribed by the party in power, no
longer entertained any hope of bettering their condition. Great
numbers in despair retorted to Lima, where the house of young
Almagro was always open to them, and the slender portion of
his father's fortune, which the governorallowed him to enjoy,
was spent in affording them fubfifience. The warm attach-
ment with which every person who served under the elder Al-
magro devoted himfelfto his interests, was quickly transferred
to his ton, who was now grown up to the age of manhood,
and possessed all the qualities which captivate the affections of

Zarate, lib. iv. c. 2-5. Vega, p. ii. lb. iii. c. 3, 4, 5. 14. Herrera, dec. vi.
lib. viii. c. 7, 8. lib. i c. 2-5. dec, vii. lib. iii. c. 14. Pizar. Varones Illuflr. 349, &c.

VOL. II. F f soldiers.

2r7

BOOK

VI.

1541.

Confider
young Alma-
gro as their
leader

Conspire a-
gainft the life
of Pizarro,

soldiers. Of a graceful appearance, dextrous at all martial ex-
ercifes, bold, open, generous, he seemed to be formed for
command; and as his father, conscious of his own inferiority
from the total want of education, had been extremely attentive
to have him infiruted in every science becoming a gentleman;
the accomplishments which he had acquired heightened the re-
sped of his followers, as they gave him diflinttion and emi-
nence among illiterate adventurers. In this young man the
Almagrians found a point of union which they wanted, and
looking up to him as their head, were ready to undertake
any thing for his advancement. Nor was affetion for Alma-
gro their only incitement; they were urged on by their own
difireffes. Many of them, deflitute of common necessaries ,
and weary of loitering away life, a burden to their chief, or
to such of their afiociates as had saved onme remnant of their
fortune from pillage and confiscation, longed impatiently for
an occasion to exert their activity and courage, and began to
deliberate how they might be avenged on the author of all
their misery. Their frequent cabals did not pass unobserved;
and the governor was warned to be on his guard againfi men
who meditated ome desperate deed, and had efolution to ex-
ecute it. But either from the native intrepidity of his mind,
or from contempt of persons whose poverty rendered their
machinations of little consequence, he disregarded the admo-
nitions of his friends. " Be in no pain, said he carelessly,
about my life; it is perfedly safe, as long as every man in
Peru knows that I can in a moment put him to death who
dares to harbour a thought against it." This security gave the
Almagrians full leisure to digest and ripen every part of their

a See NOTE XLII.

scheme c
218

scheme; and Juan de Herrada, an officer of great abilities, who B 0 K

\ I.

had the charge of Almagro's education, took the lead in their ~-----
consultations, with all the zeal which that connection inspired, 4
and with all the authority which the ascendant that he was
known to have over the mind of his pupil gave him.

ON Sunday, the twenty-fixth of June, at mid-day, the ea- and kill him.

son of tranquillity and repose in all sultry climates, Herrada,
at the head of eighteen of the most determined conspirators,
sallied out of Almagro's house in complete armour; and draw-
ing their swords, as they advanced haiily towards the governor's
palace, cried out, " Long live the king, but let the tyrant die."
Their associates, warned of their motions by a signal, were in
arms at different stations ready to support them. Though
Pizarro was usually surrounded by such a numerous train of
attendants as suited the magnificence of the moit opulent sub-
jeEt of the age in which he lived, yet as he was just risen from
table, and most of his domeflics had retired to their own apart-
ments, the conspirators pasTed through the two outer courts of
the palace unobserved. They were at the bottom of the flair-
cafe, before a page in waiting could give the alarm to his
matter, who was converting with a few friends in a large hall.
The governor, whose fleddy mind no form of danger could ap-
pal, ltarting up, called for arms, and commanded Francisco de
Chaves to make fafi the door. But that officer, who did not
retain so much presence of mind as to obey this prudent order,
running to the top of the flair-cafe, wildly asked the confpira-
tors what they meant, and whither they were going ? Infiead
of answering, they stabbed him to the heart, and burst into the
iall. Some of the persons who were there threw themfelvcs
from the windows; others attempted to fly; and a few. draw-

F f 2 ig

219

ing their swords, followed their leader into an inner apartment,
The conspirators, animated with having the objet of their
vengeance now in view, rushed forward after them. Pizarro,.
with no other arms than his sword and buckler, defended the
entry, and supported by his half-brother Alcantara, and his.
little knot of friends, he maintained the unequal contest with
intrepidity worthy of his past exploits, and with the vigour of
a youthful combatant. " Courage, cried he, companions, we
are yet enow to make those traitors repent of their audacity."
But the armour of the conspirators protecled them, while every
thrufi they made took effect. Alcantara fell dead at his brother's
feet; his other defendants were mortally wounded. The gover-
nor, so. weary that he could hardly wield his sword, and no
longer able to parry the many weapons furiously aimed at him,
received a deadly thrust full in his throat, funk to the ground,
and expired.

As oon as he was slain, the assassins ran out into the streets,

and waving their bloody swords, proclaimed the death of the
tyrant. About two hundred of their associates having joined
them, they conduied young Almagro in solemn procession
through the city, and assembling the magifirates and princi-
pal citizens, compelled them to acknowledge him as lawful fuc-
ceffor to his father in his government. The palace of Pizarro,
together with the houses of several of his adherents, were
pillaged by the soldiers, who had the fatisfa(ion at once of
being avenged on their enemies, and of enriching themfclvcs
by the spoils of those through whose hands all the wealth of
Peru had passcd .

b Z'nnte, lil. iv. c. 6-8 Gonaran lil. c. 144, 145. Vcgn, p. l. lib. iii. c. 5-7-
1Ierrina, dec. 6. lii. x. c. 4-7. Pizarro Vlar. 111u. p. 183,

Till..
B 00 K

VI.

Alinagro ac-
knowledged
as his fuccef-
( r,.. 220

THE boldness and success of the conspiracy, as well as the

name and popular qualities of Almagro, drew many soldiers to
his standard. Every adventurer of desperate fortune, all who
were dissatisfied with Pizarro, and, from the rapaciousness
of his government in the latter years of his life, the number of
malcontents was considerable, declared without hesitation, in
favour of Almagro, and he was soon at the head of eight
hundred of the most gallant veterans in Peru. As his youth
and inexperience disqualified him from taking the command
of them himself, he appointed Herrada to adt as general. But
though Almagro speedily collected such a refpedable force,
the acquiescence in his government was far from being general.
Pizarro had left many friends to whom his memory was dear;
the barbarous assassination of a man to whom his country was
so highly indebted, filled every impartial person with horror.
The ignominious birth of Almagro, as well as the doubtful
title on which he founded his pretensions, led others to con-
fider him as an usurper. The officers who commanded in
some provinces refused to recognize his authority, until it was
confirmed by the emperor. In others, particularly at Cuzco,
the royal flandard was erecded, and preparations made to re-
venge the murder of their ancient leader.

BOOK

VI.

1541.

New appear-
ances of dif-
cord.
TIo s E feeds of discord, which could not have lain long dor- Arrival of

Vaca Jie C'..-

mant, acquired greater vigour and aivity, when the arrival of tro,
Vaca de Cafiro was known. After a long and difafirous voy-
age, he was driven by ftrcfs of weather into a small harbour
in the province of Popayan; and proceeding from thence by
land, after a journey no less tedious than h!'icult, he rcach-
ed Ouito. In his way he received ;,ilnts of Pizarro's
death, and of the events which followed upon it. -He im-

m(ciai;icly

221

B 0 0 K mediately produced the royal commidsion appointing him go-

VIl

s-v',.. vernor of Peru, with the fame privileges and authority;
who assumes and his jurifdition was acknowledged, without hesitation, by
gothettleof Benalcazar, Adelantado, or lieutenant-general for the emperor

in Popayan, and by Pedro de Puelles, who, in the absence of
Gonzalo Pizarro, had the command of the troops left in Quito.
Vaca de Caitro not only assumed the supreme authority, but
chewed that he possessed the talents which the exercise of it at
thatjuncture required. By his influence and address he oon
assembled such a body of troops, as not only set him above
all fear of being exposed to any insult from the adverse party,
but enabled him to advance from Quito with the dignity that
became his character. By dispatching persons of confidence
to the different ettlements in Peru, with a formal notification
of his arrival and of his commission, he communicated to his
countrymen the royal pleasure with refpeEt to the government
of the country. By private emissaries, he excited such officers
as had discovered their disapprobation of Almagro's proceed-
ings, to manifest their duty to their overeign, by supporting
the person honoured with his commiflion. Those measures
were producaive of great effects. Encouraged by the ap-
proach of the new governor, or prepared by his machinations,
the loyal were confirmed in their principles, and avowed them
with greater boldness; the timid ventured to declare their fen-
timents; the neutral and wavering, finding it necessary to
chute a fide, began to lean to that which now appeared to e
the safest as well as the moit jufic.

Conilua of ALvMAGRO observed the rapid progress of this spirit of dif-
Alm !glo. affcdion to his cause, and, in order to give an effedual check

c Benzon, lib. iii. c. 9. Zaratc, lib. iv. c. l. Gomara, c. 146, 147. I-lcrrera,
dlec. 6. lib. x. c. , 2, 3, 7, &c.

to
222

to it before the arrival of Vaca de Cafiro, he set out at the head B o K

VI.

of his troops for Cuzco, where the most considerable body of -v
opponents had erected the royal standard, under the command
of Pedro Alvarez Holguin. During his march thither, Her-
rada, the skilful guide of his youth and of his counsels, died;
and from that time his measures were conspicuous for their
violence, but conceited with little sagacity, and executed with
no address. Holguin, with forces far inferior to those of the
opposite party, was descending towards the coast at the very
time that Almagro was on his way to Cuzco. By a very simple
firatagem, he deceived his unexperienced adversary, avoided
an engagement, and effected a juntion with Alvarado, an of-
sicer of note, who had been the first to declare against Almagro
as an usurper.

Soo N after, Vaca de Cafiro entered the camp with the troops Progress of

Vaca de

which he brought from Quito, and ereting the royal flandard Catro.
before his own tent, he declared, that, as governor, he would
discharge in person all the fundions of general of their com-
bined forces. Though formed by the tenour of his past life to
the habits of a sedentary and pacific profession, he at once as-
fumed the activity and discovered the decision of an officer long
accustomed to command. Knowing his firength to be now far
superior to that of the enemy, he was impatient to terminate
the contest by a battle. Nor did the followers of Almagro,
who had no hopes of obtaining pardon for a crime so atrocious
as the murder of the governor, decline that mode of decision.
They met at Ch-upas, about two hundred miles from Cuzco,
and fought with all the fierce animosity inspired by the violence
of civil rage, the rancour of private enlnity, the cagernefs of
revenge, and the last cforts of dcfpair. Vicdory, after re-

main in;

223

BOOK

VI.

1542.

Defeats Al-
.nlagro.

Severity of his
proceedings.

maining long doubtful, declared at last for Vaca de Cafiro.
The superior number of his troops, his own intrepidity, and
the martial talents of Francisco de Carvajal, a veteran officer
formed under the great captain in the wars of Italy, and who
on that day laid the foundation of his future fame in Peru,
triumphed over the bravery of his opponents, though led on
by young Almagro with a gallant spirit, worthy of a better
cause, and deserving another fate. The carnage was great in
proportion to the number of the combatants. Many of the
vanquished, especially such as were conscious that they might
be charged with being accessary to the aaffination of Pi-
zarro, rushing on the swords of the enemy, chose to fall like
soldiers, rather than wait an ignominious doom. Of fourteen
hundred men, the total amount of combatants on both fides,
five hundred lay dead on the field, and the number of the
wounded was still greaterd.

IF the military talents displayed by Vaca de Castro, both in

the council and in the field, surprised the adventurers in Peru,
they were fill more aflonifhed at his conduc after the vicory.
As he was by nature a rigid dispenser of juflice, and persuaded
that it required examples of extraordinary severity to restrain
the licentious spirit of soldiers so far removed from the feat of
government, he proceeded diredly to try his prisoners as rebels.
Forty were condemned to susser the death of traitors, others
were baniffled from Peru. Their leader, who made his escape
from the battle, being betrayed by some of his officers, was

dZaratc, lib. iv. c. 12-19. Gomara, c. 148. Vega, p. il. lib. iii. c. 1-18.
I-Ierrcra, dec. 7. lib, i. c. , 2, 3. lib. iii. c. i-li.

publicly
224

publicly beheaded in Cuzco; and in him the nme of Almi-
gro, and the spirit of the party, was extinct .

DURING thofc violent convulsions in Peru, the cmpcror and

his miniflers were intently cmplo cd in preparing regulations,
by which they hoped not only to rc-cftabliif tranquillity there,
but to introduce a more perfeSL fyllcm cf internal policy into
all their fcttlemcnts in the New World. Rapid and cxtenfivc
as the Spanish conquefis in America had been, they were not
carried on by any regular exertion of the national force, but
by the occasional efforts of private adventurers. After fitting
out a few of the first armaments for discovering newv regions,
tlhe court of Spain, during the busy reigns of Ferdinand and of
Charles V. the former the inot intriguing prince of the re,
and the latter the most ambitious, was encumbered with such
a multiplicity of fchcmcs, and involved in war with so many
nations of Europe, that it had not leifurc to attend to diiarnt
and less intcrefling objects. The care of prosecuting difcovcry,
or of attempting conquef, was abandoned to individuals;
and with such ardour did men push forward in this nev
career, on which novelty, the spirit of advcenture, avarice,
ambition, and the hope of meriting heaven, prompted them
with combined influence to enter, that in less than half a cen-
tury almofi the whole of that xtcnfive empire 'whlich Spain
now poficfces in the New World was fbjcclcdc to its dominion.
As the Spanish court contributed nothing towards tlic various
expeditions undertaken in Anmrica, it was not intitled to claim
much from their fucccfs. The sovereignty of the conquered
princes, with the fifth of the gold and filvcr, was rcfervcd

C Zarate, lib. iv. c. 2i. Gomara, c. i 5o. llcrrcra, dec. , lib. iii .

c . !i). vi.
c. i.

V

I 42.

t>-::S ot the

C,.?i- .1 1
d (j ii

1ir

for
V I_ 11.

Gg

1 0 0 K for the crown; every thing else was sized by the associates as

their right. The plund.'- the countries which they invaded
1542. fcrvcd to indemnify them for what they had expended in

equipping themrfelves for the service; and the conquered ter-
ritory was divided among them, according to rules which cuf-
tom had introduced, as prmanent cfiablifhments which their
successful valour merited. In the infancy of those fttlements,
when their extent as well as their value were unknown, many
irregularities escapcd obfcrvation, and it was found necessary
to connive at many exccffes. The conquered people were pil-
laged with deftrudive rapacity, and their country parcelled out
among its new maRcrs in exorbitant harcs, far exceeding the
highest recompcnc due to their ferviccs. The rude conquerors
of America, incapable of forming their cftablifhments upon any
general or extensive plan of policy, attentive only to private
interest, unwilling to forego present gain from the profpcd of
remote or public benefit, fecm to have had no objct but to
aiafs fuddcn wcalth, without regarding what might be te
confcqcunces of the means by which they acquired it. Et-,L

.hcn time at length discovered to the Spanifl court the ilm-
portance of its American poffeflions, the ncceflity of nev-
rnodelling their wxhole fiame became obvious, and in place of
the maxims and praCiccs prevalent among military adven-
tulrers, it was surd rcquifitc to fubfiitute the inflitutions of
lt ;, l 1 a r govcrnmcnt.

():r evil in particular called for an immediate remedy.
lThe conqulcrors of Mexico and Peru imitated the fatal example
of their countrymen Ifttled in the ifands, and employed them-

\x'c: in fcarching for gold nc!d filvcr with the fame inconfi-leratc
..; c'i'nefs. Sini1;! r c ('C.s fPllow(d. ' 'hc natic s cii ;!oycd in

tli
226

this labour by matters, who in imposing their talks had no re-
gard either to what they felt or to what they were able to per-
form, pined away and perished so fail, that there was reason
to apprehend that Spain, instead of poffefling countries peopled
to such a degree as to be susceptible of progressive improvement,
would oon remain proprietor only of a vast uninhabited defart.

THE emperor and his ministers were f ffible of this, and

so solicitous to prevent the extintion of the Indian race, which
threatened to render their acquisitions of no value, that from
time to time various laws, which I have mentioned, had been
made for fccuring to that unhappy people more gentle and
equitable treatment. But the distance of America from the
feat of empire, the feebleness of government in the new colo-
nies, the avarice and audacity of soldiers unaccustomed to re-
firaint, prevented these salutary regulations from operating with
any considerable influence. The evil continued to grow, and
at this time the emperor found an interval of leisure from the
affairs of Europe to take it into attentive consideration. He
consulted not only with his minifiers and the members of the
council of the Indies, but called upon fcveral pcrfons who had
resided long in the New World, to aid him with the result of
their experience and observation. Fortunately for the people
of America, among these was Bartholomew de las Casas, who
happened to be then at Madrid on a mission from a chapter of
his order at Chiapa f. Though, since the micfarriage of his
former schemes for the relief of the Indians, he had continued
filut up in his cloister, or occupied in religious funions, his
zeal in behalf of the former objects of his pity was so far from
abating, tliat, fiom an increased knowledge of their fuflcrings,

Renlcfl Hist. de Cniapa, p. 146.

G g 2 its

2 27
B 0 K

\ .

The pcrfrs
he advi~c~.

its ardour had augmented. He seized eagerly this opportunity
of reviving his favourite maxims concerning thc treatment of
the Indians. With the moving eloquence natural :: ;:' on
whose mind the scenes which he had beheld had ,.'!, d deep
imprelion, he defcrihcd the irreparable w,;is( 1i hle human
species in the New World, the Indian race almnoft totally swept
away in the islands in less than fifty years, and haflening to
extintion on the continent with the fiamc rapid decay. With
the decifive'tone of one firongly prcpofitcfld with the truth of
his own fyfcm, he imputed all tlis to a single caure, to the
exactions and cruelty of Iis countrymen, and contended that
nothing could prevent the depopulation of America, but the
declaring of its natives to be freemen, and trcating them as
fubjdcs, not as slaves. Nor did he confide for the success of
this proposal in the powers of his oratory alone. In order to
cnforce thcm, he composcd his famous treatifc concerning the
dcfirucqion of Amc-ica -, in which he relates, with many hor-
ri1 circumfianccs, but with apparent marks of exaggerated dc-
fciption, the devafiation of every province which had been
i ltcd by the Spaniards.

TH r emperor was deeply aflli(ced with the recital of so many

a.Qions hocking to humanity. But as his views extended far
beyond those of Las Casas, he perceived that relieving the In-
dians fiom opprc.iion was but one ftcp towards rendering hil
pnieflions in the New World a valuable acquisition, and would
be of little avail, unless he could circumscribe the power and
usurpations of his own futbjels there. The conquerors of
America, however great their merit had been towards their
coullntry, were mofily persons of such mncn birth, and of fuicl
alZjed rank in fociely, as give no (li/iiiCtion in the cyc of a

c lRicmlf, l, p. 19z. i99.

:1 I
' il'lC 1,1.
B 0 0 K

V].

to Int Oil u s
1 diiro 0co (if

S

rncn' ; ! 'i . exorbitant wealth with which foine of them
returnled, g' l *iLaraec to an age not accuflomed to fee men in
inferior condti n elevated above their level, and rising to emu-
late or surpass the ancient nobility in fplcndour. The ter-
ritories which their leaders had appropriated to thcmfclvcs -ere
of enormous extent ; and if the country should ever be irn-
proved in proportion to the fertility of the foil, they must grow
too wealthy and too powerful for fubjccs. It appeared to
Charles, that this abuse rcquircd a remedy no less than tlhe
other,'and that the regulations concerning both nmuf be en-
forced by a mode of government more xigorous than had yet
been introduced into America.

WITr tiis view he fiamcd a body of laws, containing many

falutaryappointments with rfpcc to the constitution and powers
of the supreme council of the Indies; concerning the flation
and jurisdiction of the royal audiences in dil-iecnt parts of Ame-
rica, the adminifiration of juflice, the order of government,
both ecclcfiaftical and civil. These were approved of by all
ranks of men. But together with them were ifTued thc fol-
lowing regulations, which excited univcrfal ala;rm, that occa-
sioned the most violent convulsion :-" That as the re^p,,ri-
micntos or fharcs of land seized by fceveral persons appelared to
be exceflive, the royal audiences are empowered to reduce them
to a moderate extent: That upon the death of any conquerorl
or planter, the lands and Indians granted to him shall not de-
sccnd to his widow or children, but relurn to the crown: l'hat
the Indians fiall henceforth be exemlnt;l from pers)onal fervid;.-
and shall not be compelled to carry the b:!rggr:l of travel!,ir'., I
labour in the mines, or to dive in the pe;-lr f!iilrlics: 'Ti!l t .,

!i Scc NO': L I1I1

t',,. ,,.

BOOK

V1.

154-2

Ne.w C~:

k ', S t C[ j i
puL , 1'
r p.

229

fl Cnd tribute due by them to their upcrior hlall be ascertained,
and they shall be paid as servants for any work they voluntarily
perform: that all persons who are or have been in public of-
sices, ccclefiaftics of every denomination, hospitals and mona-
ficrics, fiall be deprived of the lands and Indians allotted to
them, and these be annexed to the crown: That every person
in Peru, who had any criminal concern in the contefis between
Pizarro and Almagro, should forfcit his lands and Indians i."

ALL the Spanish miniflirs who hid hitherto been entrustcd

w;ilh the direction of American afliirs, and who were belt ac-
quainted with the flatc of the country, rcmonftratcd against
those regulations, as ruinous to their infant colonies. They
rcprcfentcd, that the number of Spaniards who had hitherto
emigrated to the New World was so cxtrcmcly small, that no-
thing could be expcEted from any effort of theirs towards im-
proving the vast regions over which they were scattered; that
the success of every fchcme for this purpose must depend upon
the minifiry and fcrvice of the Indians, whose native indolence
and avcrfion to labour, no profpec of benefit or promise of
reward could surmount; that the moment the right of im-
posing a talk, and cxacding the performance of it, was taken
from their mailers, every work of industry must cease, and all
the fourccs from wlich wcaltl began to pour in upon Spain
must be ftopt for ever. But Charles, tenacious at all times of
his own opinions, and so much imprcffed at present with the
view of the disorders which reigned in America, that he was
willing to hazard the application even of a dangerous remedy,
peififted in his rcfolution of publiflling the laws. That they
mlighlt be carried into cxecution witli grcatcr vigour and au-

- I-lcrrclai, (dc( - ! vi. c. 5. Fcrnandcy IiiR. llb. i. c. , 2.

thority,

23so
B 0 0 K.

%i 11
zJ 1 , Z

thority, he authorised Francisco Tcllo de Sandoval to repair to
Mexico as )iitador or fupcrintendcnt of that country, and to
co-operate with Antonio de Mendoza, the viceroy, in cnforcing
them. He appointed Blasco Nugnez Vela to be governor of
Peru, with the title of Viceroy; and in order to ftrcngthen his
administration, he cftablifhed a court of royal audience in Lima,
in which four lawycrs of cminence were to preside as judges .

THE viceroy and fpcrintcndcn t f;iilcd at the fanie time;

and an account of the laws which they were to enforce reachcd
America before them. The entry of Sandoval into Mexico
was viewed as the prelude of general ruin. The unlimited
grant of liberty to the Indians asseted every Spaniard in Ame-
rica without diRtiindion, and there was hrdly one who might
not on ome pretext be included under the other regulations,
and susser by them. But the colony in New Spain had now
been so long accuflomcd to the restraints of law and authority
under the steady and prudent administration of Mendoza, that
how much soever the spirit of the new statutes was dctefied and
dreaded, no attempt was made to obftruEt the publication of
them by any ac of violence unbecoming fubjccs. The ma-
giftrates and principal inhabitants, however, prcffnted dutiful
addrcffes to the viceroy and fupcrintclndcnt, rprcfenting the
fatal consequences of enforcing thenm. I-lappily for them,
Mcndoza, by long residence in the country, was so thoroughlly
acquaiinted with its flat, that he knew ha t was for it iintereft
as well as wlat it could bear; and Sdoval, though new in
office, displaycd a degree of moderation felclom poiftffcd by per-
sons juifl entering upon the exercise of powver. They cng;:.,c(!
to fuflpend, for foric time, the execution of v;la t was ofir..;\ t

Zaratc, lib. iii. c. 24. Guiarn, c. 151. V\'c; , p ;.. I' ii, .
c. -

I ; i

BOOK

I 4Z.

A iccv
appoinicdl
for P'c yu.

1 54 3.
Ecc 's il

Nwspain.,

1

ISTORY OF AMERICA.

B o0 K in the new laws, and not only consented that a deputation of
,-J-- c citizens fiould be sent to Europe to lay before the emperor the

;544. apprehcnfions of his filbjeds in New Spain with refpe to

their tendency and ciTecs, but they concurred with them in
supporting their sentiments. Clarlcs, moved by the opinion
of men whose abilities and integrity intitled them to decide
concerning what fell immediately under their own view, granted
such a relaxation of the rigour of the laws as rc-cftablifhcd the
colony in its former tranquillity'.
In Peru. IN Peru the storm gathered with an afpca still more fierce

and threatening, and was not so soon difpcrfcd. The conquer-
ors of Peru, of a rank much inferior to those who had sub-
jcced Mexico to the Spanish crown, farther removed from the
infpcdion of the parent slate, and intoxicated with the sudden
acquisition of wealth, carried on all their operations with greater
liccnce and irregularity than any body of adventurers in the
New World. Amidst the general subversion of law and order,
occasioncd by two fucccffive civil wars, when each individual
was at liberty to decide for himself, without any guide but his
own interest or paflions, this turbulent spirit rose above all sense
of subordination. To men thus corrupted by anarchy, the in-
trodudion of regular government, the power of a viceroy, and
the authority of a rcfpeEtable court of judicature, would have
appeared formidable refiraints, to which they would have sub-
mitted with reluctance. But they revolted with indignation
againfl the idea of complying with laws, by which they were
to be firipped at once of all they had earned so hardly during
many years of frvice and fuffiring. As the account of the

1 Fernandez ]Jil. lib. i. c. 3, 4, 5. Vega, p. Il. lib. iii. c. 21, z2. Ilcrrcra, dcc.

7. lib. v. c. 7. lib. vii, c. 14, .
c.orqueni, . I i d. lib. v, c. 13.

new laws spread successively through the different settlement,, B K

VI.

the inhabitants run together, the women in tears, and the men r---
exclaiming against the injustice and ingratitude of their fove- "<
reign, in depriving them, unheard and unconvicd, of their
possessions. " Is this, cried they, the recompence due to per-
sons, who, without public aid, at their own expence, and by
their own valour, have fubjeated to tle crown of Caflile terri-
tories of such vast extent and opulence? Are these the rewards
beflowed for having endured unparalleled distress, for having
encountered every species of danger in the service of their coun-
try ? Whose merit is Co great, whose conduct has been so irre-
proachable, that he may not be condemned by ome penal
clause in regulations, conceived in terms as loose and compre-
henfive, as if it had been intended that all should be entangled
in their snare? Every Spaniard of note in Peru has held fomc
public office, and all, without distinCtion, have been confirain-
ed to take an active part in the contefi between the two rival
chiefs. Were the former to be robbed of their property be-
cause they had done their duty ? Were the latter to be punished
on account of what they could not avoid ? Shall the conquer-
ors of this great empire, inflead of receiving marks of diftinc-
tion, be deprived of the natural consolation of providing for
their widows and children, and leave them to depend for sub-
fiftence on the feanty supply they can extort from unfeeling
courtiers m ? We are not able now, continued they, to explore
unknown regions in quefi of more secure settlements; our con-
flitutions, debilitated with age, and our bodies covered with
wounds, are no longer fit for active service; but fiill we poffcef

nm Herrera, dec. 7. lib. vii. c. 14, 15.
VTLr. IT I h vi2our'

233

,'
, · \,A.ad.

L °v0 K vigour sufficient to assert our just rights, and we will not tame-

VI. -r-. ly susser them to be wrested from us"."
1544.

An infirrec- BY discourses of this fort, uttered with vehemence, and lif-
'ji pre'en1 tened to with universal approbation, their paflions were inflam-
iiio(itraiTTn ed to such a pitch, that they were prepared for the moit violent
(f C'.iIho.

nmcafures; and began to hold consultations in different places,
how they might oppose the entrance of the viceroy and
judges, and prevent not only the execution but the pro-
mulgation of the new laws. From this, however, they
were diverted by the address of Vaca de Cafiro, who flattcrcd
thcm with hopes, that, as soon as the viceroy and judges should
arrive, and had leisure to examine their petitions and rcmon-
firances, they would concur with them in endeavouring to pro-
cure some mitigation in the rigour of laws which had been
framed without due attention either to the Rtate of the country,
or to the sentiments of the people. A greater degree of accom-
modation to these, and even some concessions on the part of
government, were now become requisite to compose the present
ferment, and to sooth the colonists into fubmiflion, by infpir-
ing them with confidence in their superiors. But without pro-
found discernment, conciliating manners, and flexibility of

h f f temper, such a plan could not be carried on. The viceroy

.cfi'cetion poffffed none of these. Of all the qualities that fit men for
n;icrtafed Iby
tJ icteloy. high command, he was endowed only with integrity and cou-

rage; the former harsh and uncomplying, the latter border-
ing so frequently on rafhncrs or obftinlicy, that in his situation
M;rch 4. they were defects rather than virtues. From the moment that

n Coliara, c. . . Hcrrcra, dec. lib. vi. c. o1, . Vega, p. II. l iii. c. 2o,
22. lib. iv. c. 3, 4.

he

he landed at Tumbcz, Nugnez Vela seems to have confidered OOK K
himself merely as an executive officer, without any difcrctionary
power; and, regardlcfs of whatever he observcd or heard con- 1544'
cerning the fiate of the country, he adhered to the letter of the
regulations with unrelenting rigour. In all the towns through
which he pafled, the natives were declared to be free, every
person in public office was deprived of his lands and fcrvants;
and as an example of obedience to others, he would not susser
a single Indian to be employed in carrying his baggage in his
march towards Lima. Amazement and confitcrnation went be-
fore him as he approached; and so little solicitous was he to
prevent them from augmenting, that on entering the capital, he
openly avowed that he came to obey the orders of his sovereign,
not to dispense with his laws. This harsh declaration was ac-
companied with what rendered it fiill more intolerable, haugh-
tiness in deportment, a tone of arrogance and decision in dif-
course, and an insolence of office grievous to men little accuf-
tomed to hold civil authority in high refpeEt. Every attempt
to procure a suspension or mitigation of the new laws, the
viceroy confidered as flowing from a spirit of difaffedion that
tended to rebellion. Several persons of rank were confined,
and ome put to death, without any form of trial. Vaca de
Cafiro was arrefied, and notwithitanding the dignity of his
former rank, and his merit in having prevented a general in-
furredion in the colony, he was loaded with chains, and hut
up in the common jail .

BUT howcvctreneral the indignation was against such pro- Then,.c,,-

ents chutie
ccedings, it is probable that-thc hand of authority would have (;on,),zlo Pi-

.;il1 Io I

their IcaiLi.

o Zaratc, lib. iv. C. 23, 24, 2. Goniara, c. 153-- 55. Veca, p. l. 1i. iv.
c.4, 5. Fernandez, lib. i. c.6-lo.

235

1)c'cn
11 h

B o0 K been strong enough to suppress it, and to prevent its bursting

VI.
--v- out with open violence, if the malcontents had not been pro-
S't4 vided with a leader of credit and eminence to unite and to

direc their efforts. From the time that the purport of the new
regulations was known in Peru, every Spaniard there turned
his eyes towards Gonzalo Pizarro, as the only person able to
avert the ruin with which they threatened the colony. From
all quarters, letters and addresses were ent to him, conjuring
him to stand forth as their common protector, and offering to
support him in the attempt with their lives and fortunes.
Gonzalo, though inferior in talents to his other brothers,
was equally ambitious, and of courage no less daring. The
behaviour of an ungrateful court towards his brothers and him-
self, dwelt continually on his mind, Fcrdinand a slate prisoner
in Europe, the children of the governor in custody of the vice-
roy, and sent aboard his fleet, himself reduced to the condition
of a private citizen in a country, for the discovery and conquest
of which Spain was indebted to his family. These thoughts
prompted him to seek for vengeance, and to assert the rights
of his family, of which he now confidered himself as the guar-
dian and the heir. But as no Spaniard can easily surmount
that veneration for his sovereign which is interwoven in his
frame, the idea of marching in arms againfi the royal flandard
filled him with horror. He hcfitated long, and was fill unre-
solvcd, when the violence of the viceroy, the universal call of
his countrymen, and the certainty of becoming soon a vitdin
himfclf to the severity of the new laws, moved him to quit his
refidcnce at Chuquifaca de la Plata, and repair to Cuzco. All
the inhabitants went out to meet him, and received him with
transports of joy, as the dclivcrcr of the colony. In the fervour
of their zeal, they eleCtcd him procurator general of tlhe Spa-

nifl
236

nifh nation in Peru, to solicit the repeal of the late regulations.
They authorised him to lay their remonfirances before the royal
audience in Lima, and upon pretext of danger from the In-
dians, authorised him to march thither in arms. Under fanc-
tion of this nomination Pizarro took possession of the royal
treasure, appointed officers, levied soldiers, seized a large train
of artillery which Vaca de Cafiro had deposited in Guamanga,
and set out for Lima, as if he had been advancing againfi a
public enemy. Difaffedion having now assumed a regular
form, and being united under a chief of such a distinguished
name, many pcrfons of note resorted to his fiandard; and a
considerable part of the troops raised by the viceroy to oppose
his progress, dfcrted to him in a body P.

BEFORE Pizarro reached Lima, a revolution had happened

there, which encouraged him to proceed with almost certainty
of success. The violence of the viceroy's adminifiration was
not more formidable to the Spaniards of Peru than his over-
bearing haughtiness was odious to his aflbciates, the judges of
the royal audience. During their voyage from Spain, ome
symptoms of coldness began to appear'. But as oon as they
entered upon the exercise of their refpedtive offices, both par-
ties were so much exasperated by frequent contefis, arising from
interference of jurifdidion and contrariety of opinion, that
their mutual disgust soon grew into open enmity. The judges
thwarted the viceroy in every measure, set at liberty prisoners
whom he had confined, justified the malcontents, and applaud-
ed their remonfirances. At a time when both departments of

P Zarate, lib. v. c. i. Gomara, c. 156, 7. Vega, p. 1. lil. iv. c. 4-12.

Fcinandelz, lib. i. C12.-17. Herrera, dec. 7. lib. vii. c. 18, &c. lib.viii. c. --.
q Gomnaa, . 171.

gover'nmcnt

BOOK

VI.

1544.

Difltlrtions
of the vitroy
and court of
audience.

257

government should have united against the approaching enemy,
they were contending with each other for superiority. The
judges at length prevailed. The viceroy, universally odious,
and abandoned even by his own guards, was seized in his pa-
lace, and carried to a desert island on the coafi, to be kept there
until he could be sent home to Spain.

THE judges, in consequence of this, having assumed the fu-

preme direction of affairs into their own hands, issued a procla-
mation suspending the execution of the obnoxious laws, and
sent a mcffage to Pizarro, requiring him, as they had already
granted whatever he could request, to difnmifs his troops, and to
repair to Lima with fifteen or twenty attendants. They could
hardly expect that a man so daring and ambitious would tamely
comply with this requisition. It was made, probably, with no
such intention, but only to throw a decent veil over their own
conduct; for Cepeda, the president of the court of audience, a
pragmatical and aspiring lawyer, seems to have held a secret
correspondence with Pizarro, and had alreadyformed the plan,
which he afterwards executed, of devoting himself to his ser-
vice. The imprisonment of the viceroy, the usurpation of the
judges, together with the universal confusion and anarchy con-
sequent upon events so singular and unexpeEted, opened new
and vast profpeEts to Pizarro. He now beheld the supreme
power within his reach. Nor did he want courage to,pufh on
towards the objec which fortune presented to his view. Car-
vajal, the prompter of his resolutions, and guide of all his
actions, had long fixed his eye upon it as the only end at
which Pizarro ought to aim. Inflead of the inferior fundion
of procurator for the Spanish settlements in Peru, he openly
demanded to be governor and captain general of the whole pro-

villCe,
BOOK

VI

1544.

The viceroy
iimprifoiied.
Scpl. 18.

Views of Pi-

y:Li 0o.
238

vince, and required the court of audience to grant him a corn-
milion to that effet. At the head of twelve hundred men,
within a mile of Lima, where there was neither leader nor
army to oppose him, such a request carried with it the authority
of a command. But the judges, either from unwillingness to
relinquish power, or from a desire of preserving some attention
to appearances, hesitated, or seemed to hesitate, about comply-
ing. Carvajal, impatient of delay, and impetuous in all his
operations, marched into the city by night, fcized several offi-
cers of diftindion obnoxious to Pizarro, and hanged them with-
out the formality of a trial. Next morning the court of au-
dience issued a commission in the emperor's name, appointing
Pizarro governor of Peru, with full powers, civil as well as
military, and he entered the town that day with extraordinary
pomp, to take pofetion of his new dignity r

BUT amidst the disorder and turbulence that accompanied

this total dissolution of the frame of government, the minds of
men, set loose from the ordinary refiraints of law and autho-
rity, aed with such capricious irregularity, that events no less
extraordinary than unexpeced followed in a rapid fucceflion.
Pizarro had scarcely begun to exercise the new powers with
which he was invefled, when he beheld formidable enemies
rife up to oppose him. The viceroy having been put on board
a vessel by the judges of the audience, in order that he might
be carried to Spain under cuflody of Juan Alvarcz, one of their
own number; as soon as they were out at sea, Alvarez, either
touched with remorse or moved by fear, fell at the feet of his
prisoner, declared him from that moment to be free, and

r Zarate, lib. v. c. 8-o1. Vegn, p. . lib. iv. c. 13-19. Gomara, c. 159-163.
Fernandez, lib, i. c, 18-5. Herrcra, dec, 7. lib, viii. c 10o--20.

that

239
BOOK

VI.

1544.

He affumnie
the goverli-
11e11 .

O. 28.

The viceroy
recovers his
liberty.

B 0 0 K that he himself, and every person in the ship, would obey him

*.-v- as the legal representative of their sovereign. Nugnez Vela

ordered them to fleer to Tumbez, and landing there, creted
the royal standard, and resumed his funtions of viceroy. Se-
veral persons of note, to whom the contagion of the seditious
spirit which reigned at Cuzco and Lima had not reached, in-
ftantly avowed their resolution to support his authority s. The
violence of Pizarro's government, who observed every indivi-
dual with the timid jealousy natural to usurpers, and punished
every appearance of difaffeaion with rigour, soon augmented
the number of his adherents, as it forced some leading men in
the colony to fly to him for refuge. While he was gathering
such strength at Tumbez, that his forces began to aflume the
appearance of what was confidered as an army in America,
Diego Centeno, a bold and ative officer, exasperated by
the cruelty and oppression of Pizarro's lieutenant-governor in
the province of Charcas, formed a conspiracy againfi his life
cut him off, and declared for the viceroy t.

ip. ^ PIZARRO, though alarmed with those appearances of hofii-

marches lity in the opposite extremes of the empire, was not difcon-
a§ainit him.

ag . certed. He prepared to aert the authority to which he had

attained, with the spirit and condua of an officer accustomed
to command, and marched diredly against the viceroy as the
enemy who was nearest as well as most formidable. As he was
master of the public revenues in Peru, and most of the military
men were attached to his family, his troops were so numerous,
that the viceroy, unable to face them, retreated towards Q.ito.

r Zarate, lib. v. c. 9. Gomara, c. 165. Fernandez, lib. i.. 23. Herrera, dec. 7.

llb. viii. c. 1. t Zarate, lib. v. c. 18. Gomara, c. 169. Herrera, dec. 7.
lib. ix. c. 27.

Pizarro
24.0

Pizarro followed him; and in that long march, through a wild
mountainous country, both suffered hardships and encountered
difficulties, which no troops, but those accustomed to serve in
America, could have endured or surmounted . The viceroy
had scarcely reached Quito, when the van-guard of Pizarro's
forces appeared, led by Carvajal, who though near fourfcorc,
was as hardy and ative as any young soldier under his com-
mand. Nugnez Vela inflantly abandoned a town incapable ci'
defence and with a rapidity more resembling a flight than a
retreat, marched into the province of Popayan. Pizarro conti-
nued to pursue; but finding it impossible to overtake him, re-
turned to Quito. From thence he dispatched Carvajal to op-
pose Centeno, who was growing formidable in the southern
provinces of the empire, and he himself remained there to make
head against the viceroy x.

13 0 C K~

V 1
1'

BY his own aEtivity, and the assistance ofBenalcazar, Nugnez The vicer:

Vela soon assembled four hundred menin Popayan. As he re- deated,
tained, amidst all his disasters, the fame elevation of mind, and
the fame high sense of his own dignity, he rejected with dif-
dain the advice of ome of his followers, who urged him to
make overtures of accommodation to Pizarro, declaring that it
was only by the sword that a contest with rebels could be de-
cided. With this intention he marched back to Ouito. Pi- 1546.
zarro, relying on the superior number, and fiill more on the
discipline and valour of his troops, advanced resolutely to
meet him. The battle was fierce and bloody, both parties January i8.
fighting like men who knew that the pofeflion of a great cm-

u See NOTE XLIV. x Zarate, lib. v. c. 15, 16-24. omara,

c. 167. Vega, p. 1 1. b. iv. C. 25-7.- . Fernandez, lib. i. . 34, 40. lIerrera,
dec. 7. lib. viii. c. 16, 2o- 7.

VO L. I. Ii pire,

24I

B O O K pire, the fate of their leaders, and their own future fortune, de-

~-\ pended upon the issue of that day. But Pizarro's veterans
546. pushed forward with such regular and well-direted force, that

they soon began to make impression on their enemies. The
viceroy, by extraordinary exertions, in which the abilities of
a commander and the courage of a soldier were equally dif-
ani nuin played, held vidcory for some time in fufpcnfc. At length he

f:11, pierced with many wounds; and the rout of his followers
became general. They were hotly pursued. His head was
cat off, and placed on the public gibbet in Quito, which Pi-
zarro entered in triumph. The troops afirmbled by Centeno
were dispersed soon after by Carvajal, and he himself compelled
to fly to the mountains, where he remained for several months
concealed in a cave. Every person in Peru, from the frontiers
of Popayan to those of Chili, fibmitted to Pizarro; and by his
fleet, under Pedro de Hinojofa, he had not only the unrivalled
command of the South-Sea, but had taken pofellion of Pana-
ma, and placed a garrison in Nombre de Dios, on the opposite
fide of the isthmus, which rendered him master of the usual
avenue of communication between Spain and Peru Y.

:vnrlro a- AFTER this decisive viCtory, Pizarro and his followers re-
vijid to as- mained for some time at Quito, and during the firfl transports
fimne the t;o-
veignty of of their exultation, they ran into every excess of licentious
PCtLu. indulgence, with the riotous spirit usual among low adven-

turers upon extraordinary success. But, amidst this dissipation,
their chief and his confidents were obliged to turn their thoughts
fometimcs to what was serious, and deliberated with much so-

Y Zaratc, lib. v. c. 31, 32. Gomara, c. 170. Vega, p. 1i. lib. iv. . 33, 34.

Fernanncez, lib. i. c. 51-54. HIcrrra, dc. 7. lib x.. . 12. 19-22. dec. 8. lib. i.
c. 1-3, Benzo, lib iii. c. i.

licitude

licitude concerning the part that he ought now to take. Car- () i
vajal, no less bold and decisive in counfcl than in the field, ----
had from the beginning warned Pizarro, that in the crcer on
which he was entering, it was vain to think of holding a
middle course ; that he must either boldly aim at all, or attempt
nothing. From the time that Pizarro obtained pofeffiion of
the government of Peru, he inculcated the fame maxim with
greater earnestness. Upon receiving an account of the victory
at Quito, he remonfirated with him in a tone frill more per-
emptory. " You have usurped (said he, in a letter written to
Pizarro on that occasion) the filprcme power in this country,
in contempt of the emperor's commiflion to another. You
have marched, in hostile array, against the royal flandard;
you have attacked the reprefcntative of your sovereign in the
field, have defeated him, and cut off his liead. Think not that
ever a monarch will forgive such insults on his dignity, or that
any reconciliation with him can be cordial or sincere. De-
pend no longer on the precarious favour of another. Assume
yourself the sovereignty over a country, to the dominion of
which your family has a title founded on the rights both of
discovery and conquest. It is in your power to attach every
Spaniard in Peru of any confequcnce inviolably to your inte-
reft, by liberal grants of lands and of Indians, or by infli-
tuting ranks of nobility, and creating titles of honour similar
to those which are courted with so much eagcrnefs in Europe.
By eftablifling orders of knighthood, with privileges and
diftindions rcfembling those in Spain, you may bestow a gra-
tification upon the officers in your fcrvice, suited to the ideas of
military men. Nor is it to your countrymen only that you
ought to attend ; endeavour to gain the natives. By marry-
in- the Coya, or daughter of the Sun next in fucc:iFion to the

Ii 2 CO1-0\II,

B OO K crown, you will induce the Indians, out of veneration for the

VI.
k.L~-J blood of their ancient princes, to unite with the Spaniards in

,546. support of your authority. Thus, at the head of the princi-

pal inhabitants of Peru, as well as of the new settlers there,
you may set at defiance the power of Spain, and repel with
ease any feeble force which it can fend at such a distance."
Cepeda, the lawyer, who was now Pizarro's confidential coun-
fellor, warmly seconded Carvajal's exhortations, and employed
whatever learning he possessed in demonstrating, that all the
founders of great monarchies had been raised to pre-eminence,
not by the antiquity of their lineage, or the validity of their
rights, but by their own enterprising valour and personal
merit ".

But chufesto PIZAR Ro liflened attentively to both, and could not conceal
negoc1iate ihllthe the fatisfauiion with which he contemplated the object that
court of
Stpain. they presented to his view. But happily for the tranquillity of

the world, few men possess that superior strength of mind,
and extent of abilities, which are capable of forming and exe-
cuting such daring schemes, as cannot be accornplifhed with-
out overturning the eflablifhed order of society, and violating
thole maxims of duty which men are accustomed to hold
sacred. The mediocrity of Pizarro's talents circumicribed his
ambition within more narrow limits. Inflead of aspiring at
independent power, he confined his views to the obtaining from
'the court of Spain a confirmation of the authority which he
now porffefd; and for that purpose, he sent an officer of
diftindion thither, to give such a representation of his con-

Vcga, p. 1 b. .iv, 40. Fernandez, lib. i. . 34. lib. ii. c. 13. 49. Herrera,
dec. 8, lib. ii. c. io.

dut,
244

dud, and of the fiate of the country, as might induce the B OO K

VI.

emperor and his ministers, either from inclination or from ne- .--
ceffity, to continue him in his present station. J546'

WHILE Pizarro was deliberating with refped to the part Confultati-

ons of the

which he hould take, consultations were held in Spain, with Spanish
no less solicitude, concerning the measures which ought to be n'iitre"
pursued in order to re-establish the emperor's authority in
Peru. Though unacquainted with the lafi excesses of outrage to
which the malcontents had proceeded there, the court had re-
ceived an account of the infurresion against the viceroy, of
his imprisonment, and the usurpation of the government by
Pizarro. A revolution so alarming, called for an immediate
interposition of the emperor's abilities and authority. But as
he was fully occupied at that time in Germany, in condud-
ing the war against the famous league of Smalkalde, one of
the most interesting and arduous enterprises in his reign, the
care of providing a remedy for the disorders in Peru devolved
upon his son Philip, and the counsellors whom Charles had ap-
pointed to assisi him in the government of Spain during his
absence. At firfi view, the ations of Pizarro and his adhe-
rents appeared so repugnant to the duty of fubjeds towards
their sovereign, that the greater part of the ministers infified
on declaring them instantly to be guilty of rebellion, and on
proceeding to punish them with exemplary rigour. But when
the fervour of their zeal and indignation began to abate, innu-
merable obstacles to the execution of this measure presented
themselves. The veteran bands of infantry, the firength and
glory of the Spanish armies, were then employed in Germany.
Spain, exhausted of men and money by a long series of waIs.
in which he had been involved by the restless ambition of two

fniccci've

245

r O K successive monarchs, could not easily equip an armament of
\^-r ffilCficnt force to reduce Pizarro. To transport any refpeable

'461' body of troops to a country so remote as Peru, appeared almost

impolfible. While Pizarro continued master of the South-Sea,
the direcL route by Nombre de Dios and Panama was impraati-
cable. An attempt to march to Qjuito by land through the new
kingdom of Granada, and the province of Popayan, across
rcgions of vafi extent, defolatc, unhealthy, or inhabited by
fierce and hoftilc tribes, would be attended with unfurmount-
able danger and hardfllips. The passage to the South-Sea
by the Straits of Magellan was so tedious, so uncertain,
and so little known in that age, that no confidence could be
placed in any eflort carried on in a course of navigation so
remote and precarious. Nothing then remained but to relin-
cquif the fyfiem which the ardour of their loyalty had firfi
fuggefled, and to attempt by lenient measures what could not
be effctedd by force. It was manifest from Pizarro's solicitude
to repreent his conduct in a favourable light to the emperor,
that, notwitlhfanding the excesses of which he had been guilty,
lie still retained sentiments of veneration for his sovereign. By
a proper application to these, together with some such concef-
sions as hould discover a spirit of moderation and forbearance
in government, he might be yet reclaimed, or the ideas of loy-
alty natural to Spaniards might so far revive among his fol-
lowers, that they would no longer lend their aid to uphold his
usurpcd authority.

c;frc np- Tll fucccfs, however, of this ncgociation, no less delicate than
pined to0 it was important, dependcd entirely on the abilities and addrcfs
i'IS:Ipc- of the prfon to whom it flould be committed. After weigh-

ing with muchl attention the comparativc merit of various pcr-

fol s,
246

sons, the Spanish minificrs fixed with unanimity of choice, upon
Pedro de la Gafca, a priest in no higher flation than that of coun-
fellorto the inquisition. Though in no public office he had been
occasionally employed by government in affairs of trust and con-
sequence, and had conducted them with no less skill than fuc-
cess; displaying a gentle and insinuating temper, accompanied
with much firmness; probity, superior to any feeling of private
interest; and a cautious circumfpeion in concerting mneafures,
followed by such vigour in executing them, as is rarely found
in alliance with the other. These qualities marked him out
for the function to which he was destined. The emperor, to
whom Gafca was not unknown, warmly approved of the choice,
and communicated it to him in a letter, containing expressions
of good-will and confidence, no less honourable to the prince
who wrote, than to the subjed who received it. Gafca, notwith-
standing his advanced age and feeble constitution, and though,
from the apprehensions natural to a man, who, during the
course of his life, had never been out of his own country,
he dreaded the effes of a long voyage, and of an unhealthy
climate a, did not hcfitate a moment about complying with the
will of his sovereign. In order to ihew that it was from this
principle alone that he aed, he refused a bifflopric which
was offered to him, in order that he might bear a more
dignified character, he would accept of no higher title than
that of president of the court of audience in Lima; and
declared that he would receive no salary on account of his
discharging the duties of that office. All he required was, that
the cxpence of supporting his family fiould be defrayed by
the public; and as lie was to go like a minister of peace with

* Fcrnandez, lib. ii. c. 17.

his

BOOK

XVI.

1546.
lion.

247

his gown and breviary, and without any retinue but a few
domestics, this would not load the revenue with any enormous
burden b

BUT while he discovered such disinterested moderation with

respect to whatever related personally to himself, he demanded
his official powers in a very different tone. He insisted, as
he was to be employed in a country so remote from the feat of
government, where he could not have recourse to his overeign
for new inflrudions on every emergency; and as the whole
success of his negociations must depend upon the confidence
which the people with whom he had to treat could place in
the extent of his powers, that he ought to be invested with un-
limited authority, that his jurifdiEtion must reach to all persons
and to all causes; that he must be empowered to pardon, to pu-
nifh or to reward, as circumstances and the behaviour of dif-
ferent men might require; that, in cafe of refifnance from the
malcontents he might be authorised to reduce them to obedi-
ence by force of arms, to levy troops for that purpose, and to
call for assistance from the governors of all the Spanish fettle-
ments in America. These powers, though manifestly conducive
to the great objeCs of his mission, appeared to the Spanish
ministers to be inalienable prerogatives of royalty which ought
not to be delegated to a fubjead, and they refused to grant
them. But the emperor's views were more enlarged. As
fiom the nature of his employments, Gafca must be entrusted
with discretionary power in several points, and all his efforts
might prove ineffectual if he was circumscribed in any one

b Zarate, lib. vi. c. 6. Gomara, c. 174. Fernandez, lib. ii. c. 14-16. Vega,
p, I. lib. v. c. i. -lerrera, dec. 8. lib. i. c. 4, &c.

particular,
B OO

VI.

1546.

Tli powers
(c 'rl ittled
:o him.
248

particular, Charles scruplcd not to invest him with authority
to the full extent that he demanded. Hi-illy satisfied with this
frefl proof of his maflcr's confidence, (Glfta haflencd Ilis de-
parture, and without either money or troops, fct out to quell a
formidable rebellionc.

ON his arrival at Nombr d Dios, lie found Hcrnan Mcxia,

an officer of note, poltcd there, by ordcr of Pizarro, with a con-
fiderable body of men, to oppocf the landing of any hoftilc
forces. But Gasea appeared in such pacific guise, with a train
so little formidable, and with a title of no such dignity as to
excite terror, that he was received with much refpct. From
Nombre de Dios he advanced to Panama, and met with a fimi-
lar reception from Hinojofa, whom Pizarro had entrustcd with
the government of that town, and the command of his fleet:
flationed there. In both places he held the fame language,
declaring that he was sent by their fovcreign as a melcngr
of peace, not as a miniftcr of vengeance; that he came to rc-
drcfs all their grievances, to revoke the laws which had ex-
cited alarm, to pardon past offences, and to r-cflablifli order
and jullice in the government of Peru. Hlis mild deportment,
the finiplicity of his manners, the sanity of his profcfion,
and a winning appearance of candour, gained credit to his
declarations. The veneration due to a person clothed with
legal authority, and aing in virtue of a royal commiflion,
began to revive among men accuflomcd for some time to no-
thing more rcfpcCable than an usurped jurifdiclion. Hinojofa,
Mexia, and fevcral other ofliccrs of diflindion, to each of whomn
Gafca applied fcparatcly, were gained over to his intcrcfl, and

c Furnandzic, lib. ii. c. 6-z8.
Vo L. JI. K k waited

249

1.

r'l. 21;
1 SA :s;

j11l1 27

I I.; ~rI \ ; p
1,aI :.

P3 o o K waited only for some decent occasion of declaring openly in his

VI. d
<~»- favourd.

1546.

THIS the violence of Pizarro oon afforded them. As oon

as he heard of Gafca's arrival at Panama, though he received,
at the fame time, an account of the nature of his commission,
and was informed that he offered to render every Spaniard in
Peru easy concerning what was past, by an a of general
oblivion; and secure with refped to the future, by repealing
the obnoxious laws; inflcad of accepting with gratitude his
fovercign's gracious concessions, he was so much exasperated
on finding that he was not to be continued in his station
as governor of the country, that he instantly resolved to op-
pose the president's entry into Peru, and to prevent his ex-
ercifing any jurifdition there. To this desperate resolution
he added another highly prcpofterous. He sent a new de-
putation to Spain to jufiify this conduCt, and to insist, in name
of all the communities in Peru, for a confirmation of the go-
vernment on himself during life, as the only means of pre-
serving tranquillity there. The persons entrusted with this
strange commitlion, intimated the intention of Pizarro to the
president, and required him, in his name, to depart from Pa-
nama and return to Spain. They carried likewise secret in-
frumlions to Hinojofa, dircting him to offer Gafca a present
of fifty thousand pesos, if he would comply voluntarily with
what was demanded of him; and if he flould continue obftinatc
to cut him off either by affafiination or poison -.

d( Fcrnandcz, lib. ii. c. 21, &c. Zarate, lib. vi. c. 6, . Gonara, c. '75. Vegn,

p . 1 .

li . . 3. c Zarate, li,. vi. c. 8. I'crnandc., lib. ii. c. 33, 34.
Htrcla, dlc. 8. lib. i. . c., 1o.

MAN Y

Violent pro-
ceedings of
'iz.rl o.
2o0

MANY circumstances concurred in pushing on Pizarro to

those wild meafurcs. Having been once accustomcd to the
pre-eminence of supreme command, he could not bear the
thoughts of descending to a private tfation. Conscious of his
own demerit, he fufpedted that the emperor fludicd only to de-
ceive him, and would never pardon the outrages which he had
committed. His chief confidents, no less guilty, entertained
the fame apprehensions. The approach of Gafca without any
military force excited no terror. There were now above fix
thousand Spaniards fettled in Peru '; and at the head of
these he doubted not to maintain his own independence, if the
court of Spain should refuse to grant what he required. But
he knew not that a spirit of dcfction had already begun to
spread among those whom he trufled most. Hinojofa, amazed
at his precipitate resolution of fctting lhimfelf in opposition to
the emperor's commiflion, and disdaining to be his infirument in
executing the odious crimes pointed out in his secret inftruc-
tions, publicly recognized the president as his only lawful fu-
perior. The officers under his command did the fame. Such
was the contagious influence of the example, that it reached
even the deputies who had been sent from Peru; and at the
time when Pizarro expected to hear either of Gafca's return to
Spain, or of his death, he received an account of his being
master of the fleet, of Panama, and of the troops stationcd
there.

IRRITATED almost to madness by an event so uncxpcdcd,

he openly prepared for war; and in order to give ome colour
of juflice to his arms, he appointed the court of audience in

f I-Icrrcra, (Idc. . lib. iii. c. .

K k Lima

BOOK

VI.

1546.

Gafca gains
his fleet.

P7iznro rc-
fd1v:s on

V' S4
'.

I 47.

25I

B 0 K Lima to proceed to the trial of Gafca, for the crimes of having

---- seized his hips, seduced his officers, and prevented his deputies
'547 from proceeding on their voyage to Spain. Cepeda, though

acing as a judge in virtue of the royal commission, did not
scruple to proflitute the dignity of his function by finding Gafca
gnilty of treason, and condemning him to death on that account .
Wild, and even ridiculous, as this proceeding was, it imposed
on the low illiterate adventurers, with whom Peru was filled,
by the semblance of a legal fandCion warranting Pizarro to carry
on hollilities againfi a conviced traitor. Soldiers accordingly
resorted from every quarter to his flandard, and he was soon
at the head of a thousand men, the becf equipped that had ever
taken the field in Peru.

Preparations GscA, on his part, perceiving that force must be employed
of Gafca. in order to acconimllifl the purpose of llis mission, was no less

assiduous in colle(ting troops from Nicaragua, Carthagena, and
other settlements on the continent; and with such success, that
he was soon in a condition to detach a squadron of his fleet,
Apiil. with a considerable body of soldiers, to the coast of Peru. Their

appearance excited a dreadful alarm; and though they did not
attempt for some time to make any dcfccnt, they did more cf-
fe cual service, by fctting ashore in different places persons who
dispersed copies of the a of general indemnity, and the rcvo-
cal ion of the late didts; and who made known every where the
pacific intentions, as well as mild temper, of tle prcfident.
The cied of spreading this information was wonderful. All
who were diffTtisfied with Pizarro's violent adminiifration, all
]who retained any sentiments of fidelity to their fvcreign, be-

g Fernandelc, lilb. i. cil . ,

ega, p. 11 lib. v. c. 7. IIcircra, iec. 8. ib. iii.
(. (.

gan
252

gan to meditate revolt. Some openly deserted a cause »-;';ch
they now deemed to be unjufi. Centeno, leaving the cave in
which he lay concealed, assembled about fifty of his former
adherents, and with this feeble half-armed band advanced boldly
to Cuzco. By a sudden attack in the night-time, in which he
displayed no less military skill than valour, he rendered him-
self master of that capital, though defended by a garrison of
five hundred men. Moil of these having ranged thcmfelves
under his banners, he liad soon the command of a rcfpcable
body of troops h

PIZARRO, though afnoniflecd at beholding one enemy ap-

proaching by ea, and another by land, at a time when he
trusted to the union of all Peru in his favour, was of a spirit
more undaunted, and more accustomed to the vicissitudes of
fortune, than to be disconcertcd or appalled.. As the danger
fro:m Centeno's operations was the moss urgent, lie inflantly
set out to oppose him. Having provided horses for all his fol-
diers, he marched with amazing rapidity. But every morning
he fou(nd his force diminishcd by numbers who had left himn
during the night; and though he became fifpicious to exccfs,
:!iid punished without mercy all whom he fuifpcccd, the rage
ot desertion was too violent to be checked. Before he got
.ithin fight of the enemy at Huarina, ncar the lake Titiaca,
}h could not muller more than four hundred foldicrs. But thcfc
i}; j iily conidcrcd as men of tried attachment, on whom lie
miight depcncl. They were indeed the holdcf; and moist defte-
rate of his followers, conscious like him lsel of crimes for
whci]c they could hardly cx)pc forgivcnefs, and without aily

i ,,ai

bt.ic, ib. ( I,-- ( t; : ,o,:: ',
c ,:rili, 1;. i ;. '

llUj.'

1300K(

VI.

1547.

In u i rctor
of Ccntllo ;

1 a I ;.
lil I .

r D

\
o o K hope but in the success of their arms. With these he did not

. .---. hesitate to attack Centeno's troops, though double to his own
oao~li 20. in number. The royalifis did not decline the combat. It was

the moRt obstinate and bloody that had hitherto been fought in
.'s Peru. At length the intrepid valour of Pizarro, and the fupe-

riority of Carvajal's military talents, triumphed over numbers,
and obtained a complete victory. The booty was immense',
and the treatment of the vanquished cruel. By this signal
filcccfs the reputation of Pizarro was re-established, and being
now deemed invincible in the field, his army increased daily in
number 1:

BUT events happened in other parts of Peru, which more

than counterbalanced the splendid viCtory at Huarina. Pizarro
had scarcely left Lima, when the citizens, weary of his oppref-
five dominion, ereCted the royal standard, and Aldana, with a
detachment of soldiers from the fleet, took poffeiion of the

;;' fca lands town. About the fame time', the president landed at Tumbez
iIl ieru.

with five hundred men. Encouraged by his pretence, every
fcttlcment in the low country declared for the king. The situ-
ation of the two parties was now perfectly reserved; Cuzco and
the adjacent provinces were possessed by Pizarro, all the reft of
the empire, from Qjiito southward, acknowledged the jurif-
didion of Gafca. As his numbers augmented fast, Gafca ad-
vanced into the interior part of the country. His behaviour
still continued to be gentle and unassuming; he exprcffcd, on
every occasion, his ardent wish of terminating the contest with-
out bloodficd. More solicitous to reclaim than to punish, he

i See NOTE XL.V. k Zaralc, lib. vii. c. 2,3. omara, c. 181.

Vega, p. ii. lib. v. c. 18, &c. Fernandez, lib. ii. c. 79. Herrera, icc. 8. lib. iv.
c. , 2. 1 Zaratc, lib. vi. c. 17.

upbraided
- A4

upbraided no man for past offences, but received them as a fa-
ther receives penitent children returning to a sense of their duty.
Though desirous of peace, he did not flackcn his preparations
for war. He appointed the general rendezvous of his troops
in the fertile valley of Xauxa, on the road to Cuzco '. There
he remained for ome months, not only that he might have
time to make another attempt towards an accommodation with
Pizarro, but that he might train his new soldiers to the use of
arms, and accustom them to the discipline of a camp, before
lie led them against a body of victorious veterans. Pizarro,
intoxicated with the success which had hitherto accompanied
his arms, and elated with having again near a thousand men
under his command, refuscd to liften to any terms, aithoughl
Cepeda, together with several of his officers, and even Carvajal
himself", gave it as their advice to clofc With the prficdent's
offer of a general indemnity, and the revocation of the ob-
noxious laws . Gafca having tried in vain every expedient to
avoid imbruing his hands in the blood of his countrymen, be-
gan to move towards Cuzco at the head of sixteen hundred
men.

B 00 K

v1.

547.

Advanrce o-
ward!sCuzco

I1c. 2.

PIZARRO, confident of vicory, suffercd lte royalifs to prifs nilh rn-c

all the rivers that lie between Gumanga and Cuzco without b;lei,.
opposition, and to advance within four leagues of that capital, ,s.
flattering himfclfthat a defeat in fich a situation as rendered a
retreat impraaicable would at once terminate the war. H-e
then marched out to meet the enemy, and Carvajal cliofe his
ground, and made the disposition of the troops with the dif- Apil.
cerning eye, and profound knowledge in the art of war, con-

rr Zarntc, lib. vii. c. Fc rnandez, lil. ii z. 77, z2.
Zl;lrti, ,J. vii. c. 6. \'V ;a, p. . lib v. . c. 27

n Sce N T L MI.

f icuoi is

255

fpicuous in all his operations. As the two armies moved for-
ward fiowly to the charge, the appearance of each was singular.
In that of Pizarro, composed of men enriched with the spoils of
the most opulent country in America, every officer, and almoll
all the private men were clothed in fluffs of silk, or brocade,
embroidered with gold and silver; and their horfcs, their arms,
their standards, were adorned with all the pride of military
ponmp . That of Gafca, though not so fplcndid, exhibited
what was no less itriking. HIe himself, accompanied by the arch-
bishop of Lima, the bishops of Quito and Cuzco, and a great
number of ecclesiastics, marching along the lines, blessing the
men, and encouraging them to a resolute discharge of their duty.

WHIEN both were just ready to engage, Cepeda set spurs to

his horse, galloped off, and surrendered himself to the prefi-
dent. Garcilafo de la Vega, and other officers of note, fol-
lowed his example. The revolt of persons in such high rank
struck all with amazement. The mutual confidence on which
the union and strength of armies depend, ceased at once. Dif-
trufi and consternation spread from rank to rank. Some silent-
ly flipped away, others threw down their arms, the greatest
number went over to the royalists. Pizarro, Carvajal, and some
leaders, employed authority, threats, and entreaties, to flop
them, but in vain. In les than half an hour, a body of men,
which might have decided the fate of the Peruvian empire, was
totally dispersed. Pizarro, feeing all irretrievably loft, cried
out in amazement to a few officers who frill faithfully adhered
to him, " What remains for us to do?" Let us rush, re-
plied one of them, upon the enemy's firmest battalion, and die
like Romans." Dejceed with such a reverse of fortune, he

P Zarate, lib vi. c. i .

had
BOOK

\'I.

5 4i.

Pizarro dc-
feired by his
troops.

.56

had not spirit to follow thlis foldicily counfcl, and with a tame- Bo 01 K

vi.

ness disgraceful to his former fame, he surrendercd to one of
Gafca's officers. Carvajal, endeavouring to escape, was over- taLken.
taken and fcizcd.

GASCA, happy in this bloodless victory, did not slain it with nl,,,! pt to

cruelty. Pizarro, Carvajal, and a frnall number of the most ,ath-
ditlinguifhed or notorious offenders, were punished capitally.
Pizarro was beheaded on the day after he surrendered. He sub-
mitted to his fate with a composed dignity, and seemed defi-
rous to atone by repentance for the crimes which he had com-
mitted. The end of Carvajal was suitable to his life. On his
trial he offered no defence. When the sentence adjudging him
to be hanged was pronounced, he carelessly replied, " One can
die but once." During the interval between the sentence and
execution, he discovered no sign either of rcmorfe for the pafl,
or of solicitude about the future; scoffing at all who visited
him, in his usual sarcastic vein of mirth, with the fame quick-
ness of repartee and gross pleasantry as at any other period of
his life. Cepeda, more criminal than either, ought to have
shared the fame fate; but the merit of having deserted his as-
fociates at such a critical moment, and with such decisive cf-
sea, saved him from immediate punilhment. He was sent,
however, as a prisoner to Spain, and died in confinementq.

IN the minute detail which the contemporary hiflorians have

given of the civil dissensions that raged in Peru, with little in-
terruption, during ten years, many circumstances occur o

q Zarate, lib. vii. c. 6,7,8. Gomara, c. 185, 86. Vega, p 1 . lib, v. c. 30, &c.
Fcrnandcz, lib. ii. c. 86, &c. Hcrrera, dcc. 8. lib. iv. c. 14, &c.

VOL. II. L1 striking,

257

B 0 K flriking, and which indicate such an uncommon state of man-

VI.
-v-2 ners, as to merit particular attention.
548.

No mrrcc- THOUGII the Spaniards who firfl invaded Pcru were of the
cenary iol- lowest order in society, and the greater part of tlhofe who aftcr-
diers in tlhe
civ:l w'ars of wards joined them were persons of desperate fortune, yet in all
cJl U.

the bodies of troops brought into the field by the different
leaders who contended for superiority, not one man aed as a
hired soldier, that follows his flandard for pay. Every adven-
turer in Peru confidered himself as a conqueror, entitled, by
his forvices, to an eftablinliment in that country whiclh had been
acquired by his valour. In the contcfts between the rival chiefs,
each chose his fide as he was direaed by his own judgment or
affedions. Hle joined his commander as a companion of his
fortune, and disdained to degrade himself by receiving the wages
of a mercenary. It was to their fords, not to prc-emincnce in
office, or nobility of birth, that most of the leaders whom they
followed were indebted for their elevation ; and each of thcir
adherents hoped, by the fame means, to open a way for him-
self to the possession of power and wealth'

"i,;.. - BUT tho'

th te troops in Peru servcd vwithout any regular pay,
, , e- they were raised at immense cxpcnce. Among men accustomed

to divide the spoils of an opulent country, the dcfire of obtaining
aalthl acquired incredible force. The ardour of pursuit aug-
:nentcd in proportion to the hope of fucccfs. Where all were
intcnt on the fame objeuQ, and under the dominion of the fame
;!nfion, there was but one mode of gaining men, or of fecur-
:nig their attachment. Officers of name and influence, befidcs

' cga, r. 1I. lib. iv. c. 38, 41.

tllC

the promise of future cftablifhments, received in hand large ra- B 0 K
tuities from the chief with whom they engaged. Gonzalo Pi-
zarro, in order to raise a thousand men, advanced five hundred
thousand pesos s. Gafca expended on the troops which he lcd
againfi Pizarro nine hundred thousand pesos'. The diflribu-
tion of property, bestowcd as the reward of success, was frill
more exorbitant. Cepeda, as the recompencc of his perfidy ,And iiinifC
and addrcf, in persuading the court of royal audience to gv iVnli!s.
the sanction of its authority to the usurped jurif.liion of Pi-
zarro, received a grant of lands which yielded an annual in-
come of a hundred and fifty thoufarnd pcfos ". Hinojofa, who
by his early defetion from Pizarro, and firrendcr of the fleet
to Gafca, decided the fate of Peru, obtaincd a difirici of country
affording two hundred thousand pesos of yearly value . While
such rewards were dealt out to the principal officers, with inorc
than royal munificence, proportional flimrcs were conferred upon
those of inferior rank.

SucH a rapid change of fortune produced its natural effCeds. 'i':r p .:

It gave birth to new wants, and new defircs. Veterans lon> i,
accustomed to hardship and toil, acquired of a fuddcn a tafti
for profuse and inconsiderate dissipation, and indulged in all
the excesses of military licentioufiefs. The riot of low de-
bauchery occupied fomc; a rclifi for cxpcniivc luxuries fprcad
among others '. The meanet soldier in Pern would have
thought himself degraded by marching on foot, and at a tiime
when the prices of horfcs in that country were exorbitant,
each insisted on being furniihcd with one before lie would take

' Fcrnandcz, lil.. c, 54. t' arat

c. 7. u Goinara, c 164. x
dec. 5. lib. ii. c. 3. dec. 8. lib. viii. c. o.

c, Jibl. ii, c. in, JIcrrcia, dc. S. 11 v.

cesa, p. i i. ib. vi. c. . I l ucL. 1
LI 2

259
tli'

the field. But though less patient under the fatigue and hard-
flips of service, they were ready to face danger and death with
as much intrepidity as ever, and animated by the hope of new
rewards, they never failed, on the day of battle, to display all
their ancient valour.

TOGETHER with their courage, they retained all the fero-

city by which they were originally distinguished. Civil discord
never raged with a more fell spirit than among the Spaniards
in Peru. To all the pafrions which usually envenom con-
tefis among countrymen, avarice was added, and rendered their
enmity more rancorous. Eagerness to seize the valuable forfei-
tures expecled upon the death of every opponent, hut the door
against mercy. To be wealthy, was of itself sufficient to expose
a man to accusation, or to fubjetl him to punishment. On the
slightest suspicions, Pizarro condemned many of the most opu-
lent inhabitants in Peru to death. Carvajal, without searching
for any pretext to juflify his cruelty, cut off many more. The
number of those who filffered by the hand of the executioner,
was not much inferior to what fell in the fields"; and the
greater part was condemned without the formality of any legal
trial.

TILE violence with which the contending parties treated their

opponents was not accompanied with its usual attendants, at-
tachment and fidelity to those with whom they aed. The
tics of honour which are held sacred among soldiers, and the
principle of integrity, interwoven as thoroughly in the Spanish
charatcr as in that of any nation, seem to have been equally

zSce NOTE XLVII.

forgotten.

,LU

11ULD
13 0 0K

VI.

1548.

xhlch t h cir
A

;,nj',ant f
Lt Ii.

forgotten. Even regard for decency, and the fcnfe of shame, J 0 o K
were totally loft. During their dissentions, there was hardly a
Spaniard in Peru who did not abandon the party which h:e had ':4"
originally espoused, betray the associates with whom he had
united, and violate the engagements under which he had come.
The viceroy, Nugnez Vela, was ruined by the treachery of
Cepeda, and the other judges of the royal audience, who were
bound by the duties of their funEtion to have supported his au-
thority. The chief advisers and companions of Gonzalo Pizar-
ro's revolt, were the first to forsake him, and submit to his ene-
mies. His fleet was given up to Gafca, by the man whom he
had ingled out among his officers to entrust with that important
command. On the day that he was to decide his fate, an army
of veterans, in fight of the enemy, threw down their arms
without striking a blow, and deserted a leader who had often
conducted them to victory. Instances of such general and
avowed contempt of the principles and obligations which attach
man to man, and bind them together in social union, rarely oc-
cur in history. It is only where men are far removed from the
feat of government, where the refiraints of law and order are
little felt, where the profpedt of gain is unbounded, and im-
mense wealth may cover the crimes by which it is aquired,
that we can find any parallel to the levity, the rapaciousness,
the perfidy and corruption prevalent among the SpaniaIds in
Peru.

ON the death of Pizarro, the malcontents in every corner of Gacac dc

Peru laid down their arms, and tranquillity seemed to be per- if.pl
feEly re-established. But two very interesting objects flill re- hlliLS.
mained to occupy the president's attention. The one was to
find immediately such employment for a multitude of turbulent

and

2G6

and daring adventurers with which the country was filled, as
might prevent them from exciting new commotions. The
other, to bellow proper gratifications upon those to whose loy-
alty and valour he was indebted for his success. The former
of these was in some measure accomplished, by appointing Pe-
dro de Valdivia to prosecute the conquest of Chili; and by em-
powering Diego Centeno to undertake the discovery of the vast
regions bordering on the river De la Plata. The reputation of
those leaders, and the hopes of bettering their condition in a new
country, alluring many of the most indigent and desperate fol-
diers to follow their flandards, drained off no inconsiderable
portion of that mutinous inflammable spirit which Gafca dreaded.

TriE latter was an affair of greater difficulty, and to be ad-

jultcd with a more attentive and delicate hand. The reparti-
mientos, or allotments of lands and Indians which fell to be
distributed, in consequence of the death or forfeiture of the for-
mer possessors, exceeded two millions of pesos of yearly rent l.
Gafca, when now absolute master of this immense property,
retained the fame disinterested sentiments which he had origi-
nally professcd, and refuted to reserve the smallest portion of it
for himself. But the number of claimants was great; and
whilst the vanity or avarice of every individual fixed the value
of his own services, and estimated the recompence which he
thought due to him, the pretensions of each were so extrava-
gant, that it was impossible to satisfy all. Gafca lifiened to
them one by one, with the most patient attention, and
that he might have leisure to weigh the comparative merit
of their fcveral claims with accuracy, he retired, with the

a VEga, p. i . lib. vi. c. 4.

archbi flop

2U
B 0 0 K

V1.

1 54S.

His dilifion
, the coun-
try among
his fuolow Crs.

archbishop of Lima and a single secretary, to a village twelve B O O K
leagues from Cuzco. There he spent several days in allottinrg _-
to each a difirid of lands and number of Indians, in pro- 4'
portion to his idea of their past services, and future importance.
But that he might get beyond the reach of the fierce storm of
clamour and rage, which he foresaw would burit out on the
publication of his decree, notwithfianding the impartial equity
with which he had framed it, he ft out for Lima, Icaving the
infirument of partition fealcd up, with orders not to open it
for some days after his departure.

THE indignation excited by publishing the decree of parti- Auag.4.

The lilcun-

tion was not less than Gafca had cxpecd. Vanity, avarice, tct i ,uca-
emulation, envy, shame, rage, and all the other pallions that '"'
most vehemently agitate the minds of men when both tlliir ho-
nour and their intercft are deeply affiCded, conspircd in adding
to i s violence. It broke out with all the fury of military info-
lence. Calumny, threats, and curses were poured out openly
upn- !c rcfi'Ldcnt. iHe was accused of ingratitude, of par-
tialil2, i..dl of inilluic. Among soldiers prompt to acion, fucl
fc(ditious difcourf l would have been soon followed by deeds no
le s violent, and thcy ;alrca y began to turn their e cs towards
fomc cldi iontcntcd leaders, (cxpcLing them to ifand forth in rc-
drcfs of their -wrongs. By foinlc vigorous interpositions of go-
vtrnilcllt, a. tinly check was ivc.n to tlis mutinous spirit, and
the dantller o aother civil war wvas avcrted fcr the prcfent *'

GAs \ h1owcevr, perciving that the flame -was fupprcftI. I;, I1!1d.;
rather ti;nll ctiliniiiicd, laboured withl the utmoii afiduilv I:il',,-

'*- ~~~~~~~~~~~~~' 1:1 :lilt.l sO-

* ll ;;;i 1,'h

I .

Z :i. , 111) V;]. c z)

(l;ua , c. i

\c'ga, p l

. . ii. c. i, S'c. V i-
(IIlatlIz., P . 11. i i c i, &c' . il.C1l;i, Jcc. lib. iv. c. , .:.

tO

263

n 0 0o K to soothe the malcontents, by bestowing large gratuities to some,

VL

.-J---,- by promising repartiientos, when they fell vacant, to others,
1'.149 and by caressing and flattering all. But that the public fecu-

rity might reft on a foundation more stable than their good
affetion, he endeavoured to strengthen the hands of his fuc-
ccTors in office, by re-eflablifhing the regular adminifiration of
justice in every part of the empire. He introduced order and
fi:nplicity into the mode of collecting the royal revenue. He
ifiued regulations concerning the treatment of the Indians, well
calculated to protect them from oppreflion, and to provide for
their infirution in the principles of religion, without depriving
1 50- the Spaniards of the benefit accruing from their labour. Having

now accomplished every object of his milnion, Gafca, longing
to return again to a private fiation, committed the government

Feh. . of Peru to the court of audience, and set out for Spain. As,

and seis out
for Spain. during the anarchy and turbulence of the four last years, there

had been no remittance made of the royal revenue, he carried
with him thirteen hundred thousand pesos of public money,
which the ceconomy and order of his adminifiration enabled
him to save, after paying all the expences of the war.

Hisrecep- HE was received in his native country with universal admi-
tion thre.

ration of his abilities, and of his virtue. Both were, indeed,
highly conspicuous. Without army, or fleet, or public funds;
with a train so simple, that only three thousand ducats were ex-
pended in equipping him c, he set out to oppose a formidable
rebellion. By his address and talents he supplied all those de-
feds, and seemed to create infiruments for executing his
dcfigns. He acquired such a naval force, as gave him the com-

c Pernandcz, lib. ii. c. 18.

mand

mand of the sea. He raised a body of men able to cope with B O K
the veteran bands which gave law to Peru. He vanquished
their leader, on whofc arms vicory had hitherto attended, and 55
in place of anarchy and usurpation, he established the govern-
ment of laws, and the authority of the rightful fovcreign. But
the praise bellowed on his abilities was exceeded by that which
his virtue merited. After rcfiding in a country where wealth
prcfcnted allurements which had seduced every person who had
hitherto poffcffcd power there, he returned from that trying
flation with integrity not only untainted but unsuspeCtcd. After
diitributing among his countrymen pofefions of greater extent
and value than had ever been in the disposal of a subjed in any
age or nation, he himself remained in his original slate of po-
verty; and at the very time, when he brought such a large recruit
to the royal treasury, he was obliged to apply by petition for a
small fum to discharge some petty debts which he had con-
trated during the course of his service . Charles was not in-
sensible to such disinterested merit. Gafca was received by him
with the moit distinguished marks of eteem, and being pro-
moted to the bfhopric of Palencia, he paifed the remainder of
his days in the tranquillity of retirement, refpeccd by his
country, honoured by his sovereign, and beloved by all.

NOTWITISTANDING all Gafca's wife regulations, the tran-

quillity of Peru was not of long continuance. In a country,
where the authority of government was almost forgotten during
the long prevalence of anarchy and mis-rule, where there were
disappointed leaders ripe for revolt, and seditious soldiers ready
to follow them, it was not difficult to kindle combustion. Se-

d< MS. penes me.
VOL. II. M m vcral

B 0 0 K veral fucccffive infurredions desolated the country for omer

VI.
-v-' years. But as those, though fierce, were only transient storms,

excited rather by the ambition and turbulence of particular
men, than by general or public motives, the detail of them is
not the objec of this history. These commotions in Peru, like
every thing of extreme violence either in the natural or political
body, were not of long duration, and by carrying off the corrupt-
ed humours which had given rife to the disorders, they contri-
buted in the end to ftrengthcn the society which at first they
threatened to destroy. During their fierce contcfts, fevcral of
the first invaders of Peru, and many of those licentious adven-
turers whom the fame of their ficcefs had allured thither, fell
by each other's hands. Each of the parties, as they alternately
prevailed in the struggle, cleared the country of a grcater num-
ber, by executing, proscribing, or banishing their opponents.
Men less enterprising and desperate, and more accnifomcd to
move in the path of fober and peaceable indufil-y, fettled in
Peru; and the royal authority was gradually cftablifhed as
frmly there as in the other Spanilh colonies.

r H E
266

# BOOK VII.

T HI
I S T

0
OF

R
BOOK

VII.

As the conquest of the two great empires of Mexico and
Peru forms the most splendid and interesting period in the
history of America, a view of their political inflitutions, and
a dcfcription of their national manners, will exhibit the human
fpecics to the contemplation of intciligent obfervcrs in a very
singular stage of its progress a.

WIiEN compared with other parts of the New World, Mex-

ico and Peru may be confidered as polifllcd flates. Inflcad of
small, indepcndent, hostile tribes, struggling for fubfiftcnce
Imidft woods and marshes, strangers to industry and arts, un-
acquainted with subordination, and almost without the appear-
ance of regular government, we find countries of great extcnt

a See NOTE XLVIII.

Mm 2 fuljed.cd
H

R
A

M

E

Y

A.
I C

BOO K

VII.

NMexico an'l
Peri] inlore
poliilicd than
otler parts
of America.

B 0 K fubjeced to the dominionof one fovcreign, the inhabitants col-
--_- lectcd together in cities, the wisdom and foresight of rulers em-

ployed in providing for the maintenance and security of the
people, the empire of laws in ome measure established, the
authority of religion recognized, many of the arts essential to
life brought to some degree of maturity, and the dawn of such
as are ornamental beginning to appear.

Their totser BUT if the conparifon be made with the people of the an-
nations of cient continent, the inferiority of America in improvement will
the ancient
continent. be conspicuous, and neither the Mexicans nor Peruvians

will be entitled to rank with those nations which merit
the name of civilized. They, like the rude tribes around them,
were totally unacquainted with the ufcful metals, and the pro-
grefs which they had made in extending their dominion over
the animal creation was inconsiderable. The Mexicans had
gone no farther than to tame and rear turkeys, ducks, a
species of finall dogs, and rabbits . By this feeble efliy of in-
genuity, the means of fubfitfence were rendered fomcwhat more
plentiful and secure, than when men dcpend solely on hunting;
but they had no idea of attempting to subdue the more robust
animals, or of deriving any aid from their ministry in carrying
on works of labour. The Peruvians fceIn to have neglected
the inferior animals, and had not rendered any of them domeflic
except the duck; but they were more fortunite in taming the
Llama, an animal peculiar to their country, in form resembling
a camel, and of a size foncwhat larger than a sheep. Under the
protcion of man, this species multiplied grcatly. Its wool fur-
niflcrd the Peruvians witl clothing, its flcfn with food. It was

b I-hrrl a, dcc. iI. lib. vii. c. 1i.

(' VC n
268

even employed as a beast of burden, and carried a moderate 1;o o K

VII.

load with much patience and docility c. It was never used for
draught; and the breed being confined to the mountainous
country, its service, if we may judge by incidents that occur
in the early Spanish writers, was not very extensive among the
Peruvians in their original slate.

IN tracing the line by which nations proceed towards civility,

the discovery of the useful metals, and the acquisition of domi-
nion over the animal creation, have been marked as ficps of ca-
pital importance in their progress. In our continent, focicty
continued in that state which is denominated barbarous, long
after men had attained both. Even with all that command over
nature which there confer, many ages clapfe, before industry be-
comes so perfed as to render fubfiflcncc secure, bcfcre the arts
that supply the wants and furnish the accommodations of life
are invented, and before any idea is conceived of the various in-
flitutions requisite in a well-ordered society. The Mexicans and
Peruvians, without knowledge of the useful metals, or the aid
of domeflic animals, laboured under disadvantages which mufi
have greatly retarded their progress, and in their highest slate
of improvement, their power was so limited, and their opera-
tions so feeble, that they can hardly be confidered as having
advanced beyond the infancy of civil life.

AFTER this general observation concerning the most fingu- \i;,, or tie

lar and distinguishing circumstance in the state of both the great i, '1f,'it,'1i,:'s.s
empires in America, I shall cndcavour to give such a view of 0' cac1',
the conftitutionand interior police of each, as may enable us to

c Vcgn, p. . lib. viii. c. 6. Zaratce lib. i. c. 14.

afccrtain

269

i o o K ascertain their place in the political scale, to allot them their

^ - proper flation between the rude tribes in the New World, and

tlhe polifled fiatcs of the ancient, and to determine how far
they had risen above the former, as well as how much they
fell below the latter.

lliperft in- MinXICO was first fubjeced to the Spanish crown. But

fu.lmion "our

acquaintance with its laws and manners is not, from

c ncer.ing
IhoJi:,ot that circumftancc, more complete. What I have remark-

ed concerning the dcfcdivc and inaccurate information on
wvlich we must rely, with rcfped to the condition and curfoms
f the favagc tribes in America, may be applicd likewise to our
knowlcdgc of the Mexican empire. Cortes, and the rapacious
adventurers who accompanied him, had not Icifure or capacity
to enrich either civil or natural hiflory with new observations.
They undertook their expedition in queit of one object, and
seem hardly to have turned their eyes towards any other. Or,
if during some flort interval of tranquillity, when the occupa-
tions of war ceased, and the ardour of plunder was suspended,
the inflitutions and manners of the people whom they had in-
vaded drew their attention, the inquiries of illiterate soldiers
were conduced with so little sagacity and precision, that the
accounts given by them of the policy and order eflablifllcd in
the Mexican monarchy arc fupcrficial, confused, and inexpli-
cable. It is rather from incidents which they relate occasion-
ally, than from their own dcdudtions and remarks, that we arc
enabled to form some idea of the genius and manners of that
people. The ol)fcurity in which the ignorance of its con-
querors involved the annals of Mexico, was augmented by the
fupcrflition of those ho fucceccddl them. As the memory of
past events wvis prefcrvcd among the Mexicans by figures

painted
270

painted on skins, on cotton cloth, or on the bark of trees, the B O O K

VII.

early missionaries, unable to comprehend their meaning, and
firuck with their uncouth forms, conceived them to be monu-
ments of idolatry which ought to be destroyed, in order to fa-
cilitate the conversion of the Indians. In obedience to an edict
issued by Juan deZummraga, a Franciscan monk, the firfi bifflop
of Mexico, all those records of the ancient Mexican fiery werc
colledecd and committed to the flames. In confcqucncc of t!'is
fanatical zeal of the m;nls who firfi visitcd New Spain, and
which their successors soon began to lament, whatever knov-
ledge of icrnote events ich rude monuments contained was
entirely lofl, and no information remained concerning the an-
cient revolutions and policy of the empire, but wlhat was de-
rived from tradition, or from ome fragments of their hiflorical
paintings that escapcd the barbarous rcfearchcs of ZuInml:lraga .
From the experiencc of all nations it is manifcft, that the me-
mory of past tranfalions can neither be long prefcrvcd, nor be
transmitted with any fidelity by tradition. The Mexican paint-
ings, which are fiupofcd to have servcd as annals of tihir em-
pire, are few in numbcr, and of abignous meaning. Thus
amidst the uncertainty of the former, and the obfcuritv of the
latter, we mufi glean whaintint. ligcncc can be colleced from
the scanty materials fcattcrcd in the Spanif writers.

AccORDING to the account of the Mexicans thcmfeclvcs, Oii.ii,(.f!

their empire was not of long duration. Their country, as they ,t,:,
relate, was originally pofcffd, ratlchr than peopled, by fiall
inldepndcnt tribes, whose mode of life and manners rcfembled
those of the rudefi savages which we have dcferilcd. But
about a period corrcfponding to the beginiiing of the Itnlti
century in the Chriflian ara, fcveral tribes moved in fucccei;vc

d Acona, lib. vi. c. 7. Torquem. Proie). lib. ii, lib, ii. c, 6. lib. xiv. c. 6.

n igrations

27I

migrations from unknown regions towards the north and north-
weft, and fettled in different provinces of Anabac, the ancient
name of New Spain. These, more civilized than the original
inhabitants, began to form them to the arts of social life. At
length, towards the commencement of the thirteenth century,
the Mexicans,'a people more polishcd than any of the former,
advanced from the border of the Californian gulf, and took
poffefion of the plains adjacent to a great lake near the centre
of the country. After residing there about fifty years, they
founded a town, since diftinguifiled by the name of Mexico,
which from humble beginnings Coon grew to be the most con-
fiderable city in the New World. The Mexicans, long after
they wcre establishcd in their new possessions, continued, like
other martial tribes in America, unacquainted with regal do-
minion, and were governed in peace and conduced in war by
such as were entitled to pre-eminence by their wisdom or their
valour. But among them, as in other states whofc power and
territories become extcnfive, the supreme authority centered at
last in a single person; and when the Spaniards under Cortes
invaded the country, Montezuma was the ninth monarch in
order who had swayed the Mexican sceptre, not by hereditary
right, but by elecion.

Sucii is the traditional talc of the Mexicans concerning the

progress of their own empire. According to this, its duration
was very short. From the firfI migration of their parent tribe,
they can reckon little more than three hundred years. From the
cflalifhment of monarchical government, not above a hundred
and thirty years, according to one account, or a hundred
and nincty-fcvcn, according to another computation , had
clapsed. If, on one hand, we suppose the Mexican slate to

c Acof. Hill. lib. vii. c. 8, &c.

f Purchas Pilgr. iii. p. o68, &c.

22

BOOK

V Iry r nt
Very recent.

h-ave

have been of higher antiquity, and to have subsisted during 1 o K
such a length of time as the Spanish accounts of its civilization .l -y-
would naturally lead us to conclude, it is difficult to conceive
how, among a people who poifcfied the art of recording events
by pictures, and who confidered it as an cfiential part of th.ir
national education, to teach their children to repeat the hillc-
rical songs which celebrated the exploits of their ancestors ',
the knowledge of past tranfadtions fiould be so slender and
limited. If, on the other hand, we adopt their own fytlem,
with refpet to the antiquities of their nation, it is no less ditli-
cult to account either for that improved state of society, or for
the extensive dominion to which their empire had attained,
when firIt visited by the Spaniards. The infancy of nations is
so long, and, even when every circumstance is favourable to
their progress, they advance so slowly towards any maturity of
strength or policy, that the recent origin of the Mexicans
seems to be a strong presumption of exaggeration, in the fplen-
did descriptions which have been given of their government
and manners.

BUT it is not by theory or conjeEtures that hiflory decides, SPa. which
with regard to the state or character of nations. It produces Prove their

progr'fs in

fads as the foundation of every judgment which it ventures to civilization.
pronounce. In collecing those which must regulate our opi-
nion in the present inquiry, ome occur that suggest an idea of
considerable progress in civilization in the Mexican empire, and
others which eem to indicate that it had advanced but little
beyond the ravage tribes around it. Both fllall be exhibited to
the view of the reader, that, fiom comparing them, he may
determine on which fide the evidence preponderates.

e lIcrrcra, dec. 3 lih. ii. c. 18.
VOL. II. N n THE

Bo o0 K Tii right of private property was perfectly understood, and
,-_~~ eftabliflcedin its full extent. Among several savage tribes, we
'liP rigt iulo have fen, that the idea of a title to the separate and exclusive
t,rr pcJty fully
cf-bifinLd. pofiefiion of any objec was hardly known; and that among

all, it was extremely limited and ill-defined. But in Mexico,
where agriculture and indutry had made ome progress, the
diftincion between real and moveable poffefions, between
property in land and property in goods, had taken place. Both
might be transferred from one person to another by sale or
barter; both might descend by inheritance. Every person
who could be denominated a free man had property in land.
This, however, they held by various tenures. Some possessed
it in full right, and it descended to their heirs. The title of
others to their lands was derived from the office or dignity
which they enjoyed; and when deprived of the latter, they loft
poffefiion of the former. Both thee modes of occupying land
were deemed noble, and peculiar to citizens of the highest
class. The tenure, by which the great body of the people held
their property, was very different. In every diftrid a certain
quantity of land was measured out, in proportion to the num-
ber of families. This was cultivated by the joint labour of
the whole; its produce was deposited in a common storehouse,
and divided among them according to their refpedive exigen-
cies. The members of the Calpullee, or associations, could
not alienate their ihare of the common estate; it was an indivi-
fible permanent property, destined for the support of their
families '. In consequence of this difiribution of the territory
of the state, every man had an interest in its welfare, and the
happiness of the individual was connected with the public
security.
f Herrcra, dcc. 3. lib. iv. c. 15. Torqucm. Mon. Ind. lib. xiv. c. 7. Corita, MS.

THE
274

THE number and greatness of the cities in the Mexican em-

pire is one of the most firiking circumstances, that diftinguii it
from those nations in America which we have already defecribed.
While society continues in a rude state, the wants of men are
so few, and they stand so little in need of mutual afti?:ce,
that their inducements to crowd together are extremmy ifccb' .
Their industry at the fame time is so iperfcl-, that it ca;:-
not secure subsistence for any considerable number of fnmi-
lies fettled in one spot. They live disperscd, at this period,
from choice as well as from necessity, or at the utmost afieinbl
in finall hamlets on the banks of the river which supplies them
with food, or on the border of ome plain left open by nature,
or cleared by their own labour. The Spaniards, accustomed to
this mode of habitation among all the avage tribes with which
they were then acquainted, were atonifhed, on entering New
Spain, to find the natives residing in towns of such extent as re-
fembled those of Europe. In the first fervour of their admnira-
tion, they compared Zempoalla, though a town only of the
second or third size, to the cities of greatest note in their own
country. When, afterwards, they visited in fucceflion Tlafcala,
Cholula, Tacuba, Tezeuco, and Mexico itself, their amaze-
ment increased so much, that it led them to convey ideas of
their magnitude and populousness bordering on what is incre-
dible. Even where there is leisure for obfcrvation, and no in-
terest that leads to deceive, conjecural estimates of the number
of people in cities are extremely loose, and uiually much ex-
aggerated. It is not surprising, then, that Cortes and his com-
panions, little accuflomed to such computations, and power-
fully tempted to magnify, in order to exalt the merit of their
own discoveries and conquests, flould have been betrayed into
this common error, and have railed their descriptions confi-

N n z dcr.;bly

BOOK

V1I

*Th- nli:m',,r
oftihir Lities,

275

P o0 K derably above truth. For this rcafon, some confiderablc abatc-
L-X-?--. ment ought to be made from their calculation of the number of

inhabitants in the Mexican cities, and we may fix the tancard
cf their population much lower than they have done; but iill
they will appear to be cities of such consequence, as arc not to
be found but among people who have made some considerable
progrels in the arts of social life g

1:

f pa;'- T' r separation of profeflions among the Mexicans is a
;iis. yp111ptoml of improvement no less remarkable. Arts, in the

early ages of focicty, are so few and so simple, that each man
is futiciently mailer of them all, to gratify every demand of
his own limited desires. The savage can form his bow, point
his arrows, rear his hut, and hollow his canoe, without call-
ing in the aid of any hand more skilful than his own. Time
must have augmented the wants of men, and ripened their in-
genuity, before the productions of art become so complicated
in their ftrudure, or so curious in their fabric, that a particular
course of education is requisite towards forming the artificer to
expertness in contrivance and workmanship. In proportion as
refinement spreads, the diftinaion of professions increases,
and they branch out into more numerous and minute fubdi-
visions. Among the Mexicans, this eparation of the arts ne-
ceffary in life had taken place to a considerable extent. The
functions of the mason, the weaver, the goldsmith, the pain-
ter, and of several other crafts, were carried on by different
persons. . Each was regularly inltruted in his calling. To it
alone his induitry was confined; and by assiduous application
to one object, together with the persevering patience peculiar
to Americans, their artizans attained to a degree of neatness

r Sec N 0 T E XLIX.

and
276

and perfection in work far beyond what could have been ex-
peted from the rude tools which they employed. Their va-
rious productions were brought into commerce; and by the
exchange of them in the stated markets held in the cities,
their mutual wants were supplied h, in such orderly intcr-
course as characterizes an improved slate of society.

THE distinction of ranks eftablifled in the Mexican empire

is the next circumstance that merits attention. In surveying
the savage tribes of America, we observed, that consciousness
of equality, and impatience of subordination, are sentiments
natural to man in the infancy of civil life. During peace, the
authority of a superior is hardly felt among them, and even in
war it is but little acknowledged. Strangers to the idea of
property, the difference in condition resulting from it is un-
known. Birth or titles confer no pre-eminence; it is only by
personal merit and accomplishments that it can be acquired.
The form of society was very different among the Mexicans.
The great body of the people were in a moit humiliating state.
A considerable number, known by the name of Mayeques,
nearly resembled in condition those peasants who, under vari-
ous denominations, were confidered during the prevalence of
the feudal system, as instruments of labour attached to the foil.
The Mayegues could not change their place of residence with-
out permiflion of the superior on whom they depended. They
were conveyed, together with the lands on which they were set-
tled, from one proprietor to another; and were bound to culti-
vate the ground, and to perform several kinds of servile work .
Others were reduced to the lowest form of fubjetion, that of

1 Cortes Rclat. ap Ramus. iii. 239, &c. Gom, Crol. c. 79. Torquem lilb. xii.

c. 34. Herrcra, dec. 2. lib. vii. c, l5, &c, i Hcrrcra, dec. 3. lib. ir.
C. 17. Corita, MS.

domestic

0 0 K
VII.

rhi cifsinc.
tion cf ranki

277

B O O K domeflic servitude, and felt the utmost rigour of that wretch-
^v__ ed iate. Their condition was held to be so vile, and their

lives deemed to be of so little value, that a person who killed
one of those slaves was not fubje&ed to any puniflhment k.
Even those confidered as freemen were treated by their haugh-
ty lords as beings of an inferior species. The nobles, poless-.
ed of ample territories, were divided into various claies, to
each of which peculiar titles of honour belonged. Some of
these titles, like their lands, descended from father to son in
perpetual succession. Others were annexed to particular
offices, or conferred during life as marks of personal diftinc-
tion '. The monarch, exalted above all, enjoyed extensive
power, and supreme dignity. Thus the diftindion of ranks
was completely eftablifled, in a line of regular Subordination,
reaching from the highest to the lowest member of the com-
munity. Each of these knew what he could claim, and what
he owed. The people, who were not allowed to wear a dress
of the fame fashion, or to dwell in houses of a form similar
to those of the nobles, accosted them with the most fubmiifive
reverence. In the presence of their sovereign, they durst not
lift their eyes from the ground, or look him in the face m.
The nobles themselves, when admitted to an audience of their
sovereign, entered bare-footed, in mean garments, and, as
his slaves, paid him homage approaching to adoration. This
refped due from inferiors to those above them in rank, was
eftabliflied with such ceremonious accuracy, that it incorpo-
rated with their language, and influenced its genius and idiom.
The Mexican tongue abounded in expreflons of reverence
and courtesy. The stile and appellations, used in the inter-

kI Herrcra, dec. 3. lib. iv. c. 7. ' Herrcra, dec. 3. lib, iv. c. 15. Corita, MS.
n Herera, dec. 3. lib, ii . c 14.

course
278

course between equals, would have been so unbecoming in 1 o0 K

VII.

the mouth of one in a lower sphere, when he accosted a per-
son in higher rank, as to be deemed an insult ". It is only
in societies, which time and the institution of regular govern-
ment have moulded into form, that we find such an orderly
arrangement of men into different ranks, and such nice atten-
tion paid to their various rights.

THE spirit of the Mexicans, thus familiarized and bended Teir politi-

cal conft.tu-

to Subordination, was prepared for submitting to monarchical tion.
government. But the dcfcriptions of their policy and laws, by
the Spaniards who overturned them, are so inaccurate and
contradictory, that it is difficult to delineate the form of their
confritution with any precision. Sometimes they represent
the monarchs of Mexico as absolute, deciding according to
their pleasure, with refpeE to every operation of the state.
On other occasions, we discover the traces of eablifhed cuf-
toms and laws, framed in order to circumscribe the power
of the crown, and we meet with rights and privileges of the
nobles which seem to be opposed as barriers against its en-
croachments. This appearance of inconsistency has arisen
from inattention to the innovations of Montezuma upon the
Mexican policy. His aspiring ambition subverted the ancient
system of government, and introduced a pure despotism. He
disregarded their laws, violated their privileges, and reduced
his fubjeas of every order to the level of slaves . The
chiefs, or nobles of the firil rank, submitted to the yoke with
such reluctance, that, from impatience to flake it off, and hope
of recovering their original rights, many of them courted the

n See N 0 T E L. ° Icrrcra, dec. 3. lib. ii. c. 14. Torqucm.
lib. ii. c. 69.

protcction

279

B 0 0 K protetion of Cortes, and joined a foreign power against their

VII.

domeffic oppressor P. It is not then under the reign of Monte-
zuma, but under those of his predecessors, that we can disco-
ver what was the original form and genius of Mexican policy.
From the foundation of the monarchy to the election of Mon-
tezuma, it seems to have subsisted with little variation. That
body of citizens, which may be diftinguiffed by the name of
nobility, formed the chief and most refpecable order in the
slate. They were of various ranks, as has already been ob-
served, and their honours were acquired and transmitted in dif-
ferent manners. Their number seems to have been great. Ac-
cording to an author accustomed to examine with attention
what he relates, there were in the Mexican empire thirty of
this order, each of whom had in his territories about a hun-
dred thousand people, and ubordinate to thee, there were
about three thousand nobles of a lower class . The territories
belonging to the chiefs of Tezeuco and Tacuba, were hardly
inferior in extent to those of the Mexican monarch r. Each
of there possessed complete territorial jurifdidion, and levied
taxes from their own vassals. But all followed the fandard
of Mexico in war, serving with a number of men in propor-
tion to their domain, and most of them paid tribute to its
monarch as their superior lord.

IN tracing those great lines of the Mexican conltitution, an

image of feudal policy in its most rigid form rites to view,
and we discern its three diftinguiflling charateriftics, a no-
bility poflhffing almost independent authority, a people de-

w Herrera, dec. 2. lib. v. c. o, ii. Torquem. lib. iv c. 49.

e Icrrcra, dec. 2. lib. viii. c. . [ Torquem. lib. ii. c. 57. Corita, MS.

pressed
280

pressed into the lowest state of fubjedion, and a king entrusted B o o K
with the executive power of the state. Its spirit and principles ---a
seem to have operated in the New World, in the fame manner
as in the ancient. The jurifdidion of the crown was extremely
limited. All real and effective authority was retained by the
Mexican nobles in their own hands, and the hadow of it
only left to the king. Jealous to excess of their own rights,
they guarded with most vigilant anxiety against the encroach-
ments of their overeigns. By a fundamental law of the em-
pire, it was provided that the king fiould not determine con-
cerning any point of general importance, without the appro-
bation of a council composed of the prime nobility . Unless
he obtained their content he could not engage the nation in war,
nor could he dispose of the most inconsiderable branch of the
public revenue at pleasure; it was appropriated to certain pur-
poses, from which it could not be diverted by the regal autho-
rity t. In order to secure full effect to those constitutional re-
ftraints, the Mexican nobles did not permit their crown to
descend by inheritance, but disposed of it by eleEtion. The
right of elecion seems to have been originally vefied in the
whole body of nobility, but was afterwards committed to fix
electors, of whom the Chiefs of Tezeuco and Tacuba were
always two. From respeCt for the family of their monarchs,
the choice fell generally upon some person sprung from it.
But as the ativity and valour of their prince was of greater
moment to a people perpetually engaged in war, than a ftri&t
adherence to the order of birth, collaterals of mature age or
diftinguilhed merit were often preferred to those who were

' Herrera. dec. 3. ib. ii. c, 9. Id. dec. 3. lib. iv. c. 16, Corita, MS.
Ibid. c. 17.

28l
VOL. II.

0 o

1lCearel

i 0 0 K

VII.

l'ov.cr nd
4;).i.& ,ur of
tlcir l- o-

'lil, 1i.s

Ortlr of thtir
tgovcrnlllCnt.

nearer the throne in direct descent u To this maxim, in their
policy, the Mexicans appear to be indebted for such a fuccef-
sion of able and warlike princes, as raised their empire, in a
short period, to that extraordinary height of power, wvhicli it
had attained when Cortes landed in New Spain.

WH ILE thejurifdi&ion of the Mexican monarchs continued

to be limited, it is probable that it was exercised with little
ostentation. But as their authority became more extensive, the
splendour of their government augmented. It was in this last
tfate that the Spaniards beheld it, and, struck with the appear-
ance of Montezuma's court, they describe its pomp at great
length, and with much admiration. The number of his-at-
tendants, the order, the silence, and the reverence with which
they served him; the vast extent of his royal mansion, the
variety of its apartments allotted to different officers, and the
ostentation with which his grandeur was displayed, whenever
he permitted his fubjets to behold him, seem to resemble the
magnificence of the ancient monarchies in Asia, rather than the
simplicity of the infant states in the New World.

BUT it was not in the mere parade of royalty that the Mexi-

can potentates exhibited their power, they manifested it more
beneficially in the order and regularity with which they con-
ducted the internal administration and police of their domi-
nions. Complete jurifdition, civil as well as criminal, over its
own immediate vassals, was vetied in the crown. Judges were
appointed for each department, and, if we may rely on the ac-
count which the Spanifli writers give of the maxims and laws

' Acot:i, lib. i. c. 24. -lcrrcra, dec. 3. lib. ii. c. 13. Corita, MS.

upon
S2

upon which they founded their decilions with rfpc^ to the
distribution of property and the puniflment of crimes, julticc
was administered in the Mexican cmpire, with a dcgrec of ord:r
and equity, refcmbling what takes place in societics igihly
civilized.

THIrEIi attention in providing for the foipport of govern-

nient was not less sagacious. Taxes were laid upon land, upon
tihe acquisitions of industry, and upon commodities of every
kind exposed to sale in the public markets. Thcie duties,
though confidcrable, were not arbitrary, or unequal. They
were imposed according to eftabliffed rules, and each knew what
share of the common burden he had to bear. As the ulfe of
money was nknown, all the taxes were paid in kind ; and tust,
not only the natural productions of all the different provinces
in the empire, but every fpecics of manufadture, and every
work of ingenuity and art, were colleted in the public forc-
houses. From those the emperor supplied his numerous,; train
of attendants in peace, and his armies during war, with food,
with cloaths, and ornaments. People of inferior condition,
neither possessing land nor engaged in commerce, were bund
to the performance of various Icrviccs. By their fatcd la-
bour the crown-lands were cultivated, pblic workls vwere
carried on, and the various houses belonging to the emperor
were built, and kept in repair .

1 00 K

1II.

It.

TIIE improved state of govcrnment amongl tle Mexicans is T.., [i(,;.c

conspicuous, not only in points elitnetial to the being of a well-
ordered society, but in fevcral regulatiols of inferior conic-

" Hcrrca, licc. z, .
lb . vii. c. 13. dec. . ilb. iv c. i6, 17. Se N O T L. 1.1.

0 02

t lllllC 't;

283

B 0 0 K quence with respect to police. The institution, which I have

VII.
v il already mentioned, of public couriers, stationed at proper inter-

vals, to convey intelligence from one part of the empire to the
other, was a refinement in police not introduced into any king-
dom of Europe at that period. The ftruture of the capital
city in a lake, with artificial dykes, and causeways of great
length, which served as avenues to it from different quarters,
ereced in the water with no less ingenuity than labour, seems
to be an idea that could not have occurred to any but a civilized
people. The fame observation may be applied to the ftruaure
of the aqueducts, or conduits, by which they conveyed a stream
of frefli water, from a considerable diitance, into the city along
one of the causeways x. The appointment of a considerable
number of persons to clean the fireets, to light them by fires
kindled in different places, and to patrole as watchmen during
the night y, discovers a degree of attention which even poliflled
nations are late in acquiring.
Their arts. THE progress of the Mexicans in various arts is confidered

as the most decisive proof of their superior refinement. Cortes,
and the early Spanish authors, describe this with rapture, and
maintain, that the mofl celebrated European artists could not
surpass or even equal them in ingenuity and neatness of work-
manship. They represented men, animals, and other objects,
by such a disposition of various coloured feathers, as is said to
have produced all the effects of light and shade, and to have
imitated nature with truth and delicacy. Their ornaments of
gold and silver have been described to be of a fabric no less
curious. But in forming any idea, from general defcrip-

' Sce N O T E LII. Y Herrera, dec. 2. lib. viii. c. 4. Torribio, MS.

tions,
284

tions, concerning the slate of arts among nations imperfectly B 0 O K
polished, we are extremely ready to err. In examining the .--
works of people whose advances in improvement are nearly the
fame with our own, we view them with a critical, and often
with a jealous eye. Whereas, when conscious of our own fu-
periority, we survey the arts of nations comparatively rude,
we are aftoni/hed at works executed by them under such ma-
nifeft disadvantages, and, in the warmth of our admiration,
are apt to represent them as productions more finifled than
they really are. To the influence of this illusion, without
supposing any intention to deceive, we may impute the exag-
geration of some Spanish authors, in their accounts of the
Mexican arts.

IT is not from those descriptions, but from confidering such

specimens of their arts as are frill preserved, that we must de-
cide concerning their degree of merit. As the ship in which
Cortes ent to Charles V. the most curious productions of the
Mexican artisans, which were collected by the Spaniards when
they first pillaged the empire, was taken by a French corsair ,
the remains of their ingenuity are less numerous than those of
the Peruvians. Whether any of their works with feathers, in
imitation of painting, be still extant in Spain, I have not
learned; but many of their ornaments in gold and silver, as
well as various utensils employed in common life, are deposited
in the magnificent cabinet of natural and artificial productions,
lately opened by the king of Spain; and I am informed by
persons on whole judgment and taste I can rely, that these boast-
ed efforts of their art are uncouth representations of common
objects, or very coarse images of the human and ome animal

z Rclac. de Cort. Ranmu. iii. 294, F.

forlns,

285

B o o K forms, destitute of grace and propriety . The jufnefs of these
'.--v--- obi,)frvations is confirmed by infpeaing the wooden prints or

copper-plates of their paintings, which have been published by
various authors. In them every figure of men, of quadrupeds,
or birds, as well as every representation of inanimated nature,
is extiemcly rude and aukward. The hardest Egyptian stile,
tiff and imperfect as it was, is more elegant. The scrawls of
children delineate objeds almost as accurately.

BUT however low the Mexican paintings may be ranked,

when viewed merely as works of art, a very different station
belongs to them, when confidcred as the records of their coun-
try, as historical monuments of its policy and tranfadions;
and they become curious as well as interesting objects of atten-
tion. The noblest and most beneficial invention of which hu-
man ingenuity can boast, is that of writing. But the first essays
of this art, which hath contributed more than all others to the
improvement of the species, were very rude, and it advanced
towards perfection slowly, and by a gradual progrefion. When
the warrior, eager for fame, wiflhed to transmit ome knowledge
of his exploits to succeeding ages; when the gratitude of a peo-
ple to their sovereign prompted them to hand down an account of
his beneficent deeds to posterity; the first method of accomplif-
ing this, that eems to have occurred to them, was to delineate,
in the best manner they could, figures representing the ation
of which they were solicitous to preserve the memory. Of this,
which has very properly been called pidure-writing ', we find
traces among ome of the most savage tribes of America. When
a leader returns from the field, he strips a tree of its bark, and

a See N OTr i: LIII. 1 Divine Legat. of Mofcs, iii. 73.

with
2'6

with red paint scratches upon it some uncouth figures, whichl 1 0 K
represent the order of his march, the number of his followers, ,-
the enemy whom he attacked, the scalps and captives which
he brought home. To tlhofe imple annals he truts for renown,
and soothes himself with hope, that by their means he fllall
receive praise from the warriors of future times C

COMPARED with those aukward efays of their savage coun-

trymen, the paintings of the Mexicans may be confidered as
works of composition and design. They were not acquainted,
it is true, with any other method of recording tranlataion,,
than that of delineating the objects which they wished to re-
present. But they could exhibit a more complex series of events
in progressive order, and describe, by a proper dilIofition of
figures, the occurrences of a king's reign firom his acceflion to
his death; the progress of an infant's education from its birth
until it attained to the years of maturity; the different recom-
pences and marks of diftindion conferred upon warriors, in
proportion to the exploits which they had performed. Some
singular specimens of this piture-writing have been prefirved,
which are jufily confidered as the most curious monuments of
art brought from the New World. The molt valuable of these
was published by Purchas in fixty-fix plates. It is divided
into three parts. The first contains the history of the Mexican
empire under its ten monarchs. The second is a tribute-roll,
representing what each conquered town paid into the royal
treasury. The third is a code of their institutions, domestic,
political, and military. Another fpccimen of Mexican paint-
ing has been publiffed in thirty-two plates, by the present

Sih W. Jo.hnson's Philof. TranfaCl. vol. Isiii p. 143. M\cm. de la Iontan. ii. 191.
Lafitau, Maurs d: Sauv. ii, 43.

archbillolp

2'7

B o K archbishop of Toledo. To both are annexed a full explana-

VII.
_-.-^ tion of what the figures were intended to represent, which

was obtained by the Spaniards from Indians well acquainted
with their own arts. The style of painting in all these is the
fame. They represent things, not words. They exhibit images
to the eye, not ideas to the understanding. They may, there-
fore, be confidered as the earliest and most imperfect essay of
men in their progress towards discovering the art of writing.
The defecs in this mode of recording tranfaaions must have
been early felt. To paint every occurrence was, from its na-
ture, a very tedious operation; and as affairs became more
complicated, and events multiplied in any society, its annals
must have swelled to an enormous bulk. Betides this, no ob-
jects could be delineated but those of sense; the conceptions of
the mind had no corporeal form, and as long as piCture-writ-
ing could not convey an idea of these, it must have been a
very imperfect art. The necessity of improving it must have
rouzed and harpened invention; and the human mind, holding
the fame course in the New World as in the Old, might have
advanced by the fame successive steps, first, from an acual
picture to the plain hieroglyphic ; next, to the allegorical sym-
bol; then to the arbitrary character; until, at length, an al-
phabet of letters was discovered, capable of exprefing all the
variety of combinations of found employed in speech. In the
paintings of the Mexicans we, accordingly, perceive, that this
progress was begun among them. Upon an attentive infpec-
tion of the plates, which I have mentioned, we may observe
some approach to the plain or simple hieroglyphic, where some
principal part or circumstance in the subjet is made to sand
for the whole. In the annals of their kings, published by
Purchas, the towns conquered by each are uniformly repre-

sented
288

sented in the fame manner by a rude delineation of a house; n ° ° K
but in order to i .nt out the particular towns which submitted u--r.-
to their vi&ori'u.- arms, peculiar emblems, sometimes natural
objects, and fir,:cimes artificial figures, are employed. In the
tribute-roll, pubiifhed by the archbishop of Toledo, the house,
which was properly the picure of the town, is omitted, and
the emblem alone is employed to represent it. They seem even
to have made some advances beyond this, towards the use of
the more figurative and fanciful hieroglyphic. In order to
describe a monarch, who had enlarged his dominions by force
of arms, they painted a target, ornamented with darts, and
placed it between him and those towns which he subdued. But
it is only in one instance, the notation of numbers, that
we discern any attempt to exhibit ideas which had no
corporeal form. They had invented artificial marks, or igns
of convention, for this purpose. By means of these, they com-
puted the years of their kings reigns, as well as the amount
of tribute to be paid into the royal treasury. The figure of a
circle represented unit, and, in small numbers, the computa-
tion was made by repeating it. Larger numbers were ex-
prefled by a peculiar mark, and they had such as denoted all
integral numbers from twenty to eight thousand. The flort
duration of their empire preventcd the Mexicans from advan-
cing farther in that long courle which conduts men from the
labour of delineating real objects, to the finplicity and ease of
alphabetic writing. Their records, notwith!an ding some dawn
of such ideas as might have led to a more perfedt tfyle, can be
confidered as nothing more than a fp;cics of piture-writinig,
so far improved as to mark their fupcriority over the savage
tribes of America, but fill so defcttive as to prove that they had

VoL. II. )P n nri

289

INCORRECT

NUMBERING

13 0 0 K

VII.

l.ittle inter-
couife among
iis several
provinces.

Spaniards. Tepeaca, at the diitance of thirty leagues fiom
Mexico, seems to have been a separate state, governed by its
own laws '. Mechoacan, the frontier of which extended within
forty leagues of Mexico, was a powerful kingdom, remarkable
for its implacable enmity to the Mexican name m. By thcfe
hostile powers the Mexican empire was circunfcribed on every
quarter; and the high ideas which we are apt to form of it from
the description of the Spanifi bifiorians, should be considerably
moderated.

IN consequence of this independence of several flates in New

Spain upon the Mexican empire, there was not any considerable
intercourse between its various provinces. Even in the interior
country, not far distant from the capital, there seem to have
been no roads to facilitate the communication of one diftrid
with another; and when the Spaniards first attempted to pe-
netrate into it, they had to open their way through forests
and marshes ". Cortes, in his adventrous march from Mexico
to Honduras in I 525, met with obftrucions, and endured hard-
ships little inferior to those with which he must have struggled
in the mos uncivilized regions of America. In some places, he
could hardly force a pafage through impervious woods, and
plains overflowed with water. In others, he found so little cul-
tivation, that his troops were frequently in danger of perifling
by famine. Such fads correspond ill with the pompous de-
scription which the Spanifl writers give of Mexican police and
indufry, and convey an idea of a country nearly similar to that
possessed by the Indian tribes in North America. Here and

' -lrrera, dec, ., lib. x. c. 15. 21. B. Diaz. c. 130.
lib. ii. c. Jo. 1" Diaz. c. 166. c. 176.

m Herrcra, dec. 3.

there
294

there a trading or a war-path, as they are called in North Ame- B 0 0 K

VII.

rica, led from one settlement to another ; but generally there ----
appeared no sign of any established communication, few marks
of industry, and no monument of art.

A NO less striking proof of this imperfection in their coIn- Farther proo

mercial intercourse, is their want of money, or ome universal of this
standard by which to estimate the value of commodities. The
discovery of this is among the steps of greatest consequence in
the progress of nations. Until it has been made, all their
tranfations must be so aukward, so operose, and so limited, that
we may boldly pronounce that they have advanced but a little
way in their career. The invention of such a commercial
standard is of such high antiquity in our hemisphere, and rites
so far beyond the ara of authentic history, as to appear almost
coeval with the existence of society. The precious metals eem
to have been early employed for this purpose, and from their
permanent value, their divisibility, and many other qualities,
they are better adapted to serve as a common standard, than any
other substance of which Nature has given us the command.
But in the New World, where these metals abound most, this
use of them was not known. The exigencies of rude tribes, or
of monarchies imperfeatly civilized, did not call for it. All
their commercial intercourse was carried on by barter, and their
ignorance of any common standard by which to facilitate that
exchange of commodities, which contributes so much towards
the comfort of life, may be justly mentioned as an evidence
of the infant slate of their policy. But even in the New
World, the inconvenience of wanting ome general infirument
of commerce began to be felt, and ome efforts were made to-

H Herrnea, dec. 3. lib. vii. c, 8.

wards

295

BOOK

, 1I.

Their funeral
;itcs.

Their ngri-
ci lIure iml-
:: ; t.

THEIR funeral rites were not less bloody than those of the

most avage tribes. On the death of any distinguished person-
age, especially of the Emperor, a certain number of his attend-
ants were chosen to accompany him to the other world, and
those unfortunate victims were put to death without mercy,
and buried in the fame tomb '.

THOUGH their agriculture was more extensive than that of

the roving tribes who trusted chiefly to their bow for food, it
seems not to have supplied them with such subsistence as men
require when engaged in efforts of active industry. The Spa-
niards appear not to have been firuck with any superiority of
the Mexicans over the other people of America in bodily vi-
gour. Both, according to their observation, were of such a
feeble frame as to be unable to endure fatigue, and the strength
of one Spaniard exceeded that of several Indians. This they
imputed to their scanty diet, on poor fare, sufficient to preserve
life, but not to give firmness to the constitution'. Such a re-
mark could hardly have been made with refpeat to any people
furnished plentifully with the necessaries of life. The difficulty
which Cortes found in procuring subsistence for his small body
of soldiers, who were often constrained to live on the fponta-
neous productions of the earth, teems to confirm the remark
of the Spanish writers, and gives no high idea of the state of
cultivation in the Mexican empire.

r fartheT A PRACTICE that was universal in New Spain appears to
ruoofthis. favour this opinion. The Mexican women gave fuck to their

h THerrcra, dec. 3. lib. ii. c. 18. Gom. Chron. c. 2oz.
iii. 306. A. Hcrrera, dec, 3. lib. iv. C. 17. dec, 2, lib. vi. c, 6.

'Relat. ap. Ramus

children
292

children for several years, and during that time they did not
cohabit with their husbands '. This precaution against a bur-
denfome increase of progeny, though necefhary, as I have al-
ready observed, among savages, who, from the hardflilps of
their condition, and the precariousness of their fubfiftcnce, find
it impossible to rear a numerous family, can hardly be supposed
to have continued among a people who lived at ease and in
abundance.

THE vast extent of the Mlexican empire, which has been con-

fidered, and with justice, as the most decisive proof of a confi-
derable progress in regular government and police, is one of
those fadts in the history of the New World, which seems to
have been admitted without due examination or sufficient evi-
dence. The Spanish historians, in order to magnify the valour
of their countrymen, are accustomed to represent the dominion
of Montezuma as itretching over all the provinces of New
Spain from the North to the Southern Ocean. But a great part
of the mountainous country was possessed by the Otomies, a
fierce uncivilized people, who seem to have been the residue of
the original inhabitants. The provinces towards the'north
and weft of Mexico were occupied by the Chichemecas, and
other tribes of hunters. None of these recognized the Mexi-
can monarch as their superior. Even in the interior and more
level country, there were several cities and provinces which had
never submitted to the Mexican yoke. Tlafcala, though only
twenty-one leagues from the capital of the empire, was an in-
dependent and hostile republic. Cholula, though frill nearer,
had been subjected only a ihort time before the arrival of the

1 Goin. Chron. c. 208. Herrcra, dec. 3. lib. iv. c, 16.

Spaniard'.

B 0 0 K

\' ..

Doubts COI-
cerning the
Cxtent of 1IIi
Cl1il

293

BOOK

Vll.

Their mode
of computing
linllt'.

Fats indicat-
ing a finall
progress in ci-
vilization.

Their wars
continual an]
ferocious,

not proceeded far beyond the first stage in that progress which
must be completed, before any people can be ranked among
polished nations d

THEIR mode of computing time may be confidered as a more

decisive evidence of their progress in improvement. They di-
vided their year into eighteen months, each consisting of twenty
days, amounting in all to three hundred and sixty. But as they
observed that the course of the fun was not completed in that
time, they added five days to the year. These, which were
properly intercalary days, they termnedfupernumerary or wafie;
and as they did not belong to any month, no work was done,
and no sacred rite performed on them; they were devoted
wholly to festivity and paftimee. This near approach to phi-
lofophical accuracy, is a remarkable proof that the Mexicans
had bestowed ome attention upon inquiries and speculations,
to which men in a very rude state never turn their thoughts..

SUCH are the most triking particulars in the manners and

policy of the Mexicans, which exhibit them to view as a people
considerably refined. From other circumstances, one is apt to
fufpea that their character, and many of their institutions, did
not differ greatly from those of the other inhabitants of Ame-
rica.

LIKE the rude tribes around them, the Mexicans were in-

ceffantly engaged in war, and the motives which prompted them
to hostility seem to have been the fame. They fought, in order
to gratify their vengeance, by ihedding the blood of their ene-

d See NOTE LIV.

c Acofta, lib, vi c. 2.

mies.
-29o

miles. In battle they were chiefly intent on taking prisoners, ° () K
and it was by the number of these that they estimated the glory ---
of vicory. No captive was ever ransomed or spared. All were
sacrificed without mercy, and their fleflh devoured with the fame
barbarous joy as among the fiercest savages. On obme occasions
it rose to even wilder excesses. Their principal warriors covered
thenfelves with the fltins of the unhappy victims which they
had slain, and danced about the streets, boasting of their owni
valour, and exulting over their enemies f. Even in their civil
institutions we discover traces of that barbarous disposition
which their system of war inspired. The four chief counlellors
of the empire were distinguished by atrocious titles, which
could have been aumed only by a people who delighted in
blood g. This ferocity of character prevailed among all the na-
tions of New Spain. The Tlafcalans, the people of Mechoacan,
and other states at enmity with the Mexicans, delighted equally
in war, and treated their prisoners with the fame cruelty. In
proportion as mankind combine in social union, and live under
the influence of equal laws and regular policy, their manners
soften, sentiments of humanity arise, and the rights of the fpe-
cies come to be understood. The fierceness of war abates, and
even while engaged in hostility, men remember what they owe
one to another. The savage fights to destroy, the citizen to
conquer. The former neither pities nor spares, the latter has
acquired sensibility that tempers his rage. To this sensibility
the Mexicans seem to have been perfet strangers, and among
them war was carried on with so much of its original barbarity,
that we cannot but fufped their degree of civilization to have
been very imperfect.

Hcerrcra, dec. . lib, ii. c. 15. Goi. Chron. c. 217. B See NOTE LV.

P p 2 TlIEiF

29I

B 0 0 K wards supplying that defect. The Mexicans, among whom the

-Cv- number and greatness of their cities gave rile to a more extended

commerce, than in any part of America, had begun to employ a
common standard of value, which rendered finaller transactions
much more easy. As chocolate was the favourite drink of
persons in every rank of life, the nuts or almonds of cacoa, of
which it is comnpoed, were of such universal consumption, that,
in their stated markets, these were willingly received in return
for commodities of finall price. Thus they came to be con-
fidered as the instrument of commerce; and the value of what
one wished to dispose of, was estimated by the number of nuts
of the cacoa, which he might expect in exchange for it. This
seems to be the utmost length which the Americans had ad-
vanced towards the discovery of any expedient for supplying
the use of money. And if the want of it is to be held, on one
hand, as a proof of their barbarity, this expedient for supplying
that want, hould be admitted on the other, as an evidence no
less satisfying, of the superior progress which the Mexicans had
made in refinement and civilization.

Uoubtscon- IN such a rude state were many of the Mexican pro-
ccrning the vinces when first visited by their conquerors. Even their
finte of their
cities. cities, extensive and populous as they were, seem rather to be

the habitation of men just emerging from barbarity, than the
residence of a poliflhed people. The description of Tlafcala
nearly resembles that of an Indian village. A number of low
straggling huts, scattered about irregularly, according to the
caprice of each proprietor, built with turf and stone, and
thatched with reeds, without any light but what they received
by a door, so low that it could not be entered upright p. In

' Herrera, dec. 2. lib. vi. c. 12.

MeKico,

Mexico, though from the peculiarity of its situation, the difpo-
fition of the hou fes was more orderly, the ftru ture of the greater
part was equally mean. Nor does the fabric of their temples and
other public edifices seem to have been such as entitled them to
the high praises beltowed upon them by many Spaniih authors.
As far as one can gather from their obscure and inaccurate de-
scriptions, the great temple of Mexico, the most famous in New
Spain, which has been represented as a magnificent building,
raied to such a height, that the ascent to it was by a stair-case
of a hundred and fourteen steps, was a solid mass of earth es a
square form, faced partly with rione. Its base on each fide
extended ninety feet, and decreasing gradually as it advanced
in height, it terminated in a quadrangle of about thirty feet,
where were placed a shrine of the deity, and two altars on
which the victims were sacrificed . All the other celebrated
temples of New Spain exatly resembled that of Mexico
Such ftrudures convey no high idea of progress in art and in-
genuity; and one can hardly conceive that a form more rude
and simple could have occurred to a nation, in its first efforts
towards erecing any great work.

GREATER skill and ingenuity were displayed, if we may

believe the Spanish historians, in the houses of the emperor and
in those of the principal nobility. There, ome elegance of
design was visible, and a commodious arrangement of the apart-
ments was attended to. But if buildings corresponding to such
descriptions had ever existed in the Mexican cities, it is probable
that some remains of them would still be visible. From the man-
ner in which Cortes conduted ithe siege of Mexico, we can,

q Hcrrcra, dec. 2. lib. vii. C. 17.
VOL. II.

' See NOTE LVI.

indeed,

IB 0

Temple,,

and othei
public build-
ings.

2"9)7

f o O 0K indeed, easily account for the total deitruction of whatever had

VII.
^ ---- any appearance of splendor in that capital. But as only two

centuries and a half have elapsed since the conquest of New
Spain, it fceins altogether incredible, that in a period so hort,
every vestige of this boasted elegance and grandeur flould have
disappeared; and that in none of the other cities, particularly
in those which did not susser by the destructive hand of the
conquerors, there are not any ruins, which can be confidered.
as monuments of their ancient magnificence.

EVEN in a village of the rudest Indians there are buildings

of greater extent and elevation than common dwelling-houfes.
Those which are deffined for holding the council of the tribe,
and in which all assemble on occasions of public festivity, may
be called tfately edifices, when compared with the reft. As
among the Mexicans the diftintion of ranks was established,
and property was unequally divided, the number of dirtinguilmed
ftrutures in their towns, would of course be greater than in
other parts of America. But these seem not to have been either
so solid or magnificent as to merit these pompous epithets which
some Spanish authors employ in describing them. It is pro-
bable that, though more ornamented, and built on a larger
scale, they were erected with the fame flight materials which
the Indians employed in their common buildings , and time,
in a space much less than two hundred and fifty years, may
have swept away all remains of them t.

FROM this enumeration of fads, it seems, upon the whole, to
be evident, that the state of society in Mexico was considerably

Scc NOTE LVII. t See NOTE LVIII.

advanced.
29S

advanced beyond that of the savage tribes which we have de- L o o }
lineated. But it is no less manifest, that with refpet to many --v
particulars, the Spaniflh accounts of their progress appear to he
highly embellifled. There is not a more frequent or a more ser-
tile source of deception in describing the manners and arts of
savage nations, or of filch as are imperfectly civilized, than that
of applying to them the names and phrases appropriated to the
inftitutiols and refinements of polished life. When the leader of
a small tribe, or the head of a rude community, is dignified witl
the title of king or emperor, the place of his residence can re-
ceive no other name but that of his palace; and whatever hi'
attendants may be, they muff be called his court. Under fucul
appellations they acquire an importance and dignity which does
not belong to them. The illusion spreads, and giving a false co-
lour to every part of the narrative, the imagination is o much
carried away with the resemblance, that it becomes difficult to
discern objects as they really are. The Spaniards, when they firfl
touched on the Mexican coast, were so much struck with the
appearance of attainments in policy and in the arts of life, far fu-
perior to those of the rude tribes with which they were hitherto
acquainted, that they fancied they had at length discovered a
civilized people in the New World. This comparison between
the people of Mexico and their uncultivated neighbours, they
Teem t have kept constantly in view, and observing with ad-
miration many things which marked their pre-eminence, they
employ in describing their imperfect policy and infant arts, such
terms as are applicable to the inffitutions of men far beyond
them in improvement. Both these circumfances concur in de-
tracing from the credit due to the early Spanifll descriptions of
Mexican manners. By drawing a parallel between them and
those of people so much less civilized, they raised their

Q 2 o\w

299

B o o K own ideas too high. By their mode of describing them, they
_---- conveyed ideas to others no less exalted above truth. Later wri-

ters have adopted the style of the original hifforians, and im-
proved upon it. The colours with which De Solis delineates
the characer of Montezuma, the splendor of his court, the
laws and policy of his empire, are the fame that he must have
employed in exhibiting to view the monarch and inflitutions
of an highly polished people.

BuT though we may admit, that the warm imagination of

the Spaniflh writers has added some embellishment to their de-
scriptions, this will not justify the decisive and peremptory
tone, with which several authors pronounce all their accounts of
the Mexican power, policy, and laws, to be the ficions of men
who wished to deceive, or who delighted in the marvellous.
There are few historical fads that can be ascertained by evi-
dence more unexceptionable, than may be produced in support
of the material articles, in the description of the Mexican con-
flitution and manners. Eye-witnesses relate what they had be-
held, men who had resided among the Mexicans'both before
and after the conquest, describe institutions and customs which
were familiar to them, persons of such different profefilons that
objects mutt have presented themselves to their view under every
various aspet, soldiers, priests, and lawyers, all concur in their
testimony. I lad Cortes ventured to impose upon his sovereign,
by exhibiting to him a piture of imaginary manners, there
wanted not enemies and rivals who were qualified to deteCt his
deceit, and who would have rejoiced in exposing it. But ac-
cording to the jufft remark of an author, whose ingenuity has
illuliratcd, and whose eloquence has adorned the history of
Amrnica , this fppofition is in itself as improbable, as the at-

' M. I'AbWb Raynal. Hid, Pilof. & Polit. &c, iii. 127.

tempt
too,

tempt would have been audacious. Who among the destroyers B O O K

VII.

of this great empire was so enlightened by science, or so atten- --
tive to the progress and operations of men in social life, as to
frame a fictitious system of policy, so well combined and so
consistent, as that which they delineate, in their accounts of the
Mexican government ? Where could they have borrowed the
idea of many institutions in legislation and police, to which, at
that period, there was nothing parallel in the nations with which
they were acquainted ? There was not, at the beginning of the
sixteenth century, a regular cftabliflment of ports for convey-
ing intelligence to the overeign of any kingdom in Europe.
The fame observation will apply to what they relate, with re-
sped to the ftruaure of the city of Mexico, the regulations con-
cerning its police, and various laws established for the admi-
niftration ofj uftice, or securing the happiness of the community.
Whoever is accustomed to contemplate the progress of nations,
will often, at very early stages of it, discover a premature and
unexpected dawn of those ideas, which give rife to iftitutions,
that are the pride and ornament of its most advanced period.
Even in a state as imperfetly polished as the Mexican empire,
the happy genius of ome sagacious observer, excited or aided
by circumfiances unknown to us, may have introduced intitu-
tions which are seldom found but in societies highly refined.
But it is almost impossible that the illiterate conquerors of the
New World should have formed in any one instance a conception
of customs and laws, beyond the flandard of improvement in
their own age and country. Or if Cortes and his followers had
been capable of this, what inducement had those by whom they
were superseded to continue the deception ? Why hould Co-

rita.,

3o01

rita, or Motolinea, or Acofta, have amnuled their sovereign or
their fellow-citizens with a tale purely fabulous ?

IN one particular, however, the guides whom we muff fol-

low have represented the Mexicans to be more barbarous per-
haps than they really were. Their religious tenets, and the
rites of their worship, are described by them as wild and cruel
in an extreme degree. Religion, which occupies no confider-
able place in the thoughts of a savage, whose conceptions of any
superior power are obscure, and his sacred rites few and simple,
was formed, among the Mexicans, into a regular system, with
its complete train of priests, temples, victims, and festivals.
This, of itself, is a clear proof that the state of the Mexi-
cans was very different from that of the ruder American tribes.
But from the extravagance of their religious notions, or the
barbarity of their rites, no conclusion can be drawn with cer-
tainty concerning the degree of their civilization. For nations,
long after their ideas begin to enlarge, and their manners to
refine, adhere to systems of superstition, founded on the rude
conceptions of early ages. From the genius of the Mexican
religion, we may, however, form a most juss conclusion with
refpea to its influence upon the character of the people. The
asped of superstition in Mexico was gloomy and atrocious. Its
divinities were clothed with terror, and delighted in vengeance.
They were exhibited to the people under detestable forms that
created horror. The figures of serpents, of tygers, and of other
deftrudive animals, decorated their temples. Fear was the only
principle that inspired their votaries. Fasts, mortifications, and
penances, all rigid, and many of them excruciating to an extreme

degree,
BOOK

VII.

Religion of
lie Mexicans.
302

degree, were the means which they employed to appeafG their B O O K

VII.

wrath, and they never approached their altars without fprink- ---
ling them with blood drawn from their own bodies. But, of all
offerings, human sacrifices were deemed the most acceptable.
This religious belief, mingling with the implacable spirit of
vengeance, and adding new force to it, every captive taken il
war was brought to the temple, was devoted as a vicim to the
deity, and sacrificed with rites no less solemn than cruel x. The
heart and head were the portion consecrated to the gods; the
warrior by whose prowess the prisoner had been seized, carried
off the body to feast upon it with his friends. Under the im-
preflion of ideas so dreary and terrible, and accustomed daily to
cfenes of bloodshed rendered awful by religion, the heart of
man muff harden, and be lteeled to every sentiment of hu-
manity. The spirit of the Mexicans was accordingly un-
feeling and atrocious. The genius of their religion so far
counterbalanced the influence of policy and arts, that, not-
withifanding their progress in both, their manners, instead of
softening, became more fierce. To what circumstances it was
owing that superstition assumed such a dreadful form among
the Mexicans, we have not fuflicient knowledge of their
history to determine. But its influence is visible, and produced
an effet that is singular in the history of the human species.
The manners of the people in the New World, who had made
the greatest progress in the arts of policy, were the most fero-
cious, and the barbarity of tome of their customs exceeded even
those of the savage state.

THE empire of Peru boasts of an higher antiquity than that T'icctiions

of' Peru to an
of Mexico. According to the traditionary accounts collected iniig antiqu-ll

tv,

Cort. Rclat. ap Ramus. iii. z40, &c. B. Diaz, c. 82. Acofta, lib. v. . 3, &c.
Hcrrcra, dec 3. lib. ii. c. 5, &c. Gomara Chron. c, 8, &c, Sec N 0 T E LIX.

by

3c3

1, 0 o K by the Spaniards, it had subsisted four hundred years, under

VII.

-¥-.. twelve fuccefiive monarchs. But the knowledge of their an-

cient flory, which the Peruvians could communicate to their
.i ccrtain. conquerors, muf have been both imperfect and uncertain .

Like the other American nations, they were totally unac-
quainted with the art of writing, and deflitute of the only
means by which the memory of part tranfadions can be pre-
served with any degree of accuracy. Even among people to
whom the use of letters is known, the ara where the authen-
ticity of history commences, is much posterior to the introduc-
tion of writing. That noble invention continued long subser-
vient to the common business and wants of life, before it was
employed in recording events, with a view of conveying in-
formation from one age to another. But in no country did
ever tradition alone carry down historic knowledge, in any full
continued stream, during a period of half the length that the
monarchy of Peru is said to have subsisted.

Dcfcts in TH E Q9ipos, or knots on cords of different colours, which
their records
by ito.s are celebrated by authors fond of the marvellous, as if they had

been regular annals of the empire, imperfetly supplied the
place of writing. According to the obscure description of them
by Acofa a, which Garcilaffo de la Vega has adopted with little
variation, and no improvement, the quipos seem to have been a
device for rendering calculation more expeditious and accurate.
By the various colours different objects were denoted, and by
each knot a distinct number. Thus an account was taken, and
a kind of register kept, of the inhabitants in each province, or
of the several productions colleced there for public use. But
as by these knots, however varied or combined, no moral or

z See NOTE LX. ' Hist b. vi. c. 8.

abftraft

abftrafl idea, no operation or quality of th mnind coula b- re- I 0
presented, they contributed little towards prfL:-vi ng the ncii.y-v' ..--
of ancient events and iifitutions. The M.xica:i :.!.i;:. and
symbols, rude as they were, conveyed to them mor-e 1! .:')..! ;r:
of remote tranfadtions, than the Peruvians could ti,; ' f!,:
their boasted quipos. IHad they been even of moc; c,..,n.
lfe, and better adapted to fiuply the place of writr.-: recor .,
they perifled so generally, together with the other nonuime!nt,
of the Pcruvian ingenuity, in the gcneral w.reck oc a!ioncd by
the Spanish conquest, and the civil wars fubfequcnt to it, that ino
accefiion of light or knowledge comes from them. All the ze,3
of Garcilaffo de la Vega for the honour of that race of monarcl,
from whom he descended, all the induflry of his rleiarches, and
the-fuperior advantages with which he carricd them on, opened
no source of information unknown to the Spanifl authlors who
wrote before him. In his RoyalCCommientaries, lie confines him-
self to illuitrate what they had related concerning the antiquities
and institutions of Perub; and his illustrations, like their
accounts, are derived entirely from the traditionary tales cur-
rent among his countrymen.

VERY little credit then is due to the minute details which

have been given of the exploits, the battles, the conqucfts, and
private charater of the early Peruvian monarchs. We can
reft upon nothing in their story, as authentic, but a few
fads, so interwoven in the fyttem of their religion and po-
licy, as preserved the memory of them from being loft; and
upon the description of such cuftoims and inflitutions as con-
tinued in force at the time of the conquest, and fell under the

'I Lil i. c. In.

3r'5
R r

inimediat.
VOL. II,

i O O K by the Spaniards, it had subsisted four hundred years, under

-\ .. twelve successive monarchs. But the knowledge of their an-

cient story, which the Peruvians could communicate to their
.i:iccrtain. conquerors, must have been both imperfect and uncertain .

Like the other American nations, they were totally unac-
quainted with the art of writing, and destitute of the only
means by which the memory of past tranfations can be pre-
served with any degree of accuracy. Even among people to
whom the use of letters is known, the ara where the authen-
ticity of history commences, is much posterior to the introduc-
tion of writing. That noble invention continued long subser-
vient to the common bufineis and wants of life, before it was
employed in recording events, with a view of conveying in-
formation from one age to another. But in no country did
ever tradition alone carry down historic knowledge, in any full
continued stream, during a period of half the length that the
monarchy of Peru is said to have subsisted.

Defets in
their records
by Ouhipos.

THE ZUpos, or knots on cords of different colours, which

are celebrated by authors fond of the marvellous, as if they had
been regular annals of the empire, imperfectly supplied the
place of writing. According to the obscure description of them
by Acota a, which Garcilaffo de la Vega has adopted with little
variation, and no improvement, the quipos seem to have been a
device for rendering calculation more expeditious and accurate.
By the various colours different objets were denoted, and by
each knot a diftint number. Thus an account was taken, and
a kind of register kept, of the inhabitants in each province, or
of the several productions collected there for public use. But
as by these knots, however varied or combined, no moral or

2 Sec NOTE LX.

a Hilt. lib. vi. c. 8.
304

abfiradt

abftra& idea, no operation or quality of the mind could -b re- Pn o lK
presented, they contributed little towards prcic:-ving the mc:.ry )1 --
of ancient events and inflitutions. The Mexican p': in,' and
symbols, rude as they were, conveyed to them more iL' .vlc;!g
of remote tranfadions, than the Peruvians could di.;-i' c fr:-l
their boasted quipos. Had they been even of mo-r c'-..:lnr.-
use, and better adapted to supply the place of wrilt tn record ,
they perished so generally, together with the other imo!lunen t
of the Peruvian ingenuity, in the general vwreck occa!ioncd by
the Spanish conquest, and the civil wars subsequent to it, that 1no
acceflion of light or knowledge comes fiom them. All the zeal
of Garcilaffo de la Vega for the honour of that race of monarch
firom whom he descended, all the industry of his reiearches, and
the superior advantages with which he carried them on, opened
no source of information unknown to the Spanif authors who
wrote before him. In his Royal Comnimentarics, lie confines him-
self to illustrate what they had related concerning the antiquities
and institutions of Peru b; and his illustrations, like their
accounts, are derived entirely from the traditionary tales cur-
rent among his countrymen.

VERY little credit then is due to the minute details which

have been given of the exploits, the battles, the conquests, and
private characer of the early Peruvian monarchs. We can
reft upon nothing in their tory, as authentic, but a few
facts, so interwoven in the fyftein of their religion and po-
licy, as preserved the memory of them from being loft; and
upon the description of fch customs and infritutions as con-
tinued in force at the time of the conquest, and fell under the

b Lib. i.c. o.

immlediate.

3°5
VOL. II.

R r

B 0 0 K immediate observation of the Spaniards. By attending care-

vII.
--v-- fiully to these, and endeavouring to separate them from what

appears to be fabulous, or of doubtful authority, I have la-
boured to form an idea of the Peruvian government and

manners.

Origin of THE people of Peru, as I have already observed, had not
their civil
policy, advanced beyond the rudest form of avage life, when Manco

Capac, and his consort Mama Ocollo, appeared to infirud and
civilize them. Who these extraordinary personages were, whe-
ther they imported their system of legislation and knowledge of
arts from n ome country more improved, or, if natives of Peru,
how they acquired ideas so far superior to those of the people
whom they addressed, are circumstances with refpet to which
the Peruvian tradition conveys no information. Manco Capac
and his consort, taking advantage of the propensity in the Pe-
ruvians to fuperilition, and particularly of their veneration for
the Sun, pretended to be children of that glorious luminary,
and to deliver their inftrudions in his name and authority.
The multitude listened and believed. What reformation in
policy and manners the Peruvians ascribe to those founders of
their empire, and how, from the precepts of the Inca and his
coniort, their ancestors gradually acquired some knowledge of
those arts, and ome relifl for that industry, which render sub-
fiftence secure, and life comfortable, hath been formerly related.
Those bleflings were originally confined within narrow pre-
cinfls; for the authority of the first Inca did not reach many
leagues beyond Cuzco. But, in process of time, his successors
extended their dominion over all the regions that firetch to the

IuoI; p. 63, &c.

weft
306

vwet of the Andes from Chili to Quito, eflablillin in every r )
province their peculiar policy and rligious inflitutionil. _-,- ~

THE most singular and striking circulniflnce in the Peruvian Foit,, r.

government, is the influence of religion upon it. gcniu:; and
laws. Religious ideas make such a feeble iiprefjion on the
mind of a savage, that their effect upon his Ientinments and
manners are hardly perceptible. Among the IMexicans, reli-
gion, reduced into a regular system, and holding a considerable
place in their public intitutions, operated with con!iicuous
efficacy in forming the peculiar character of that people. But
in Peru, the whole system of civil policy was founded on reli-
gion. The Inca appeared not only as a legislator, but as the
messenger of Heaven. His precepts were received not merely
as the injunctions of a superior, but as the mandates of the
Deity. His race was held to be sacred; and in order to pre-
serve it diftin&t, without being polluted by any mixture of in-
ferior blood, the sons of Manco Capac married their owns fifers,
and no person was ever admitted to the throne who could not
claim it by such a pure descent. To those Children of the Sun,
(for that was the appellation bestowed upon all the offspring of
the firif Inca) the people looked up with the reverence due to
beings of a superior order. They were deemed to be under the
immediate protection of the deity from whom they issued, and
by him every order of the reigning Inca was uppofed to be
dictated.

FROM those ideas two consequences refilted. The authority Twvorcl,,i

of the Inca was unlimited and absolute, in the mofl extensive this
meaning of the words. Whenever the decrees of a prince are
confidered as the commands of the Divinity, it is not only an

Rr 2 act

3°7

at of rebellion, but of impiety, to dispute or oppose his will.
Obedience becomes a duty of religion; and as it would be pro-
fane to controul a monarch under the guidance of Heaven, and
presumptuous to advise him, nothing remains but to submit
with implicit rcfped. This muf necefiarily be the effe of
every government eftablifled on pretensions of intercourse with
superior powers. Such accordingly was the blind fubmiilion
which thle Peruvians yielded to their Ibvereigns. Theperfons of
highest rank and greatest power in their dominions acknow-
ledged them to be of a more exalted nature; and in testimony
of this, wlhen admitted into their presence, they entered with
a burden upon their shoulders, as an emblem of their servitude,
and willingncfs to bear whatever the Inca was pleated to impose.
Among their fubjeds, force was not requisite to second their
commands. Every officcr entruftedwith the execution of them
was revered, and, according to the account of an intelligent
observer of Peruvian manners d, might proceed alone from one
extremity of the empire to another, without meeting oppofi-
tion; for, on producing a fiinge from the royal Borla, an orna-
ment peculiar to the reigning Inca, the lives and fortunes of the
people were at his disposal.

ANOTHER consequence of establishing government in Peru

on the foundation of religion, was, that all crimes were pu-
nifllid capitally. They were not confidered as transgressions
of human laws, but as insults offered to the Deity. Each,
without any diftindion between such as were flight and such
as were atrocious, called for vengeance, and could be expiated
only by the blood of the offender. Consonantly to the fame
ideas, puniflmnent followed the trespass with inevitable cer-

" Zarate, lib. i, c. 3.

tainty
BOOK(

\ 11.

Th'-, .1,roltte
( '..':r 01t the

punifiled Ca-
pitally. ScS

tainty, because an offence against Heaven was deem d ium.a an O o (
high enormity as could not be pardonede. Among a peopie .-
of corrupted morals, maxims of jurisprudence so iLverc and
unrelenting, by rendering men ferocious and defperatc, wout l
be more apt to multiply crimes than to restrain them. EIut
the Peruvians, of simple manners and unfufpicious faith, wcr
held in such awe by this rigid discipline, that the number of
offenders were extremely finall. Veneration for monarchs,
enlightened and directed, as they believed, by the divinity
whom they adored, prompted them to their duty; the drcad
of puniflment, which they were taught to confider as unavoid-
able vengeance inflicted by offended Heaven, withheld them
from evil.

THE system of superstition on which the Incas ingrafted ',id ?cni!

of thci:' :I

their pretensions to fuch'high authority, was of a genius very gin:.
different from that established among the Mexicans. Manco
Capac turned the veneration of his followers entirely towards
natural objects. The Sun, as the great source of light, of joy,
and fertility in the creation, attrated their principal homage.
The Moon and Stars, as co-operating with him, were entitled
to secondary honours. Wherever the propensity in the human
mind to acknowledge and to adore ome superior power, takes
this diretion, and is employed in contemplating the order and
beneficence that really exist in nature, the spirit of fuperl-ition
is mild. Wherever imaginary beings, created by the fancy and
the fears of men, are supposed to preside in nature, and become
the objects of worlhip, fuperfitiion always assumes a wilder and
more atrocious form. Of the latter we have an exmnple among

' Vega, lit). ii. c. C.

th

j39

i o O K the Mexicans, of the former among the people of Peru. They
-,-r- . had not, indeed, made such progress in observation or inquiry,

as to have attained just conceptions of the Deity; nor was there
in their language any proper name or appellation of the Su-
preme Power, which intimated that they had formed any idea
of him as the Creator and Governor of the World '. But by
directing their veneration to that glorious luminary, which, by
its universal and vivifying energy, is the best emblem of divine
beneficence, the rites and observances which they deemed ac-
ceptable to him were innocent and humane. They offered to
the Sun a part of those productions which his genial warmth
had called forth from the bosom of the earth, and reared to
maturity. They sacrificed, as an oblation of gratitude, ome
of the animals who were indebted to his influence for nourish-
ment. They presented to him choice specimens of those works
of ingenuity which his light had guided the hand of man in
forming. But the Incas never stained his altars with human
blood, nor could they conceive that their beneficent father the
Sun would be delighted with such horrid victims g. Thus the
Peruvians, unacquainted with those barbarous rites which ex-
tinguifl sensibility, and suppress the feelings of nature at the
fight of human sufferings, were formed, by the spirit of the
fuperitition which they had adopted, to a national charaCter
more gentle than that of any people in America.

Its influence ITS influence operated even upon their civil institutions, and
on cl po-
cCl, p tended to correct in them any thing that was adverse togentlenefs

of character. The dominion of the Incas, though the mort abfo-
lute of all despotisms, was mitigated by its alliance with reli-

f Acofla, lib, v. c. 3. g See N 0 T E LXI.

gion.

gion. The mind was not humbled and depressed by the idea of COO iK
aforced fubjeion to the will of a superior; obedience, paid
to one who was believed to be clothed with divine authority,
was willingly yielded, and implied no degradation. The io-
vereign, conscious that the fubmifilve reverence of his people
flowed from their belief of his heavenly descent, was continu-
ally reminded of a diftintion which prompted him to imitate
that beneficent power which he was supposed to represent. In
consequence of those imprefions, there hardly occurs in the
traditional history of Peru, any instance of rcbellion aga.ilf
the reigning prince, and, among twelve fucceflive monarch,
there was not one tyrant.

EVEN the wars in which the Incas engaged, were carried ari 'u.,,.

on with a spirit very different fiom that of other American , .r,,lll
nations. They fought not, like savages, to destroy and cxtcr-

inate; or, like the Mexicans, to glut blood-thirsty diviitics
with human sacrifices. They conquered, in order to rcclailn
and civilize the vanquished, and to diffuse the knowledge of
their own institutions and arts. Prisoners feenl not to ha!ve
been exposed to the insults and tortures, which wcre their l:)t
in every other part of the New World. The incas tooki tii
people whom they fibdued under their protection, nd ad-
mitted them to a participation of all the advlantiges cllnjo)c
by their original fubjecs. This practice, io rpuglllr t to
American ferocity, and resembling the humanity of thec nmott
polifled nations, mufl be ascribed, like other ,cculi.ritirs
which we have obecrvcd in the Peruvian manners, to the gcni t
of their religion. The Incas, conlidcring the homage pid tu,
any object but the heavenly powers which they adored, a im-
pious, were fond of gaining proselytes to their favourite !1 I-

I,_1)1.

31

i o o) K tcm. The idols of every conquered prloince were carried in

--v'~ triu,,ph to the great temple at Cu.co h, and pl.ccd there as

trophies of the superior power of the divinity wvho was the
protector of the empire. 'The people were treated with lenity,
and infl-uctcd in the religious tenets of their new masters , that
the conqueror might have the glory of having added to the
number of the votaries of hi' father the Sun.
i'ecili-ir f:it THrF slate of property in Peru, was no less singular than that

of religion, and contributed, likewise, towards giving a mild
turn of charadter to the people. All the lands capable of cultiva-
tion were divided into three shares. One was consecrated to the
Sun, and whatever it produced was applied towards the eredtion
of temples, and furniflling what was requisite towards celebrat-
ing the public rites of religion. The other belonged to the Inca,
and was set apart as the provision made by the community for the
support of government. The third and largest share was reserved
for the maintenance of the people, among whom it was parcelled
out. No person, however, had a right of exclusive property
in the portion allotted to him. He possessed it only for a year,
at the expiration of which a new division was made in propor-
tion to the rank, the number, and exigencies of each family.
All those lands were cultivated by the joint industry of the
community. The people, summoned by a proper officer, re-
paired in a body to the fields, and performed their common
tafl, while fbngs and musical initruments cheered them to
'cs of their labour k. By this singular distribution of territory, as well

as by the mode of cultivating it, the idea of a common interest,

h l-Herrera, dec. 5, lil,. iv. c. 4. V g, lilb . v .

c. . H rrcra, dec. 5.

lib. iv. c. . d
Ilcrrcra, dec. 5. lib. iv. c. 2. Vega, lib. v. c. 5.

and
1

and of mutual subser-viency vas continually inculcated. E-. h , o
irdividual felt Iis connection with tlio a-round him, and --
knew that he depended on their fricndly aid for lxvhit incrc:iif
lie was to reap. A slate thus conflituted Inay be conlidered as
one great family, in which the union of members was io
complete, and the exchange of good offices Io perceptible, as to
create ~tronger attachment, and to bind iman to mian in cloler
intercourfl than sublisted under any form of society eflilbliiied
in America. From this resulted gentle manners, and mild vir-
tues unknown in the savage state, and with which the Mexi-
cans were little acquainted.

BUT, though the inflitutions of the Incas were ib framed !:c(!l.il:t . '
as to itrengthen the bonds of affedtion among their fubjeds, there '"'"1-
was great inequality in their condition. The diitintion of
ranks was fully eablifiled in Peru. A great body of the in-
habitants, under the denomination of Yanaconas, were held in
a state of servitude. Their garb and houifs were of a forml
different from thole of free-men. Like the Taini,'ics of
Mexico, they were employed in carrying burdens, and in per-
forming every other work of drudgery . Next to them i j
rank, were such of the people as were free, but diftinguiflied
by no official or hereditary honours. Above them were ralild,
thole whom the Spaniards call Orejoiins, from the ornaments
worn in their ears. They formed what may be denominated
the order of nobles, and in peace, as well as war, held every
office of power or trui l"'. At the head of all were the chil-
dren of the Sun, who, by their high defent, and peculiar pri-

lerrera, dec. 5. lib. iii, c, 4, lib. x. c. 8. " I-Itricra, dcc. 5. lib. iv. c. ,
VOL. JI,

S f

vilcegc.,

'1 ,

vileges, were as much exalted above the Orejones, as thet
were elevated beyond the people.
':,1 of arts. Sucii a form of society, from the union of its members, as

well as fiomn the difiinCion in their ranks, was favourable to
progress in the arts. But the Spaniards, having been ac-
quainted with the improved tate of various arts in Mexico,
several years before they discovered Peru, were not so much
(truck with what they observed in the latter country, and de-
scribe the appearances of ingenuity there with lets warmth of
admiration. The Peruvians, nevertheless, had advanced far
beyond the Mexicans, both in the necelary arts of life, and in
such as have ome title to the name of elegant.

IN Peru, agriculture, the art of primary necessity in social

life, was more extensive, and carried on with greater kill
than in any part of America. The Spaniards, in their progress
through the country, were so fully supplied with provisions
of every kind, that in the relation of their adventures we meet
with none of those dismal scenes of distress occasioned by fa-
mine, in which the conquerors of Mexico were so often in-
volved. The quantity of foil under cultivation was not left to
the discretion of individuals, but regulated by public authority
in proportion to the exigences of the community. Even the
calamity of an unfiuitful season was but little felt; for the pro-
dut of the lands consecrated to the Sun, as well as those set
apart for the Inca, being deposited in the tambos, or public
storehouses, it remained there as a stated provision for times
of scarcity ". As the extent of cultivation was determined with

' Zaratc, lib. i. . . g. a, lib. i. c. 8.

such
~ O0 1K

\II .

I nproved
ftae of agri-
t ulture.

315
such provident attention to the demands of the state, the in- 1; 0 o K

\II

vention and industry of the Peruvians were called forth to cx- - --,
traordinary exertions, by certain defects peculiar to their cli-
mate and foil. All the vast rivers that flow from the Andes
take their course earfiard to the Atlantic Ocean. Peru is wa-
tered only by ome streams which rufl down fiom the moun-
tains like torrents. A great part of the low country is
sandy and barren, and never refrefied with rain. In order to
render such an unpromising region fertile, the ingenuity of the
Peruvians had recourse to various expedients. B1y means of
artificial canals, conducted, with much patience and confider-
able art, from the torrents that poured across their country,
they conveyed a regular supply of moisture to their fields o.
They enriched the foil by manuring it with the dung of sea-
fowls, of which they found an inexhaustible store on all the
islands scattered along their coasts P. In describing the cutolns
of any nation thoroughly civilized, such practices would hard-
ly draw attention, or be mentioned as in any degree remark-
able, but in the hitfory of the improvident race of men in
the New World, they are entitled to notice as singular proof,
of industry and of art. The use of the plough, indeed, wa
unknown to the Peruvians. They turned up the earth with
a kind of mattock of hard wood '. Nor was this labour deemed
so degrading as to be devolved wholly upon the women. Both
sexes joined in performing this necefltry work. Even the
children of the Sun set an example of indulry, by cultivating
a field near Cuzco with their own hands, and they dignified
this function by denominating it their triumph over the earth'.

0 Zaratc, lib. i. c. . V , lib. v. c. i. & 24.. P Acofa, lib. iv c. 37,

Vega, lib. v. c. 3. Svu NO'' E LXII. 'i Zaratc, lib. i c. . ' ^ ;
lib, v. . 2.

T.i-
f 2

TIlE superior ingenuity of the Peruvians is obvious, like-
vise, in the conftruution of their houses and public buildings.
In the extenlive plains which firetch along the Pacific Ocean,
where the iky is perpetually fierene, and the climate mild, their
houses were very properly of a fabric extremely flight. But
in the higher regions, where rain falls, where the viciflitude of
fe.tions is known, and their rigour felt, they were conlructIed
with greater solidity. They were generally of a square form,
the walls about eight feet high, built with bricks hardened in
the fun, the door low and strait, and without any windows.
Simple as thcfe flrudurcs were, and rude as the materials may
.flee to be of which they were formed, they were io durable, that
many of thenm fill sublist in different parts of Peru, long after
every monumenlt that might have conveyed to us any idea of the
domncftic state of the other American nations has vanilhed fiom
the face of the earth. But it was in the temples consecrated to
the Sun, and in the buildings destined for the residence of their
monarchs, that the Peruvians displayed the utmost extent of
their art and contrivance. The descriptions of them by such
of the Spanifi writers as had an opportunity of contemplating
them while, in some measure, entire, might have appeared
highly exaggerated, if the ruins which tfill remain, did not
vouch the truth of their relations. These ruins of sacred or
royal buildings are found in every province of the empire,
and by their fi-cquency demonstrate that they are monuments
of a powerfill people, who muff have Lublilted, during a pe-
r'id of 1!bnie extent, in a late of no inconsiderable improve-
ment. They appear to have been edifices various in their di-
mcenlions. Sonim of a moderate lize, many of immense extent,
.ill rclnarkable for solidity, and refemnbling each other in the
. ilc of architceurc. The temple of Pachacanac, together

with
B) () K

\ II.

J h]cir build-
:I

sith a palace of the Inca, and a forrrefi, wereTO coctecd to- l 0 o
gether as to form one great !.rutue, above half a league in l -
circuit. In this prodigious pile, the lame lingiilataffe in build--
ing is conspicuous as in other works of the Perrvian<. As
they were unacquainted with the ule of the pulley, and othcr-
mechanical powers, and could not elevate the large itoncs and(
bricks which they employed in building to any conliderai)!
height, the walls of this edifice, in which they iceml to have'
made their greatell effort towards magnificence, did not ri!c
above twelve feet from the ground. Though they had not dil-
covered the ulie of mortar or of any other cement in buildincll
the bricks or ifones were joined with io much nicety, th.:t til-
seams can hardly be dicferned'. The apartments, as far as thu
distribution of them can be traced in the ruins, were ill-difipoid,
and afforded little accommodation. There was not a ing]e
window in any part of the building; and as no light could en-
ter but by the door, all the apartments of largeit diimen!ion
mufl either have been perfetly dark, or illuminated by olne
other means. But with all there and many other iperfecions
that might be mentioned, in their art of building, the works
of the Peruvians which still remain mufi be conlidered as fili-
pendous efforts of a people unacquainted with the utf of iron,
and convey to us an high idea of the power poiclileu by their
.ncient monarchs.

Tli il'S:, however, were not tile noblefr olr lmoi ufefil works 'l'. ''.

,f tle Incas. The two great roads fiom Ci'tIco to Q0ito, ex-
tcndiin in an uninterrupted liretch above five hundred leagues,
arc entitled to still higher praise. The one was cndutd

Sce NOT LXI1J.

t ! 1 !0Ul"!1.

j17

B 0 0 K through the interior and mountainous country, the other

VIIT

-,,/j through the plains on the sea-coast. From the language of ad-

miration in which some of the early writers express their ato-
niflment when they first viewed those roads, and from the
more pompous dcfcriptions of later writers, who labour to sup--
port foine favourite theory concerning America, one might be
led to compare this work of the Incas to the famous military
ways which remain as monuments of the Roman power: But
in a country where there was no tame animal except the Llama,
which was never used for draught, and but little as a beast of bur-
den, where the high roads were seldom trod by any but a human
foot, no great degree of labour and art was requisite in forming
them. The Peruvian roads were only fifteen feet in breadth',
and in many places so slightly formed, that time soon effaced
every vestige of the course in which they ran. In the low
country little more seems to have been done, than to plant trees
or to fix pofis at certain intervals, in order to mark the proper
route to travellers. To open a path through the mountainous
country was a more arduous talk. Eminences were levelled,
and hollows filled up, and, for the preservation of the road, it
was fenced with a bank of turf. At proper distances, tambos,
or storehouses, were erected for the accommodation of the Inca
and his attendants, in their progress through his dominions.
From the manner in which the road was originally formed in
this higher and more impervious region, it has proved more
durable; and though, from the inattention of the Spaniards to
every object but that of working their mines, nothing has been
done towards keeping it in repair, its course may frill be traced u

' Cieca, c 60. U Xerez, p. 189. 191. Zarate, lib. i. c. 13, 14. Vega,
lib. ix. c. 13. Bougucr Voyage, p 1o5. Ulloa Entrctcene ientos, p. 365.

Such

Such were the celebrated road of the Incas; and even from I: o

0

this description, divested of every circumi ance of manifcl --.
exaggeration, or of suspicious alpeit, it must be colfidlercd a~.
a striking proof of an extraordinary progress ill inlprovcncnt
and policy. To the avage tribes of Amnerica, the idea of
facilitating communication with places at a dillance had never
occurred. To the Mexicans it was hardly knownl. Even in
the moil civilized countries of Europe, men had advanced far;
in refinement, before it became a regular objec of na-
tional police to form such roads as render intcrcourfc conm-
modious.

THE formation of those roads introduced another improve- : 'ii-

ment in Peru equally unknown over all the reft of A merica. In
its course from south to north, the road of the Incas was inter-
feded by all the torrents which roll from the Andes towards the
Western Ocean. From the rapidity of their course, as well as
from the frequency and violence of their inundation, thcf
were unnavigable. Some expedient, however, was to be found
for paiing them. The Peruvians, from their unacquaintance
with the use of arches, and their inability to work in wood,
could not conifruat bridges either of stone or timber. But neccf-
fity, the parent of invention, suggested a device which sup-
plied that defect. They formed cables of great strength, by
twitting together tome of the pliable withs or oficrs, with
which their country abounds; fix of which they firetched a-
cross the fiream parallel to one another, and made them fast oin
each fide. These they bound firmly together by interweaving
smaller ropes so close, as to form a compact piece of net-work,
which, being covered with branches of trees and carth, they

pOr'(1

o Oc K pafied along it with tolerable security x. Proper persons were
..J--- appointed to attend at each bridge, to keep them in repair,

and to afift paflengers . In the level country, where the ri-
vers became deep and broad and still, they are passed in halzas,
or floats; in the con2rution, as well as navigation of which,
the ingenuity of the Peruvians appears to be far superior to
that of aly people in America. These had advanced no far-
ther in naval skill than the use of the paddle, or oar; the
Peruvians ventured to raise a mast, and spread a fail, by means
of which their balzas not only went nimbly before the wind,
but could veer and tack with great celerity .

Ji ('c ,' i- Nor were the ingenuity and art of the Peruvians confined sole-
;iik vu ly to objcts of efiential utility. They had made ome progress

in arts, which may be called elegant. They pofeffed the pre-
cious metals in greater abundance than any people of America.
They obtained gold in the fame manner with the Mexicans, by
searching in the channels of rivers, or waffing the earth in
which particles of it were contained. But in order to procure
silver, they exerted no inconsiderable degree of skill and in-
vention. They had not, indeed, attained the art of finking a
shaft into the bowels of the earth, and penetrating to the riches
concealed there; but they hollowed deep caverns on the banks
of rivers, and the fides of mountains, and emptied such veins as
did not dip suddenly beyond their reach. In other places,
whcre the vein lay near the surface, they dug pits to such a
depth, that the person who worked below could throw out the
ore, or hand it up in bafkcts . They had discovered the art

» N C) '] F. IX1. Y Sancho ap. Ram. iii. 376, B. Zaratc, ilt. i. c. 14.

Vegn, lil iii. c. 7, 8. -1errcri. dcc. v lib. iv. c. 3, 4. Ulloa Voy.
i, 176, &C. 2 diluflo iii 414. A

Of
320

of smelting and refining this, either by the simple application 3 o o .
of fire, or where the ore was more flubborn, and impregnat-
ed with foreign substances, by placing it in small ovens or fur-
naces on high grounds, so artificially conflruded, that the
draught of air performed the function of a bellows, a machine
with which they were totally unacquainted. By this simple
device, the purer ores were smelted with such facility, that
the quantity of silver in Peru was so considerable, that
many of the utensils employed in the funEtions of common
life were made of it b. Several of those veflels and trinkets
are said to have merited no small degree of eflimation, on ac-
count of the neatness of the workmanship, as well as the in-
trinfic value of the materials. But as the conquerors of Ame-
rica were well acquainted with the latter, but had scarcely any
conception of the former, moit of them were melted down,
and rated according to their weight and fineness in the division
of the spoil.

IN other works of mere curiosity, or ornament,their ingenuity Works of
has been highly celebrated. Many of these have been dug out of elegance.
the Guacas, or mounds of earth, with which they covered the
bodies of the dead. Among there are mirrors of various dimen-
lions, of hard ihining stones highly polished; veflels of earthen
ware of different forms; hatchets, and other infiruments, some
defined for war, and others for labour. Some were of flint,
some of copper, hardened to such a degree by an unknown
process, as to supply the place of iron on several occasions.
Had the use of these tools formed of copper been general, the
progress of the Peruvians in the arts might have been such, as
b Acofta, lib. iv, c. 4, 5. Vega, p. i, lib. viii. c. 25. Ulloa Entrcten. 258.

, j,
T t

to
VOL. IL

BOOK

VII.

An imperfea
civilization.

No cities but
Cuzco.

to emulate that of more cultivated nations. But either the
metal was so rare, or the operation by which it was hardened
so tedious, that their infiruments of copper were few, and so
extremely frmall, that they seem to have been employed only
in flighter works. But even to such a circumscribed use of
this imperfect metal, the Peruvians were indebted for their fu-
periority to the other people of America in various arts '. The
fame observation, however, may be applied to them, which I
formerly made with refped to the arts of the Mexicans. From
several specimens of Peruvian utensils and ornaments, which
are deposited in the royal cabinet in Madrid, and from some
preserved in different collections in other parts of Europe, I
have reason to believe, that the workmanship is more to be ad-
mired on account of the rude tools with which it was executed,
than on account of its intrinsic neatness and elegance; and that
the Peruvians, though the most improved of all the Americans,
were not advanced beyond the infancy of arts.

BUT notwithstanding so many circumflances, which seem to

indicate an high degree of improvement in Peru, others occur
that suggest the idea of a society frill in the first stages of its
transition from barbarism to civilization. In all the dominions
of the Incas, Cuzco was the only place that had the appearance,
or was entitled to the name of a city. Every where else, the
people lived mostly in detached habitations, dispersed over the
country, or, at the utmost, fettled together in small villages d.
But until men are brought to assemble in numerous bodies, and
incorporated in such close union, as to enjoy frequent inter-
course, and to feel mutual dependence, they never imbibe per-

c Ulloa Voy. tom. i. 381, &c. Id. Entreten. p. 369, &c.
d Zaratc, lib. i. c. 9. Herrera, dec. v. lib. vi. c. 4.

fedly

,'2 -)
*J)r

sealy the spirit, or assume the manners of social life. In a
country of immense extent, with only one city, the progress
of manners, and the improvement either of the ncceflary or
more refined arts, must have been so flow, and carried on un-
der such disadvantages, that it is more surprising the Pcruvians
should have advanced so far in refinement, than that they did
not proceed farther.

IN consequence of this state of imperfect union, the fcpara-

tion of profeflions in Peru was not so complete as among the
Mexicans. The less closely men associate, the more simple
are their manners, and the fewer their wants. The crafts of
common and most necessary use in life do not, in such a fiate,
become so complex or difficult, as to render it requisite that
men hould be trained to them by any particular course of
education. All those professions were accordingly exercised by
every Peruvian indiscriminately. None but the artists, em-
ployed in works of mere curiosity or ornament, constituted a
separate order of men, or were distinguished from other citi-
zens

FROM the want of cities in Peru, another consequence fol-

lowed. There was little commercial intercourse among the in-
habitants of that great empire. The activity of commerce is
co-eval with the foundation of cities; and from the moment
that the members of any community fettle in considerable
numbers in one place, its operations become vigorous. The
citizen must depend for fubfiflence on the labour of those who
cultivate the ground. They, in return, must receive some
' Acofta, lib. vi. c. 15. Vega, lib. v. c. 9. Herrcra, dlcc. v. ib. i . c. 4.

T t 2 equivalent.

No perfed
separation or
profdtsons.

Little coin-
mercial inter-

course.
B 0 0 K

VII. 3~3
5 D

B O O K equivalent. Thus mutual intercourse is established, and the

VII. v__ productions of art are regularly exchanged for the fruits

of agriculture. In the towns of the Mexican empire, flated
markets were held, and whatever could supply any want or
desire of man was an object of commerce. But in Peru, from
the singular mode of dividing property, and the manner in
which the people were fettled, there was scarcely any species
of commerce carried on between different provinces', and
the community was less acquainted with that aive inter-
course, which is at once a bond of union, and an incentive
to improvement.

Unwarlike BUT the unwarlike spirit of the Peruvians was the most re-
fiirt of the

prva markable, as well as most fatal defeC in their charadter g. The

greater part of the rude nations in America opposed their in-
vaders with undaunted ferocity, though with little condut or
success. The Mexicans maintained the firuggle in defence of
their liberties, with such persevering fortitude, that it was with
difficulty the Spaniards triumphed over them. Peru was sub-
dued at once, and almost without refitance; and the most
favourable opportunities of regaining their freedom, and of
crushing their oppressors, were loft through the timidity of the
people. Though the traditional hiflory of the Peruvians re-
presents all the Incas as warlike princes, frequently at the head
of armies, which they led to vicory and conquefi; few fymp-
toms of such a martial spirit appear in any of their operations
subsequent to the invasion of the Spaniards. The influence,
perhaps, of those institutions which rendered their manners

f Vega, lib. vi. c. 8. c Xercz, go. Sancho ap. Ram. iii. 37z.
Herrera, dec. v. lib. i. c, 3,

gentle,
324

gentle, gave their minds this unmanly softness; perhaps, the B K
conflant serenity and mildness of the climate may have ener- 3
vated the vigour of their frame; perhaps, some principle in
their government, unknown to us, was the occasion of this po-
litical debility. Whatever may have been the cause, the fad
is certain;- and there is not an instance in history of any people
so little advanced in refinement, so totally deititute of military
talents and enterprize. This charaQcer hath descended to their
posterity. The Indians of Peru are now more tame and de-
pressed than any people of America. Their feeble spirits, re-
laxed in lifeless inaction, seem hardly capable of any bold or
manly exertion.

BUT, besides those capital defects in the political slate of

Peru, ome detached circumstances and facts occur in the Spa-
nifh writers,which discover a considerable remainder of barba-
rity in their manners. The fame cruel custom, that prevailed in
some of the most savage tribes, subsisted among the Peruvians;
On the death of the Incas, and of other eminent persons, a
considerable number of their attendants were put to death,
and interred around their Guaca, that they might appear in
the next world with their former dignity, and be served with
the fame respect. On the death of Huana-Capac, the most
powerful of their- monarchs, above a thousand vicims were
doomed to accompany him to the tomb h. In one particular,
their manners appear to have been more barbarous than those
of most rude tribes. Though acquainted with the use of fire
in preparing maize, and other vegetables for food; they de-
voured both fleih and fish perfecly raw, and astonished the

h Acofta, lib. v. c. 7.

Spaniards

325

BOOK

VII.

Other domi-
nions of Spain
in America.

A brief fur-
vey of them.

Such as are
adjacent to
the empire of
Mexico.

Cinaloa and
Sonora, &c.

Spaniards with a pracice repugnant to the ideas of all civilized
people i.

BUT though Mexico and Peru are the possessions of Spain in
the New World, which, on account both of their antient and
present state, have attracted the greatest attention; her other
dominions there are far from being inconsiderable, either in
extent or value. Mofi of them were reduced to fubjedion,
during the first part of the sixteenth century, by private adven-
turers, who fitted out their small armaments either in Hifpa-
niola, or in Old Spain; and were we to follow each leader in
his progress, we hould discover the fame daring courage, the
fame persevering ardour, the fame rapacious desire of wealth,
and the fame capacity of enduring and surmounting every
thing in order to attain it, which distinguished the operations of
the Spaniards in their greater American conquests. But, in-
stead of entering into a detail,which, from the similarity of the
tranfations, would appear almost a repetition of what has
been already related, I hall satisfy myself with such a view of
those provinces of the Spanish empire in America, which have
not hitherto been mentioned, as may convey to my readers a
more adequate idea of its greatness, fertility, and opulence.

I B EGIN with the countries contiguous to the two great mo-

narchies, of whose history and institutions I have given ome
account, and shall then briefly describe the other difirids of
Spanish America. Thejurifdition of the viceroy of New Spain
extends over several provinces, which were not fubjedt to the
dominion of the Mexicans. The countries of Cinaloa and So-
nora, that firetch along the east fide of the Vermilion ea, or
gulf of California, as well as the immense kingdoms of New

j Xcrez, p. 19o. Sancho, Ram. iii. 372. C. Herrcra, dec. v. lib. i. c. 3.

Navarre
326

Navarre and New Mexico, which bend towards the weft and B o K

VII.

north, did not acknowledge the sovereignty of Montezuma, or a
his predecessors. These regions, not inferior in magnitude to
all the Mexican empire, are reduced more or less completely
under the Spanish yoke. They extend through the most de-
lightful part of the temperate zone; their foil is, in general,
remarkably fertile, and all their producions, whether animal
or vegetable, are most perfec in their kind. They have all a
communication either with the Pacific Ocean, or with the Gulf
of Mexico, and are watered by such rivers as not only enrich
them, but may become subservient to commerce. The num-
ber of Spaniards fettled in those vast countries, is indeed ex-
tremely small. They may be said to have subdued, rather than
to have occupied them. But if the population in their antient
establishments in America hall continue to increase, they may
gradually spread over those diftridss, of which, however invit-
ing, they have not hitherto been able to take pofleffion.

ON E circumfiance may contribute to the speedy population

of some difRrics. Very rich mines both of gold and silver have Rich :i;n-.
been discovered in many of the regions which I have men-
tioned. Wherever there are opened, and worked with success,
a multitude of people retort. In order to supply them with
the necessaries of life, cultivation must be increased, artisans
of various kinds mufl assemble, and industry as well as wealth
will be gradually diffrued. Many examples of this have oc-
curred in different parts of America since they fell under
the dominion of the Spaniards. Populous villages and large
towns have suddenly arisen amidt uninhabited wilds and
mountains; and the working of mines, though far from being
the most proper objed towards which the attention of an infant

society

3$7

o o K society should be turned, may become the means both of pro

.-j.~ moting useful aivity, and of augmenting the'number of peo-

\ r-nt ad ple. A recent and singular infiance of this has happened, which,
rinllarkc: as it is but little known in Europe, and may be producive of

great effects, merits attention. The Spaniards fettled in the
provinces of Cinaloa and Sonora, had been long diflurbed by
the depredations of oine fierce tribes of Indians. In the year
r765, their incursions became so frequent, and so defirudive,
that the inhabitants, in despair, applied to the Marquis de
Croix, viceroy of Mexico, for such a body of troops as might
enable them to drive those formidable invaders from their
places of retreat in the mountains. Butthetreafury of Mexico
was so much exhausted by the vait fums drawn from it, in or-
der to support the late war againfi Great Britain, that the vice-
roy could afford them no aid. The refped due to his virtues,
accomplished what his official power could not effed. He pre-
vailed.with the merchants to advance about two hundred thou-
sand pesos for defraying the expence of the expedition. The
war was conduCted by an officer of abilities; and after being
protraced for three years, chiefly by the difficulty of pursuing
the fugitives over mountains and through defiles which were
almost .impalfable, it terminated in the year 1771, in the final
submission of the tribes, which had been so long the object of
terror to the two provinces. In the course of this service, the
Spaniards marched through countries into which they seem not
to have penetrated before that time, and discovered mines of
such value, as was aflonifhing even to men acquainted with the
riches contained in the mountains of the New World. At
Cineguilla, in the province of Sonora, they entered a plain of
fourteen leagues in extent, in which they found gold in grains,
.at the depth of only sixteen inches, of such a size, that some

of
328

of them weighed nine marks, and in such quantities, that in a
short time, with a few labourers, they collected a thousand
marks of gold in grains, even without taking time to wash the
earth that had been dug, which appeared to be so rich, that
persons of skill computed that it might yield what would be
equal in value to a million of pesos. Before the end of the
year 1771, above two thousand persons were fettled in
Cineguilla, under the government of proper magifirates, and
the infpetion of several ecclefiafiics. As several other mines,
not inferior in riches to that of Cineguilla, have been disco-
vered, both in Sonora and Cinaloak, it is probable that thfee
neglected and thinly inhabited provinces may oon become as
populous and valuable as any part of the Spanish empire in
America.

BOOK

\ 1.

Probable
effc¢ts of this.
Tn E peninsula of California, on the other fide of the Vermi- C:lifornia,

its/ lte ;

lion Tea, seems to have been less known to the ancient Mexi-
cans, than the provinces which I have mentioned. It was dif-
covered byCortes in the year 536 (Book V. p. I44). During
a long period it continued to be so little frequented, that even
its form was unknown, and in molt charts it was represented
as an island, not as a peninsula'. Though the climate of this
country, if we may judge from its situation, must be very de-
firable; the Spaniards have made finall progrcfs in popling it.
Towards the close of the last century, theJcfui ts, who had grcat
merit in exploring this neglected province, and in civilizing its
rude inhabitants, imperceptibly acquired a dominion over it as
complete as that which they poffeccd in their milfions in Pa-

See N 0 T 1;. LXV.

I Sce N ' E LI.
VoL. II.

329
U u

1; " t ' . ,

BOOK

VII.

and probabi-
I ty of its im-
proving.

Yucatan and
l-Io!lduras.

raguay, and they laboured to introduce into it the fame policy,
and to govern the natives by the fame maxims. In order to
prevent the court of Spain from conceiving anyjealoufy oftheir
designs and operations, they seem fludioufly to have depreciat-
ed the country, by representing the climate as so disagreeable
and unwholesome, and the foil as so barren, that nothing but
their zealous desire of converting the natives, could have in-
duced them to fettle there m. Several public-fpirited citizens
endeavoured to undeceive their sovereigns, and to give them a
better view of California; but in vain. At length, on the ex-
pulfion of the Jesuits from the Spanish dominions, the court of
Madrid, as prone at that juncture to fufped the purity of the
Order's intentions, as formerly to confide in them with implicit
trust, appointed Don Joseph Galvez, whose abilities have since
raised him to the high rank of minister for the Indies, to visit
that peninsula. His account of the country was favourable;
he found the pearl fishery on its coafis to be valuable, and
discovered mines of gold of a very promising appearance .
From its vicinity to Cinaloa and Sonora, it is probable, that if
the population of these provinces hall increase in the manner
which I have supposed, California may, by degrees, receive
from them such a recruit of inhabitants, as to be no longr
reckoned among the desolate and useless distriCts of the Spa-
nifl empire.

ON the east of Mexico, Yucatan and Honduras are compre-

hended in the government of New Spain, though antiently they
can hardly be said to have formed a part of the Mexican em-
pire. Thefc large provinces, firetching from the Bay of Cam-
)peacly beyond Cape Gracias a Dios, do not, like the other

"' 1 Iii].& (.'zlliorili-1, j. Z2 j.

n Lorcnzano, 349, 350.

territories
33°

territories of Spain in the New World, derive their value either B o o K

VII.

fron the fertility of their foil, or the richness of their mines, _
but they yield, in greater abundance than any part of Ame-
rica, the logwood tree, which, in dying some colours, is so far
preferable to any other material, that the consumption of it
in Europe is conidcrable, and it has become an article in
commrcc of grct value. During a long period, no Euro-
pean nation intruded upon the Spaniards in those provinces,
or attm-nptcd to obtain any share in this branch of trade. But
after the conqueis of Jamaica by the English, it oon appeared
what a formidable rival was now feated in the neighbourhood
of the Span ifh territories. One of the first objedcs that tempt-
ed the English, was the great profit arising from the logwood
trade, and the facility of wresting ome portion of it from the
Spaniards. Some adventurers from Jamaica made the firfl Thcir de-
attempt at Cape Catoche, the south-east promontory of Yuca-
tan, and by cutting logwood there, carried on a gainful traffic.
When most of the trees near the coast in that place were
felled, they removed to the island of Trift, in the Bay of Cam-
peachy; and, in later times, their principal fiation has been
in the Bay of Honduras. The Spaniards, alarmcd at this
encroachment, endeavoured by negociation, rcmonrirances,
and open force, to prevent the English from obtaining any
footing on that part of the American continent. But aftcr
firuggling against it for more than a century, the clifafIers of
lafi war extorted from the court of Madrid a rclulcant content
to tolerate this fcttlement of forcigncrs in the heart of its terri-
tories °. The pain which this humbling conceliion occationed.
seems to have fuiggcfedl a method of rendering it of little coii-
fcquencc, more cfifetual than all the cfiorts of ncocuta ion ot

0 Tiiaty of l':uiis, .t. xviii,

T.T 11

\ :o)! cc.

33I

B K violence. The logwood produced on the weft coast of Yuca-

_-^ tan, where the foil is drier, is in quality far superior to that

which grows on the marshy grounds where the English are
and revival. fettled. By encouraging the cutting of this, and permitting

the importation of it into Spain without paying any duty r,
such vigour has been given to this declining branch of com-
merce, and the logwood which the English bring to market
has funk so much in value, that their trade to the Bay of
Honduras has gradually declined q since it obtained a legal
fanEtion; and, it is probable, will soon be finally abandoned.
In that event, the provinces of Yucatan and Honduras will
become possessions of considerable importance to Spain.

Costa Rica ST I LL farther cast than Honduras lie the two provinces of
and Vcragua. Cofla Rica and Veragua, which likewise belong to the vice-

royalty of New Spain; but both have been so much neglected
by the Spaniards, and are apparently of such small value, that
they merit no particular attention.
'Chili. TH.E most important province depending on the vice-royalty

of Peru, is Chili. The Incas had established their dominion
in ome of its southern diftrias; but in the greater part of the
country, its gallant and high spirited inhabitants maintained
their independence. The Spaniards, allured by the fame of its
opulence, early attempted the conquest of it under Diego Al-
magro; and after his death, Pedro de Valdivia resumed the
lcfign. Both met with fierce opposition. The former relin-
quilhcd the enterprize in the manner which I have mentioned r.
The latter, after having given many displays, both of courage

P Rcal Cedula, Caimpomancs, iii. 145. 1 See NOTE LXVII.
J Book vi. p. 195, &c.

and
332

333

and military skill, was cut off with a considerable body of
troops under his command. Francisco de Villagra, his lieu-
tenant, by his spirited conduc, checked the natives in their
career, and saved the remainder of the Spaniards from deftruc-
tion. By degrees, all the champaign country along the coafi
was fubjeted to the Spanish dominion. The mountainous
country is flill poffefied by the Puelches, Araucos, and other
tribes of its original inhabitants, formidable neighbours to the
Spaniards, with whom, during the course of two centuries,
they have been obliged to maintain perpetual hostility, sus-
pended only by a few intervals of insecure peace.

THAT part of Chili, then, which may properly be deemed a

Spanish province, is a narrow difirid, extending along the coast
from the desert ofAtacamas to the island of Chiloe, above nine
hundred miles. Its climate is the mofi delicious in the New
World, and is hardly equalled by that of any region on the
face of the earth. Though bordering on the Torrid Zone, it
never feels the extremity of heat, being screened on the east by
the Andes, and refreshed from the weft by cooling fea-breezes.
The temperature of the air is so mild and equable, that the Spa-
niards give it the preference to that of the southern provinces
in their native country. The fertility of the foil corresponds
with the benignity of the climate, and is wonderfully accom-
modated to European productions. The most valuable ofthefe,
corn, wine, and oil, abound in Cliil, as if they had been native
to the country. All the fruits imported from Europe attain to
full maturity there. The animals of our cmifphere not only
multiply, but improve in this delightful region. The horned
cattle arc of larger size than those of Spain. Its breed of horfcs
furpaffcs, both in beauty and in spirit, the famous Anda-

u fian

B0 0K

V11.

Excel.nce of
its climate
ane. fil.

B O o K lufian race, from which they sprung. Nor has Nature ex-

VII
v _ ~haufted her bounty on the surface of the earth; she has tfored

its bowels with riches. Valuable mines of gold, of silver, of
copper, and of lead, have been discovered in various parts
of it.

Cause of its A COUNTRY distinguished by so many blessings, we may be
being ne-
glected by apt to conclude, would early become a favourite fation of the
Iards.P"n Spaniards, and must have been cultivated with peculiar predi-

ledion and care. Inflead of this, a great part of it remains
unoccupied. In all this extent of country, there are not above
eighty thousand white inhabitants, and about three times that
number of negroes and people of a mixed race. The most ser-
tile foil in America lies uncultivated, and ome of its most pro-
mifing mines remain unwrought. Strange as this neglect of
the Spaniards to avail themselves of advantages, which seemed
to court their acceptance, may appear, the causes of it can be
traced. The only intercourse of Spain with its colonies in the
South Sea, was carried on during two centuries by the annual
fleet to Porto-bello. All the produce of the colonies were ship-
ped in the ports of Callao, or Arica in Peru, for Panama, and
carried from thence across the Ifihmus. All the commodities
which they received from the mother-country, were conveyed'
from Panama to the fame harbours. Thus both the exports
and imports of Chili passed through the hands of the mer-
chants of Peru. These had of courfc a profit on each; and
in both tranfations the Chilefe felt their own fubordi-
nation; and having no direCt intercourse with the parent
ftatc, they depended upon another province for the difpofll
of their productions, as well as for the supply of their wants.
Under such difcouragcmcnts, population could not incrcafc,

and
334

and indufiry was destitute of one chief incitement. But
now that Spain, from motives which I hall mention hereafter,
has adopted a new system, and carries on her commerce with
the colonies in the South Sea, by hips which go round Cape
Horn, a direct intercourse is opened between Chili and the Mo-
ther-country. The gold, the silver, and the other commodi-
ties of the province, will be exchanged in its own harbours
for the manufactures of Europe. Chili may speedily rife into
that importance among the Spanish settlements to which it is
entitled by its natural advantages. It may become the granary
of Peru, and the other provinces along the Pacific Ocean; it
may supply them with wine, with cattle, with horses, with
hemp, and many other articles for which they now depend up-
on Europe. Though the new system has been cflablifhcd only
a few years, those effects of it begin already to be observed .
If it hall be adhered to with any steadiness for halfa centu-
ry, one may venture to foretell, that population, induflry, and
opulence, will advance in this province with rapid progress.

Tothe eai of the Andes, the provinces of Tucumanand Rio

de la Plata, border on Chili, and like it were dependent on the
Vice-royalty of Pcru. These regions of immense extent firetch
in length from north to south above thirteen hundred miles,
and in breadth more than a thousand. This country, which is
larger than most European kingdoms, naturally forms itfclf in-
to two great divisions, one on the north, anld the other on the
south of Rio dc la Plata. Tice foirmcr coimprchiinds Paraguay,
the famous miflions of the Jcfuits, and fevcral other diftricls.
But as difputcs hl:vc lon ful fificd between the courts of Spain

BOOK

\ II.

Profpea of
its improve-
llent.

Provincc.s of

njiiI Rio i Ia
I'1 a ta.

Norilicin rA
f(ollie Crn i
' l011.
a (tiunt i , I. 5

;!1l.1

335

and Portugal, concerning its boundaries, which, it is probable,
will be soon finally ascertained, either amicably, or by the de-
cifion of the sword, I chufe to reserve my account of this nor-
thern division, until I enter upon the history of Portuguese
America, with which it is intimately connected; and in relating
it, I hall be able from authentic materials, supplied both by
Spain and Portugal, to give a full and accurate description of
the operations and views of the Jesuits, in rearing that singular
fabrick of policy in America, which has drawn so much atten-
tion, and has been so imperfectly underflood. The latter divi-
sion of the province contains the governments of Tucuman
and Buenos-Ayres; and to these I hall at present confine my
observations.

THE Spaniards entered this part of America by the river De

la Plata; and though a fucceflion of cruel disasters besel them in
their early attempts to establish their dominion there, they were
encouraged to persist in the design, at first by the hopes ofdif-
covering mines in the interior country, and afterwards by the
necessity of occupying it, in order to prevent any other nation
from fettling there, and penetrating by this route into their rich
possessions in Peru. But except Buenos-Ayres, they have made
no settlement of any consequence in all the vail space which I
have mentioned. There are indeed scattered over it, a few
places on which they have bestowed the name of towns, and to
which they have endeavoured to add some dignity, by erecling
them into bifhopricks; but they are no better than paltry vil-
lages, each with two or three hundred inhabitants. One cir-
cumftancc, however, which was not originally forefecn, has
contributed to render this difria, though thinly peopled, of
considerable importance. The province of Tucuman, together
with the country to the south of the Plata, inflcad of being

covered
BOOK

VII.

View of the
latter. 336

covered with wood like other parts of America, forms one vast o o K
open plain, almofi without a tree. The foil is a deep fertile --
mould, watered by many fireams descending from the Andes,
and clothed in perpetual verdure. In this rich pasturage, the
horses and cattle imported by the Spaniards from Europe have
multiplied to a degree which almost exceeds belief. This has
enabled the inhabitants not only to open a lucrative trade with
Peru, by supplying it with cattle, horses, and mules, but to
carry on a commerce no less beneficial, by the exportation of
hides to Europe. From both the colony has derived great
advantages. But its commodious situation for carrying on
contraband trade, has been the chief source of its prosperity,
While the court of Madrid adhered to its antient system, with
refpet to its communication with America, the river De la
Plata lay so much out of the course of Spanish navigation,
that interlopers, almost without any rifque of being either
observed or obltruded, could pour in European manufactures
in such quantities, that they not only supplied the wants of
the colony, but were conveyed into all the eastern diftrids of
Peru. When the Portuguese in Brasil extended their fettle-
ments to the banks of Rio de la Plata, a new channel was
opened, by which prohibited commodities flowed into the Spa.-
niflh territories, with fill more facility, and in greater abun-
dance. This illegal traffic, however detrimental to the parent
state, contributed to the increase of the fttllement, which had
the immediate benefit of it, and Buenos Ayres became gra-
dually a populous and opulent town. What may be the
effedc of the alteration lately made in the government of this
colony, the nature of which ihall be dcfcribcdl in the fubfc-
quent Book, cannot hitherto be known.

VO L. II

337
' L '..

B O O K ALL the other territories of Spain in the New World, the
kvl-- islands excepted, of whose discovery and reduction I have for-
Other terr- merly given an account, are comprehended under two great di-
tories of
Spain. visions; the former denominated the kingdom of Tierra Firm(,

the provinces of which firetch along the Atlantic, from the
eastern frontier of New Spain to the mouth of the Orinoco;
the latter, the New Kingdom of Granada, situated in the in-
terior country. With a hort view of these I hlall close this
part of my work.

To the east of Veragua, the last province subjcd to the vice-
Daricn. roy of Mexico, lies the ifihmus of Darien. Though it was in

this part of the continent, that the Spaniards firfi began to
plant colonies, they have made no considerable progress in
peopling it. As the country is extremely mountainous, de-
luged with rain during a good part of the year, remarkably
unhealthful, and contains no mines of great value, they
would probably have abandoned it altogether, if they had not
been allured to continue by the excellence of the harbour of
Porto-bello on the one ea, and that of Panama on the other.
Thcfe have been called the keys to the communication be-
tween the north and south sea, between Spain and her moit
valuable colonies. In consequence of this advantage, Pa-
nama has become a considerable and thriving town. The
peculiar noxiousness of its climate has prevented Porto-bello
from increaing in the fame proportion. As the intercourse
with the fettlemcnts in the Pacific Ocean, is now carried on
by anothcr channel, it is probable that both Porto-bcllo and
Panama will decline, when no longer nourifed and enriched
by that commerce, to which they were indebted for their prof-
p)critv, and even their exifience.

TJI E

THE provinces of Carthagena and Santa Martha, firetch to B O K

VII.

the eastward of the isthmus of Darien. The country fill con- -
tinucs mountainous, but its vallies begin to expand, are well Carthagena
watered, and extremely fertile. Pedro de Heredia fubjeded Martha.
this part of America to the crown of Spain, about the year
i 32. It is thinly peopled, and of courfc ill cultivated. It
produces, however, a variety of valuable drugs, and ome
precious floncs, particularly emeralds. But its chief import-
ance is derived from the harbour of Carthagena, the fafcft and
best fortified of any in the American dominions of Spain. In a
situation so favourable, commerce soon began to flourish. As
early as the year i 544, it seems to have been a town of some
note. But when Carthagena was chosen as the port in which
the galcons should first begin to trade on their arrival from
Europe, and to which they were directed to return, in order
to prepare for their voyage homeward, the commerce of its
inhabitants was so much favoured by this arrangement, that
it soon became one of the most populous, opulent, and beau-
tiful cities in America. There is, however, reason to appre-
hend, that it has reached its highefi point of exaltation, and
that it will be so far affected by the change in the Sparifn
fylecm of trade with America, which has withdrawn from it
the desirable visits of the galeons, as to feel at least a tempo-
rary decline. But the wealth now collected there, muff find
or create employment for itfclf, and may be turned with ad-
vantage into fomc new channel. Its harbour is so ffe, and
so conveniently situated for receiving commodities from
Europe, its merchants have been so long accuflomcd to con-
vey there into all the adjacent provinces, that it is probable
they will flill retain this branch of trade, and Carth:llln con-
tinuc to be a city of great importance.

Xx z

339

B O O K THE province contiguous to Santa Martha on the east, was

VII. V 1v~ . first visited by Alonfo de Ojeda, in the year 499 t; and the
Vcnezucla. Spaniards, on their landing there, having observed some huts in

an Indian village built upon piles, in order to raise them above
the flagnated water which covered the plain, were led to bestow
upon it the name of Venezuela, or little Venice, by their usual
propensity to find a resemblance, between what they discovered
in America, and the objeEts which were familiar to them in
Europe. They made ome attempts to fettle there, but with
little success. The final reduction of the province was accom-
plifled by means very different from those to which Spain was
indebted for its other acquisitions in the New World. The
ambition of Charles V. often engaged him in operations of such
variety and extent, that his revenues were not sufficient to de-
fray the expence of carrying them into execution. Among
other expedients for supplying the deficiency of his funds, he
had borrowed large fums from the Velfers of Augiburgh, the
most opulent merchants at that time in Europe. By way of re-
tribution for these, or in hopes, perhaps, of obtaining a new
loan, he betlowed upon them the province of Venezuela, to be
held as an hereditary fief of the crown of Caflile, on condition
thatwithin a limited timethey should render themselves maflers
of the country, and establish a colony there. Under the direction
of such persons, it might have been expected, that a fcttlement
would have been eflablifhed on maxims very different from
those of the Spaniards, and better calculated to encourage such
ufcful indufiry, as they might have known to be the only cer-
tain source of profpcrity and opulence. But unfortunately
they committed the execution of their plan to fomne of those

t IS ok ii. p. ;,18.

foldicrs
340

soldiers of fortune with which Germany abounded in the fix- B o o K

vII.

teenth century. These adventurers, impatient to amass riches,
that they might speedily abandon a station which they soon
discovered to be very uncomfortable, instead of planting a
colony that might have cultivated and improved the country,
wandered from difirid to diflridt in search of mines, plunder-
ing the natives with unfeeling rapacity, or opprefing them by
the imposition of intolerable tafls. In the course of a few
years, their avarice and exations, in comparison with which
those of the Spaniards were moderate, desolated the province
so completely, that it could hardly afford them fubfiftance, and
the Velfers relinquilhed a property, from which the inconfi-
deratc conduct of their agents left them no hope of ever de-
riving any advantage u. When the wretched remainder of the
Germans deserted Venezuela, the Spaniards again took pof-
session of it; but, notwithstanding many natural advantages,
it is one of their most languishing and unproductive fettle-
ments.

THE provinces of Caraccas and Cumana are the last of the Caraccas and

Spanish territories on this coat; but in relating the origin and
operations of the mercantile company, in which an exclusive
right of trade with them has been veiled, I fllall hereaftcr have
occasion to confider their fiate and productions.

TIIE new kingdom of Granada i; entirely an inland country N'- l:I, :;-

domi ol (;:r.-

of vast extent. Tllis important addition was ma:d to the donli- nl.,
nions of Spain about the year 15 36, by Sebaffian dc Benalcazar
and Gonzalo Ximnces de OJefaitla, two of tie bravcft and motl
accomplifihcd oficers employed in the conqucft of Americ.

u Oviedo y Iagnos di. \i \'cnczuchi, p. I , &c.

34.I

B o K The former, who commanded at that time in Quito, attacked

vi.

it from the south; the latter made his invasion from Santa
Martha on the north. As the original inhabitants of this
region were farther advanced in improvement than any people
in America, but the Mexicans and Peruvians x, they defended
themselves with great rolution and good condut. The
abilities and perseverance of Bcnalcazar and Quefada fur-
mounted all opposition, though not without encountering
many dangers, and reduced the country into the form of a
Spanish province.

THE new kingdom of Granada is so far elevated above the

level of the ea, that though it approaches almost to the equa-
tor, the climate is remarkably temperate. The fertility of its
vallics is not inferior to that of the richest diftridts in Ame-
rica, and its higher grounds yield gold and precious stones of
various kinds. It is not by digging into the bowels of the
earth that this gold is found; it is mingled with the foil near
the surface, and separated from it by repeated washings with
water. This operation is carried on wholly by negroe slaves;
for though the chill subterranean air has been discovered, by
experience, to be so fatal to them, that they cannot be employed
in the deep silver mines, they are more capable of performing
the other fpccics of labour than Indians. As the natives in
the new kingdom of Granada are exempt from that service,
which has wafted their race so rapidly in other parts of Ame-
rica, it is remarkably populous. Some difiriEts yield gold with
a profusion no less wonderful than that in the vale of Cinc-
guilla, which I have formerly mentioned, and it is often found
in peplitas, or grains, which manifcfi the abundance in which

x Look iv p. 345, &c.

it
342

it is produced. On a rising ground near Pampelona, ingle B o o 1;
labourers have collected in a day what was equal in value to _>iL
a thousand pesos Y. A late governor of Sante Fc brought with
him to Spain a lump of virgin gold, estimated to be worth
seven hundred and forty pounds sterling. But without found-
ing any calculation on what is rare and extraordinary, the
value of the gold usually colle6ted in this country, particu-
larly in the provinces of Popayan and Choco, is of confider-
able amount. Its towns are populous and flourishing. The
number of inhabitants in almost every part of the country
daily increases. Cultivation and induitry of various kinds
begin to be encouraged, and to prosper. A considerable trade
is carried on with Carthagena, the produce of the mines, and
other commodities, being conveyed down the great river of St.
Magdalen to that city. On another quarter, the new king-
dom of Granada has a communication with the Atlantic by
the river Orinoco; but the country which firetches along its
banks towards the east, is little known, and imperfectly occu-
pied by the Spaniards.

y Piedrahita Hist. del N. Reyno, p. 481, MS. penes me.

'r H E

# BOOK VIII.

THE
H I S T O R Y

F
A M E R I C A.

BOOK VIII.

AFTER tracing the progress of the Spaniards in their B K
discoveries and conquests during more than half a century,
I have conduted them to that period when their authority ofTionthe

policy and
was established over almost all the vast regions in the New trade of the

Spanil co-

World frill subjed to their dominion. The effeCt of their set- lonics.
tlements upon the countries of which they took porfeffion, the
maxims which they adopted in forming their new colonies, the
interior ftrudure and policy of there, together with the in-
fluence of their progreflive improvement upon the parent
slate, and tle commercial intcrcourfe of nations, are the ob-
jeds to which we now turn our attention, and they are no
less interefling than important.

THE first vifiblc confcqucncc of the eflablifhments made Dei)opllaniion

of Amic a
by the Spaniards in America, was the diminution of the an- ilh. fttli cnft

Vo L. I1. Y y Cicnlt of 1lllh'.

BOOK

VIII.

Causes of this
in the islands,
and sone parts
of the con-
tinent.

cient inhabitants, to a degree equally astonishing and deplo-
rable. I have already, on different occasions, mentioned the
disastrous influence under which the connetion of the Ameri-
cans with the people of our hemisphere commenced, both in
the islands, and in several parts of the continent, and have
touched upon various causes of their rapid consumption.
Wherever the inhabitants of America had resolution to take
arms in defence of their liberty and rights, many perished in
the unequal contest, and were cut off by their fierce invaders.
But the greatest desolation followed after the sword was
sheathed, and the conquerors were setted in tranquillity. It
was in the islands, and in those provinces of the continent
which firetch from the Gulf of Trinidad to the confines of
Mexico, that the fatal effeEs of the Spanish dominion were
firfl and most sensibly felt. All there were occupied either by
wandering tribes of hunters, or by such as had made but small
progress in cultivation and industry. When they were com-
pelled by their new masters to take up a fixed residence, and
to apply to regular labour; when talks were imposed upon
them disproportioned to their strength, and were exacted with
unrelenting severity ; they possesed not vigour either of mind
or of body to sustain this unusual load of opprefifon. Dejetion
and despair drove many to eni their lives by violence. Fatigue
and famine destroyed more. In all those extensive regions, the
original race of inhabitants wafted away; in ome it was totally
extinguifilcd. In Mexico, where a powerful and martial
people distinguished their opposition to the Spaniards, by es-
forts of courage worthy of a better fate, great numbers fell in
the field; and there, as well as in Peru, still greater numbers
perishcd under the hardflhips of attending the Spanish armies
in their various expeditions and civil wars, worn out with the

inccfli'nt
346

incessant toil of carrying their baggage, provisions, and mili- B o K

VIII.
tary flores.

BUT neither the rage nor cruelty of the Spaniards were so In New Spain

defirudive to the people of Mexico and Peru, as the inconfidc-
rate policy with which they established their new settlements.
The former were temporary calamities, fatal to individuals;
the latter was a permanent evil, which, with gradual confump-
tion, wafted the nation. When the provinces of Mexico and
Peru were divided among the conquerors, each was eager to
obtain a diftrid, from which he might expect an infatantaneous
recompence for all his services. Bold adventurers, accustomed
to the careleffiefs and dissipation of a military life, had nei-
ther indufiry to carry on any plan of regular cultivation, nor
patience to wait for its flow, but certain returns. Inflead of
fettling in the vallies occupied by the natives, where the ser-
tility of the foil would have amply rewarded the diligence of
the planter, they chose to fix their flations in ome of the
mountainous regions, frequent both in New Spain and in Peru.
To search for mines of gold and silver, was the chief obje of
their activity. The valt profpeds which this opens, and the
alluring hopes which it continually prefcnts, correspond won-
derfully with the spirit of cnterprize and adventure that ani-
mated the first emigrants to America in every prt of their
conduc. In order to pufll forward those favourite projcEs,
so many hands were wanted, that the service of the natives
became indifpcnfably rcquifitc. They were, accordingly,
compelled to abandon their antient habitations in the p)lains,
and driven in crowds to the mountains. The fuddcn transition
fiom the flltry climate of the vallics, to tlh chill pcnetrating
air )pculiar to higlh lands in the torrid zone; the fatigue of

Y y" c o.'l , it;lnt:

347

BOOK

V11I.

Not the result
of any system
of policy;

exorbitant labour, scanty or unwholesome nourishment, and
the despondency occasioned by a species of oppression to which
they were not accustomed, and of which they saw no end,
affected them nearly as much as their less indufirious country-
men in the islands. They funk under the united pressure of
those calamities, and melted away with almost equal rapidity .
In consequence of this, together with the introduction of the
small-pox, a malady unknown in America, and extremely fatal
to the natives a, the number of people, both in New Spain and
Peru, was so much reduced, that in a few years the accounts
of their antient population appeared almost incredible b.

SUCH are the most considerable events and causes, which, by
their combined operation, contributed to depopulate America.
Without attending to these, many authors, astonished at the
suddenness of the desolation, have ascribed this unexampled
event to a scheme of policy no less profound than atrocious.
The Spaniards, as they pretend, conscious of their own inability
to occupy the vast regions which they had discovered, and fore-
feeing the impossibility of maintaining their authority over a
people infinitely superior to themselves in number, in order to
preserve America, resolved to exterminate the inhabitants, and
by converting it into a defart, endeavoured to secure their
own dominion over itc. But nations seldom extend their views
to objecs so remote, or lay their plans so deep; and, for the
honour of humanity, we may observe, that no nation ever de-

7 Torquemada, i. 613.
lib, x. c. 4. Ulloa Entreten. 206.
See N 0 T E LXVIII.

a B. Diaz, c. 124. Herrera, dec. ii.

b Torquem. 615. 642,643.
c See N 0 T E LXIX.

liberately
348

349

liberately formed such an execrable scheme. The Spanish B K
monarchs, far from ading upon any such system of deftrudion, V-lvi
were uniformly solicitous for the preservation of their new
fubjeas. With Iabella, zeal for propagating the christian
faith, and the desire of communicating the knowledge of truth,
and the consolations of religion, to people destitute of spiritual
light, were more than ostensible motives for encouraging Co-
lumbus to attempt his discoveries. Upon his success, he
endeavoured to fulfil her pious purpose, and manifested the
most tender concern to secure not only religious inftrution,
but mild treatment, to that inoffensive race of men fubjed[ed
to her crown d. Her successors adopted the fame ideas; and,
on many occasions, which I have mentioned, their authority
was interposed in the most vigorous exertions, to proteC the
people of America from the oppression of their Spanish sub-
jets. Their regulations for this purpose were numerous, and
often repeated. They were framed with wisdom, and dictated
by humanity. After their possessions in the New World be-
came so extensive, as might have excited some apprehensions
of difficulty in retaining their dominion over them, the spirit
of their regulations was as mild as when their settlements
were confined to the islands alone. Their solicitude to pro-
tea the Indians seems rather to have augmented as their ac-
quifitions increased; and from ardour to accomplish this, they
enaEted, and endeavoured to enforce the execution of laws,
which excited a formidable rebellion in one of their colonies,
and spread alarm and difaffedion through all the reft. But
the avarice of individuals was too violent to be controuled
by the authority of laws. Rapacious and daring adven-
turers, far removed from the feat of government, little

d See NOT E LXX,

accuflomed

B O O K accustomed to the refiraints of military discipline while in ser-

_L vice, and fiill less disposed to refped the feeble jurisdiCtion of

civil power in an infant colony, despised or eluded every re-
gulation that set bounds to their exactions and tyranny. The
parent fIate, with persevering attention, issued edids to pre-
vent the oppression of the Indians; the colonifis, regardless of
these, or truiing to their ditfance for impunity, continued to
confider and treat them as slaves. The governors themselves,
and other officers employed in the colonies, several of whom
were as indigent and rapacious as the adventurers over whom
they presided, were too apt to adopt their contemptuous ideas
of the conquered people; and, instead of checking, encouraged
or connived at their excesses. The desolation of the New
World should not then be charged on the court of Spain, or
be confidered as the effect of any system of policy adopted
there. It ought to be imputed wholly to the conquerors and
first planters of America, who, by measures no less inconfide-
rate than unjust, counteraced the edids of their sovereign,
and have brought disgrace upon their country.

nor the cf- WITI sPill greater injustice, have many authors reprefcnted
f of reli- the intoerating fpiril of the Roman Catholic religion, as the
gion. the intolerating spirit of the Roman Catholic religion, as the

cause of exterminating the Americans, and have accuscd the
Spanish ecclcfiafics of animating their countrymen to the
flaughtcr of that innocent people, as idolaters and enemies of
God. But the firit missionaries who visited America, though
weak and illiterate, were pious men. They early cfp)ou fcr the
dcfence of the natives, and vindicated their charadcr from the
;iflicrlionis of tleir conquerors, who, describing theml as inc;i-
l);iblc of I;cing formed to thec offices of civil life, or of colllrc-
J-C enIin tlhe doclrincs of religion, contended, that they were

a fb-
350

a subordinate race of men, on whom the hand of nature had B K

VIII.

set the mark of servitude. From the accounts which I have v1.
given of the humane and persevering zeal of the Spanish mif-
fionaries, in protecting the helpless flock committed to their
charge, they appear in a light which reflets lustre upon their
function. They were ministers of peace, who endeavoured to
wrest the rod from the hands of oppressors. To their power-
ful interposition, the Americans were indebted for every regu-
lation tending to mitigate the rigour of their fate. The clergy
in the Spanish settlements, regular as well as secular, are fill
confidered by the Indians as their natural guardians, to whom
they have recourse under the hardships and exactions to which
they are too often exposed .

BUT, notwithstanding the rapid depopulation of America, a The number

or Indians

very considerable number of the native race fill remains both in sill rciiiin-
Mexico and Peru, especially in those parts which were not ex- ing.
posed to the first fury of the Spanish arms, or dcfolated by the
first efforts of their indufiry, still more ruinous. In Guatimala,
Chiapa, Nicaragua, and other delightful provinces of the
Mexican empire that firetch along the fouth-fca, the race of
Indians is still numerous. Their settlements in some places are
so populous, as to merit the name of cities f. In the three au-
diences into which New Spain is divided, there are at least two
millions of Indians; a pitiful remnant, indeed, of its antient po-
pulation ! but such as fill forms a body of people superior in
number to that of all the other inhabitants of this vast country .
In Peru several lifirids, particularly in the kingdom of Quito,
are occupied almofi entirely by Indians. In otllhr provinces,
e Sec NOTE LXXI. Sec NOTE LXXII c Se N OT? [: L\XIII.

tilt y

351

352
BOOK

VIII.

General idea
of the policy
of Spain in its
colonies.

HISTORY OF AMERICA.

they are mingled with the Spaniards, and in many of their
settlements praftife the mechanic arts, and fill most of the in-
ferior stations in society. As the inhabitants, both of Mexico
and Peru,were accustomed to a fixedtefidence, and to tome de-
gree of regular indutry, less violence was requisite in bringing
them to some conformity with the European modes of civil life.
But wherever the Spaniards fettled among the savage tribes of
America, their attempts to incorporate with them have been
always fruitless, and often fatal to the natives. Impatient of
restraint, and disdaining labour as a mark of servility, they
either abandoned their original sea ts, and fought for independ-
ance in mountains and forests inaccessible to their oppressors,
or perished when reduced to a state repugnant to their antient
ideas and habits. In the diflrias adjacent to Carthagena, to
Panama, and to Buenos-Ayres, the desolation is more gene-
ral than even in those parts of Mexico and Peru, of which the
Spaniards have taken most full possession.

BUT the establishments of the Spaniards in the New World,

though fatal to its antient inhabitants, were made at a period
when that monarchy was capable of forming them to best ad-
vantage. By the union of all its petty kingdoms, Spain was
become a powerful state, equal to so great an undertaking. Its
monarchs, having extended their prerogative far beyond the li-
mits which once circumscribed the regal power in every king-
dom of Europe, were hardly subjea to controul, either in con-
certing, or in executing their measures. In every wide extend-
ed empire, the form of government must be simple, and the au-
thority of the sovereign absolute, that his resolutions may be
taken with promptitude, and pervade the whole with undimi-
nifhed force. Such was the power of the Spanish monarchs,

when

when they were called to deliberate concerning the mode of o O K

VIll.

establishing their dominion over the molt remote provinces, ~,
that had ever been fubjeted to any European flatc. In this
d!liberation, they felt theinfelves under no constitutional re-
firaint, and that as independent mailers of their own resolves,
they might issue the edids requisite for modelling the govern-
nu nt of the new colonies, by a mere ad of prerogative.

THIs early interposition of the Spanish crown, in order to Earl. inter-

regulate the policy and trade of its colonies, is a peculiarity Pf'il'aon (ifthe
which diftinguiflies their progress from that of the colonies of r'ty.
any other European nation. When the Portuguese, the Eng-
liPl, and French, took possession of those regions in America
which they now occupy, the advantages which they promised
to yield were so remote and uncertain, that they were suffered
to struggle through a hard infancy, almof without guidance
or protection from the parent state. But gold and silver, the
first productions of the Spanish settlements in the New World,
were more alluring, and immediately attracted the attention
of their monarchs. Though they had contributed little to the
discovery, and almofi nothing to the conqucfi of the Newx
World, they instantly assumed the funtion of its legislators;
and having acquired a species of dominion formerly unknown,
they formed a plan for exercising it, to which nothing similar
occurs in the history of human affairs.

TI-IE fundamental maxim of Spanifll jurifprutlcncewith re- All prwe]

fpet to America, is to confider what has been acquired there veictl 'll i
as veiled in the crown, rather than in the flatc. By the cro",",.
bull of Alexander VI. on which, as its great charter, Spain
founded its right, all the regions that had been, or should

VOL. 11. Z z zu

353

BOOK

V111.

All the new
dominions of
Spain fubjct-
ed to two
viceros.

be discovered, were befiowed as a free gift upon Ferdinand and
Isabella. They and their successors were uniformly held to be
the universal proprietors of the vafi territories, which the arms
of their fubjeIs conquered in the New World. From them,
all grants of land there flowed, and to them they finally return-
ed. The leaders who conduted the various expeditions, the
governors who presided over the different colonies, the officers
ofjuflice, and the ministers of religion, were all appointed by
their authority, and removable at their pleasure. The people
who composed infant settlements were intitled to no privileges
independent of the sovereign, or that served as a barrier against
the power of the crown. It is true, that when towns were
built, and formed into bodies corporate, the citizens wereWer-
mitted to eledt their own magistrates, who governed by laws
which the community enacled. Even in the moil despotic
flates, this feeble spark of liberty is not extinguished. But in
the cities of Spanish America, this jurifdidion is merely muni-
cipal, and is confined to the regulation of their own interior
commerce and police. In whatever relates to public govern-
ment, and the general interest, the will of the overeign is law.
No political power originates from the people. All centres in
the crown, and in the officers of its nomination.

WHEN the conquests of the Spaniards in America were com-
pleted, their monarchs, in forming the plan of interior policy
for their new dominions, divided them into two immense go-
vernments, one subjed to the viceroy of New Spain, the other
to the viceroy of Peru. The jurifdidion of the former extended
over all the provinces belonging to Spain in the northern di-
vision of the American continent. Under that of the latter, was
comprehended whatever she poffiffed in South America. This

arrangement,
354

arrangement, which, from the beginning, was attended with
many inconveniencics, became intolerable when the remote
provinces of each viccroyalty began to improve in industry and
population. The people complained of their subjection to a
filperior, whose place of residence was so distant, or so inac-
ceffible, as almot excluded them from any intercourse with the
feat of government. The authority of the viceroy over diflri.Ids
so far removed from his own eye and observation, was unavoid-
ably both feeble and ill-direcqcd. As a remedy for those evils,
a third viccroyalty has been cfiabliflhd in the present century,
at Santa Fe dc Bogota, the capital of the new kingdom of Gra-
nada, the jurifdidion of which extends over the whole king-
dom of Tierra Firme, and the province of Ouitoh. Those
viceroys not only represent the person of their sovereign, but
possess his regal prerogatives within the precinEts of their own
governments, in their utmofi extent, Like him, they exercise
supreme authority in every department of government, civil,
military, and criminal. They may preside in every tribunal.
They have the sole right of nominating the persons who
hold many offices of the highest importance, and the occa-
fional privilege of supplying such as are in the royal gift, until
the successor appointed by the king shall arrive. The exter-
nal pomp of their government is suited to its real dignity and
power. Their courts are formed upon the model of that at
Madrid, with horse and foot guards, a household regularly
established, numerous attendants, and ensigns of command,
displaying such magnificence, as hardly retains the appearance
of delegated authority .
h Voy. deUlloa, i. 23 25 .

' llo;, Voy. i. 432. Gage, 61.
Z% , 2

BOOK

VIII.
Their powers.

355
BUT

B O O K BUT as the viceroys cannot dischargein person the functions

VIII.

of a supreme magifirate in every part of their extenfie c jurif-

Courts ofAu- dicion, they are aided in their government by officers and tri-
dience.

bunals similar to those in Spain. The condu . of civil affairs
in the various provinces and difiridLs, into which the Spanish
dominions in America are divided, is committed 'o magistrates
of various orders and denominations; fomne appointed by the
king, others by the viceroy, but all subjcd to his command,
and amenable to his jurifdidion. The administration ofjuflice
is vested in tribunals, known by the name of Aldiences, and
formed upon the model of the court of Chancery in Spain.
These are eleven in number, and difpcnfe juflice to as many
difirids, into which the Spanish dominions in America are di-
vided k. The number of judges in them is various, according
to the extent and importance of their jurifdicion. The fiation
of a judge in the court of Audience is no less honourable than
lucrative, and is commonly filled by persons of such abilities
and merit, as renders this tribunal extremely refpedable. Both
civil and criminal causes come under their cognizance, and for
Their jurif- each peculiar judges are set apart. Though it is only in the

iion. moit despotic governments that the Sovereign exercises in per-

son the formidable prerogative of administering jutfice to his
fubjets, and in absolving, or condemning, consults no law but
what is deposited in his own breast; though, in all the mo-
narchies of Europe, judicial authority is committed to magif-
trates, whose decisions are regulated by known laws and efla-
hlifhed forms, the Spanish viceroys have often attempted to in-
trude themselves into the feat ofjuflice, and with an ambition
which their diflance from the controul of a superior, rendered

k See NOTE LXXIV.

bold,
35G

bold, have aspired at a power which their master does not vcn- 1 ( o OK
ture to aume. In order to check an usurpation which muf lt
have annihilated juflice and security in the Spanish colonies, by
fubjcciing the lives and property of all to the will of a inglc
man, the viceroys have been prohibited, in the molt explicit
terms, by repeated laws, from interfering in the judicial pro-
ceedings of the courts of Audience, or from delivering an opi-
nion, or giving a voice, with refped to any point litigated be-
fore them J. In ome particular cafes, in which any question of
civil right is involved, even the political regulations of the
viceroy may be brought under the review of the court of Au-
dience, which, in those inflances, may be deemed an interme-
diate power placed between him and the people, as a conflitu-
tional barrier to circumscribe his jurifdition. But as legal re-
firaints on a person who represents the sovereign, and is clothed
with his authority, are little suited to the genius of Spanish po-
licy; the hesitation and reserve with which it confers this
power on the courts of Audience, are remarkable. They may
advifc, they may remonfirate, but in the event of a direct col-
lifion between their opinion and the will of the viceroy, what
he determines must be carried into execution, and nothing re-
mains for them, but to lay the matter before the king and the
council of the Indies m. But to be intitled to remonfirate, and
inform against a person, before whom all others mull be silent,
and tamely fubmitto his decrees, is a privilege which adds dig-
nity to the courts of Audience. This is farther augmented by
anothercircumflance. Upon the death of a viceroy, without
any provision of a fucccffor by the king, the supreme power

i Rccop. lib. ii. tit. xv. I. 35. 38 44. lib, iii. tit. iii. 1. 36, 37.
rn Solorz. Dc jure Ind. lib. iv. c. 3. n. 40, 41. Recop. lib ii. lit. xv. . 6. l iii.
tit. iii. 1. 34. Lib. v. tit. ix. 1. .

is

357

B 0 0 K is vceted in the court of Audience resident in the capital of the

\~-~-
I] viceroyalty, and the senior judge, assisied by his brethren, ex-

ercifes all the functions of the viceroy while the office con-
tinues vacant ". In matters that come under the cognizance
of the Audiences, in the course of their ordinary jui-fdicion,
as courts of justice, their sentences are final in every litigation
concerning property of less value than fix thoufind pesos;
but when the subjed in dispute exceeds that fum, their deci-
sions are subjed to review, and may be carried by appeal be-
fore the royal council of the Indies o.

Council of IN this council, one of the most considerable in the monarchy
th0e hius. for dignity and power, is veiled the supreme government of all

the Spanish dominions in America. It was first eflablifieed by
Ferdinand, in the year 1511, and brought into a more perfeCt
Its power. form by Charles V. in the year 524. Its jurifdiCion extends

to every department, ecclesiastical, civil, military, and comlner-
cial. All laws and ordinances relative to the government and
police of the colonies originate there, and must be approved of
by two-thirds of the members, before they are iflued in the
name of the king. All the offices, of which the nomination is
reserved to the crown, are conferred in this council. To it c:.ch
person employed in America, from the viceroy downwards, is
accountable. It reviews their condu, rewards their services,
and inflits the punishments due to their malverfiations p. Be-
fore it is laid whatever intelligence, either public or secret, is
received from America, and every scheme of improving the
adminifiration, the police, or the commerce of the colonies, is

Recop lib. ii. tit. x. 1. 57, & . o Recop. lib. v tit. xiii . . , &c.
p Rccop. lib. ii. tit. ii. 1. 1,, &c.

fnbniittcd

submitted to its consideration. From the firfi institution of
the council of the Indies, it has been the conflant object of
the catholic monarchs to maintain its authority, and to make
such additions from time to time, both to its power and its
splendour, as might render it formidable to all their fubjeas in
the New World. Whatever degree of public order and virtue
still remains in that country, where so many circumfiances
conspire to relax the former, and to corrupt the latter, may be
ascribed in a great measure to the wife regulations and vigilant
infpeltion of this refpedable tribunal q.

As the king is supposed to be always present in his council

of the Indies, its meetings are held in the place where he re-
fides. Another tribunal has been inflituted, in order to regu-
late such commercial affairs, as required the immediate and per-
fonal infpedtion of those appointed to superintend them. This
is called Casa de la Contratacion, or the house of trade, and was
eftablificd in Seville, to whose port commerce with the New
World was confined, as early as the year I50I. It may be
confidered both as a board of trade, and as a court of judica-
ture. In the former capacity, it takes cognizance of whatever
relates to the intercourse of Spain with America, it regulates
what commodities flould be exported thither, and has the in-
fpedion of such as are received in return. It decides concern-
ing the departure of the fleets for the Weft Indies, the freight,
and burden of the ships, their equipment, and destination. In
thelattercapacity, it judges with refped to every queftion,civil,
commercial, or criminal, arising in consequence of the tranf-
aions of Spain with America; and in both these departments,

q Solorz. de Jure Ind, lib, iv. . 22,

its

B 0 0 K

Vill.J

Casa d Con-
It, ~n-;n

359

B O 0 K its decisions are exempted from the review of any court but

\ in

that of the council of the Indies r.

SUCii is the great outline of that fyfIem of government, which
Spain has established in her Americancolonies. To enumerate
the various subordinate boards and officers employed in the
adminifiration ofjuftice, in collecting the public revenue, and
in regulating the interior police of the country, to describe
their different funcions, and to inquire into the mode and
effect of their operations, would prove a detail no less intri-
cate than minute and uninterefling.

'irft oljeEt, THE first objeC of the Spanish monarchs was to secure the
eoxcufe an productions of the colonies to the parent slate, by an absolute
trade, prohibition of any intercourse with foreign nations. They

took poffeiffon of America by right of conquefl, and conscious
of the feebleness of their infant settlements, and aware of the
difficulty in establishing their dominion over such vast regions,
or of retaining so many reluctant nations under the yoke, they
dreaded the intrusion of strangers; they even shunned their in-
fpedion, and endeavoured to keep them at a distance from their
coasts. This spirit ofjealoufy and exclusion, which at first was
natural, and perhaps necessary, augmented as their poffeflions
in America extended, and the value of them came to be more
fully understood. In consequence of it, a system of colonizing
was introduced, towhich there had hitherto been nothing fimi-
lar among mankind. In the ancient world, it was not uncom-
mon to fend forth colonies. But they were of two kinds only.
They were cither migrations, which served to diSburden a late

r Recop. lib. ix. tit. i. Vcitia Norte de la Contratacion, lib. i. c. ;

of
360

HISTORY OF AMERICA.

of its superfluous fubjeds, when they multiplied too fast for B o o K
the territory which they occupied: or they were military de-
tachments stationed, as garrisons, in a conquered province. The
colonies of some Greek republics, and the swarms of northern
barbarians which fettled in different parts of Europe, were of
the firit species. The Roman colonies were of the second. In
the former, the connedcion with the mother-country quickly
ceased, and they became independent states. In the latter, as
the disjunction was not complete, the dependence continued.
In their American settlements, the Spanish monarchs took what Regulatio.

for that pu-

was peculiar to each, and itudied to unite them. By fending poie.
colonies to regions so remote, by efiablifhing in each a form of
interior policy and administration, under diflind governors,
and with peculiar laws, they disjoined them from the mother-
country. By retaining in their own hands the rights of legi-
flation, as well as that of imposing taxes, together with the
power of nominating the persons who filled every department,
civil or military, they secured their dependence. Happily for
Spain, the situation of her colonies was such, as rendered it
possible to reduce this new idea into practice. Almost all the
countries which she had discovered and occupied, lay within
the tropics. The producions of that large portion of the globe,
are different from those of Europe, even in its most southern
provinces. The qualities of the climate and of the foil naturally
turn the industry of those who fettle there into new channels.
When the Spaniards first took poIfeffion of their domains in
America, the precious metals which they yielded, were the
only object that attracted their attention. Even when their
efforts began to take a better direction, they employed them-
selves almost wholly in rearing such peculiar productions of the
climate, as, from their rarity or value, were of chief demand in

VOL. II. 3 A the

B o o K the mother-country. Allured by vat profpets of immediate

v; wealth, they disdained to wafie their indufiry on what was less

lucrative, but of superior moment. In order to render it im-
possible to correfe this error, and to prevent them from making
any efforts that might interfere with those of Spain, the eta-
blifhment of several species of manufadures, and even the cul-
ture of the vine, or olive, are prohibited in the colonies', un-
der evere penalties t. They mufi trust entirely to the mother-
country for the objects of primary neceflity. Their clothes,
their furniture, their infiruments of labour, their luxuries, and
even a considerable part of the provisions which they con-
fumed, were imported from Spain. During a great part of the
sixteenth century, Spain poffefling an extensive commerce and
flourishing manufactures, could supply with cafe the growing
demands of her colonies, from her own stores. The produce
of their mines and plantations was given in exchange for
these. But all that the colonies received, as well as all that
they gave, was conveyed in SpaniSh bottoms. No vessel be-
longing to the colonies was ever permitted to carry the com-
modities of America toEurope. Even the commercial inter-
course of one colony with another, was either absolutely pro-
hibited, or limited by many jealous refiriEtions. All that
America yields flows into the ports of Spain; all that it con-
fumes must issue from them. No foreigner can enter one of
its colonies without express permission; no vessel of any
foreign nation is received into their harbours; and the pains
of death, with confiscation of moveables, are denounced
againfi every inhabitant who presumes to trade with them u.
Thus the colonies are kept in a fiate of perpetual pupillage;

* See N O'T E LXXV. t B. Ulloa Retab. des Manus. &c, p. 206.
u Recopil, lib. ix, tit, xxvii. 1. i. 4. 7, &c.

and

and by the introduction of this commercial dependence, a re-
finement in policy of which Spain set the first example to the
European nations, the supremacy of the parent state hath been
maintained over remote colonies during two centuries and a
half.

*3t)3
B3 0 K_

VIII.
SUCH are the capital maxims to which the Spanif monarchs Slow pogrc.

of populartior

teem to have attended in forming their new settlements in from iLulop,-.
America. But they could not plant with the fame rapidity that
they had destroyed; and, from many concurring causes, their
progress was extremely flow, in filling up the immense void
which their devastations had occasioned. As soon as the rage
for discovery and adventure began to abate, the Spaniards
opened their eyes to danger and difireffes, which at first they
did not perceive, or had despised. The numerous hardships
with which the members of infant colonies have to firuggle,
the diseases of unwholesome climates, fatal to the constitution
of Europeans; the difficulty of bringing a country, covered
with forests, into culture; the want of hands necessary for
labour in some provinces, and the flow reward of indufiry in
all, unless where the accidental discovery of mines enriched a
few fortunate adventurers, were evils universally felt and mag-
nified. Discouraged by the view of these, the spirit of migra-
tion was so much damped, that sixty years after the discovery
of the New World, the number of Spaniards in all its pro-
vinces is computed not to have exceeded fifteen thousand x.

THE mode in which property was distributed in the Spanish Difcouraigci
colonies, and the regulations established with refpec to the by the rali of

x See NOTE LXXVI.

tranfiniffion

B 0 0 K tranfmiflion of it, whether by descent, or by sale, were ex-

w _» tremely unfavourable to population. In order to promote a ra-

pid increase of people in any new settlement, property in land
ought to be divided into small shares, and the alienation of it
should be rendered extremely easy . But the rapaciousness of
the Spanish conquerors of the New World paid no regard to
this fundamental maxim of policy; and, as they poifeffed power,
which enabled them to gratify the utmost extravagance of their
wishes, many of them seized diftrids and provinces of vast ex-
tent, and held them as encomiendas. By degrees they obtained
the privilege of converting a part of these into Mayorafgos, a
species of fief, introduced into the Spanish system of feudal
jurisprudence , which can neither be divided nor alienated.
Thus a great portion of landed property, under this rigid form
of entail, is withheld from circulation, and descends from fa-
ther to son unimproved, and of little value either to the proprie-
tor or to the community. In the account which I have given
of the reduction of Peru, various examples occur of enormous
traacs of country occupied by ome of the conquerors . The
excesses in other provinces were similar; for as the value of the
lands which they acquired, was originally estimated according
to the number of Indians which lived upon them, America was
in general so thinly peopled, that only districts of great extent
could afford such a number of labourers, as might be employed
in the mines with any profped of considerable gain. The per-
nicious effects of those radical errors in the distribution and
nature of property in the Spanish settlements, are felt through
every department of induitry, and may be confidered as one

Y Dr. Smith's Inquiry, ii. 166. Recop. lib. iv. tit. iii. 1. 24.
a Book vi. p. 259.

great
364

great cause of a progress in population so much flower than 3 0 K

VIII.
that which has taken place in better constituted colonies b. v

To this we may add, that the support of the enormous and and the na-

ture of their

expensive fabric of their ecclesiastical establishment, has been a eccleaaatical
burden on the Spanish colonies, which has greatly retarded the policy
progress of population and indufiry. The payment oftythes is
a heavy tax on indufiry; and if the exaction of them be not re-
gulated and circumscribed by the wisdom of the civil magi-
firate, it becomes intolerable and ruinous. But, infleadofany
refiraint on the claims of ecclesiastics, the inconsiderate zeal of
the Spanish legislators admitted them into America in their full
extent, and at once imposed on their infant colonies a burden
which is in no flight degree oppressive to society even in its
most improved state. As early as the year 15oi, the payment
of tythes in the colonies was enjoined, and the mode of it re-
gulated by law, and every article of primary necessity, towards
which the attention of new settlers must naturally be turned, is
fubjedted to that grievous exadiond. Nor were the demandsof
the clergy confined to articles of simple culture. Its more arti-
ficial and operose produtions, such as sugar, indigo, and co-
chineal, were oon declared to be tythabled; and thus the in-
dufiry of the planter was taxed in every flage of its progress,
from its rudest essay to its highest improvement. To the weight
of this legal imposition, the bigotry of the American Spaniards
has made many voluntary additions. From their fond'delight,
in the external pomp and parade of religion, and frpm super-
flitious reverence for ecclefiafiics of every denomination, they

b See N O T E XXVII. L Recop. lib. i. tit. xvi. 1. 2.
d Ibid. 1. 3 and 4.

have

365

t; o o K have bestowed profuse donatives on churches and monasteries,

---_-' and have unprofitably wafted a large proportion of that wealth,

which might have nourished and given vigour to produtive
labour in growing colonies.

Various or- BUT so fertile and inviting are the regions of America, which
ders of peo-
ple in f co- the Spaniards have occupied, that notwithstanding all the cir-
lonics. cumftances, which have checked and retarded population, it

has gradually increased, and filled the colonies of Spain with
citizens of various orders. Among these, the Spaniards, who
Cliapciones arrive from Europe, distinguished by the name of Chapetones,

are the first in rank and power. From the jealous attention of
the Spanish court to secure the dependence of the colonies,
every department of consequence is filled by persons sent from
Europe; and in order to prevent any dubious fidelity from
being employed, each must bring proof of a clear descent from
a family of OldChriftians, untainted with any'mixture of Jewish
or Mahometan blood, and never disgraced by any censure of
the inquisition e. In such pure hands, power is deemed to be
safely lodged, and almost every public funcion, from the vice-
royalty downwards, is committed to them alone. Every
person, who by his birth, or residence in America, may be
fufpeaed of any attachment or interest adverse to the mother-
country, is the objea of distrust to such a degree, as amounts
nearly to an exclusion from all offices of confidence or autho-
rity f, By this conspicuous predilection of the court, the Cha-
petones are raised to such pre-eminence in America, that they
look down with disdain on every other order of men.
e Rccopil. lib. ix. tit. xxvi. . 5, 16. f See NOTE LXXVIII,

THE

366
1)

TH E charater and state of the Creoles, or descendants of Eu- B K
ropeans fettled in America, the second class of fubjeds in the k-
Spanish colonies, has enabled the Chapetones to acquire other eod the
advantages, hardly less considerable than those which they de-
rive from the partial favour of government. Though some of
the Creolian race are descended from the conquerors of the
New World though others can trace up their pedigree to the
noblest families in Spain; though many are poifeffed of ample
fortunes, yet, by the enervating influence of a sultry climate,
by the rigour of a jealous government, and by their despair
of attaining that diftinaion to which mankind naturally aspire,
the vigour of their minds is so entirely broken, that a great
part of them waife life in luxurious indulgences, mingled with
an illiberal fuperflition still more debating. Languid and un-
enterprizing, the operations of an acive extended commerce
would be to them so cumbersome and oppressive, that in al-
most every part of America they decline engaging in it. The
interior traffic of every colony, as well as its trade with the
neighbouring provinces, and with Spain itself, are carried on
chiefly by the Chapetones g; who, as the recompence of their
industry, amass immense wealth, while the Creoles, funk in
sloth, are satisfied with the revenues of their paternal estates.

FROM this tated competition for power and wealth, between Rivalip lbe-
those two orders of citizens, and the various passions excited tween the ;..
by a rivalfhip so interesting, their hatred is violent and im-
placable. On every occasion, symptoms of this aversion break
out, and the common appellations which each bellows on the
other, are as contemptuous as those which flow from the most

g Voy. de Ulloa, . Z7. 2i. Voy. de Frezier, 227.

deep-

367

deep-rooted national antipathy h. The court of Spain, from a
refinement of distrustful policy, cherishes those feeds of discord,
and foments this mutual jealousy, which not only prevents the
two most powerful classes of its fubjeds in the New World
from combining against the parent tate, but prompts each,
with the most vigilant zeal, to observe the motions and to
counteract the schemes of the other.

THE third class of inhabitants in the Spanish colonies is a
mixed race, the offspring either of an European and a negroe,
or of an European and Indian, the former called Mulattoes,
the latter Mestizos. As the court of Spain, solicitous to incor-
porate its new vassals with its ancient fubjeCs, early encourag-
ed the Spaniards fettled in America to marry the natives of that
country, several alliances of this kind were formed in their in-
sant colonies i. But it has been more owing to licentious in-
dulgence, than to compliance with this injunction of their so-
vereigns, that this mixed breed has multiplied so greatly, as to
constitute a considerable part of the population in all the Spa-
nifh settlements. The several stages of descent in this race,
and the gradual variations of shade until the African black, or
the copper-colour of America, brighten into an European com-
plexion, are accurately marked by the Spaniards, and each dif-
tinguifhed by a peculiar name. Those of the first generation are
confidered and treated as Indians and negroes; but in the third
descent, the characeriftic hue of the former disappears; and in
the fifth, the deeper tint of the latter is so entirely effaced, that
they can no longer be distinguished from Europeans, and are en-

h Gage's Survey, p. 9. Frezier, 22z6.
IHrrera, dec. i. lib. v. c. 12. Dec. iii, lib, vii. c. 2.

i Recopil. lib. vi. tit. i. 1. 2.

titled

368
BOOK

VIII.

A mixed race
forms the
third order
of citizens.

titled to all their privileges k. It is chiefly by this mixed race,
whose frame is remarkably robust and hardy, that the mechanic
arts are carried on, and other aEtive funalions in society are
discharged, which the two higher claifes of citizens, from
pride, or from indolence, disdain to exercise '.

THE negroes hold the fourth rank among the inhabitants of

the Spanish colonies. The introduction of that unhappy part
of the human species into America, together with their services
and sufferings there, hall be fully explained in another place;
here they are mentioned chiefly, in order to point out a pecu-
liarity in their situation under the Spanish dominion. In several
of their settlements, particularly in New Spain, negroes are
chiefly employed in domestic service. They form a principal
part in the train of luxury, and are cherished and carefled by
their superiors, to whose vanity and pleasures they are equally
subservient. Their dress and appearance is hardly les fplen-
did than that of their masters, whose manners they imitate,
and whose passions they imbibe m. Elevated by this diftinacion,
they have assumed such a tone of superiority over the Indians,
and treat them with such insolence and scorn, that the anti-
pathy between the two races has become implacable. Even in
Peru, where negroes are more numerous, and employed in
field-work as well as domestic service, they maintain their as-
cendant over the Indians, and their mutual hatred subsists with
equal violence. The laws have industriously fomented this
aversion, to which accident gave rife, and, by most rigorous in-

k Voy. deUlloa, i. p. 27.
Melendez, Teforos, Verdadcros, i. 354.
i. 451.

I Ibid. p. 29. Voy. de Bouguer, p. o04.

m Gage, p. 56. Voy. deUlloa,

junaionls,

369

B 0 0 K
BOOK

VIII.

c'11

Negroes form
the fourth or-
der.
VOL. II.

3B

juncions, have endeavoured to prevent every intercourse that
might form a bond of union between the two races. Thus,
by an artful policy, the Spaniards derive strength from that
which is the weakness of other European colonies, and have
secured as associates and defenders, those very persons who
elsewhere are objects ofjealoufy and terror ".

THE Indians form the last, and the mofi depressed order of

men in that country, which belonged to their ancestors. I
have already traced the progress of the Spanish ideas with re-
sped to the condition and treatment of that people, and
have mentioned the most important of their more early regula-
tions, concerning a matter of so much consequence in the ad-
minifiration of their new dominions. But since that period to
which I have brought down the hiflory of America, the infor-
mation and experience acquired during two centuries, have
enabled the court of Spain to make such improvements in this
part of its American system, that a hort view of the present
condition of the Indians may prove both curious and in-
teresting.

BY the famous regulations of Charles V. in 542, which
have been so often mentioned, the high pretensions of the con-
querors of the New World, who confidered its inhabitants as
slaves, to whose service they had acquired a full right of pro-
perty, were finally abrogated. From that period, the Indians
have been reputed freemen, and intitled to the privileges offub-
jceQs. When admitted into this rank, it was deemed jufi, that
they should contribute towards the support and improvement

i Rccopil. lib. vii. it. v. 1. 7. I-Icrrcra, dec. viii. lib. vii. c. z. Frezicr, 244.

of

370

BOOK
B K

The Indians
lfr;:i the lft
order of ci-
lz ensl.

Their prcfint
condition.

of the society, which had adopted them as members. But as
no considerable benefit could be expeded from the voluntary
efforts of men, unacquainted with regular industry, and averse
to labour, the court of Spain found it necessary to fix and ec-
cure, by proper regulations,what it thought reasonable to exat
from them. With this view, an annual tax was imposed upon
every male, from the age of eighteen to fifty; and, at the
fame time, the nature as well as extent of the services which
they might be required to perform, were ascertained with pre-
cifion. This tribute varies in different provinces, but if we
take that paid in New Spain as a medium, its annual amount
is nearly four Shillings a head; no exorbitant fum in countries
where, as at the source of wealth, the value of money is ex-
tremely low . The right of levying it likewise varies. In
America, every Indian is either an immediate vassal of the
crown, or depends upon ome subjed to whom the difirid, in
which he resides, has been granted for a limited time, under
the denomination of enconienda. In the former cafe, about
three-fourths of the tax are paid into the royal treasury; in the
latter, the fame proportion of it belongs to the holder of the
grant. When Spain first took poffeflion of America, the
greater part of it was parcelled out among its conquerors, or
those who first fettled there, and but a small portion reserved
for the crown. As those grants, which were made for two
lives only p, reverted successively to the sovereign, he had it in
his power either to diffuse his favours by grants to new pro-
prietors, or to augment his own revenue by valuable annexa-

* See NOT E LXXIX. Recopil. lib. vi. tit. v. 1. 42. Hackluyt, vol. iii, p. 461.
P Recopil. lib. vi. tit. viii. 1. 48. Solorz. de Ind. jure, lib, ii. c. 16.

tions.

sl 0 C) K

Tav irnc-os:
on them

371

B O O K tions q. Of these, the latter has been frequently chosen; the

vl. number of Indians now depending immediately on the crown,

is much greater than in the first age after the conquest, and
this branch of the royal revenue continues to extend.
The services TH E benefit arising from the services of the Indians accrues

ded either to the crown, or to the holder of the encomienda, accord-

ing to the fame rule observed in the payment of tribute. Those
services, however, which can now be legally exaded, are very
different from the servile talks originally imposed upon the In-
dians. The nature of the work which they mufi perform is
defined, and an equitable recompence is granted for their la-
bour. The stated services demanded of the Indians, may be
divided into two branches. They are either employed in works
of primary necessity, without which society cannot subsist com-
< fortably, or are compelled to labour in the mines, from which

the Spanish colonies derive their chief value and importance.
In consequence of the former, they are obliged to assist in the
culture of maize, and other grain of necessary consumption; in
tending cattle, in erecting edifices of public utility, in build-
ing bridges, and in forming high roadsr; but they cannot be
constrained to labour in raising vines, olives, and sugar-canes,
or any species of cultivation, which has for its objec the grati-
fication of luxury, or commercial profit . In consequence of
the latter, the Indians are compelled to undertake the more un-
pleasant talk, of extrating ore from the bowels of the earth,

q See NOTE LXXX. r Recopil. lib. vi. tit. xiii. 1. 19. Solorz.
de Ind. jure, ii. lib. i. c. 6, 7. 9. * Recopil. lib. vi. tit. xiii. c. L 8.
Solorz. lib. i. c. 7. N° 41, &c.

and
372

and of refining it by fucceflfve processes, no less unwholesome
than operose '.

THE mode of exacting both these services is the fame, and

is under regulations framed with a view of rendering it as lit-
tle oppressive as poflible to the Indians. They are called out
alternately in divisions, termed Mitas, and no person can be
compelled to go but in his turn. In Peru, the number called
out must not exceed the seventh part of the inhabitants in any
difirid u. In New Spain, where the Indians are more nume-
rous, it is fixed at four in the hundred x. During what time
the labour of those Indians, who are employed in agriculture,
continues, I have not been able to learn Y. But in Peru, each
Mita, or division, deflined for the mines, remains there fix
months; and while engaged in this service, a labourer never
receives less than two Shillings a day, and often earns more than
double that fum z. No Indian, residing at a greater distance
than thirty miles from a mine, is included in the Mita, or
division employed in working it'; nor are the inhabitants of
the low country exposed to certain deftrudion, by compelling
them to remove from that warm climate, to the cold elevated
regions where minerals abound b.

THE Indians who live in the principal towns, are entirely
subjed to the Spaniff laws and magistrates; but in their own
villages, they are governed by Caziques, tome of whom are the
descendants of their ancient lords, others are named by the

The mode of
exadingthefe.

How govcrn-
ed.

t See N 0 T E LXXXI. u Recopil, lib, vi. tit. xii. 1. 21. x Ibid.
1. 22. Y See N O T E LXXXII. z Ulloa Entreten. 265, 266.
a Recopil. lib. vi. tit. xii. 1. 3, h Ibid. 1. 29. and tit. i. 1. i3.
See N 0T' E LXXXIII.

Spanifli

373
BOOK

VIII.

B O O K Spanish viceroys. These regulate the petty affairs of the people

_VI.; under them, according to maxims of justice, transmitted to

them by tradition from their ancestors. To the Indians, this
jurifdiion, lodged in such friendly hands, affords ome con-
folation; and so little formidable is this dignity to their new
mafters,that they often allow it to descend by hereditary rightc.
For the farther relief of men so much exposed to oppreflion,
the Spanish court has appointed an officer in every diftrid,with
the title of Protetor of the Indians. It is his function, as the
name implies, to assert the rights of the Indians, to appear in
their defence in the courts of justice; and, by the interposition
of his authority, set bounds to the encroachments and exac-
tions of his countrymend. A certain portion of the reserved
fourth of the annual tribute, is destined for the salary of the
caziques and protectors, another is applied to the maintenance
of the clergy employed in the inftrudion of the Indians . An-
other part seems to be appropriated for their support, and the
payment of their tribute in years of famine, or when a particu-
lar diftriC is affected by any extraordinary calamity". Besides
this, provision is made by various laws, that hospitals shall be
founded in every new settlement for the reception of Indians g.
Such hospitals have accordingly been ereOted, both for the indi-
gent and infirm in Lima, in Cuzco, and in Mexico, where the
Indians are treated with tenderness and humanity h.

SUCH is the great outline of the jurisprudence and policy
by which the Indians are now governed in the provinces be-

c Solorz. dejure Ind, lib. i. c. 26. Recopil. lib. vi. tit. vii. d Solorz. lib. i.
C. 27. p. zo2 . Recopil. lib. vi. tit. vi. e Recopil. lib. vi. tit. v. 1. 30.
Tit. xvi. 1. 12- 15. f Recopil. lib. vi. tit. iv. 1. 13. g Recopil. lib. i.
tit. iv . . , &c. h Voy. de Ulloa, i. 429. 509. Churchill, iv. 496.

p~~~~hrhli.4ó

longing
374

375

longing to Spain. In those regulations of the Spanish mo- B 0 o K
narchs, we discover no traces of that cruel system ofextermina- l.
tion, which they have been charged with adopting; and if we
admit, that the neceflity of securing subsistence for their colo-
nies, or the advantages derived from working the mines, give
them a right to avail themselves of the labour of the Indians,
we must allow, that the attention with which they regulate and
recompense that labour, is provident and sagacious. In no code
of laws is greaterfolicitude displayed, or precautions multiplied
with more concern, for the preservation, the security, and the
happiness of the subjec, than we discover in the colleaion of
the Spanish laws for the Indies. But those later regulations,
like the more early ediEts which have been already mentioned,
have too often proved ineffecual remedies against the evils
which they were intended to prevent. In every age, if the fame
causes continue to operate, the fame effedts must fllow. From
the immense distance between the power entrufled with the
execution of laws, and that, by whose authority they are
enacted, the vigour even of the most absolute government must
relax, and the dread of a superior, too remote to observe with
accuracy, or to punish with dispatch, must insensibly abate.
Notwithstanding the numerous injunctions of the Spanish mo-
narchs, the Indians fiill susser, on many occasions, both from
the avarice of individuals, and from the exacdions of the ma-
gifirates, who ought to have proteted them; unreasonable
tasks are imposed; the term of their labour is prolonged, and
they groan under all the insults and wrongs which are the lot
of a dependent people'. From ome information, on which
I can depend, such oppreflion abounds more in Peru, than
in any other colony. But it is not general. According to

i Se N 0 T E LXXXIV,

the accounts, even of those authors who are mnoi disposed to
exaggerate the sufferings of the Indians, they, in several pro-
vinces, enjoy not only ease, but affluence; they possess large
farms; they are maiers of numerous herds and flocks; and,
by the knowledge which they have acquired of European arts
and industry, are -supplied not only with the necessaries, but
with many luxuries of life k.

AFTER explaining the form of civil policy in the Spanish

colonies, and the state of the various orders of persons fubjedt
to it, she peculiarities in their ecclesiastical contfitution merit
consideration. Notwithilanding the superstitious veneration
with which Spaniards are devoted to the Holy See, the vi-
gilant and jealous policy of Ferdinand early prompted him to
take precautions againfi the introduction of the papal dominion
into America. With this view, he solicited Alexander VI. for
a grant of the tythes in all the newly-difcovered countries ',
which he obtained on condition of his making provision
for the religious inftrution of the natives. Soon after,
Julius II. conferred on him the right of patronage, and ab-
solute disposal of all ecclesiastical benefices there m. Both these
pontiffs, unacquainted with the value of what he demanded,
beflowed those donations with an inconsiderate liberality,
which their fucceflors have often lamented, and wished to recal.
In consequence of those grants, the Spanilh monarchs have be-
come, in effect, the heads of the American church. In them
the adminiitration of its revenues is veiled. Their nomination
of persons to supply vacant benefices is instantly confirmed by

k Gage's Survey, p. 85 . 10. 14. 19, &c.
.p Solorz, de jure Ind. ii. p. 498.

I Bulla Alex. VI. A. D. Is1.
m Bulla Julii, ii. 1508. Ibid. 509.

the
BOOK

VIII,

Ecclefiatical
conftitation
of the colo-
nies.

Restraints on
the papal ju-
rifdidtion.

4
376

377

the pope. Thus, in all Spanish America, authority of every
species centres in the crown. There no collision is known be-
tween spiritual and temporal jurifdidion. The king is the only
superior, his name alone is heard, and no dependence upon
any foreign power has been introduced. Papal bulls can-
not be admitted into America, nor are they of any force there,
until they have been previously examined, and approved of by
the royal council of the Indies " ; and if any bull should be fur-
reptitioufly introduced, and circulated in America without ob-
taining that approbation, ecclesiastics are required not only to
prevent it from taking effeQ, but to seize all the copies of it,
and transmit them to the council of the Indies °. To this limi-
tation of the papal jurifdition, equally singular whether we
confider the age and nation in which it was devised, or the jea-
lous attention with which Ferdinand, and his fuccefTors, have
fludied to maintain it in full force P, Spain is indebted, in a great
measure, for the uniform tranquillity which has reigned in her
American dominions.

THE hierarchy is etablifhed in America in the fame form as

in Spain, with its full train of archbishops, bishops, deans, and
other dignitaries. The inferior clergy are divided into three
classes, under the denomination of Curas, Doclrineros, and
Mifoneros. The firit are parifh-priefts in those parts of the
country where the Spaniards have fettled. The second have
the charge of such difirids as are inhabited by Indians, sub-
jeaed to the Spanish government, and living under its protec-
tion. The third are employed in converting and inftruding

n Recopil, lib. i. tit. ix. 1. . and Autas del Confejo de las Indias, clxi.
o Recop. lib. i. tit. vii. 1. 55. P Recop. lib. i. paflim.
VOL. II.

BOOK

VIII.

Form and en-
dowment of
the church in
the Spanifi
colonies.

.holoc
3 C

BOOK

VIII.

Pernicious es-
seas of mo-
nastic inftitu-
lions.

those fiercer tribes, which disdain filbmifion to the Spanish
yoke, and live in remote or inaccessible regions, to which the
Spanish arms have not penetrated. So numerous are the eccle-
fiaflics of all those various orders, and such the profuse liberality
with which many of them are endowed, that the revenues of the
church in America are immense. The superstition of Rome ap-
pears with its utmost pomp in the New World. Churches and
convents there are magnificent and richly adorned; and on high
festivals, the display of gold and silver, and precious stones, is such
as exceeds the conception of an Europeanq. An ecclefiaflical
eflablifhment so splendid and cxpenfive, is unfavourable, as has
been formerly observed, to the progress of rising colonies; but
in countries where riches abound, and the people are so delighted
with parade, that religion must assume it, in order to attract their
veneration, this propensity to ostentation has been indulged, and
becomes less pernicious.

THE early inititution of monaiteries in the Spanish colonies,

and the inconsiderate zeal in multiplying them, have been at-
tended with consequences more fatal. In every new settlement,
the first object is to encourage population, and to incite every
citizen to contribute towards augmenting the strength and num-
ber of the community. During the youth and vigour of so-
ciety, while there is room to spread, and fuflenance is procur-
ed with facility, mankind increase with amazing rapidity. But
the Spaniards had hardly taken possession of America, when,.
with a most prepoflerous policy, they began to ereCt convents
where persons of both sexes were hut up, under a vow to de-
feat the purpose of nature, and to counteract the first of her

i Voy. de Ulloa, i. 430,

laws.
378

laws. Influenced by a misguided piety, which afcribcs tran- B oo I
fcendent merit to a iate of celibacy, or allured by the prospeCt ._
of that listless cafe, which, in sultry climates, is deemed fu-
preme felicity, numbers crowd into those mansions of sloth and
superstition, and are loft to society. As none but prfons of
Spanish extrat are admitted into the monasteries of the New
World, the evil is more sensibly felt, and every monk or nun,
may be confidered as an ative member withdrawn from civil
life. The impropriety of such foundations in any situation
where the extent of territory requires additional hands to im-
prove it, is o obvious, that ome catholic flates have expressly
prohibited any person in their colonies from taking the monastic
vows r. Even the Spanish monarchs, on ome occasions, fcem
to have been alarmed with the spreading of a spirit so adverse to
the increase and prosperity of their colonies, that they have en-
deavoured to check it . But the Spaniards in America, more
thoroughly under the influence of fuperflition than their coun-
trymen in Europe, and directed by ecclesiastics more bigoted
and illiterate, have conceived such an high opinion of monastic
fanBity, that no regulations can refirain their zeal; and, by
the excess of their ill-judged bounty, religious houses have
multiplied to a degree no less amazing than pernicious to
focicty .

IN viewing the slate of colonies, where the number and in- chiaiaacr of

eccle.fiaflics in

fluence of ecclesiastics is so great, the charac9cr of this power- sCiplillilAie-
ful body is an objed that merits particular attention. A con- rica;
fiderable part of the secular clergy in Mexico and Peru are na-

1 Voy. de Ulloa, ii. 14. ' Hcrrera, dec. v. lib. ix. c. i, 2. Rccop.
lib. i. tit. iii. 1. , 2. 'Tit. iv. c. 2. Solorz, lib. iii. c. 23.

t See NOTE LXXXV.

379
3C

tli vs

B O O K tives of Spain. As persons accustomed by their education to the

VIII. retirement and indolence of academic life, are more incapable

of ative enterprize, and less disposed to strike into new paths,
than any order of men, the ecclesiastical adventurers by whom
the American church is recruited, are commonly such as, from
merit or rank in life, have little profpeEt of success in their
of thfecu- own country. Accordingly, the secular priefis in the New

World are still less diltinguifhed than their brethren in Spain,
for literary accomplishments of any species; and though, by
the ample provision which has been made for the American
church, many of its members enjoy that ease and independence,
which is favourable to the cultivation of science; the body of
secular clergy has hardly, during two centuries and a half, pro-
duced one author whose works convey such useful information,
or possess such a degree of merit, as to be ranked among those
which attract the attention of enlightened nations. But the
greatest part of the ecclesiastics in the Spanish settlements are re-
of the regu- gulars. On the discovery of America, a new field opened to the

rts. pious zeal of the monastic orders; and, with a becoming ala-

crity, they immediately ent forth miflionaries to labour in
it. The first attempt to inflrud and convert the Americans,
was made by monks; and, as oon as the conquest of any pro-
vince was completed, and its ecclesiastical eflablifhment began to
assume ome form, the popes, as a reward of their service, per-
mitted the missionaries of the four mendicant orders, to accept
of parochial charges in America, to perform all spiritual func-
tions, and to receive the tythes, and other emoluments of the
benefice, without depending on the jurifdition of the bishop of
the diocese, or being subjea to his censures. In consequence of
this, a new career of usefulness, as well as new objects of am-
bition presented themselves. Whcnever a call is made for a fresh

supply
380

supply of miflionaries, men of the most ardent and aspiring minds,
impatient under the restraint of a cloister, weary of its insipid uni-
formity, and fatigued with the irksome repetition of its frivolous
functions, offer their service with eagerness, and repair to the
New World in quest of liberty and diftindion. Nor do they
pursue them without success. The highelf ecclesiastical honours,
and most lucrative preferments in Mexico and Peru, are often in
the hands of regulars; and to them chiefly the Americans are
indebted for any portion of science that is cultivated among
them. They are almost the only Spanish ecclesiastics, from
whom we have received any accounts either of the civil or natu-
ral history of the various provinces in America. Some of them,
though deeply tinged with the indelible fuperflition of their
profefion, have published books which give a favourable idea
of their abilities. The natural and moral history of the New
World, by the Jesuit Acofta, contains more accurate obiervati-
ons, perhaps, and more found science, than are to be found in
any description of remote countries published in the sixteenth
century.

BUT the fame disgust with monafiic life, to which America is

indebted for ome inflruEors of worth and abilities, filled it
with others of a very different character. The giddy, the pro-
fligate, the avaricious, to whom the poverty and rigid difci-
pline of a convent are intolerable, confider a miflion to America
as a release from mortification and bondage. There they soon
obtain rome parochial charge, and far removed, by their fitua-
tion, from the infpedtion of their monastic superiors, and ex-
empt, by their charadter, from the jurisdiction of their diocesan "

u Avendano Thef. Indic. ii. 253.

BOOK

V1iJ.

1-- -

Dissolute
manners of
tome of themu
they

381

B O O K they are hardly subjed to any controul. According to the tefti-

VIiI.
vi-l-- mony of the most zealous catholics, many of the regular clergy in

the Spanish settlements, are not only destitute of the virtues be-
coming their profcffion, but regardless of that external decorum
and refped for the opinion of mankind, which preserve a fem-
blance of worth, where the reality is wanting. Secure of impu-
nity, some regulars, in contempt of their vow of poverty, engage
openly in commerce; and are so rapaciously eager in amassing
wealth, that they become the most grievous oppressors of the
Indians, whom it was their duty to have protected. Others, with
no less flagrant violation of their vow of chaffity, indulge with
little disguise in the most dissolute licentiousness x.

VARIOUs schemes have been proposed for redressing enormities

so manifest and offensive. Several persons no less eminent for
piety than discernment, have contended, that the regulars in
conformity to the canons of the church, ought to be confined
within the walls of their cloiffters, and should no longer be per-
mitted to encroach on the functions of the secular clergy. Sme
public-fpirited magistrates, from conviction of its being necef-
fary to deprive the regulars of a privilege, bestowed at firil with
good intention, but of which time and experience had discovered
the pernicious effedas, openly countenanced the secular clergy in
618. their attempts to assert their own rights. The Prince D'Efquilache,

viceroy of Peru under Philip III. took mcafures so decisive and
effectual for circumscribing the regulars within their proper sphere,
as struck them with general consternation . They had recourse

7 See NOTE LXXXVI. y Sec N 0 T E LXXXVII.

to
382

to their usual arts. They alarmed the superstitious, by represent- B o K

VIII.

ng the proceedings of the viceroy as innovations fatal to re- vl---
ligion. They employed all the refinements of intrigue, in order
to gain persons in power; and seconded by the powerful in-
fluence of the Jesuits, who enjoyed all the privileges which be-
longed to the Mendicant orders in America, they made a deep
imprefiion on a bigoted prince, and a weak minifiry. The an-
cient practice was tolerated. The abuses which it occasioned con-
tinued to increase, and the corruption of Monks, exempt from
the reflraints of discipline, and the infpeEtion of any superior,
became a disgrace to religion. At last, as the veneration of the
Spaniards for the monastic orders began to abate, and the power
of the Jesuits was on the decline, Ferdinand VI. ventured to ap-
ply the only effectual remedy, by issuing an edit prohibiting June 23d.

1757.

regulars of every denomination from taking the charge of any
parish with the cure of fouls; and declaring, that on the de-
mise of the present incumbents, none but secular priefis, sub-
jeEt to the jurifdition of their diocesans, shall be presented to
vacant benefices . If this regulation is carried into execution
with fleadinefs, in any degree proportional to the wisdom with
which it is framed, a very considerable reformation may take
place in the ccclefiafiical slate of Spanish America, and the fe-
cular clergy may gradually become a respectable body of men.
The deportment of many ecclefiaflics, even at present, seems
to be decent and exemplary, otherwise they would not be held
in such high efimation, and poflifs such a wonderful acend-
ant over the minds of their countrymen, throughout all the
Spanifi settlements.

' Real Cedula MS. penes me.

31 T

383

B O O K BUT whatever merit the Spaniih ecclesiastics in America may

VII.
v--ll. possess, the success of their endeavours in communicating the
Small pro- knowlecge of true religion to the Indians, has been more im-
grefs in con-
verting the perfect than might have been expected, either from the degree
nhrdianity. of their zeal, or from the dominion which they had acquired

over that people. For this various reasons may be assigned.
The first mifflonaries, in their ardour to make proselytes, ad-
mitted the people of America into the chriflian church, with-
out previous inftrution in the doctrines of religion, and even
before they themselves had acquired such knowledge of their
language, as to be able to explain to them the mysteries of faith,
or the precepts of duty. Refting upon a subtle diflindion in
fcholaffic theology, they adopted this firange pratice, no less
inconsistent with the spirit of a religion, which addresses itself
to the understanding of men, than repugnant to the dictates
of reason. As soon as any body of people, overawed by dread
of the Spanish power, moved by the example of their own chiefs,
incited by levity, or yielding from mere ignorance, expressed
the flightcft desire of embracing the religion of their conquerors,
they were instantly baptized. While this rage of conversion con-
tinued, a ingle clergyman baptized in one day above five thou-
sand Mexicans, and did not desist until he was o exhausted by
fatigue, that he was unable to lift his hands . In the course of
a few years, after the reduction of the Mexican empire, the fa-
crament of baptism was administered to more than four millions.
Proselytes adopted with such inconsiderate haste, and who were
neither initruaed in the nature of the tenets, to which it was
supposed they had given assent, nor taught the absurdity of those

a P. Torribio, MS. Torquem. Mon. Ind. lib. xvi. c. 6.
b P. Torribio. Ibid. Torquem. lib. xvi. c. 8.

which
384

which they were required to relinquish, retaincd their veneration o o K
for their ancient superstitions in full force, or mingled an at-
tachment to is doctrines and ritcs, with that flcnder knowledge
of Christianity which they acquired. Thefc fcntircnts they
transmittcd to their posterity, into whofc minds tcy have fulnkl
so deep, that the Spanifl cclefiaftics, with all their indufiry,
have not bccn able to eradicate them. The religious institutions
of tlicir anccfiors arc still remembered, and held in honour by
the Indians, both in Mexico and Peru; and whenever they think
themfelvcs out of reach of infpeacion by the Spaniards, they as-
femble and celebrate their idolatrous rites .

BUT this is not the most unsurmountable obflacle to the pro-

grefs of Christianity among the Indians. The powers of their
uncultivated underflandings are so limited, their obfcrvations
and refleEtions reach so little beyond the mere objects of sense,
that they seem hardly to have the capacity of forming abftrad
ideas, and possess not language to express them. To such men,
the sublime and piritual doctrincs of Christianity mufi be incom-
prehenfible. The numerous and fplcndid ceremonies of popish
worship, as they catch the eye, plcafe and interest them; but
when their infiructors attempt to explain the articles of faith,
with which those external observances are connected, though
they linen with patience, they so little conceive the meaning
of what they hear, that their acquicfccnce does not merit the
name of belief. Their indifference is fill greater than their
incapacity. Attentive only to the prcfent moment, and
ingroffed by the objects before them, the Indians so fcldom

c Voy. de Ulloa, i. 341. Torqucm, lib. xv. c. 23. Lib. xvi, c. 28. (ngc, 171
VoL. II.

385
3 D

B o 0 K reflect upon what is pail, or take thought for what is to come,

V11i. that neither the promises, nor threats of religion, make much

impreflion upon them; and while their foresight rarely ex-
tends so far as the next day, it is almost impossible to inspire
them with solicitude about the concerns of a future world. Afto-
nifhed equally at their slowness of comprehension, and at their
insensibility, some of the early missionaries pronounced them a
race of men so brutish, as to be incapable of understanding the
firit principles of religion. A council held at Lima, decreed,
that, on account of this incapacity, they ought to be excluded
from the sacrament of the Eucharifta. And though Paul III. by
his famous bull, issued in the year 537, declared them to be
rational creatures, entitled to all the privileges of christians c;
yet, after the lapse of two centuries, during which they have
been members of the church, so imperfect are their attainments
in knowledge, that very few poisess such a portion of spiritual
discernment, as to be deemed worthy of being admitted to the
holy communion f. From this idea of their incapacity and im-
perfet knowledge of religion, when the zeal of Philip II. efta-
blifhed the inquisition in America in the year I570, the Indians
were exempted from the jurifdidtion of that revere tribunal g, and
still continue under the inspection of their diocesans. Even after
the most perfect inftrution, their faith is held to be feeble and
dubious; and though some of them have been taught the learned
languages, and have gone through the ordinary course of acade-
mic education with applause, their frailty is still so much sus-
peded, that no Indian is either ordained a priest, or received in-
to any religious order h.

d Torqucm, lib. xv. c. 20. e Torquem, lib. xvi. c. 25. Garcia origen. 311.
I Voy. de Ulloa, i. 343. c Recop. lib. vi. tit. i. 1. 35.
h Torquemn, lib. xvii. c. 13. Sec N 0 T E LXXXVIII.

FROM

p
386

FROM this brief survey, ome idea may be formed of the inte- B o K

rior itateofthe Spanish colonies. The various producions with vm .
which they supply and enrich the mother-country, and the sys- Productions

of the Spanili.

tern of commercial intercourse between them, come next in order colonies.
to be explained. If the dominions of Spain in the New World,
had been of filch moderate extent, as bore any proportion to the
parent state, the progress of her colonizing might have been at-
tended with the ame benefit as that of other nations. But
when, in les than half a century, her inconsiderate rapacity had
seized on countries larger than all Europe, her inability to fill
such vait regions, with a number of inhabitants sufficient for the
cultivation of them, was so obvious, as to give a wrong direc-
tion to all the efforts of the colonifis. They did not form com-
pact settlements, where industry, circumscribed within limits,
both in its views and operations, is conducted with that fober pre-
serving spirit, which gradually converts whatever is in its posses-
sion to its proper use, and derives from it the greatest advantage.
Instead of this, the Spaniards, reduced by the boundless profpedt
which opened to them, divided their poffiefions in America into
governments of vast extent. As their number was too small to
attempt the regular culture of the immense provinces, which
they occupied rather than peopled, they bent their attention to
a few objects, that allured them with hopes of sudden and exor-
bitant gain, and turned away with contempt from the humbler
paths of induitry, which lead more slowly, but with greater cer-
tainty, to wealth and increase of national strength.

OF all the methods by which riches may be acquired, that of From their

searching for the precious metals is one of the molt inviting to
men, who are either unaccuflomed to the regular assiduity with

3 D 2 which

387

which the culture of the earth, and the operations of commerce
mufft be carried on, or so enterprising and rapacious, as not to be
satisfied with the gradual returns of profit which they yield.
Accordingly, as oon as the several countries in America were
fubjeced to the dominion of Spain, this was almost the only
method of acquiring wealth which occurred to the adventurers,
by whom they were conquered. Such provinces of the conti-
nent as did not allure them to fettle, by the profpet of their
affording gold and silver, were totally negleted. Those, in which
they met with a disappointment of the sanguine expecations they
had formed, were abandoned. Even the value of the islands,
the first fruits of their discoveries, and the first object of their
attention, funk so much in their estimation, when the mines
which they had opened there were exhausted, that they were de-
ferted by many of the planters, and left to be occupied by more
industrious poffeflors. All crowded to Mexico and Peru, where
the vat quantities of gold and silver found among the natives,
who searched for them with little industry, and less skill, pro-
mifed an unexhaufted store, as the recompence of more intelli-
gent and persevering efforts.

DURING several years, the ardour of their researches was

kept up by hope, rather than success. At length, the rich silver
mines of Potofi, in Peru, were accidentally discovered in the
year I545 , by an Indian, as he was clambering up the moun-
tain, in pursuit of a Llama which had strayed from his flock.
Soon after the mines of Sacotecas, in New Spain, little inferior
to the other in value, were opened. From that time, successive dif-
coveries have been made in bothcolonies, and silver mines are now

i Fcrnandez, p. i. lib, xi. c . f.

so

388
-j

VII.

Discovery of
thofc of Po-
tofi aid Sa-
cotccas.

p
·e

so numerous, that the working of them, and of ome few mines
of gold in the provinces of Tierra Firma, and the new kingdom
of Granada, has become the capital occupation of the Spani-
ards, and is reduced into a system no less complicated than in-
terefling. To describe the nature of the various ores, the mode
of extracting them from the bowels of the earth, and to explain
the several processes by which the metals are separated from the
fubfiances with which they are mingled, either by the aacion of
fire, or the attractive powers of mercury, is the province of
the natural philosopher or chymift, rather than of the his-
torian.

THE exuberant profusion with which the mountains of the

New World poured forth their treasures, astonished mankind,
accuflomed hitherto to receive a penurious supply of the precious
metals, from the more cfanty flores contained in the mines of the
ancient hemisphere. According to principles of computation,
which appear to be extremely moderate, the quantity of gold and
silver that has been regularly entered in the ports of Spain, is
equal in value to four millions flerling annually, reckoning from
the year 1492, in which America was discovered to the present
time. This in two hundred and eighty-three years, amounts
to eleven hundred and thirty-two millions. Immense as this
fum is, the Spanish writers contend, that as much more ought
to be added to it, in consideration of the treasure which has been
extradted from the mines, without paying duty to the king. By
this account, Spain has drawn fiom the New World a supply of
wealth, amounting at least to two thousand millions of pounds
sterling .

Uari Tcor. y PraCt. de Coincrcia, c. 3. I-trrcra, dcc. viii. lib. xi. c. .
ce NOTE LXXXIX.

BOOK
B 0 0 KI

VIII.

'_

-- .

Riches wlhich
they yield.

389

390
BOO K THE mines, which have yielded this amazing quantity of

v_1__. treasure, are not worked at the expence of the crown, or of

Spirit to the public. In order to encourage private adventurers, the
which this ecrgt
gives rife. person who discovers a new vein, is intitled to the property of

it. Upon laying his claim before the governor of the province,
a certain extent of land is measured off, and a certain number
of Indians allotted him, under the obligation of his opening
the mine within a limited time, and of his paying the cuflo-
mary duty to the king, for what it shall produce. Invited by
the facility with which such grants are obtained, and encouraged
by some itriking examples of success in this line of adventure;
not only the sanguine and the bold, but the timid and diffident
enter upon it with atoniihing ardour. With vafi objects always
in view, fed continually with hope, and expecting every moment
that fortune will unveil her secret stores, and give them up to
their withes, they deem every other occupation insipid and unin-
teresting. The charms of this pursuit, like the rage for deep
play, is so bewitching, and take such full possession of the mind,
as even to give a new bent to the natural temper. Under its
influence, the cautious become enterprizing, and the covetous
profuse. Powerful as this charm naturally is, its force is aug-
mented by the arts of an order of men known in Peru, by the
cant name of searchers. These are commonly persons of defpe-
rate fortunes, who, availing themselves of ome skill in mineral-
ogy, accompanied with the insinuating manner, and confident
pretensions peculiar to projectors, address the wealthy and the
credulous. By plausible descriptions of the appearances which
they have discovered of rich veins hitherto unexplored; by pro-
ducing when requisite, specimens of promising ore; by affirm-
ing, with an imposing assurance, that success is certain, and
that the expence must be trifling; they seldom fail to persuade.

An

An association is formed; a small fum is advanced by each co- B o o K
partner; the mine is opened; the searcher is entrusted with the , '.
sole direction of every operation; unforeseen difficulties occur;
new demands of money are made; but amidst a succession of dif-
appointments and delays, hope is never extinguished, and the ar-
dour of expectation hardly abates. For it is observed, that if
any person once enter this seducing path, it is almost impossible
to return; his ideas alter, he seems to be poffeiTed with another
spirit, visions of imaginary wealth are continually before
his eyes, and he thinks, and speaks, and dreams of nothing
else .

SUCH is the spirit that muff be formed, wherever the aive Fatal effects

exertions of an) society are chiefly employed in working mines
of gold and silver. No spirit is more adverse to such improve-
ment in agriculture and commerce, as render a nation really
opulent. If the system of administration in the Spanish colonies
had been founded upon principles of found policy, the power
and ingenuity of the legislature would have been exerted with
as much ardour, in restraining its fubjees from such pernicious
industry, as is now employed in alluring them towards it.
" Projeas of mining (fays a good judge of the political conduct
" of nations) inflead of replacing the capital employed in them,
" together with the ordinary profit of stock, commonly absorb
" both capital and profit. They are the projects, therefore, to

which, of all others, a prudent law-giver, who desired to

"increase the capital of his nation, would least chufe to give
"any extraordinary encouragement, or to turn towards them

1 Ulloa Entreten, p. 223.

"' -rater

b

391

B 0 0K '" greater share of that capital than would go to them of its own

" accord. Such, in reality, is the absurd confidence which all
"men have in their own good fortune, that wherever there is
"the least probability of success, too great a flare of it is apt to

go to them of its own accord m." But in the Spanish colonies,

government is fludious to cherish a spirit which it should have
laboured to depress, and by the sanction of its approbation aug-
ments that inconsiderate credulity, which has turned the active
industry of Mexico and Peru into such an improper channel.
To this may be imputed the slender progress which they have
made during two centuries and a half, either in useful manufac-
tures, or in those lucrative branches of cultivation, which furnish
the colonies of other nations with their staple commodities. In
comparison with the precious metals, every bounty of nature is
so much defpiled, that this extravagant idea of their value has
mingled with the idiom of the language in America, and the
Spaniards fettled there denominate a country, rich, not from the
fertility of its foil, the abundance of its crops, or the exuberance of
its pastures, but on account of the minerals which its mountains
contain. In quefi of there, they abandon the delightful plains of
Peru and Mexico, and retort to barren and uncomfortable regi-
ons, where they have built ome of the largest towns which they
possess in the New World. As the acivity and enterprise of the
Spaniards originally took this diretion, it is now so difficult to
bend them a different way, that although, from various causes,
the gain of working mines is much decreaed; the fascination
continues, and almost every person, who takes any active part in
the commerce of New Spain or Peru, is fiill engaged in some ad-
venture of this kind .

n, Dr. Smith's Inquiry, &c, ii. 155. n Scc NOTE XC.

BUT

Bur though mines are the chief object of attention to the B K

Spaniards, and the precious metals which they yield, form the VIL.
principal article in their commerce; the fertile countries which Other com-

modities of

they possess, supply them with other commodities of such value the Spanifli
or scarcity, as to attract a considerable degree of attention. colonies.
Cochineal is a production almofl peculiar to New Spain, of such
demand in commerce, that the sale is always certain, and it yields
such profit, as amply rewards the pains and attention employed in
rearing the curious insets of which this valuable drug is com-
posed, and preparing it for the market. Quinquina, or Jesuits
Bark, the most salutary simple, perhaps, and of most reflorative
virtue, that Providence, in companion for human infirmity, has
made known unto man, is found only in Peru, to which it affords
a lucrative branch of commerce . The indigo of Guatimala is
superior in quality to that of any province in America, and culti-
vated to a considerable extent. Cacoa, though not peculiar to
the Spanish colonies, attains to its highest state of perfection
there, and from the great consumption of chocolate in Europe, as
well as in America, is a valuable commodity. The tobacco of
Cuba, of more xquifite flavour than any brought from the New
World; the sugar raised in that island, in Hispaniola, and in
New Spain; together with drugs of various kinds, may be men-
tioned among the natural productions of America, which enrich
the Spanish commerce. To these mufft be added an article of
no inconsiderable account, the exportation of hides; for which,
as well as for many of those which I have enumerated, the
Spaniards are more indebted to the wonderful fertility of the
country than to their own foresight and industry. The do-
meftic animals of Europe, particularly horned cattle, have

n See NOTE XCI.

multiplied

393

E
VOL. II.

B OO K multiplied in the New World with a rapidity which almost ex-

VIII, ceeds belief. A few years after the Spaniards fettled there, the

herds of tame cattle became so numerous, that their proprietors
reckoned them by thousands°. Less attention being paid to
them, as they continued to increase, they were suffered to run
wild, and spreading over a country of boundless extent, under a
mild climate, and covered with rich pasture, their number be-
came immense. They range over the vast plains which extend
from Buenos Ayres, towards the Andes, in herds of thirty or
forty thousand and the unlucky traveller who once falls in
among them, may proceed several days before he can disentangle
himself from among the crowd that covers the face of the earth,
and seems to have no end. They are hardly lets numerous in
New Spain, and in several other provinces: these are killed
merely fbr the fake of their hides ; and the aughter at certain
seasons is so great, that the stench of the carcases, which are left
in the field, would affect the air, if large packs of wild
dogs, and vast flocks of gallinazos, or American vultures, the most
voracious of all the feathered kind, did not instantly devour them.
The number of those hides exported in every fleet to Europe is
prodigious, and is a lucrative branch of commerce P.

ALMOST all those articles may be confidered as flaple commo-

dities peculiar to America, and different, if we except that last
mentioned, from the produacions of the mother-country.

Advantages WHEN the importation into Spain of those various articles
which Spain
derivcs from from her colonies, first became active and considerable, her in-
her colonies.

o Oviedo ap. Ramus. iii. tot, B. Hackluyt, iii. 466. 51.,
P Acofta, lib. iii. c. 33. Ovallo Hilt. of Chili. Church. Collcet. iii. 47. fep. Ibid. v.
p. 68o. 692. LettrcsEdif. xiii. 235. Fcuill, i. 249.

terior
394

395

terior indufiry and manufactures were in a slate so prosperous, B o K
that with the product of there, she was able both to purchase the VIII.
commodities of the New World, and to answer its growing de-
mands. Under the reigns of Ferdinand and Isabella, and Charles V.
Spain was one of the most indutrious countries in Europe.
Her manufactures in wool, and flax, and silk, were so extensive,
as not only to furnish what was sufficient for her own confump-
tion, but to afford a surplus for exportation. When a market
for them, formerly unknown, and to which she alone had access,
opened in America, he had recourse to her domestic itore, and
found there an abundant fupplyq. This new employment must
naturally have added vivacity to the spirit of induitry. Nourished
and invigorated by it, the manufactures, the population, and wealth
of Spain might have gone on increasing in the fame proportion
with her colonies. Nor was the fiate of the Spanish marine
at this period less flourishing than that of its manufactures. In
the beginning of the sixteenth century, Spain is said to have
pofeffed above a thousand merchant hips r, a number probably
far superior to that of any nation in Europe. By the aid which
foreign trade and domeflic indufiry give reciprocally to each
other in their progress, the augmentation of both mufl have
been rapid and extensive, and Spain might have received the
fame accession of opulence and vigour from her acquisitions in
the New World, that other powers have derived from their colo-
nies there.

BUT various caufcs prevented this. It is with nations as with why iledoes

individuals, when wealth flows in gradually, and with mo- rivthefa tnle.
derate increase, it feeds and nourishes that activity which is

' See NOTE XCIJ. r Campomanes, ii. 140.

3 E 2

friendly

B o o K friendly to commerce, and calls it forth into vigorous and well

Vll. conduted exertions; but when it pours in suddenly, and

with too full a fiream, it overturns all fober plans of industry,
and brings along with it a tafle for what is wild, and extrava-
gant, and daring in business or in ation. Such was the great
and sudden augmentation of power and revenue that the posses-
sion of America brought into Spain, and some symptoms of
its pernicious influence upon the political operations of that
monarchy oon began to appear. For a considerable time,
however, the supply of treasure from the New World was scanty
and precarious, and the genius of Charles V. conduced public
measures with such prudence, that the effeCs of this influence
were little perceived. But when Philip II. acended the Spanish
throne, with talents far inferior to those of his father, a d re-
mittances from the colonies became a regular and vast branch of
revenue, the fatal operation of this rapid change in the state of
the kingdom, both on the monarch and his people, was at
once conspicuous. Philip, pofleffing that spirit of unceasing
assiduity, which often characterizes the ambition of men of
moderate talents, entertained such an high opinion of his own
resources, that he thought nothing too arduous for him to under-
take. Shut up himself in the solitude of the Escurial, he
troubled and annoyed all the nations around him. He waged
open war with the Dutch and English; he encouraged and aid-
ed a rebellious facion in France; he conquered Portugal, and
maintained armies and garrisons in Italy, Africa, and both the
Indies. By such a multiplicity of great and complicated opera-
tions, pursued with ardour during the course of a long reign,
Spain was drained both of men and money. Under the weak
administration of his fucccffor, Philip Ill. the vigour of the na-
tion continued to dccrcafc, and funk into the lowcft decline,

when
396

when the inconsiderate bigotry of that monarch expelled at once
near a million of his most industrious subje&s, at the very time
when the exhausted tfate of the kingdom required some extraor-
dinary exertion of political wisdom to augment its numbers, and
to revive its firength. Early in the seventeenth century, Spain
felt such a diminution in the number of her people, that from
inability to recruit her armies, he was obliged to contract her
operations. Her flourishing manufactures were fallen into de-
cay. Her fleets, which had been the terror of all Europe, were
ruined. Her extensive foreign commerce was loft. The trade
between different parts of her own dominions was interrupted,
and the (hips which attempted to carry it on, were taken and
plundered by enemies, whom they once derpifed. Even agri-
culture, the primary object of indufiry in every prosperous slate,
was neglected, and one of the most fertile countries in Europe
hardly raised what was sufficient for the support of its own in-
habitants.

IN proportion as the population and manufactures of the parent
late declined, the demands of her colonies continued to in-
crease. The Spaniards, like their monarchs, intoxicated with
the wealth which poured in annually upon them, deserted tile
paths of industry, to which they had been accustomed, and re-
paired with eagerness to those regions from which this opulence
issued. By this rage of emigration, another drain was opened,
and the firength of the colonies augmented by cxhaufting that
of the mother-country. All those emigrants, as well as the ad-
venturers, who had at first fettled in America, depended ab-
folutely upon Spain for almost every article of nccefary con-
fumption. Engaged in more alluring and lucrative pursuits,
or prevented by rcflraints wliich government imposed, they

could

BOOK

VIl.

A.D. 61Or.

Rapid decline
ol its trade.

397

B O O K could not turn their own attention towards establishing the ma-

Viii. nufaaures requisite for comfortable subsistence. They received

(as I have observed in another place) their cloathing, their fur-
niture, whatever ministers to the ease or luxury of life, and even
their infiruments of labour from Europe. Spain thined of peo-
ple, and void of indufiry, was unable to supply their increasing
demands. She had recourse to her neighbours. The manufac-
tures of the Low Countries, of England, of France, andof Italy,
which her wants called into existence, or animated with new
vivacity, furnished in abundance whatever he required. In
vain did the fundamental law, concerning the exclusion of
foreigners from trade with America, oppose this innovation.
Necessity, more powerful than any statute, defeated its opera-
tions, and confirained the Spaniards themselves to concur in
eluding it. The English, the French, and Dutch, relying on
the fidelity and honour of Spanish merchants, who lend their
names to cover the deceit, fend out their manufaEtures to Ame-
rica, and receive the exorbitant price for which they are fold there,
either in specie, or in the rich commodities of the New World.
Neither the dread of danger, nor the allurement of profit, ever
induced a Spanish fator to betray or defraud the person who
confided in him'; and that probity, which is the pride and dif-
tintion of the nation, contributes to its ruin. In a hort time,
not above a twentieth part of the commodities exported to
America was of Spanish growth or fabric '. All the reft was
the property of foreign merchants, though entered in the name
of Spaniards. The treasure of the New World may be said
henceforward not to have belonged to Spain. Before it reached

c Zavala Rcprcfcntacion, p. z26. t Campomanes, ii. 138.

Europe,
398

Europe, it was anticipated as the price of goods purchased from E oo K
foreigners. That wealth, which by an internal circulation, would -J-
have spread through each vein of industry, and have conveyed
life and aivity to every branch of manufacure, flowed out of
the kingdom with such a rapid course, as neither enriched nor
animated it. On the other hand, the artisans of rival nations,
encouraged by this quick sale of their commodities, improved
so much in skill and induflry, as to be able to afford them at a
rate so low, that the manufactures of Spain, which could not
vie with theirs, either in quality or cheapness of work, were fill
farther depressed. This defirudive commerce drained off the
riches of the nation faifer and more completely, than even the
extravagant schemes of ambition carried on by its monarchs.
Spain was so much atonifhed and difireffed, at beholding her
American treasures vanish almofl as soon as they were imported,
that Philip III. unable to supply what was requisite in circulation,
issued an edid, by which he endeavoured to raise copper money,
to a value in currency nearly equal to that of silver U and the
lord of the Peruvian and Mexican mines was reduced to a
wretched expedient, which is the last resource of petty impove-
rifhed fates.

THus the poffeflions of Spain in America have not proved a

source of population and of wealth to her, in the fame manner
as those of other nations. In the countries of Europe, where
the spirit of industry subsists in full vigour, every person fettled
in such colonies, as are similar in their situation to those of
Spain, is supposed to give employment to three or four at home
in supplying his wants . But wherever the mother-country

m Uztariz, . 104 x Child on trade and colonies.

cannot

399

BOOK

VIII.

Increased by
the mode of
regulating its
intercourse
with America.

cannot afford this supply, every emigrant may be confidered as
a citizen loft to the community, and firangers muff reap all the
benefit of answering his demands.

SUCH has been the internal state of Spain from the close of the

sixteenth century, and such her inability to supply the growing
wants of her colonies. The fatal effects of this disproportion be-
tween their demands, and her capacity of answering them, have
been much increased by the mode in which Spain has endea-
voured to regulate the intercourse between the mother-country
and the colonies. It is from her idea of monopolizing the trade
with America, and debarring her fubjets there from any com-
munications with foreigners, that all her jealous and fyflematic
arrangements have arisen. These are so singular in their nature
and consequences, as to merit a particular explanation. In order
to secure the monopoly at which he aimed, Spain did not vest
the trade with her colonies in an exclusive company, a plan
which has been adopted by nations more commercial, and at a
period when mercantile policy was an object of greater atten-
tion, and ought to have been better understood. The Dutch
gave up the whole trade with their colonies, both in the East and
Weft Indies, to exclusive companies. The English, the French,
the Danes, have imitated their example with refpet to the Eafft
Indian commerce; and the two former have laid a similar re-
firaint upon ome branches of their trade with the New World.
The wit of man cannot, perhaps, devise a method for checking
the progress of induflry and population in a new colony more
effectual than this. The interest of the colony, and the exclu-
five company, must in every point be diametrically oppcfite;
and as the latter possesses such advantages in this unequal con-
test, that it can prescribe at pleasure the terms of intercourse,

the
4oo

HISTORY OF AMERICA.

the former muff not only buy dear and fell cheap, but susser the
mortification of having the increase of their surplus flock dif-
couraged by those very persons to whom alone they are permitted
to dispose of it y.

BOOK

VIII.

t ,_J
SPAIN, it is probable, was preserved from falling into this This confined

to one port

error in policy, by the high ideas which he early formed con- in Spain.
cerning the riches of the New World. Gold and silver were com-
modities of too high value to vest a monopoly of them in pri-
vate hands. The crown wiffied to retain the direCtion of a com-
merce so inviting; and in order to secure that, ordained that the
cargo of every hip fitted out for America hould be infpeded by
the officers of the Casa de Confratacion in Seville, before it could
receive a licence to make the voyage and that on its return,
a report of the commodities which it brought should be made to
the fame board, before it could be permitted to land them. In
consequence of this regulation, all the trade of Spain with the
New World centered in the port of Seville, and was gradually
brought into a form, in which it has been conduted, with little
variation, from the middle of the sixteenth century almost to
our own times. For the greater security of the valuable cargoes
sent to America, as well as for the more easy prevention of fraud,
the commerce of Spain with its colonies is carried on by fleets,
which fail under firong convoys. These fleets consisting of two
squadrons, one diltinguifhed by the name of Galeons, the other
by that of the Flota, are equipped annually. Formerly they
took their departure from Seville; but as the port of Cadiz has
been found more commodious, they have failed from it since th
year 1720.

y Siihl's Inquiry, ii. 171.

3 F
Vol.. II.

T, -i:

B OO K THE Galeons destined to supply Tierra Firme, and the king-
._ _ sdoms of Peru and Chili, with almost every article of luxury, or
Carried on by necessary consumption, that an opulent people can demand,
the Galeons,

touch first at Carthagena, and then at Porto-bello. To the for-
mer, the merchants of Santa Martha, Caraccas, the New King-
dom of Granada, and several other provinces resort. The latter
is the great mart for the rich commerce of Peru and Chili. At
the season when the Galeons are expected, the produt of all the
mines in there two kingdoms, together with their other valuable
commodities, is trcnfported by ea to Panama. From thence,
as oon as the appearance of the fleet from Europe is announced,
they are conveyed across the isthmus, partly on mules, and partly
down the river Chagre to Porto-bello. This paltry village, whose
climate, from the pernicious union of excessive heat, continual
moifiure, and the putrid exhalations arising from a rank foil, is
more fatal to life than any perhaps in the known world, is im-
mediately filled with people. From being the residence of a few
negroes and mulattoes, and of a miserable garrison relieved every
three months, its streets are crowded with opulent merchants
from every corner of Peru, and the adjacent provinces. A fair
is opened, the wealth of America is exchanged for the manufac-
tures of Europe, and during its prescribed term of forty days,
the richest traffic on the face of the earth is begun and finished,
with that simplicity of tranfadtion and unbounded confidence,
and Flota. which accompany extensive commerce'. The Flota holds its

course to Vera Cruz. The treasures and commodities of New
Spain, and thedepending provinces, which were deposited at Los
Angeles in expectation of its arrival, are carried thither, and the

' See NOTE XCIII.

commercial
402

commercial operations of Vera Cruz, conduted in the fame
manner with those of Porto-bello, are inferior to them only in
importance and value. Both fleets, as soon as they have com-
pleted their cargoes from America, rendezvous at the Havanna,
and return in company to Europe.

BOOK

VII.

*

. -

_

THE trade of Spain with her colonies, while thus fettered and Bad effe of
reflrided, came necessarily to be conducted with the fame spirit this arrange-

ment.

and upon the fame principles, as that of an exclusive company.
Being confined to a ingle port, it was of course thrown into a
few hands, and almost the whole of it was gradually engrossed
by a finall number of wealthy houses, formerly in Seville, and
now in Cadiz. These by combinations, which they can easily
form, may altogether prevent that competition which prefervcs
commodities at their natural price; and by acting in concert, to
which they are prompted by their mutual interest, they may
raise or lower their value at pleasure. In consequence of this,
the price of European goods in merica is always high, and
often exorbitant. A hundred, two hundred, and even three
hundred per cent. are profits not uncommon i the commerce of
Spain with her colonies . From the ifme engrofling spirit it
frequently happens, that traders of the second order, whose
warehouses do not contain a complete assortment of commodi-
ties for the American market, cannot purchase from the more
opulent merchants, such goods as they wanr, at a lower price than
that for which they are fold in the colonies. With the fame vi-
gilant jealousy that an exclusive company guards againit the
intrusion of the free trader, those overgrown monopolifs en-
deavour to check the progress of every one whose encroachments

1 B. Ulloa Retabliff. part ii. .
p. 19

3 F 2 they

403

B O O K they dread h. But this restraint of the American commerce to

v J,1 one port, not only assets its domestic state, but limits its foreign

operations. A monopolif may acquire more, and certainly will
hazard less, by a confined trade which yields exorbitant profit,
than by an extensive commerce in which he receives only a mo-
derate return of gain. It is often his interest not to enlarge, but
to circumscribe the sphere of his aivitv; and instead of calling
forth more vigorous exertions of commercial industry, it may be
the object of his attention to check and set bounds to them. By
some such maxim, the mercantile policy of Spain seems to have
regulated its intercourse with America. Inflead of furnishing
the colonies with European goods in such quantity as might ren-
der both the price and the profit moderate; the merchants of
Seville and Cadiz seem to have supplied them with a sparing hand,
that the eagerness of competition amongst customers obliged to
purchase in a scanty market, might enable their faCors to dif-
pose of their cargoes with exorbitant gain. About the middle of
the last century, when the exclusive trade to America from Seville
was in its mofi flourishing ltate, the burden of the two united
squadrons of the Galeons and Flota, did not exceed twenty-
seven thousand five hundred tonsc. The supply which such a
fleet could carry must have been very inadequate to the demands
of those populous and extensive colonies, which depended upon
it for all the luxuries, and many of the necessaries of life.

Remedicspro- SPAIN early became sensible of her declension from her for-
posed. mer prosperity, and many refpedable and virtuous citizens em-

b Smith's Inquiry, ii. 171. Canipomancs, Educ. Popul. i. 438.
c Camponanes, Educ. Popul. i. 435. ii. 1lo,

ployed
4o04

ployed their thoughts in dvifing methods for reviving the decay- C o o K
ing induflry and cmmerce of their country. From the violence
of the remedies proposed, e may ju 'ge how desperate and fatal
the malady appeared. Some, confounding a violation of police
with criminality againfl tle ftat , con!ended, that in order to
check illicit commerce, every pcrfon convicted of carrying it on,
should be punishcd with death, and cor.fifcation of all his ffL2s d.
Others, forgetting the diftintion between civil offences and ats
of impiety, insisted, that contraband trade fhoi,ld be ranked
among the crimes reserved for the cognizance of the Inquisition;
that such as were guilty of it might be tried and punished, ac-
cording to the secret and ummary form in which that dr,'adful
tribunal excrcifes its jurisdiction c. Others, uninfiruded by ob-
fcrving the pernicious effects of monopolies in every country
where they have been established, have proposed to veil the trade
with America in exclusive companies, whom interest would render
the most vigilant guardians of the Spanish commerce against the
encroachments of inteIlopers .

BESIDE these wild projeics, many schemes better digested, at

first without effect, and more beneficial, were fuggefled. But un-
der the feeble monarchs, with whom the reign of the Austrian
line in Spain closed, incapacity and indecision are conspicuous in
every department of government. Instead of taking for their mo-
del the active adminiitration of Charles V. they affeEted to imitate
the cautious procraflinating wisdom of Philip II. and destitute of
his talents, they deliberated perpetually, but determined nothing,
No remedy was applied to the evils under which the national

d M. de Santa Cruz Comercio Suelto, p. 142. e Moncada Rcftauracion
politica de Efpagna, p. 41. f Zavala y Augnon Reprefentacion, &c. p. 190

commerce,

B o o K commerce, domeflic as well as foreign, languished. These evils
_'-_, continued to increase, and Spain, with dominions more extensive

and more opulent than any European slate, poffcffed neither
vigour, nor money h, nor indufiry. At length, the violence of a
great national convulsion rouzed the slumbering genius of Spain,
and the efforts of the two contending parties in the civil war,
kindled by the dispute concerning the succession of the crown at
the beginning of this century, called forth, in forne degree, the
ancient spirit and vigour of the nation. While men were form-
ing, capable of adopting more liberal sentiments, than those
which had influenced the cuncils of the monarchy during the
course of acentury, Spain derived from an unexpected source the
means of availing itself of their talents. The various powers
who favoured the pretensions either of the Austrian or Bourbon
candidate for the Spanish throne, ent formidable si ets and ar-
mies to their support. France, England, and Holland remitted
immense fums to Spain. These were spent in the provinces
which became the theatre of war. Part of the American trea-
sure, of which they had drained the kingdom, flowed back thi-
ther. From this aera, one of the most intelligent Spanish authors
dates the revival of the monarchy; and, however humiliating
the truth may be, he acknowledges, that it is to her enemies
his country is indebted for the acquisition of a fund of circu-
lating specie, in rome measure adequate to the exigencies of the
public .

Steps towards As oon as the Bourbons obtained quiet poffeflion of the
iprove Bur-t throne, they discerned this change in the spirit of the people,
bon mlo- and in the fate of the nation, and took advantage of it; for
narchs,

h See NOTE XCIV. i Campomancs, i. 420.

although
406

although that family has not given monarchs to Spain, remark-
able for superiority of genius, they have all been beneficent
princes, attentive to the happiness of their fubjeds, and solicitous
to promote it. It was, accordingly, the firit object of Philip V.
to suppress an innovation which had crept in during the courfc of
the war, and overturned the whole system of the Spanish com-
merce with America. The English and Dutch, by their fuperio-
rity in naval power, having acquired such command of the sea, as
to cut off all intercourse between Spain and her colonies, Spain,
in order to furnish them those necefflies of life, without which
they could not exifi, and as the only means of receiving from
hnence any part of their treasure, departed so far from the usual
rigour of its maxims, as to open the trade with Peru to her allies
the French. The merchants of St. Malo, to whom Louis XIV.
granted the privilege of this lucrative commerce, engaged in it
with vigour, and carried it on upon principles very different from
those of the Spaniards. They supplied Peru with European com-
modities at a more moderate price, and not in itinted quantity;
the goods which they imported were conveyed to every province
of Spanish America, in such abundance as had never been known
in any former period. If this intercourse had been continued,
the exportation of European commodities from Spain must have
ceased, and the dependence of the colonies on the mother-
country have been at an end. The most peremptory injunctions
were therefore issued, prohibiting the admiflion of foreign veifels
into any port of Peru or Chili k, and a Spanish squadron was em-
ployed to clear the South Sea of intruders, whose aid was no longer
necessary.

k Frezier Voy. 256. B. Ulloa Retab. ii. 104, &c. Alccdo y Hcrrera Avifo, &c. 236.

BUT,

BOOK

VIII.

by excluding
foreigners
froml trade
with Peru;

1713.

407

BUT though, on the cessation of the war, which was ter-

minated by the treaty of Utrecht, Spain obtained relief from
one encroachment on her commercial sysem, she was exposed to
another which he deemed hardly less pernicious. As an induce-
ment that might prevail with Queen Anne to conclude a
peace, which France and Spain desired with equal ardour,
Philip V. not only conveyed to Great Britain the Afiento, or con-
trat for supplying the Spanilh colonies with negroes, which had
formerly been enjoyed by France, but granted it the more ex-
traordinary privilege of fending annually to the fair of Porto-
bello a hip of five hundred tons, laden with European commo-
dities. In consequence of this, Britilh factories were efrablifhed
at Carthagena, Panama, Vera Cruz, Buenos Ayres, and other
Spanish settlements. The veil with which Spain had hitherto
covered the slate and tranfadions of her colonies was removed.
The agents of a rival nation, residing in the towns of most ex-
tensive trade, and of chief retort, had the best opportunities of
becoming acquainted with the interior condition of their pro-
vinces, of observing their stated and occasional wants, and of
knowing what commodities might be imported into them with
the greatest advantage. In consequence of information so au-
thentic and expeditious, the merchants of Jamaica, and other
English colonies who traded to the Spanish main, were enabled
to assort and proportion their cargoes, so exactly to the demands
of the market, that the contraband commerce was carried on
with a facility, and to an extent unknown in any former pe-
riod. This, however, was not the most fatal consequence of
the Affiento to the trade of Spain. The agents of the British
South Sea Company, under cover of the importation which
they were authoriscd to make by the ship ent annually to Porto-
bello, poured in their commodities on the Spanish continent,

without
BOOK

VIII.

by checking
contraband
trade,

particularly
ofthe Englifi
Affiento com-
pany,

408

without limitation or refiraint. Instead of a ship of five hundred
tons, as flipulated in the treaty, they usually employed one
which exceeded nine hundred tons in burden. She was accom-
panied by two or three smaller veflels, which mooring in some
neighbouring creek, supplied her clandeflinely with fiefh bales
of goods, to replace such as were fold. The infpedors of the fair,
and officers of the revenue, gained by exorbitant presents,
connived at the fraud'. Thus, partly by the operations of the
company, and partly by the activity of private interlopers, al-
most the whole trade of Spanish America was ingroffed by so-
reigners. The immense commerce of the Galeons, formerly the
pride of Spain, and the envy of other nations, funk to nothing,
and the squadron itself, reduced from fifteen thousand to two
thousand tons m served hardly any purpose but to fetch home the
royal revenue arising from the fifth on ilver.

WHILE Spain observed those encroachments, and felt so fenfi-

bly their pernicious effects, it was impossible not to make some
effort to restrain them. Her firit expedient was to tfation ships of
force under the appellation of Guarda Coflas, upon the coafis of
those provinces, to which interlopers most frequently retorted.
As private interest concurred with the duty which they owed to
the public, in rendering the officers who commanded them vigi-
lant and aive, ome check was given to the progress of the con-
traband trade, though in dominions so extensive, and so accefli-
ble by ea, no number of cruizers was sufficient to guard against
its inroads in every quarter. This interruption of an intercourse,
which had been carried on with so much facility, that the mer-
chants in the Britiflh colonies were accustomed to confider it

1 See NOTE XCV,
VOL. II.

m Alccdo y Hcrrcra, p, 359. Cainpomanes, i. 436.

3 G almost

BOOK

VIII.

1737

Guarda Cos-
tas employed
for this pur
pose.

4o09

B 0 0 K almost as an allowed branch of commerce, excited murmurs and

VIlI* complaints. These authorised, in ome measure, and rendered

more interesting, by several unjustifiable as of violence com-
mitted by the captains of the Spanish Guarda Costas, precipitated
1739. Great Britain into a war with Spain, by which the latter obtain-

ed a final release from the Affiento, and was left at liberty to re-
gulate the commerce of her colonies, without being refrained by
any engagement with a foreign power.

The use of
regill(r flips
introduced.

As the formidable encroachments of the English on their Ame-

rican trade, had discovered to the Spaniards the vast consumption
of European goods in their colonies, and taught them the advan-
tage of accommodating their importations to the occasional de-
mand of the various provinces, they perceived the necessity of de-
vising some method of supplying their colonies, different from
their ancient one, of fending thither periodical fleets. This mode
of communication was not only uncertain, as the departure of
the Galeons and Flota was fomnetimes retarded by various acci-
dents, and often prevented by the wars which raged in Europe,
but was ill adapted to afford America a regular and timely
supply of what it wanted. The scarcity of European goods in
the Spanish settlements frequently became excessive; their price
rose to an enormous height; the vigilant eye of mercantile at-
tention did not fail to observe this f;vourahle opportunity, an
ample supply was poured in by interlopers from the English, the
French, and Dutch islands; and when the Galeons at length
arrived, they found the markets so gluttid by this illicit com-
merce, that there was no demand for the commodities with vw inch
they were loaded. In order to remedy this, Spain permitted a

con-
410

considerable part of her commerce with America, to be carried B o K
oil by regiferJ.iAps, . These are fitted out, during the intervals
between the stated seasons when the Galeons and Flota fail, by
merchants in Seville or Cadiz, upon obtaining a licence f.om
the council of the Indies, for which they pay a very high pre-
mium, and are deflined for those ports where any extraordinary
demand is foreeen or expc&ed. By this expedient, such a re-
gular fupp!v of fresh commodities is conveyed to the American
market, th-it the interloper is no longer allured by the fame pro-
fpet of excessive gain, or the people in the colonies urged by the
fame necessity, to engage in the hazardous adventures of contra-
band trade.

IN proportion as experience manifcfted the advantages of car- The galeons

rying on trade in this mode, the number of regifier flips in-
creased; and at length, i theyear 748, the Galeons, afterhav-
ing been emplo)ed upwards of two centuries, weie finally abo-
lifhed. From that period there has been no intercourse with
Chili and Peru but by tingle ihips, dispatched from time to time
as occasion requires, and when the merchants expec a market
will open. These fail round Cape Horn, and convey directly to
the ports in the South Sea the productions and manufadurcs of
Europe, for which the people fettled in those countries were for-
merly obliged to repair to Porto-bello or Panama. These towns,
as has been formerly observed, must gradually decline, when c-
prived of that commerce to which they owed their exiftencc. This
disadvantage however is more than compensated, for the whole
continent of South America receives supplies of European com-
modities, with so much regularity, and in such abundance, as
mufft contribute greatly to the happiness and prosperity of all tlh
colonies fettled there. But as all the regificr ships dcfiincd for
the South Seas, mufl still take their departure from C(adiz, and

3G 2 arc

41

BOOK

VIII.

Schemes for
reviving com-
nierce,

are obliged to return thither , this branch of the American com-
merce, even in its new and improved form, continues fubje to
the restraints of a species of monopoly, and feels those pernicious
effects of it, which I have already described.

NOR has the attention of Spain been confined to regulating

the trade with its flourishing colonies, it has extended likewise
to the reviving commerce in those settlements where it was ne-
gleted, or had decayed. Among the new taftes which the peo-
ple of Europe have acquired, in consequence of their intercourse
with the natives of those countries which they conquered in
America, that for chocolate is one of the most universal. The
use of this liquor made with a paste, formed of the nut, or al-
mond of the cacao-tree, compounded with various ingredients,
the Spaniards firfi learned from the Mexicans; and it has ap-
peared to them, and to the other European nations, so palatable,
so nourishing, and so wholesome, that it has become a commer-
cial article of considerable importance. The cacao-tree grows
spontaneously in several parts of the torrid zone; but the nuts
of the best quality, next to those of Guatimala, on the South Sea,
are produced in the rich plains of Carraccas, a province of Tierra
Firme. In consequence of this acknowledged superiority in the
quality of cacao in that province, and its communication with the
Atlantic, which facilitates the conveyance to Europe, the culture of
the cacao there is more extensive than in any diftrid of America.
But the Dutch, by the vicinity of their settlements in the small
islands of Curazoa and Buen-Ayre, to the coast of Caraccas, gradu-
ally ingroffed the greatest part of the cacao trade. The traffic with
the mother-country for this valuable commodity ceased almost en-

n Campomancs, i. 434, 440.

tirely
412

tirely; and such was the supine negligence of the Spaniards, or
the defects of their commercial arrangements, that they were ob-
liged to receive from the hands of foreigners this production of
their own colonies, at an exorbitant price. In order to remedy
an evil no less disgraceful, than pernicious to his fubjeds,
Philip V. in the year 1728, granted to a body of merchants, an
exclusive right to the commerce with Caraccas and Cumana, on
condition of their employing, at their own expence, a sufficient
number of armed vessels to clear the coast of interlopers. This
society, diltinguiflled ometimes by the name of the Company of
Guipufcoa, from the province of Spain in which it is eflablifhed,
and sometimes by that of the Company of Caraccas, from the
diflrid of America to which it trades, has carried on its operations
with such vigour and success, that Spain has recovered an impor-
tant branch of commerce, which he had suffered to be wrested
from her, and is plentifiully supplied with an article of extensive
consumption at a moderate price. Not only the parent fiate, but
the colony of Caraccas, has derived great advantages from this
institution; for although, at the first asped, it may appear to be
one of those monopolies, whose tendency is to check the spirit of
industry, inflead of calling it forth to new exertions, it has been
prevented from operating in this manner, by several salutary re-
gulations, framed upon foresight of such bad effcts, and of
purpose to obviate hem. The planters in the Caraccas are not
left to depend entirely on the company, either for the importa-
tion of European commodities, or the ale of their own produc-
tions. The inhabitants of the Canary Islands have the privilege
of fending thither annually a register hip of considerable bur-
den; and from Vera Cruz in New Spain, a free trade is per-
mitted in every port comprehended in the charter of the com-

pan1

BOOK

VIII.

by eftablilh-
ing the com-
pany of Ca-
raccas.

413

B 00 K
BOOK

Enlargement
ofconimcicial
ideas in Spain.

pany. In consequence of this, there is such a competition, that
both with refpea to what the colonies purchase, and what they
fell, the price seems to be fixed at its natural and equitable ratc.
The company has not the power of raising the former, or degrad-
ing the latter at pleasure ; and accordingly, since it was elallifh-
ed, the increase of culture, of popula ion, and of i.Le flock, in
the province of Caraccas has been very considerable °.

BUT as it is slowly that nations relinquish any system which

time has rendered venerable, or that commeice can be divcrt-d
from the channel in which it has long been accuftmed to flow;
Philip V. in his new regulations concerning tlhe American trade,
paid such deference to the ancient maxim of Spin, concerning
the limitation of all importation from the New World to one
harbour, as to oblige both tile register flhips which returned from
Peru, and those of the Guipofcoan Company from Caraccas, to
deliver their cargoes in the port of Cadiz. Since his reign, fcnti-
ments more liberal and enlarged begin to spread in Spain. I he
spirit of philosophical inquiry, which it is the glory of the prefcnt
age to have turned from frivolous or abflrufe speculations, to the
business and affairs of men, has extended its influence beyond
the Pirenees. In the researches of ingenious authors, concern-
ing the police or commerce of nations, the errors and defcds of
the Spanish fyfrem with refpet to both met every eye, and have
not only been exposed with fcverity, but are held up as a warning
to other flates. The Spaniards, ifung with their reproaches, or
convinced by their arguments, and admonished by several en-
lightened writers of their own country, seem at length to have
discovered the deftrudivc tendency of those narrow maxims,

o See NOTE XCVI.

which,
414

which, by cramping commerce in all its operations, have so long
retarded its progress. It is to the monarch now on the throne,
that Spain is indebted for the first public regulation formed in
confcquence of those ideas.

WHILE Spain adhered with rigour to her ancient maxims

concerning her commerce with America, fie was so much afraid
of opening any channel, by which an illicit trade might find
admission into the colonies, that she alrnoft shut hcrfclf out from
any intercourfc with them, but that which was carried on by
her annual fleets. There was no ctabliflhment for a regular
communication of either public or private intelligence, between
the mother-country and its American settlements. From the
want of this ncccflhry institution, the operations of the state,
and the business of individuals, were retarded or conducted un-
kilfully, and Spain often received from foreigners her firfl in-
formation with rcfpeat to very intereffing events in her own co-
lonies. But though this dcfeEt in police was sensibly felt, and
the remedy for it was obvious, that jealous spirit with which
the Spanish monarchs guarded the cxclufive trade, restrained
them from applying it. At length Charles III. surmounted
those considerations which had deterred his predeccf)or, and in
the year 1764, appointed packet-boats to be difpltclicd on the
firit day of acll onth, from Corugna to the Havanna or Porto-
Rico. Fron thence letters are conveyed in fimaller vcffels to
Vcra (.ruz and Prto-lcllo, andll transmittcd by post through
tile killdloms of Ticrra Firmc, Granada, Peru, and New Spain.
W htl, no less regularity packet-boats fi-il once in two months to
Rio dc la: Plata, for the accoiiiinmod,tti of the p)oviinccs to the
call of the Andes. Thus provision is made for a lpccdly :Jii(i

cci L. i a

Eflablijimcnt
of regular
packet-boats. ROOK

VII'.
B 0 0 K

415

certain circulation of intelligence throughout the vast dominions
of Spain, from which equal advantages must redound to the poli-
tical and mercantile interest of the kingdom P. With this new
arrangement, a scheme of extending commerce has been more
immediately connected. Each of the packet-boats, which are
vessels of ome considerable burden, is allowed to take in half
a loading of such commodities as are the product of Spain, and
molt in demand in the ports whither they are bound. In re-
turn for these they may bring home to Corugna an equal quan-
tity of American producions9. This may be confidered as the
firfi relaxation of those rigid laws, which confined the trade
with the New World to a single port, and the first attempt to
admit the reft of the kingdom to some share in it.

IT was oon followed by one more decisive. In the year

1765, Charles III. laid open the trade to the windward islands,
Cuba, Hispaniola, Porto Rico, Margarita, and Trinidad, to his
fubjeds in every province of Spain. He permitted them to fail
from certain ports in each of these, specified in the edia, at any
season, and with whatever cargo they deemed most proper, with-
out any other warrant than a simple clearance from the cuflom-
house of the place whence they took their departure. He re-
leafed them from the numerous and oppreflive duties imposed
on goods exported to America, and in place of the whole sub-
flituted a moderate tax of fix in the hundred on the commo-
dities sent from Spain. He allowed them to return either to
the fame port, or to any other where they might hope for a
more advantageous market, and there to enter the homeward
cargoe, on payment of the usual duties. This ample privilege

P Ponz Viage deEfpagna, vi. Prol. p. 5.

1 Append. ii. a la Educ. Pop. p. 31.

which
BOOK

VIII.

Free trade
permitted to
several pro-
vinces.

4I6

which at once broke through all the fences, which the jealous po-
licy of Spain had been labouring for two centuries and a half to
throw round its commercial intercourse with the New World, was
soon after extended to Louisiana, and to the provinces of Yucatan
and Campeachy r.

BOO~

VI"I.

B 0 0

THE propriety of this innovation, which may be confidered Beneficial es-

as the most liberal effort of Spanish legislation, has appeared fe ofit.
from its effedts. Prior to the edict in favour of the free trade,
Spain derived hardly any benefit from its negledted colonies in
Hifpaliola, Porto-Rico, Margareta, and Trinidad. Its commerce
with Cuba was inconsiderable, and that of Yucatan and Cam-
peachy was ingroffed almost entirely by interlopers. But as
soon as a general liberty of trade was permitted, the intercourse
with those provinces revived, and has gone on with a rapidity of
progression, of wlich there are few examples in the hillory of na-
tions. In lets than ten years, the trade of Cuba has been more than
tripled. Even in those fcttlements where, from the languishing
slate of indulry, greater efforts were requisite to restore its ai-
vity, their commerce has been doubled. It is computed, that
such a number of ships is already employed in the free trade,
that the tonnage of them far exceeds that of the Galeons and
Flota, at the mofi flourihfing aera of their commerce. The be-
nefits of this arrangement are not confined to a few merchants,
cflablifhed in a favourite port. They are diffuscd through every
province of the kingdom ; and by opening a new market for
their various producions and manufacures, must encourage and
add vivacity to the industry of the farmer and artificer. Nor
does the kingdom profit only by what it exports, it derives

VOL. II.

r Append. ii. a aEdutc. Pop. 37. 54. 91.

H

417

B O O K advantage likewise from what it receives in return, and has the
& 71m^ profpe& of being soon able to supply itself with several commo-

dities of extensive consumption, for which it formerly depended
on foreigners. The consumption of sugar in Spain is perhaps
as great in proportion to the number of its inhabitants, as that
of any European kingdom. But though possessed of countries in
the New World, whose foil and climate are most proper for rear-
ing that valuable plant, though the dometfic culture of the sugar-
cane in the kingdom of Granada was once considerable, such
has been the fatal tendency of its inflitutions in America, and
such the pressure of injudicious taxes in Europe, that Spain has
loft almost entirely this branch of induflry, which has enriched
other nations. This commodity, which has now become an ar-
ticle of primary necessity in Europe, the Spaniards were obliged
to purchase of foreigners, and had the mortification to fee their
country drained annually of an immense um on that ac-
count s. But if that spirit, which the permission of free trade has
put in motion, shall persevere in its efforts with the fame vigour,
the cultivation of sugar in Cuba and Porto Rico, may increase so-
much, that in a few years their growth may be equal to the de-
mand of the kingdom.

Free trade HER experience of the beneficial consequences resulting from
permitted be- having relaxed somewhat of the rigour of her ancient laws with
tween the co-
lonies. refpeE to the commerce of the mother-country with the colo-

nies, has induced Spain to permit a more liberal intercourse of
one colony with another. By one of the jealous maxims of the
old system, all communication between the various provinces

. Uztariz, c. 94.

situated
4I8

situated on the South Seas, was prohibited under the mofl severe n o o K
penalties. Though each of thee yield peculiar productions, the Vil'.
reciprocal exchange of which might have added to the happiness
of their refpetive inhabitants, or have facilitated their pro-
grefs in indufiry, so solicitous was the council of the Indies, to
prevent their receiving any supply of their wants, but by the
periodical fleets from Europe; that in order to guard again ft
this, it cruelly debarred the Spaniards in Peru, in New Spain, in
Guatimala, and the New Kingdom of Granada, from such a cor-
refpondence with their fellow-fubjeds, as tended manifefily to
their mutual prosperity. Of all the numerous restriCtions de-
vised by Spain for securing the exclusive trade with her Ame-
rican settlements, none perhaps was more illiberal, none seems
to have been more sensibly felt, or to have produced more hurt-
ful effects. This grievance, coeval with the settlements of Spain
in the New World, is at last redressed. In the year 1774,
Charles III. published an edidt, granting to the four vast pro-
vinces which I have mentioned, the privilege of a free trade
with each other . What may be the effects of opening this
communication between countries destined by their situation for
reciprocal intercourse, cannot yet be determined by experience.
They can hardly fail of being beneficial and extensive. The
motives for granting this permission are manifestly no less
laudable, than the principle on which it is founded is liberal;
and both discover the progress of a spirit in Spain, far elevated
above the narrow prejudices and maxims on which their system
for regulating the trade, and conducting the government of their
colonies, was originally founded.

: Real Cedula penes me. Ponz Vingc de Efpagna, vi. Prologo, p. 2. NOTE XCVII

,3 I ? AT

419

BOOK

VIII.

New regula
tions concern-
ing the go-
vernment of
the colonies.

Reformation
of the courts
of justice.

New diftribu-
tion of go-
rernments.

AT the fame time that Spain has been intent on introducing

regulations, suggested by more enlarged views of policy into her
fytlem of American commerce, he has not been inattentive to
the interior government of her colonies. Here too there was
much room for reformation and improvement, and Don Joseph
Galvez, who has now the direetion of the department for Indian
affairs in Spain, has enjoyed the best opportunities, not only of
observing the defecs and corruption in the political frame of the
colonies, but of discovering the sources of those evils. After being
employed seven years in the New World on an extraordinary mif-
sion, and with very extensive powers, as infpeaor-general of New
Spain; after visiting in person the remote provinces of Cinaloa,
Sonora, and California, and making several important alterations
in the slate of their police and revenue; he began his ministry
with a general reformation of the tribunals of justice in America.
In consequence of the progress of population and wealth in the
colonies, the business of the Courts of Audience has increased so
much, that the number of judges of which they were originally
compoed, has been found inadequate to the growing labours and
duties of the office, and the salaries fettled upon them, inferior
to the dignity of the station. As a remedy for both, he obtained
a royal edidt, establishing an additional number of judges in
each court of audience, with higher titles, and more ample ap-
pointments .

To the fame intelligent minister Spain is indebted for a new

distribution of government in its American provinces. Even
since the establishment of a third viceroyalty in the New King-

s Gazeta de Madrid, 19th March, 1776.

dom
420

dom of Granada, o prodigious is the extent of the Spanish do-
minions in the New World, that several places ubjed to the
jurifdition of each of the viceroys, were at such an enormous
diflance from the capitals in which they resided, that neither
their attention, nor their authority, could reach them. Some
provinces subordinate to the viceroy of New Spain, lay above
two thousand miles from Mexico. There are countries subjea
to the viceroy of Peru fiill farther from Lima. The people in
those remote diftris, could hardly be said to enjoy the benefit
of civil government. The oppression and insolence of its infe-
rior ministers they often feel, and rather submit to these in
silence, than involve themselves in the expence and trouble of
resorting to the diflant capitals, where alone they can find re-
dress. As a remedy for this, a fourth viceroyalty has been ered-
ed, to the jurifdiaion of which are ubjected the Provinces of
Rio de la Plata, Buenos-Ayres, Paraguay, Tucuman, Potofi, Sta.
Cruz de la Sierra, Charcas, and the towns of Mendoza and St.
Juan. By this well-judged arrangement, two advantages are
gained. All the inconveniences occasioned by the remote situ-
ation of those provinces, which had been long felt, and long
complained of, are removed. The countries moit diflant from
Lima are separated from the viceroyalty of Peru, and united
under a superior, whose feat of government at Buenos-Ayres
will be commodious and accessible. The contraband trade with
the Portuguese, which was become so extensive, as must have
put a final flop to the exportation of commodities from Spain to
her southern colonies, may be checked more thoroughly, and with
greater facility, when the supreme magistrate, by his vicinity
to the places in which it is carried on, can view its progress
and effects with his own eyes. Don Pedro Zevallos, who ha;
been raised to this new dignity, with appointments equal to

those

BOOK

VIII.

New vice-
royalty,
Augult 1776,
on Rio de la
Plata.

421

those of the other viceroys, is well acquainted both with the slate
and the interest of the countries over which he is to preside,
having served in them long, and with diftinEion. By this dif-
memberment, succeeding that which took place at the erection
of the viceroyalty of the New Kingdom of Granada, almost
two-third parts of the territories originally fubje& to the viceroys
of Peru, are now lopped off from their jurisdiction.

THE limits of the viceroyalty of New Spain have likewise

been considerably circumscribed, and with no less propriety and
discernment. Four of its most remote provinces, Sonora, Cina-
loa, California, and New Navarre, have been formed into a fe-
parate government. The Chevalier de Croix, who is intrusted
with this command, is not dignified with the title of viceroy,
nor does he enjoy the appointments belonging to that rank, but
his jurifdiion and authority is altogether independent on the
viceroyalty of New Spain. The erecion of this last government
seems to have been suggested, not only by the consideration of
the remote situation of those provinces from Mexico; but by at-
tention to the late discoveries made there, which I have men-
tioned Y. Countries containing such riches, and which probably
may rife into such importance, required the immediate infpec-
tion of a governor, to whom they were specially committed. As
every consideration of duty, of interest, and of vanity, must con-
cur in prompting those new governors to encourage such exer-
tions as tend to diffuse opulence and prosperity through the pro-
vinces committed to their charge, the beneficial effects of this
arrangement may be considerable. Many diftri&s in America,
long depressed by the languor and feebleness natural to provinces
which compose the extremities of an overgrown empire, may be

y Book vii. p. 327.

animated
BOOK

VIII.

New govern-
ment in pro-
vinces of So-
nora, &c.

4'22

animated with vigour and ativity when brought so near the feat
of power, as to feel its invigorating influence.

BOO K

VIII.
SUCH, since the accession of the Bourbons to the throne of Attempts to

ref- rm do-

Spain, has been the progress of their regulations, and the gra- meftic policy.
dual expansion of their views with refpeat to the commerce and
government of their American colonies. Nor has their attention
been so entirely engrossed by what related to the more remote
parts of their dominions, as to render them neglectful of what
was fill more important, the reformation of domestic errors and
defects in policy. Fully sensible of the causes to which the de-
clenfion of Spain, from her former prosperity, ought to be im-
puted they have made it a great object of their policy, to re-
vive a spirit of industry among their fubjeEts, and to give such
extent and perfection to their manufactures, that they may be
able to supply the demands of America from their own stock, and
to exclude foreigners from a branch of commerce which has been
so fatal to. the kingdom. This they have endeavoured to ac-
complifh by a variety of edics issued since the peace of Utrecht.
They have granted bounties for the encouragement of ome
branches of indultry; they have lowered the taxes on others;
they have prohibited, or have loaded with additional duties, such
foreign manufactures as come in competition with them; they
have instituted societies for the improvement of trade and agri-
culture; they have planted colonies of husbandmen in ome un-
cultivated diftrids of Spain, and divided among them the waite
fields; they have had recourfc to every expedient, devised by
commercial wisdom, or commercial jealousy, for reviving their
own industry, and difcountenancing that of other nations. These

h o WCver ,';,

423

B O K however, it is not my province to explain, or to inquire into their
i_1_, propriety and effeas. There is no effort of legislation more ar-

duous, no experiment in policy more uncertain, than an attempt
to revive the spirit of industry where it has declined, or to intro-
duce it where it is unknown. Nations already possessed of ex-
tensive commerce, enter into competition with such advantages,
derived from the large capitals of their merchants, the dexterity
of their manufacturers, the alertness acquired by habit in every
department of business, that the state which aims at rivalling, or
supplanting them, must expect to struggle with many difficulties,
and be content to advance slowly. If the quantity of productive
indufiry now in Spain, be compared with that of the kingdom
under the last liflefs monarchs of the Austrian line, its progress
must appear considerable, and is sufficient to alarm the jealousy
and to call forth the most vigorous efforts of the nations now in
possession of the lucrative trade which the Spaniards aim at wrefl-
ing from them. One circumifance may render those exertions of
Spain an object of more serious attention to the other European
powers. They are not to be ascribed wholly to the influence of
the crown and its ministers. The sentiments and spirit of the
people seem to second the provident care of their monarchs, and
to give it greater effec. They have adopted more liberal ideas,
not only with refpea to commerce, but domeflic policy. In all
their later writers, defects in their arrangements concerning both
are acknowledged, and remedies proposed, which pride would not
have allowed their ancestors to confers, and ignorance rendered
them incapable of difcerningx. But after all that the Spaniards
have done, much remains to do. Many pernicious institutions

* See NOTE XCVIII.

and
424

HISTORY OF AMERICA.

and abuses, deeply incorporated with the fyfiem of internal po- B K
licy and taxation, which has been long established in Spain, must s .
be abolished before industry and manufactures can recover an ex-
tensive ativity.

STILL, however, the commercial regulations of Spain with re- Contraband

trade.

speCt to her colonies, are too rigid and systematical to be carried
into complete execution. The legislature that loads trade with
impositions too heavy, or fetters it by refiriEions too evere, de-
feats its own intention; and, in truth, is only multiplying the
inducements to violate its statutes, and proposing an high pre-
mium to encourage illicit traffic. The Spaniards, both in Eu-
rope and America, circumscribed in their mutual intercourse by
the jealousy, or oppressed by the exactions of the crown, have
their invention continually on the stretch how to elude its edias.
The vigilance and ingenuity of private interefl discover means of
effecting this, which public wisdom cannot foresee, nor public
authority prevent. This spirit, counteracting that of the laws,
pervades the commerce of Spain with America in all its branches;
and from the highest departments in government, descends to the
lowest. The very officers appointed to check contraband trade,
are often employed as instruments in carrying it on; and the
boards infiituted to restrain and punish it, are the channels through
which it flows. The king is supposed to be defrauded by various
artifices, of more than one half of the revenue which he ought
to receive from America Y; and as long as it is the interest of so
many persons to screen those artifices from detection, the know-
lege of them will never reach the throne. "How many ordi-

y Solorz de Ind.jurc, ii. lib. v.
VOL. II.

3 I

" 11nallCCs

B O O K "nances, fays Corita, how many infirudions, how many letters

VI_. "from our sovereign, are rent in order to correa abuses, and how

' little are they observed, and what small advantage is derived
"from them. To me the old observation appears just, that
"where there are many physicians, and many medicines, there
"is a want of health; where there are many laws, and many
" judges there is a want ofjuftice. We have viceroys, presidents,
"governors, oydors, corrigidors, alcaldes, and thousands of al-
"guazils abound every where; but notwithstanding all there,
" public abuses continue to multiply '." Time has increased the
evils which he lamented as early as the reign of Philip II. A
spirit of corruption has infected all the colonies of Spain in Ame-
rica. Men far removed from the feat of government, impatient
to acquire wealth, that they may return speedily from what they
are apt to confider as a slate of exile in a remote unhealthful
country, allured by opportunities too tempting to be refilled, and
seduced by the example of those around them, find their senti-
ments of honour and of duty gradually relax. In private life, they
give themselves up to a dissolute luxury, while in their public
conduc they become unmindful of what they owe to their so-
vereign and their country.

Trade be- BEFORE I close this account of the Spanish trade in America,
tween New
Spain and the there remains one detached, but important branch of it, to be
Philippines. mentioned. Soon after his accession to the throne, Philip II.

formed a scheme of planting a colony in the Philippine islands,
which had been neglected since the time of their discovery;; and
1564. he accomplished it by means of an armament fitted out from New

Spain . Manila, in the island of Luconia, was the flation

a MS. penes me. a Book v. p. 127, &c. b Torquem. lib. v. c. 14.

chosen
426

chosen for the capital of this new establishment. From it an B o K
active commercial intercourse began with the Chinese, and a
considerable number of that industrious people, allured by the
profped of gain, fettled in the Philippines under the Spanish pro-
tedion. They supplied the colony so amply with all the valu-
able productions and manufactures of the East, as enabled it to
open a trade with America, by a course of navigation, the longest
from land to land on our globe. In the infancy of this trade, it
was carried on with Callao, on the coast of Peru; but experience
having discovered many difficulties in this mode of communica-
tion, the flaple of this commerce between the east and weft was
removed from Callao to Acapulco, on the coast of New Spain.

AFTER various arrangements, it has been brought into a re-

gular form. One or two ships depart annually from Acapulco,
which may carry out silver to the amount of five hundred thou-
sand pesos', but have hardly any thing else of value on board;
in return for which, they bring back spices, drugs, china, and
japan wares, calicoes, chintz, muslins, silks, and every precious
article with which the benignity of the climate, or the ingenuity
of its people, have enabled the East to supply the reft of the
world. For some time the merchants of Peru were admitted to
participate in this traffic, and might fend annually a ship to Aca-
pulco, to wait the arrival of the veftels from Manila, and receive
a proportional share of the commodities which they imported. At
length, the Peruvians were excluded by most rigorous edicts, and
all the commodities from the East reserved solely for the confump-
tion of New Spain.

c Recop. lib. ix. c. 45. 1. 6.

427

IN
31 z

B O O K IN consequence of this Indulgence, the inhabitants of that
, l country enjoy advantages unknown in the other Spanifl colo-

nies. The manufactures of the East are not only more suited to
a warm climate, and more showy than those of Europe, but can
be fold at a lower price; while at the fame time, the profits
upon them are so considerable, as to enrich all those who are
employed, either in bringing them from Manila, or vending
them in New Spain. As the interest both of the buyer and fel-
ler concurred in favouring this branch of commerce, it continued
to extend in spite of regulations, concerted with the moil anxi-
ousjealoufy to circumbfcribe it. Under cover of what the laws
permit to be imported, vast quantities of India goods are poured
into the markets of New Spain d, and when the flota arrives at
Vera Cruz, it often finds the wants of the people already sup-
plied by cheaper and more acceptable commodities.

THERE is not in the commercial arrangements of Spain, any

circumfiance more inexplicable than the permiflion of this trade
between New Spain and the Philippines, or more repugnant to
its fundamental maxim of holding the colonies in perpetual de-
pendance on the mother-country, by prohibiting any commer-
cial intercourse that might suggest to them the idea of receiving
a supply of their wants from any other quarter. This per-
mission muff appear fill more extraordinary, from confidering
that Spain herself carries on no direc trade with her settlements
in the Philippines, and grants a privilege to one of her Ame-
rican colonies, which he denies to her fubjecs in Europe. It
is probable, that the colonifs which originally took poffcfion
of the Philippines, having been sent out from New Spain, be-

d See NOTE XCIX.

gun
428

gun this intercourse with a country which they confidered, in some B o O K
measure, as their parent slate, before the court of Madrid was v]l.-
aware of its consequences, or could establish regulations in order
to prevent it. Many remonfirances have been presented against
this trade, as detrimental to Spain, by diverting into another
channel, a large portion of that treasure which ought to flow into
the kingdom, as tending to give rife to a spirit of independence
in the colonies, and to encourage innumerable frauds, against
which it was impoflible to guard, in tranfaions so far removed
from the infpetion of government. But as it requires no flight
effort of political wisdom and vigour to abolish any practice,
which numbers arc interested in supporting, and to which time
has added the fandion of its authority, the commerce betwixt
Acapulco and Manila seems to be as considerable as ever, and
may be confidered as one chief cause of the elegance and splendor
conspicuous in this part of the Spanish dominions.

BUT, notwithstanding this general corruption in the colonies, Public re-

and all the defalcations of the public revenue, by the illicit im venue from
portation of foreign commodities, or by the fraudulent arts of its
own fubjeds, the Spanish monarchs receive a very considerable
fum from their American dominions. This arises from taxes of
various kinds, which may be divided into three capital branches.
The firfl contains what is paid to the king, as sovereign, or fupe-
rior lord of the New World : to this class belongs the duty on the
gold and filvcr railed from the mines, and the tribute exaded
from the Indi.ans; the former is termed by the Spaniards the
rght of figniorily, the latter is llhe du/y of vaffilage. The second
branch colmprehendcls the numerous duties upon commerce, which
accompany a;nl opprcfs it in every flep of its progress, from the
grcatcft tranfacliuns of the wholesale merchant, to the petty

traffic

429

B o K traffic of the vender by retail. The third includes what accrues

VIII.

V_. to the king, as head of the church, and administrator of eccle-

fiaftical funds in the New World. In consequence of this he
receives the first fruits, annats, fpoiis, and other spiritual re-
venues, levied by the apostolic chamber in Europe; and is
entitled, likewise, to the profit arising from the sale of the bull
of Cruzado. This, which is published every two years, contains,
an absolution from past offences by the pope, and, among
other immunities, a ermiffion to eat several kinds of prohibited
food, during Lent, and on meagre days. The monks employed
in dispersing those bulls, extol their virtues with all the fervour
of interested eloquence; the people, ignorant and credulous,
liften with implicit assent; and every person in the Spanish co-
lonies, of European, Creolian, or mixed race, purchases a bull,
which is deemed essential to his salvation, at the rate set upon
it by government .
Its amount. WHAT may be the amount of those various funds, it is almost

impossible to determine with precision. The extent of the Spa-
nifh dominions in America, the jealousy of government, which
renders them inaccessible to foreigners, the mysterious silence
which the Spaniards are accustomed to observe with refped to
the interior state of their colonies, combine in covering this
subjed with a veil which it is not easy to remove. But an ac-
count, apparently no less accurate, than it is curious, has lately
been publishcd of the royal revenue in New Spain, from which
we may form ome idea with refped to what is collected in the
other provinces. According to that account, the crown does

c See NOTE C.

not
430

not receive from all the departments of taxation in New Spain, B o o K
above a million of our money, from which one half mufft be , V_.
deducted as the xpence of the provincial eflablifhment f. Peru,
it is probable, yields a rum not inferior to this, and if we sup-
pose that all the other regions of America, including the
islands, furnish a third share of equal value; we shall not per-
haps be far wide from the truth, if we conclude, that the net
public revenue of Spain, raised in America, does not exceed a
million and a half sterling. This falls far short of the immense
fums, to which suppositions, founded upon conjecture, have
raised the Spanish revenue in America g. It is remarkable, how-
ever, upon one account. Spain and Portugal are the only
European powers, who derive a direEt revenue from their colo-
nies as their quota towards defraying the general expence of
government. All the advantage that accrues to other nations,
from their American dominions, arises from the exclusive en-
joyment of their trade; but beide this, Spain has brought her
colonies to contribute to increase the power of the state; and in
return for protection, to bear a proportional hare of the com-
mon burden.

ACCORDINGLY, what I have computed as the amount of the

Spanish revenue from America, comprehends only the taxes
colle6ted there, and is far from being the whole of what accrues
to the king from his dominions in the New World. The heavy
duties imposed on the commodities exported from Spain to
America h, as well as what is paid by those which she fends
home in return; the tax upon the negroe-flaves, with which

f See NOTE Cl. e Sec NOTE CII. h See NOTE CIII.

Africa

431

B OO K Africa supplies the New World, together with several smaller

VmII. branches of finance, bring large fums into the treasury, the precise

extent of which I cannot pretend to ascertain.

Expenceof BUT if the revenue which Spain draws from America be
admliniltra-
tion. great, the expence of administration in her colonies bears pro-

portion to it. In every department, even of her domestic po-
lice and finances, Spain has adopted a system more complex,
and more encumbered with a variety of tribunals, and a multi-
tude of officers, than that of any European nation, in which the
sovereign posseses such extensive power. From the jealous fpi-
rit with which she watches over her American settlements, and
her endeavours to guard against fraud in provinces so remote
from infpeaion; boards and officers have been multiplied there
with fill more anxious attention. In a country where the ex-
pence of living is great, the salaries allotted to every person in
public office muff be high, and must load the revenue with an
immense burden. The parade of government greatly augments
the weight of it. The viceroys of Mexico, Peru, and the New
Kingdom of Granada, as representatives of the king's person,
among people fond of ostentation, maintain all the state and
dignity of royalty. Their courts are formed upon the model of
that at Madrid, with horse and foot guards, a household regular-
ly established, numerous attendants, and ensigns of power, dif-
playing such pomp, as hardly retains the appearance of dele-
gated authority. All the expence incurred by supporting the
external and permanent order of government is defrayed by the
crown. The viceroys have besides peculiar appointments suited
to their exalted station. The salaries fixed by law are indeed
extremely moderate, that of the viceroy of Peru is only thirty
thousand ducats; and that of the viceroy of Mexico twenty

thousand
432

thousand ducats i. Of late, they have been raised to forty thou-
sand.

THESE salaries, however, constitute but a small part of their

revenue. The exercise of an absolute authority xtending to
every department of government, and the power of difpoiing of
many lucrative offices, affords to them innumcrt)!e opportuni-
ties of accumulating wealth. To these, which may be confider-
ed as legal and allowed emoluments, vast ums are often added
by exations, which in countries so far removed from the feat of
government, it is not easy to discover, and impossible to retrain.
By monopolizing ome branches of commerce, by a lucrative
concern in others, by conniving at the frauds of merchants, a
viceroy may raise such an annual revenue, as no fuhjed of any
European monarch enjoys . From the single article of presents
made to him on the anniversary of his Name-day (which is always
observed as an high feflival), I am informed that a viceroy has
been known to receive /sixty thousand pesos. According to a
Spanish faying, the legal revenues of a viceroy are known, his
real profits depend upon his opportunities and his conscience.
Conscious of this, the kings of Spain, as I have formerly ob-
served, grant a commission to their viceroy only for a few years.
This circumstance, however, renders them often more rapacious,
and adds to the ingenuity and ardour wherewith they labour to
improve every moment of power which they know is haflening
fast to a period; and hort as its duration is, it usually affords
sufficient time for repairing a hattered fortune, or creating a new
one. But even in situations so trying to human frailty, there
are inflances of virtue that remain unfeduced. In the year 1772,

i Recop. lib. iii. tit. iii. c. 72.

Ik See NOTE CIV.
VOL. II.

300K

B 0i 0
kiiii.

433

~~~04040A .1
thle

: o o K the Marquis de Croix finished the term of his viceroyalty in

XV1I. New Spain with unfufpeaed integrity; and inflead of bringing

home exorbitant wealth, returned with the admiration and ap-
plause of a grateful people, whom his government had rendered
happy.

NOTES

NOTE

s

AND
ILLUSTRATIONS.

K 2

# NOTES AND ILLUSTRATIONS.

N O T E S

AND
ILLUSTRATIONS.

NOTE I. p. .

O UR knowledge of the events which happened in the conquest of
New Spain, is derived from sources of information more original and
authentic than that of any tranfadion in the history of America. The
letters of Cortes to the Emperor Charles V. are the most valuable of
these, and the first in order of time. As Cortes early assumed a com-
mand independent of Velasquez, it became necessary to convey such an ac-
count of his operations to Madrid, as might procure him the approbation
of his sovereign.

THE first of his dispatches has never been made public. It was rent

from Vera-Cruz, July 6, 1519. It muff have come to the Emperor's
hands while he was in Germany, as he left Spain on the 2zd of May in
that year, in order to receive the imperial crown. I have made diligent
search for a copy of this dispatch, both in Spain and in Germany, but
without success. This, however, is of less consequence, as it could not
contain any thing very material, being written o soon after Cortes arrived
in New Spain. The second dispatch, dated Otober 3oth, 520, was
published at Seville, A. D. 522z, and the third and fourth soon after

they

they were received. A Latin translation of them appeared in Germany
A. D. 532. Ramufio oon after made them more generally known, by
inserting them in his valuable collection. They contain a regular and
minute history of the expedition, with many curious particulars concern-
ing the policy and manners of the Mexicans. The work does honour to
Cortes; the style is simple and perspicuous; but as it was manifeffly his
interest to represent his own actions in the fairest light, his vitories are pro-
bably exaggerated, his lofies diminished, and his aets of rigour and violence
somewhat softened.

THE next in order is the Cronica de la Nueva Efpagna, by Francisco

Lopez de Gomara, published A. D. 1554. Gomara's historical merit is
considerable. His mode of narration is clear, flowing, always agreeable,
and sometimes elegant. But he is frequently inaccurate and credulous;
and as he was the domestic chaplain of Cortes after his return from New
Spain, and probably composed his work at his desire, it is manifest that
he labours to magnify the merit of his hero, and to conceal or extenuate
such tranfadtions as were unfavourable to his character. Of this Herrera
accuses him in one inflance, Dec. ii. lib. iii. c. 2. and it is not once only
that this is conspicuous. He writes, however, with o much freedom con-
cerning several measures of the Spanish court, that the copies both of his
Hiftoria de las Indias, and of his Cronica, were called in by a degree
of the council of the Indies, and they were long confidered as prohibited
books in Spain, though of late licence to print them has been granted.
Pinelo Biblioth. 589.

The Chronicle of Gomara induced Bernal Diaz del Castillo to com-

pose his Hiftoria Verdadera de. la Conquifta de la Nueva Efpagna. He
had been an adventurer in each of the expeditions to New Spain, and
was the companion of Cortes in all his battles and perils. When he
found that neither he himself, nor many of his fellow-foldiers
were once mentioned by Gomara, but that the fame of all their

exploits
444

exploits was ascribed to Cortes; the gallant old veteran laid hold of his
pen with indignation, and composed his true history. It contains a pro-
lix, minute, confused narrative of all Cortes's operations, in such a rude
vulgar style as might be expected from an illiterate soldier. But as he
relates tranfations of which he was witness, and in which he performed a
considerable part, his account bears all the marks of authenticity, and is
accompanied with such a pleasant naivete, with such interesting details,
with such amusing vanity, and yet so pardonable in an old soldier who had
been (as he boasts) in a hundred and nineteen battles, as renders his book
one of the moll singular that is to be found in any language.

PET. MARTYR ab Angleria in a Treatise de Infulis nuper inventis, added

to his Decades de rebus Oceanicis & novo orbe, gives ome account of
Cortes's expedition. But he proceeds no farther than to relate what hap-
pened after his first landing. This work, which is brief and flight, seems
to contain the information transmitted by Cortes in his first dispatches, em-
bellifhed with several particulars communicated to the author by the officers
who brought the letters from Cortes.

BUT the book to which the greater part of modern historians have had

recourse for information concerning the conquest of New Spain, is Hiftoria
de la Conquifta de Mexico, per D. Antonio de Solis, first published A. D.
1684. I know no author in any language whose literary fame has risen so
far beyond his real merit. De Solis is reckoned by his countrymen one of
the purest writers in the Castilian tongue; and if a foreigner may venture
to give his opinion concerning a matter of which Spaniards alone are quali-
sied to judge, he is inmitled to that praise. But, though his language be
correct, his taste in composition is far from being jus. His periods are so
much laboured as to be often fliff, and ometimes tumid; the figures,
which he employs by way of ornament, are trite or improper, and his ob-
servations superficial. There blemishes, however, might easily be over-
looked, if he were not defetive with refpet to all the great qualities of an
historian. Destitute of that patient industry in research, which condudts
to the knowledge of truth; a stranger to that impartiality which weighs evi-

dence

445

dence with cool attention, and ever eager to establish his favourite system
of exalting the character of Cortes into that of a perfet hero, exempt from
error, and adorned with every virtue, he is less solicitous to di fcover what
was true, than to relate what might appear splendid. When he attempts
any critical difcuflion, his reasonings are fallacious, and founded upon an
imperfect view of facts. Though he sometimes quotes the dijpatches of
Cortes, he seems not to have consulted them; and though he sets out with
some censure on Gomara, he frequently prefers his authority, the most
doubtful of any, to that of the other contemporary historians.

BUT of all the Spanish writers, Herrera furnishes the fullest and most ac-

curate information concerning the conquest of Mexico, as well as every
other transaction in America. The industry and attention with which
he consulted not only the books, but the original papers and public records,
which tended to throw any light upon the fubjeet of his enquiries, were o
great, and he usually judges of the evidence before him with so much im-
partiality and candour, that his decads may be ranked among the moftju-
dicious and useful historical collections. If, by attempting to relate the
various occurrences in the New World in a ftrit chronological order, the
arrangement of events in his work had not been rendered so perplexed, dif-
conneted, and obscure, that it is an unpleasant task to colleEt from dif-
ferent parts of his book, and piece together the detached shreds of a story,
he might justly have been ranked among the most eminent historians of
his country. He gives an account of the materials from which he com-
posed his work, Dec. vi. lib. iii. c. 19.

NOTES
446

NOT E II. p. 3.

C R T E S purposed to have gone in the train of Ovando when
he set out for his government in the year 1502, but was detained
by an accident. As he was attempting in a dark night to scramble up
to the window of a lady's bed chamber, with whom he carried on an
intrigue, an old wall, on the top of which he had mounted, gave
way, and he was so much bruiscd by the fall as to be unfit for the
voyage. Gomara, Cronica de la Nueva Efpagna, cap. i.

NOTE III. p. 5.

C O R T E S had two thousand pesos in the hands of Andrew Duero,
and he borrowed four thousand. These fums are about equal in
value to fifteen hundred pounds sterling ; but as the price of every
thing was extremely high in America, they made but a scanty flock
when applied in this manner. Herrera, Dec. ii. lib. iii. c. . B. Diaz.
C. 20.

N OT E IV. p. 9.

H E names of those gallant officers which will often occur in the

subsequent ltory, were Juan Velasquez de Leon, Alonfo Hernan-
dez Portocarrero, Francisco de Montejo, Chriftoval de Old, Juan
de Efcalante, Francisco de Morla, Pedro de Alvarado, Francisco de
Salceda, Juan deEfcobar, Gines de Nortes. Cortes himself com-
manded the Capitana, or Admiral. Francisco de Orozco, an officer
formed in the wars of Italy, had the command of the artillery. The
experienced Alaminos aed as chief pilot.

NOTE
VOL. II.

N O T E V. p. ii.

I N those different conflits, the Spaniards loft only two men, but
had a considerable number wounded. Though there be no occa-
sion for recourse to any supernatural cause to account either for the
greatness of their vicories, or the smallness of their loss, the Spanish
historians fail not to ascribe both to the patronage of St. Jago, the tu-
ttlar Saint of their country, who, as they relate, fought at the head
of their countrymen, and by his prowess gave a turn to the fate of
the battle. Gomara is the first who mentions this apparition of St.
.Iarnes. It is amusing to observe the embarrassment of B. Diaz de Caf-
tillo, occasioned by the struggle between his superstition and his vera-
city. The former disposed him to believe this miracle, the latter re-
trained him from affirming it. " I acknowledge, fays he, that all
our exploits and victories are owing to our Lord Jesus Christ, and
that in this battle there was such a number of Indians to every one of
us, that if each had thrown a handful of earth they might have buried
us, if by the great mercy of God we had not been proteEted. It may
be that the person whom Gomara mentions as having appeared on a
mottled grey horse, was the glorious apostle Signor St. Jago or
Signor St. Pedro; and that I, as being a finner, was not worthy to
fee him. This I know, that I saw Francisco de Morla on such a
horse, but as an unworthy tranfgrefror, did not deserve to fee any of
the holy apostles. It may have been the will of God, that it was so
as Gomara relates, but until I read his Chronicle I never heard among
any of the conquerors that such a thing had happened." Cap.. 34.

NOTE VI. p. 6.

SEVE RAIL Spanish hifiorians relate this occurrence in such
terms, as if they wished it should be believed, that the Indians
hladed with the presents, had carried them from the capital in the fame
lhort space of time that the couriers performed that journey. This is

incredible ;
448

incredible; and Gomara mentions a circumflance whlich flhews, that
nothing extraordinary happened on this occasion. This rich prcfirnt
had been prepared for Grijalva, when he touched at the fame place
some months before, and was now ready to be delivered, as soon as
Montezuma sent orders for that purpose. Gomara, Cron. c. xxvii.
p. 28.

ACCORDING to B. Diaz dcl Cafillo, the value of the fihler plate

representing the moon, was alone above twenty thousand pesos, about
five thousand pounds sterling.

NOTE VII. p. 22.

T H I S private traffic was direaly contrary to the instructions of
Velasquez, who enjoined, that whatever was acquired by trade fliould
be thrown into the common flock. But it appears, that the soldiers
had each a private assortment of toys, and other goods proper for the
Indian trade, and Cortes gained their favour by encouraging this under-
hand barter. B. Diaz, c. 41.

NOTE VIII. p. 32.

G O M A R A has published a catalogue of the various articles of
which this present consisted. Cron. c. 49. P. Martyr ab Angleria,
who saw them after they were brought to Spain, and who seems to
have examined them with great attention, gives a dcfcription of each,
which is curious, as it conveys some idea of the progrcfs which the
Mexicans had made in several arts of elegance. De infulis nuper in-
ventis liber, p. 354, &c.

NOTE IX. p. 38.

T HE RE is no circumftancc in the hiflory of the conqtucll of
America, which is more qucflionable than the account of the nuiic-
rous armies brought into the field against the Spaniards. As the war

3 L with

449

with the Tlafcalans, though of flort duration, was one of the most
considerable which they waged in America, the account given of their
forces merits some attention. The only authentic information concern-
ing this is derived from three authors. Cortes, in his second dispatch to
the emperor, dated at Segura de la Frontera, October 30, 1520, thus
estimates the number of their troops: in the firtf battle 6000; in the
second battle oo,ooo; in the third battle 50,000. Relat. ap. Ra-
rnuf. iii. 228. Bernal Diaz del Castillo, who was an eye-witness, and
engaged in all the actions ofthiswar, thus reckons their numbers : in
the first battle 3000, p. 43; in the second battle 6000, ibid. in the
third battle 50,000, p. 45. Gomara, who was Cortes's chaplain after
his return to Spain, and published his Cronica in 552, follows the
computation of Cortes, except in the second battle, where he reckons
the Tlafcalans at 80,ooo, p. 49. It was manifeltly the interest of Cortes
to magnify his own dangers and exploits. For it was only by the me-
rit of extraordinary services, that he could hope to atone for his irregu-
lar conduct, in assuming an independent command. Bern. Diaz,
though abundantly disposed to place his own prowess, and that of his
fellow-conquerors, in the most advantageous point of light, had not the
fame temptation to exaggerate; and, it is probable, that his account
of the numbers approaches nearer to the truth. The assembling of an
army of 150,000 men requires many previous arrangements, and such
provision for their subsistence as seems to be beyond the foresight of A-
mericans. The degree of cultivation in Tlafcala does not seem to have
been so great, as to have furnished such a vast army with provisions.
Though this province was so much better cultivated than other regions
of New Spain, that it was called the country of bread, yet the Spa-
niards in their march suffered such want, that they were obliged to
subsist upon Tunas, a species of fruit which grows wild in the fields.
1Herrera, Dec. ii. lib. vi. c. 5. p. 82.

NOT E
450

NOTE X. p. 42.

TH E S E unhappy victims are said to be persons of diltinodon. It
seems improbable that so great a number as fifty should be employed
as spies. So many prisoners had been taken and difniffed, and the
Tlafcalans had sent so many messages to the Spanish quarters, that
there appears to be no reason for hazarding the lives of so many conli-
derable people, in order to procure information about the position and
state of their camp. The barbarous manner in which Cortes treated a
people unacquainted with the laws of war established among polished
nations, appears so shocking to the later Spanish writers, that they di-
minifh the number of those whom he punished so cruelly. Herrera
fays, that he cut off the hands of seven, and the thumbs of some more.
Dec. ii. lib. ii. c. 8. De Solis relates, that the hands of fourteen or
fifteen were cut off, and the thumbs of all the reft. Lib. ii. c. 20.
But Cortes himself, Relat. p. 228, b. and after him Gomara, c. 48, as-
firm, that the hands of all the fifty were cut off.

NOTE XI. p. 44.

T HE horses were objets of the greatest aftoniihment to all the
people of New Spain. At first they imagined the horse and his rider,
like the centaurs of the ancients, to be some monstrous animal of a ter-
rible form; and supposing, that their food was the fame as that of men,
brought flesh and bread to nourish them. Even after they discovered
their mistake, they believed the horses devoured men in battle, and
when they neighed, thought that they were demanding their prey.
It was not the interest of the Spaniards to undeceive them. Herrera,
Dec. ii. lib. vi. c. X i.

NOT I

451

NOTE XII. p. 49.

ACCORDING to Bart. de las Casas, there was no reason for this
lilacre, and it was an at of wanton cruelty, perpetrated merely
to strike terror into the people of New Spain. Relac. de la De-
flruyc. p. 17, &c. But the zeal of Las Casas often leads him to ex-
aggerate. In opposition to him Bern. Diaz. c. 83, asserts, that the
first minlionaries sent into New Spain by the emperor, made a judicial
inquiry into this tranfacdion; and having examined the priests and
elders of Cholula, found that there was a real conspiracy to cut off
the Spaniards, and that the account given by Cortes was exactly
true. As it was the object of Cortes at that time, and manifestly his
interest, to gain the good-will of Montezuma, it is improbable, that
he would have taken a ep which tended so visibly to alienate him
from the Spaniards, if he had not believed it to be necessary for his
own preservation. At the fame time, the Spaniards who served in
America had such contempt for the natives, and thought them so
little entitled to the common rights of men, that Cortes might hold
the Cholulans as guilty upon flight and imperfec evidence. The fe-
verity of the punishment was certainly excessive and atrocious.

N O T E XIII. p. 50.

T HIS description is taken almol literally from Bernal Diaz del
Castillo, who was so unacquainted with the art of composition, as
to be incapable of embellishing his narrative. He relates, in a fim-
ple and rude style, what passed in his own mind, and that of his fellow-
soldiers on that occasion ; " and let it not be thought firange, fays
he, that I hould write in this manner of what then happened: for it
ought to be confidered, that it is one thing to relate, another to have
beheld things that were never before seen, or heard, or spoken of
among men." Cap. 86. p. 64. b.

NOTE
452

NOTE XIV. p. 6G.

B. Diaz del Cafillo gives us some idea of the fatigue and hardllips
they underwent in performing this, and other parts of duty. Dur-
ing the nine months that they remained in Mexico, every man,
without anydiftintion between officers and soldiers, slept on his arms,
in his quilted jacket and gorget. They lay on mats, or straw spread
on the floor, and each was obliged to hold himself as alert as if he
had been on guard. " This, adds he, became so habitual to me, that
even now in my advanced age, I always sleep in my cloaths, and
never in any bed. When I visit my Encomienda, I reckon it suitable
to my rank, to have a bed carried along with my other baggage ; but
1 never go into it, but, according to custom, 1 lie in my cloaths, and
walk frequently during the night in the open air, to view the flars
as I swas wont when in firvice." Cap. o8.

NOTE XV. p. 63.

C ORTES himself, in his second dispatch to the emperor, does
not explain the motives which induced him either to conden
Qualpopoca to the flames, or to put Montezuma in irons. Ramus.
iii. 236. B. Diaz is silent with refped to his reasons for the former;
and the only caulf lie assigns for the latter was, that lie might meet
with no interruption in executing the sentence pronounced against
Qualpopoca, c. xcv. p. 75. But as Montezuma was his prisoner,
and absolutely in his power, the insult oflercd to that monarch could
have no effic but to irritate himn uiiieccffaiily. Gomara supposes, that
Cortes had no other objed than to occupy Montezuma with his own
distress and faferings, that he might give less attention to what befcl
Qualpopoca. Cron. c. 89. 11errera adopts the fame opinion. Dcc.
ii. lib. viii. c. 9. But it fiems an odd xpedicnt, in order to make
person bear one injury, to load him with another that is greater. D)c
Solis imagines, that Cortes had nothing cefc in vi.ew than to intimi-

kd ate

453

date Montezuma, so that he might make no attempt to rescue the
vi&ims from their fate; but the spirit of that monarch was so sub-
miflivc, and he had so tamely given up the prisoners to the disposal of
Cortes, that he had little to dread from him. If the explanation
which I have attempted to give of Cortes's proceedings on this occa-
sion be not admitted, it appears to me, that they mutt be reckoned
among the wanton and barbarous as of oppreflion which occur too
often in the hiflory of the conquest of America.

N O T E XVI. p. 67.

DE Solis asserts, lib. iv. c. 3. that the proposition of doing homage
to the King of Spain, came from Montezuma himself, and was made
in order to induce the Spaniards to depart out of his dominions.
He describes his condut on this occasion, as if it had been founded
upon a scheme of profound policy, and executed with such refined ad-
dress, as to deceive Cortes himself. But there is no hint or circum-
stance in the contemporary historians, Cortes, Diaz, or Gomara, to
justify this theory. Montezuma, on other occasions, discovered no
such extent of art and abilities. The anguish which he felt in per-
forming this humbling ceremony is natural, if we suppose it to have
been involuntary. But, according to the theory of De Solis, it would
have been preposterous, and inconsistent with his own design of de-
ceiving the Spaniards.

NOTE XVII. p. 69.

IN several of the provinces, the Spaniards, with all their induflry
and influence, could colle& no gold. In others, they procured
only a few trinkets of small value. Montezuma assured Cortes, that
the present which he offered to the King of Catile, after doing ho-
mage, consisted of all the treasure amassed by his father; and told
him, that he had already distributed the reft of his gold and jewels

among
454

among the Spaniards. B. Diaz, c. 104. Gomara relates, that all
the silver collected amounted to 500 marks. Cron. c. 93. This
agrees with the account given by Cortes, that the royal fifth of filrc
was ioo marks. Relat. 239. B. So that the fum total of filvcr was
only 4000 ounces, at the rate of eight ounces a mark, which demon-
ftrates the proportion of silver to gold to have been exceedingly finall.

N O T E XVIII. p. 70.

D E Solis, lib. iv. c. i. calls in queflion the truth of this tranfac.
tion, from no better reason than that it was inconfiltent with that
prudence which distinguishes the charadter of Cortes. But he
ought to have recollectedthe impetuofityof his zeal at Tiafcala, which
was no less imprudent. He asserts, that the evidence for it refts upon
the tetlimony of B. Diaz del Castillo, of Gomara, and of Herrera.
They all concur, indeed, in mentioning this inconsiderate ltep which
Cortes took, and they had good reason to do so; for Cortes himself
relates this exploit in his second dispatch to the Emperor, and seems to
glory in it. Cort. Relat. Ramus. iii. 140. D. This is one instance,
among many, of De Soli's having consulted with little attention the
letters of Cortes to Charles V. from which the most authentic inform-
ation with respect to his operations mut be derived.

NO T E XIX. p. 74.

H E RRERA and Dc Solis suppose, that 'Vlafqucz was encou-
raged to equip this armament against Cortes, by the accounts which
he received from Spain concerning the reception of the agents
sent by the colony of Vera Cruz, and the warmth with which Sonsec
bilhop of Burgos had espoused his intercft, and condemned the pro-
ceedings of Cortes. Herrera, dec. ii. lib. ix. c. 18. De Solis, lib. iv.
c. 5. But the chronological order of events rceutcs tllis supposition.
Portocarrero and Montejo failed from Vera Cruz July 26, i1S9.

VoL. II. 3 M I lcri( ra,

155

Herrera, dec. ii. lib. v. c. 4. They landed at St. Lucar in O&ober,
according to Herrera, ibid. But P. Martyr, who attended the court
at that time, and communicated every occurrence of moment to his
correspondents day by day, mentions the arrival of these agents, for
the first time, in December, and speaks of it as a recent event. Epifi.
650. All the historians agree, that the agents of Cortes had their
first audience of the emperor at Tordefillas, when he went to that
town to visit his mother in his way to St. Jago de Compoftella. Her-
rera, dec. ii. lib. v. c. 4. De Solis, lib. iv. c. 5. But the emperor set
out from Valladolid for Tordefillas, on the i ith of March 520o; and
P. Martyr mentions his having seen at that time the presents made to
Charles, Epift. 665. The armament under Narvaez failed from
Cuba in April 1520. It is manifest then, that Velasquez could not
receive any account of what passed in this interview at Tordefillas, pre-
vious to his hostile preparations against Cortes. His real motives
seem to be those which I have mentioned. The patent appointing him
Adclantado of New Spain, with such extensive powers, bears date
November 13, 1519. Herrera, dec. ii. lib. iii. c. ii. He might re-
ceive it about the beginning of January. Gomara takes notice, that
as soon as this patent was delivered to him, he began to equip a fleet
and levy forces. Cron. c. 96.

N O T E XX. p. 76.

D E Solis contends, that as Narvaez had no interpreters, he could
hold no intercourse with the people of the provinces, nor converse
with them in any way but by signs, and that it was equally ipoffible
for him to carry on any communication with Montezuma. Lib. iv.
c. 7. But it is upon the authority of Cortes himself that I relate all
the particulars of Narvaez's correspondence, both with Montezuma
and with his fubjets in the maritime provinces. Relat. Ramus. iii.
244, A. C. Cortes affirms, that there was a mode of intercourse be-
tween Narvaez and the Mexicans, but does not explain how it was
carried on. Bcrnal Diaz supplies this defc, and informs us, that

the
45(

the three deserters who joined Narvaez ated as interpreters, having
acquired a competent knowledge of the language, c. ii o. With his
usual minuteness, he mentions their names and characters, and relates,
in chapter 22, how they were punifled for their perfidy. The Spa-
niards had now resided above a year among the Mexicans; and it is
not surprising, that several among them should have made some profi-
ciency in speaking their language. This seems to have been the cafe.
Herrera, dec. ii. lib. x. c. i. Both B. Diaz, who was present, and
Herrera, the moit accurate and belt informed of all the Spanifl wri-
ters, agree with Cortes in his account of the secret correspondence
carried on with Montezuma. Dec. ii. lib. ix. c. 8, 19. Dc Solis
seems to confider it as a discredit to Cortes, his hero, that Monte-
zuma hould have been ready to engage in a correspondence with Nar-
vaez. He supposes that monarch to have contraEted such a wonder-
ful affection for the Spaniards, that he was not solicitous to be deli-
vered from them. After the indignity with which he had been treat-
ed, such an affection is incredible; and even De Solis is obliged to ac-
knowledge, that it must be looked upon as one of the miracles which
God wrought to facilitate the conquest, lib. iv. c. 7. The truth
is, Montezuma, however much overawed by his dread of the Spa-
niards, was extremely impatient to recover his liberty.

NOTE XXI p. 89.

T H E S E words I have borrowed from the anonymous Account of
the European Settlements in America, publifled by Dodfley, in two
volumes, 8vo. a work of so much merit, that I fliould think there
is hardly any writer in the age who ought to be afhained of acknow-
ledging himself to be the author of it.

N O T E XXII. p. 95.

T H E contemporary historians differ considerably with rcfpc to
the loss of the Spaniards on this occasion. Cortes, in his second
dispatch to the emperor, makes the number only 150. Rclat. ap.

3 M 2 Ramus.

457

Ramus. iii. p. 249, A. But it was manifestly his interest, at that
juncture, to conceal from the court of Spain the full extent of the loss
which he had sustained. De Solis, always studious to diminish every
misfortune that besel his countrymen, rates their loss at about two
hundred men. Lib. iv. c. 19. B. Diaz affirms, that they loft 870
men, and that only 440 escaped from Mexico, c. 128, p. 1o8. b.
Palafox, bishop of Los Angeles, who seems t have inquired into the
early tranfaEtions of his countrymen in New Spain, with great atten-
tion, confirms the account of B. Diaz with refpet to the extent of
their loss. Virtudes del Indio, p. 22. Gomara states their loss at
450 men. Cron. c. 109. Some months afterwards, when Cortes had re-
ceived several reinforcements, he mustered his troops, and found them
to be only 59o. Relat. ap. Ramus. iii. p. 255, E. Now, as Narvaez
brought 880 men into New Spain, and about 400 of Cortes's soldiers
were then alive, it is evident, that his loss in the retreat from Mexico
must have been much more considerable than what he mentions. B. Diaz,
solicitous to magnify the dangers and sufferings to which he and his
fellow-conquerors were exposed, may have exaggerated their loss;
but, in my opinion, it cannot well be estimated at less than 600 men.

N O T E XXIII. p. II3.

S 0 M E remains of this great work are still visible, and the spot
where the brigantines were built and launched, is frill pointed out to
firangers. Torquemada viewed them. Monarq. Indiana, vol. i.
p. 531.

NOTE XXIV. p. 120.

T H IE Ration of Alvarado on the causeway of Tacuba was the nearest
to the city. Cortes observes, that there they could diftinEtly observe
what passcd when their countrymen were sacrificed. Relat. ap.
Ramus. iii. p. 273. E. B. Diaz, who belonged to Alvarado's divi-
sion, relates what he behcld with his own eyes. C. 152. p. 148, b.
149, a. Like a man whofc courage was so clear as to be aove sus-

picion,
458

picion, he describes, with his usual simplicity, the impression which this
fpetacle made upon him. " Before, fays he, I saw the breasts of my
companions opened, their hearts yet fluttering, offering to an accurscd
idol, and their flefl devoured by their exulting enemies, I was accuf-
tomed to enter a battle not only without fear, but with high tirit.
But from that time I never advanced to fight the Mexicans without
a secret horror and anxiety, my heart trembled at the thoughts of the
death which I had seen them susser." He takes care to add, that as
soon as the combat began this terror went off; and, indeed, his ad-
venturous bravery on every occasion is full evidence of this. B. Diaz,
c. 156. p. 157, a.

N O E XXV. p. I25.

O N E circumstance in this siege merits particular notice. The ac-
count which the Spanish writers give of the numerous armies em-
ployed in the attack or defence of Mexico, seems to be incredible.
According to Cortes himself, he had at one time 50o,ooo auxiliary
Indians in his service. Relat. Ramus. iii. 275, E. Gomara aflerts,
that they were above 200,000. Cron. c. 36. Herrera, an author of
higher authority, fays, they were about 2oo,oo0. Dec. iii. lib. i.
c. 19. None of the contemporary writers ascertain explicitly the
number ofperfons in Mexico during the siege. But Cortes, on iteveral
occasions, mentions the number of Mexicans who were slain, or who
perifled for want of food; and, if we may rely on those circumstances,
it is probable, that above two hundred thousand mufl have been shut
up in the town. But the quantity of provisions necessary for the sub.
fiftence of such vast multitudes assembled in one place during three
months is so great, and it requires so much foresight and arrangement
to colled them, so as to be certain of a regular supply, that one can
hardly believe that this could be accomplifled in a country where
agriculture was so imperfet as in the Mexican empire, where there
were no tame animals, and by a people naturally so improvident, and

(o

459

so incapable of executing a complicated plan as the most improved
Americans. The Spaniards, with all their care and attention, fared
very poorly, and were often reduced to extreme distress from want
of provisions. B. Diaz, p. 142. Cortes Relat. 271. D. Cortes, on one
occasion, mentions slightly the subsistence of his army; and after
acknowvledging, that they were often in great want, adds, that they
receivcd supplies from the people of the country, of fish, and of some
fruit, which he calls the cherries of the country, ibid. B. Diaz
fays, that they had cakes of maize, and cerafas de la tierra; and when
the fafon of these was over, another fruit, which he calls Tunas; but
their most comfortable fubfifence was a root which the Indians use as
food, to which he gives the name of Quilites, p. 142. The Indian
auxiliaries had one means of subsistence more than the Spaniards. They
fed upon the bodies of the Mexicans whom they killed in battle. Cort.
Relat. 176, C. B. Diaz confirms his relation, and adds, that when
the Indians returned from Mexico to their own country, they carried
with them large quantities of the flesh of the Mexicans salted or dried,
as a most acceptable present to their friends, that they might have the
pleasure of feeding on the bodies of their enemies in their fetivals,
p. 57. De Solis, who seems to confider it as an imputation of dif-
credit to his countrymen, that they should a in concert with auxilia-
ries who fed upon human fleflh, is solicitous to prove, that they en-
deavoured to prevent their associates from eating the bodies of the
Mexicans, lib. v. c. 24. But he has no authority for this from the
original historians. Neither Cortes himself, nor B. Diaz, seem to have
had any such scruple; and, on many occasions, mention the Indian
repafis, which were become familiar to them, without any mark of
abhorrence. Even with this additional flock of food for the Indians,
it was hardly possible to procure subsistence for armies amounting to
such numbers as we find in the Spanish writers. Perhaps, the best so-
lution of the difficulty is, to adopt the opinion of B. Diaz del Castillo,
the molt artless of all the HiJoriadores primitivos. " When Gomara,
fays he, on some occasions relates, that there were so many thousand
Indians our auxiliaries, and on others, that there were so many thou-

sand
460

sand houses in this or that town, no regard is to be paid to his enume-
ration, as he has no authority for it, the numbers not being in reality
the fifth of what he relates. If we add together the different numbers
which he mentions, that country would contain more millions than
there are in Castile." C. 129. But thoughl some considerable deduc-
tion should certainly be made from the Spanish accounts of tle Mexi-
can forces, they mutt have been very numerous; for nothing but an
immense superiority in number, could have enabled them to withstand
a body of nine hundred Spaniards, commanded by a general of such
abilities as Cortes.

N O T E XXVI. p. 138.

I N relating the oppressive and cruel proceedings of the conquerors
of New Spain, I have not followed B. de las Casas as my guide.
His account of them, Relat. de la Deltruyc. p. i 8, &c. is manifeltly
exaggerated. It is from the testimony of Cortes himfclf and Gomara,
who wrote under his eye, that I have taken my account of the puniih-
ment of the Panucans; and they relate it without any disapprobation.
B. Diaz, contrary to his usual custom, mentions it only in general
terms, c. 162. IHerrera, solicitous to extenuate this barbarous ac-
tion of his countrymen, though he mentions 6o caziques, and 4co
men of note, as being condemned to the flanes, aflrts, that thirty only
were burned, and the refl pardoned. I)cc. iii. lib. v. c. 7. But this
is contrary to the teftiinony of the original iflorians, particularly of
Comara, whom it appears lic Iad consultcd, as hle adopts fevcral of
his exprcffions in this pallagc. ''lic pullifhillent o Guatiinozin is re-
lated by the moR authentic of the Sl;palilli writers. Torqueinada has
extrated from a history of 'l'czuco, comiplofre in the Mexican tongue,
an account of this tranfadtion, more l.ivouraible to Cuatiinozin than
that of the Spanifli authors. Mon. Indi;lna, i. 575. According to
that account, Cortes had scarcely a lihadov of evidence to justify such
a wanton at of cruelty. B. Diaz affirms, tll;.t Guatimozin and his
fcllow.fuffcrers aIferted their innocence with their lalt breath, and that

11ma11

46

many of the Spanifli soldiers condemned this action of Cortes as
equally unneceflary and unjust, p. 200, b. 201, a.

N O T E XXVII. p. 140.

T1 I E motive for undertaking this expedition was, to punifl Chris-
toval de Olid, one of his officers who had revolted against him, and
aimed at fltablifling an independent jurifdiEtion. Cortes regarded
this infurretion as of such dangerous example, and dreaded so
much the abilities and popularity of its author, that in person he led
the body of troops deflined to suppress it. He marched, according
to Gomara, three thousand miles, through a country abounding with
thick forests, rugged mountains, deep rivers, thinly inhabited, and
cultivated only in a few places. What he suffered from famine, from
the hostility of the natives, from the climate, and from hardships of
every species, has nothing in history parallel to it, but what occurs in
the adventures of the other discoverers and conquerors of the New
World. Cortes was employed in this dreadful service above two
years; and though it was not distinguished by any splendid event, he
exhibited, during the course of it, greater personal courage, more for-
titude of mind, more perseverance and patience, than in any other
period or scene in his life. Herrera, dec. iii. lib. vi, vii, viii, ix. Go-
inara Cron. c. 163-I77. B. Diaz, 174-I 90.

N O T E XXVIII. p. I42.

A C C R D I N G to Herrera, the treasure which Cortes brought
with him, confifled of fifteen hundred marks of wrought plate,
two hundred thousand pesos of fine gold, and ten thousand of inferior
standard, many rich jewels, one in particular worth forty thousand
pesos, and several trinkets and ornaments of value. Dec. iv. lib. iii.
c. 8. lib. iv. c. i. He afterwards engaged to give a portion with his
daughter of a hundred thousand pesos. Gomara Cron. c. 237. The

fortune
462

fortune which he left his sons was very confiderab!e. But as we have
before related, the fum divided among the conquerors on the first re-
duation of Mexico was very small. There appears then to bc some
reason for fufpeding that the accusation of Cortes's enemies were not
altogether destitute of foundation. They charged him with having
unjustly applied to his own use a disproportionate lhare of the lecxican
spoils; with having concealed the royal treafurcs of Montezuma and
Guatimozin, with defrauding the king of his fifth, and robbing his
followers of what was due to them. HItrrera, dec. iii. lib. viii. c. 15.
dec iv. lib. iii. c. 8. Some of the conquerors themselves entertained
suspicions of the fame kind. B. Diaz, c. 157.

N O T E XXIX. p. 47.

I N tracing the progress of the Spanish arms in New Spain, we have
followed Cortes himself as our molt certain guide. His dispatches
to the emperor contain a minute account of his operations. But the
unlettered conqueror of Peru was incapable of relating his own ex-
ploits. Our information with refpe& to them is derived, however, from
contemporary and refpetable authors.

TIIE most early account of Pizarro's tranfadions in Peru, was pub-

lifhed by Francisco de Xerez, his secretary. It is a simple unadorned
narrative, carried down no farther than the death of Atahualpa, in
1533; for the author returned to Spain in 1534, and soon after he
landed, printed at Seville his flort History of the Conqucft of Peru,
addressed to the emperor.

DON Pedro Sancho, an officer w:' served under Pizarro, drew up

an account of his expedition, which was translated into Italian by Ra-
mufio, and infcrted in his valuable colleedion, but has never been
publiihed in its original language. Sancho returned to Spain at the
fame time with Xercz. Great credit is due to what both tlofe aurlior.s
relate concerning thc progress and opcrations of Pizarro, but tie re-

VoL. II. N lideince

1 )

fidence of the Spaniards in Peru had been so short, at the time when
they left it, and their intercourse with the natives so slender, that their
knowledge of the Peruvian manners and customs is very iinperfeat.

T'HE next contemporary historian is Pedro Cieza de Leon, who

published his Chronica del Peru, at Seville in 553. If he had
finifled all that he proposes in the general division of his work, it
would have been the most complete hifiory which had been published
of any region in the New World. He was well qualified to execute it,
having fcrved during seventeen years in America, and visited, in per-
son, most of the provinces concerning which he had occasion to write.
But only the firfl part of his Chronicle has been printed. It contains
a description of Peru, and several of the adjacent provinces, with an
account of the inflitutions and customs of the natives, and is written
with so little art, and such an apparent regard for truth, that one mufft
regret the loss of the other parts of his work.

THIS loss is amply supplied by Don Augufline Zarate, who publiflh-

ed, in 1555, his Hiftoria del defcubrimiento y Conquefta de la Pro-
vincia del Peru. Zarate was a man of rank and education, and em-
ployed in Peru as comptroller-general of the public revenue. I-is
l.ifory, whether we attend to its matter or composition, is a book of
considerable merit; as he had opportunity to be well informed, and
seems to have been inquisitive with rfpcc to the manners and tran-
fadions of the Peruvians, great credit is due to his testimony.

DON Diego Fcrnandcz publishcd his IIiftoria del Peru in 57r.

His sole object is to relate the difenfions and civil wars of the Spani-
ards in that empire. As he served in a public flation in Peru, and was
well acquainted both with the country, and with the principal ators
in those singular scenes which he dcfcribcs; as he possessed ound un-
derftanding, and great impartiality, his work may be ranked among
those of the hiflorians most ditinguifllcd for their industry in research,
or their capacity in judging with refple to the events which they relate.

T1 I

A 4
(;

TIE last author who can be reckoned among tie contemporary

lifforians of the conquest of Peru, is Garcilafo de la Vega, Inca. For
though the first part of his work, intitlcd, Commcntarios Rca/ls dl Ori-
gen dc los Incas Reics del Peru, was not published sooner than the year
1609, feventy-fix years after the death of Atahualpa the last emperor,
yet, as he was born in Peru, and was the son of an officer of diftindion
among the Spanish conquerors, by a Caya, or lady of the royal race,
on account of which he always took the name of Inca, as he was maf-
ter of the language spoken by the Incas, and acquainted with the tra-
ditions of his countrymen, his authority is rated very high, and often
placed above that of all the other historians. His work, however, is
little more than a commentary upon the Spanish writers of the Peru-
vian itory, and composed of quotations taken from the authors whom
I have mentioned. This is the idea which he himself gives of it, lib. i.
c. I o. Nor is it in the account of fads only that he follows them ser-
vilely. Even in explaining the inltitutions and rites of his anceitors,
his information seems not to be more perfed than theirs. His explana-
tion of the Quipos is almost the fame with that of Acofia. He pro-
duces no specimen of Peruvian poetry, but that wretched one which
he borrows from Blas Valera, an early mifflonary, whose memoirs
have never been published. Lib. ii. c. r5. As for composition, ar-
rangement, or a capacity of distinguishing between what is fabulous,
what is probable, and what is true, one searches for them in vain in the
commentaries of Inca. His work, however, notwithstanding its
great defeds, is not altogether deflitute of use. Some traditions
which he received from his countrymen are preserved in it. His
knowledge of the Peruvian language has enabled him to corret some
errors of the Spanish writers, and he has inserted in it some curious
fads taken from authors whose works were never published, and are
now loft.

N O 'T r.
3 N

NOTE XXX. p. 152.

O N E may form an idea both of the hardships which they endured,
and of the sickliness of the regions which they visited, from the
extraordinary mortality that prevailed among them. Pizarro carried
out 112 men, Almagro 70. In less than nine months 130 of there
died. Few fell by the sword; most of them were cut off by diseases.
Xerez, p. 8o.

N O T E XXXI. p. 155.

T H I S island, fays Herrera, is rendered so uncomfortable by the
unwholefomenefs of its climate, its impenetrable woods, its rugged
mountains, and the multitude of infecs and reptiles, that it is seldom
any softer epithet than that of infernal is employed in describing it.
The fun is almost never seen there, and throughout the year it hardly
ever ceases to rain. Dec. iii. lib. x. c. 3. Dampier touched at this
island in the year 1685; and his account of the climate is not more
favourable. Vol. i. p. 172. He, during his cruize on that coast, vi-
fited most of the places where Pizarro landed, and his description of
them throws light on the narrations of the early Spanish historians.

N O T E XXXII. p. 16.9.

B Y this time horses had multiplied greatly in the Spanish fcttlemcnts
on the continent. When Cortes began his expedition in the year
15 18, though his armament was more considerable than that of Pizar-
ro, and coinpofed of pcrfons superior in rank to those who invaded
Peru, he could procure no more than fixtccn horses.

NOTE
466

N O T E XXXIII. p. 17S.

IN the year 1740, D. Ant. Ulloa, and D. George Juan, travelled
from Guayquil to Motupe, by the fame route which Pizarra took.
From the description of their journey, one may forml an idea of the
difficulty of his march. The sandy plains between St. Mliclhacl de
Piura and Motupe extend go miles, without water, without a tree. a
rplant, or any green thing, on a dreary stretch of burning sand. Voyage,
torn. i. p. 399, &c.

NOTE XXXIV. p. 175.

T H I S extravagant and unseasonable discourse of Valvcrde has been
censured by all hiiftorians, and with juflice. But though he seems
to have been an illiterate and bigotted monk, nowise resembling the
good Olinedo, who accompanied Cortes, the absurdity of his addreis
to Atahualpa must not be charged wholly upon him. Ilis harangue
is evidently a translation, or paraphrase of that form, cncerted by a
junto of Spanifli divines and lawyers in the year 1509, for explaining
the right of their king to the fovercignty oftlhe New World, and for
direcing the oflicers employed in America how they flould take pof-
fcflion of any new country. See Vol. i. Note xxiii. The f ntilncnts con.
tained in Valverdc's harangue inuft not then be imputed to the bigot
ted inbccillity of a particular man, but to that of llt age. Gomari
and Benzoni relate one circunflance concerning Valvcrde, which, i(
authentic, renders him an objic not of contempt only, but ot liorror.
They aflcrt, that during the whole ation, Valvcrdc, continued to cx-
cite the foldicrs to slaughter, calling to themi to strike the enemly not
with the edge, but with the points of their swords. Goin. Cro.
c. 13. Benz. Hiflor. Nov. Orbis, lib. iii. c. 3. Such behaviour waz
very difercllnt from that of the Roman Catliolic clergy in other parts of
America, where they uniformly exerted their influence to protd th'
Indians, and to ilodcratc the ferocity of their coutitryillie.

N () ' I .

4

N O T E XXXV. p. 176.

T V 0 different systems have been formed concerning the condua
of Atahualpa. The Spanish writers, in order to justify the violence
of their countrymen, contend, that all the Inca's professions of
friendship were feigned; and that his intention in agreeing to an inter-
view with Pizarro at Caxamalca, was to cut off him and his followers
at one blow; that for this purpose he advanced with such a nume-
rous body of attendants, who had arms concealed under their garments
to execute this scheme. This is the account given by Xerez and Za-
rate, and adopted by Herrera. But if it had been the plan of the Inca
to destroy the Spaniards, one can hardly imagine that he would have
permitted them to march unmolested through the desert of Motupe,
or have negleced to defend the passes in the mountains, where they
might have been attacked with so much advantage. If the Peruvians
marched to Caxamalca with an intention to fall upon the Spaniards, it is
inconceivable, that of so great a body of men, prepared for aion, not
one fmould attempt to make resistance, but all tamely susser themselves to
be butchered by an enemy whom they were armed to attack. Ata.
hualpa's mode of advancing to the interview, has the afpe& of a
peaceable procefflion, not of a military enterprize. He himself, and
his followers, were in their habits of ceremony, preceded, as on days
of solemnity, by unarmed harbingers. Though rude nations are fre-
quently cunning and false, yet, if a scheme of deception and treachery
must be imputed either to a monarch, that had no great reason to be
alarmed at a visit from strangers who solicited admifflon into his pre-
tence as friends, or to an adventurer so daring, and so little fcrupu-
lous as Pizarro, one cannot hesitate in determining where to fix the
presumption of guilt. Even amidst the endeavours of the Spanifll
writers to palliate the proceedings of Pizarro, one plainly perceives,
that it was his intention, as well as his interest, to seize the Inca, and
that he had taken measures for that purpose, previous to any suspicion
of that monarch's designs.

GARCILA SS
4.8

GARCIL ASSO DE LA VEGA, extremely folic tou vindli: '- ).-
trymen, the Perux ians, from the crime of having concerted t J': I.' c-
tion of Pizarro and his followers, and no left afraid to carge the .5'?a-
niards with improper conduct towards the Inca, has lral.'d another
system. He relates, that a man of majestic form, with lo!n b-a;d,
and garments reaching to the ground, having appeared in xifion to
Viracocha, the eighth Inca, and declared, that he was a child of the
Sun, that monarch built a temple in honour of this person, and creEted
an image of him, resembling, as nearly as possible, the singular
form in which he had exhibited himfclf to his view. In this temple
divine honours were paid to him, by the name of Viracocha. P. i.
lib. iv. c. 21. lib. v. c. 22. When the Spaniards first appeared
in Peru, the length of their beards, and the dress they wore, firuck
every person so much with their likeness to the image of Viracocha,
that they supposed them to be children of the Sun, who had descended
from heaven to earth. All concluded, that the fatal period of the Pe-
ruvian empire was now approaching, and that the throne would be oc-
cupied by new possessors. Atahualpa himself, confidering the Spa-
niards as messengers from heaven, was so far from entertaining an)
thoughts of resisting them, that he determined to yield implicit obedi-
ence to their commands. From those sentiments flowed his profeflions
of love and refpe&. To those were owing the cordial reception of
Soto and Ferdinand Pizarro in his camp, and the fubiniflivc reverence:
with which he advanced to visit the Spanifl general in hii: quarters.
But from the gross ignorance of Philipillo, the interpreter, the decla.
ration of the Spaniards, and his answer to it, were so ill explained,
that by their mutual inability to comprehend each other's intentions,
the fatal rencounter at Caxanatca, with all its dreadful conllequences.
was occasioned.

IT is remarkable, that no traces of this fuprfltitious veneration of

the Peruvians for the Spaniards, are to be found either in Xerez, or
Sancho, or Zarate, previous to the interview at Caxamalca ; and yet
the two former servcd under Pizarro at that time, and the latter vilited.

lct'sa

-' K

Peru soon after the conqucft. If either the Inca himself, or his
nmeTngcrrs, had addressed the Spaniards in the words which La Vega
put in teir mlouths, they muff have been truck witi; such fubinilive
declarations ; and they would certainly have availed thein'lves of
them to accomplish their own designs with greater Iar-ility. La Vega
himnfelf, though his narrative of the intercourse betw.cen the Inca and
Spaniards, preceding the encounter at Caxamalca, is oundcd on the
supposition of his believing them to be Viracochas, or divine beings,
p. ii. lib. i. c. 17, &c. yet, with his usual inattention and inaccuracy,
he admits, in another place, that the Peruvians did not recollec the
resemblance between them and the god Viracocha, until the fatal difaf-
ters subsequent to the defeat at Caxamalca, and then only began to call
them Viracochas. P. i. lib. v. c. 2. This is confirmed by Herrera,
dec. v. lib. ii. c. I2. In many different parts of America, if we may
believe the Spanifi writers, their countrymen were confidered as divine
beings who had descended from Heaven. But in this instance, as in
many which occur in the intercourse between nations, whose progress
in refinement is very unequal, the ideas of those who used the expref-
sion, were different from the ideas of those who heard it. For, such
is the idiom of the Indian languages, or such is the simplicity of those
who speak them, that when they fee any thing with which they were
formerly unacquainted, and of which they do not know the origin,
they fay that it came down from heaven. Nugnez. Ram. iii.

327, C.

TI-IE account which I have given of the sentiments and proceedings
of the Peruvians, appears to be more natural and confitent than either
of the two proceeding, and is better supported by the fads related by the
contemporary historians.

ACCORDING to Xerez, p. 200, two thousand Peruvians were killed.
Sancho makes the number of the slain fix or seven thousand. llam. iii.
274, D. By La Vega's account, five thousand were massacred.
P. ii. lib. i c. 25. The number which I have mentioned, being

the
. -..

the medium between the extremes, may probably be ncareft the
truth.

N O T E XXXVI. p. 178.

N O T H I N G can be a more itriking proof of this, than that three
Spaniards travelled from Caxamalca to Cuzco. The distance be-
tween them is fix hundred miles. In every place throughout this vail
extent of country, they were treated with all the honours lwhich the
Peruvians paid to their fovcreigns, and even to their divinities. Under
pretext of amassing what was wanting for the ransom of the Inca, they
demanded the plates of gold with which the walls of the l.cinrplc of the
Sun in Cuzco were adorned; and though the priests were unwilling to
alienate those sacred ornaments, and the people refused to violate the
shrine of their God, the three Spaniards with their own hands robbed
the Temple of part of this valuable treasure; and such was the re-
verence of the natives for their persons, that though they beheld tiis
ac of sacrilege with aftoniflhment, they did not attempt to prevent or
disturb the commission of it. Zarate, lib. ii. c. 6. Sancho ap. Ramus. iii.
375, D.

N O T E XXXVII. p. 88.

A C C R D 1 N G to Ierrera, the spoil of Cuzco, after setting apar;
tlhe kinlt'; fifih, was divided among 480 perrons. Each rcceived
4000 pclos. Tlis amounts to 1,90,000 pesos. Dcc. v. lib. vi. c. .
But .as the 7lneral, and other officers, wvce entitled to a part far grealt (r
than tat o: the private men, the uin total nmut have rile'n much be-
yond what 1 have mentioned. Gomara, c 3.2 and Zarate, lil. ii.
c. 8. satisfy themselves with aflrting in general, that the plunder u,!
Cuzco was of greater value than the ranibom of .Atahualpa.

'\ 0)' 1

477
Vol., 11.

O

N O TE XXXVIII. p. 19o.

N o expedition in the New World was conducted with more per-
fevering courage than that of Alvarado, and in none were greater
hardships endured. Many of the persons engaged in it were, like their
leader, veterans who had served under Cortes, inured to all the ri.
gour of American war. Such of my readers as have not an opportu-
nity of perusing the striking description of their fufterings by Zarate
or Ilerrera, may form ome idea of the nature of their march from the
sea coast to Quito, by consulting the account which D. Ant. Ulloa
gives of his own journey in 1736, nearly in the fame route. Voy.
tomr. i.p. 178, &c. or that of M. Bouguer, who proceeded from
Puerto Viejo to Quito, by the fame road which Alvarado took. He
compares his own journey with that of the Spanifl leader, and, by the
comparison, gives a molt striking idea of the boldness and patience of
Alvarado, in forcing his way through so many obstacles. Voyage du
Perou, p. xxviii, &c.

NOTE XXXIX. p. I9i.

A CC OR DING to Herrera, there was entered on account of the
king, in gold, 155,300 pesos, and 5400 marks (each 8 ounces)
of silver, besides several vessels and ornaments, ome of gold, and
others of silver; on account of private persons, in gold 499,000oo
pesos, and 54,000 marks of silver. Dec. v. lib. vi. c. 13.

N O T E XL. p. 198.

T H E Peruvians had recourse to other military arts than those of
the Spaniards. As the cavalry were the chief obje& of their ter-
ror, they endeavoured to render them incapable of ating, by throw-
ing a long thong with a tone fattened to each end. This twitled about
the horse and its rider, entangled them so as to render them in.

capable
-47

capable of acding. Herrcra mentions this as an invention of their own.
Dec. v. lib. viii. c. 4. But as I have observed, vol. i. p. 375, this weapon
is conmmon among fevcral barbarous tribes towards the extremity of
South America; and it is more probable, that the Peruvians had ob-
served the dexterity with which they used it in hunting, and on this
occasion adopted it themselves. The Spaniards were considerably an-
noved by it. Herrera, ibid. Another inltance of the ingenuity of
the Peruvians deserves mention. By turning a river out of its chan-
nel, they overflowed a valley, in which a body of Spaniards was poll-
ed, so suddenly, that it was with the utmost difficulty they made their
escape. Herrera, Dec. v. lib. viii. c. 5.

NOTE XLI. p 5.

H E R E R A' s account of Orellana's voyage is the most minute,
and apparently the most accurate. It was probably taken from
the journal of Orellana himself. But the dates are not diftin&ly mark-
ed. His navigation down the Coca, or Napo, begun early in
February 1541 ; and he arrived at the mouth of the river on the 26th
of August, having spent near seven months in the voyage. M. de la
Condamine, in the year 1743, failed from Cucnca to Para, a fettle-
ment of the Portuguese at the mouth of the river, a navigation much
longer than that of Orellana, in less than four months. Voyage,
p. 179. But the two adventurers were very diflerently provided fr
the voyage. This hazardous undertaking, to which ambition pro ipted
Orellana, and to which the love of science led M. de la Condamine, was
undertaken in the year 1769, by Madame Godin ds Odonais, from
conjugal affection. The narrative of the hardlhips which flie fuflered,
of the dangers to which flie was cxpofed, and of the difalters which
besel her, is one of the most singular and asseting flories in any lan-
guage, exhibiting in her conduct a striking pidture of the fortitude
which diftinguifl the one sex, mingled with the sensibility and tenderness
peculiar to the other. Lettre de M. Godin, a M. de la Condamine.

. 0

,", 0 T II

473

NOTE XLII. p. 218.

H E R R E R A gives a firiking picture of their indigence. Twelve
gentlemen, who had been officers of diftin&ion under Almagro,
lodged in the fame houfc, and having but one cloak among them, it
was worn alternately by him who had occasion to appear in public,
while the refl, from the want of a decent dress, were obliged to keep
within doors. Their former friends and companions were so much
afraid of giving offence to Pizarro, that they durst not entertain,
or even converse with them. One may conceive what was the condi-
tion, and what the indignation of men once accustomed to power and
opulence, when they felt themselves poor and despised, without a
roof under which to flielter their heads, while they beheld others,
whose merit and services were not equal to theirs, living with splendor
in sumptuous edifices. Dec. vi. lib. viii. c. 6.

N O T E XLIII. p. 229.

HI E R R E R A, the mofR accurate of the Spanish historians, asserts,
that Gonzalo Pizarro possessed domains in the neighbourhood of
Chuquefaca de la Plata, which yielded him an annual revenue greater
than that of the archbishop of Toledo, the best endowed fee in Eu-
rope. Dec. vii. lib. vi. c. 3.

N O T E XLIV. p. 241.

A I. L the Spanifl writers describe his march, and the distresses of
both parties very minutely, Zarate observes, that hardly any pa-
rallel to it occurs in history, either with refpet to the length of the
retreat, or the ardour of the pursuit. Pizarro, according to is com-
putation, followed the viceroy upwards of three thousand miles. Lib.
v. c. i6. 26.

NOTE
474

N O T E XLV. p. 254.

IT amounted, according to Fernandez, the best informed historian
of that period, to one million four hundred thousand pesos. Lib. ii.
c. 79.

N O T E XLVI. p. 255.

C A R V A J AL, from the beginning, had been an advocate for an
accommodation with Gafca. Finding Pizarro incapable of hold-
ing that bold course which he originally suggested, lie recommended to
him a timely fubmifiion to his sovereign as the fafcft measure. When
the president's offers were firfl communicated to Pizarro, " By our
Lady (said he, in that firain of buffoonry which was familiar to him)
the priest issues gracious bulls. He gives'them both good and cheap;
let us not only accept of them, but wear them as reliques about our
necks." Fernandez, lib. ii. c. 63.

N O T E XLVII. p. 260.

D UR ING the rebellion of Gonzalo Pizarro, fkven hundred men
were killed in battle, and three hundred and eighty were hanged
or beheaded. Herrera, dec. viii. lib. iv. c. 4. Above three hundred
of these were cut off by Carvajal. Fernandez, lib. ii. c. 91. Zaratc
makes the number of thofc put to a violent death five hundred.
Lib. vii. c. i.

N O T E XLVIII p. 267.

IN my inquiries concerning the manners and policy of the Mexicans.
I have received much information from a large manuscript of Don
Alonfo d Corita, one of the judges in the Court of Audlicncc i
Mexico. In the year 1553, Philip II. in order that he mil ht disco.

''( I

475

ver the inode of levying tribute from his Indian fubjccts, that would
be most beneficial to tlie crown, and leafi oppreflive to them, addreflid
a andate to all the Courts of Audience in America, enjoining them
to answer certain queries which he proposed to them, concerning the
;ncient form of government eftablifled among the various nations of
Indians, and the mode in which they paid taxes to their kings,
or chiefs. In obedience to this mandate, Corita, who had refined
nineteen years in America, fourteen of which he paTed in New Spain,
composed the work of which I have a copy. He acquaints his so-
vereign, that he had made it an objet during his residence in America,
and in all its provinces which he had visited, to enquire diligently into
the manners and customs of the natives; that he had conversed, for
this purpose, with many aged and intelligent Indians, and consulted fe-
veral of the Spanish ecclesiastics, who underflood the Indian languages
most perfeEtly, particularly sone of those who landed in New Spain
soon after the conquest. Corita appears to be a man of some learning,
and to have carried on his inquiries with the diligence and accuracy to
which he pretends. Greater credit is due to his teitimony from one
circumflance. His work was not composed with a view to publicati-
on, or in support of any particular theoey, but contains simple, though
full answers to queries proposed to im officially. Though Herrera
does not mention him among the a .thors whom he had followed as
guides in his history, I should suppose, from several fadts of which he
takes notice, as well as from several expressions which he uses, that
this memorial of Corita was not unknown to him.

N O T E XLIX. p. 276.

T I- E' early Spanifn writers were so hasty and inaccurate in efrimat-
ing the numbers of people in the provinces and towns of America,
that it is impossible to ascertain that of Mexico itself with any
degree of precision. Cortes describes the extent and populousness of
Mexico in general terms, which imply, that it was not inferior to the

grcateft
,76

greatest cities in Eurnpe. Goinara is more explicit, and ailir!', I that
there were 6o,oo hioufcs, or families in Ac:-ico. Crol . . I .: ;-,' ;
adopts his opinion. Dec. ii. lib. vii. c. ; and the lc'nc., lity (of xvri
ters follow theml implicitly without inquiry or fcruplc. Ac\o-Ji; \,
this account, the inhabitants of Mexico mlutt l\'e bCee about 32, -)
Torquamada, with his ufuial propensity to the n rvellous, a!Thlr,
that there were a hundred and twenty thousand hoiufes or fanilies in
Mexico, and consequently about fix hundred thousand inhabitants.
Lib. iii. c. 3. But in a very judicious account of the Mexican e-
pire, by one of Cortes's officers, the population is fixed at 60,ooo
people. Ramufio, iii. 309, A. Even by this account, which pro-
bably is much nearer the truth than any of the foregoing, Mexico was
a great city.

N O T E L. p. 279.

IT is to P. Torribio de Benavente, that I am indebted for this curi-
ous observation. Palafox, bishop of Los Angeles, confirms and
illustrates it more fully. The Mexican (fays he) is the only language
in which a termination indicating refpeEt, filaas rcvercntiales y dc cor-.
te/ia, may be affixed to every word. By adding the final syllable zhi,
or azin to any word, it becomes a proper expreflion of veneration in
the mouth of an inferior. If, in speaking to an equal, the word Father
is to be used, it is Tatl; but an inferior fays Tatzin. One priell
speaking to another, calls him Tcopixque; a person of inferior rank
calls him Teopixcaizin. The name of the emperor who reigned when
Cortes invaded Mexico, was Mlontczuma, but his vasals, from reve-
rence, pronounced it Montczumazin. Torribio, MS. Palaf. Virtudes
del Indio, p. 65. The Mexicans had not only reverential nouns, but
reverential- verbs. The manner in which these are formed from the
verbs in common use, is explained by D. Jos. Aug. Aldama y Guc.
vara in his viMexican Grammar, N 188.

N O T E

NOTE LI. p. 283.

F R 0 M comparing several passages in Corita and Herrera, we may
collet, with some degree of accuracy, the various modes in v. hich the
Mexicans contributed towards the support of government. Some
persons of the first order seem to have been exempted from the payment
of any tribute, and, as their only duty to the public, were bound to
personal service in war, and to follow the banner of the sovereign with
their vassals. 2. The immediate vassals of the crown were bound not
only to personal military service, but paid a certain proportion of the
produce of their lands in kind. 3. Those who held offices of honour
or trust, paid a certain share of what they received in consequence of
holding these. 4. Each Capullee, or association, cultivated some part
of the common field allotted to it, for the behoof of the crown, and de-
posited the produce in the royal granaries. 5. Some part of what-
ever was brought to the public markets, whether fruits of the earth,
or the various produtions of their artists and manufacturers, was de-
manded for the public use, and the merchants who paid this were
exempted from every other tax. 6. The Mayeques, or adfcripti gleba,
were bound to cultivate certain diftrids in every province, which may
be confidered as crown lands, and brought the increase into public
ftoreloufes. Thus the sovereign received some part of whatever was
ufcful or valuable in the country, whether it was the natural produc
tion of the foil, or acquired by the industry of the people. What each
contributed towards the support of government, seems to have been
inconsiderable. Corita, in answer to one of the queries put to the
Audience of Mexico by Philip II. endeavours to estimate in money
the value of what each citizen might be supposed to pay, and does
not reckon it at more than three or four reals, about eighteen pence or
two flillingsi a head.

N O T E LII. . 284.

C 0l T I' S, who fcemns to have been as much aftonifled with this,
as witli nly inflance of Mexican ingecnuity, gives a particular de-
scription of it. Along one of the caufcways, Iays lhe, by which they

enter
478

ter the city, are condudetd two conduits, conipofed of cl:;v t,.':llipCr
with mortar, about two paces in breadth, and rail:d about fix f;rt.
II one of them is conveyed a tream of excellent wat.:-, a.; 1;.; t' a t'l,
body of a man, into the centre of the city, and it fupplic, al tli: ':;;ia-
bitants plentifully. The other is empty, that when it i nIcI ifary 1o
clean, or rplair the former, the Itreami of water may be turned ii'r, it.
As this conduit passes along two of the bridges, wllere there arl breaches
in the caufcway, through which the fait water of the lake flows, it is
conveyed over them in pipes as large as tlhe body of an ox, thcen
carried from the conduit to the remote quarters of the city in canocs,
and bold to the inhabitants. Illat. ap. Ramus. 241, A.

NOTE LIII. p. 289.

IN the armoury of the royal palace of Madrid, are flewn suits of
armour, which are called Montezumas. They are composted of
thin lacquered copper-plates. In the opinion of very intelligent judges
they are evidently eaRtern. The forms of the silver ornaments upon
them, representing dragons, &c. may be confidered as a confirmation of
this. They are infinitely superior in point of workmanfliip to any effort
of American art. The Spaniards probably received them from the Philip-
pine islands. The only unquestionable specimen of Mexican art that I
know of in Great Britain, is a cup of very fine gold, which is said to
have belonged to Montezuma. It weighs 5 oz. iz dwt. Three
drawings of it were exhibited to the Society of Ai.tiquaries, June o,
1765. A man's head is represented on this cup. Oni one fide the full
face, on the other the profile, on the third the back parts of the head.
The relievo is said to have been produced by puncling the inside of the
cup, so as to make the reprefcntation of a Ifacc on te outside. Tiie
features are rude, but very tolerable, and certainly too rude for Spa-
nifll workmianflip. This cup was purchafied by Edward arl of Or-
ford, while he lay in tlhe harbour of Cadiz with the leet under lis
command, and is now in the poffellion of Ihis g!rando , Lrd Arcler.

VoL. I. 3 P 1 arn

479

I am indebted for this information to my refpetable and ingenious
friend Mr. Barrington.

N O T E LIV. p. 290.

T II F. lcarned reader will perceive how much I lave been indebted,
in this part of my work, to the guidance of the bifflop of Gloucester,
-who has traced the successive tfeps, by which the human mind ad-
vanced in this line of its progress, with much erudition, and greater
ingenuity. lie is the sirs, as far as I know, who formed a rational and
confiflent theory concerning the various modes of writing praftifed by
nations, according to the various degrees of their improvement. Div.
I,l ation of Moses, iii. 69, &c. Some important observations have been
added by the learned and intelligent author of the Traite de la Forma-
tion Mechanique des Langues, tom i. 295, &c.

As the Mlexican paintings are the most curious monuments extant

,f the carlieff mode of writing, it will not be improper to give some
account of the means by which they were preserved from the general
wreck of every work of art in America, and communicated to the
Public. For the most early and complete collection of these, pub-
liflhed by Purchas, we are indebted to the attention of that curious in-
quirer, HI-akluyt. Don Antonio Mendoza, viceroy of New Spain, hav-
ing deemed tho't paintings a proper prcfent for Charles V. the flip
in which they were sent to Spain, was taken by a French cruizer, and
they came into the poflcffion of Thevct, the king's geographer, who
having travelled himself into the New World, and described one of
its provinces, was a curious obfcrver of whatever tended to illustrate
the manners of the Americans. On his death, they were purclafed by
11akluyt, at that time chaplain of the English ambaflhdor to the
l'rcnll court; and, being left by him to Purchas, were publiflicd at
the clflie ,f the learned antiquary Sir Henry Spelman. lurchas, iii.

so05.

rTlI: ficoLnd fpr)Cnlc n of Mexican picture-writing was publilhed by
Dr. rancis Gcielli Carreri, in two copper-plates. The first is a nmap,

or
8o0

NOTES AND IL, S T 1 1 I () I' :.

or representation of the progress of the ancient Mexicans on til;; llii l
arrival in the country, and of the various Rations in which they fttle l,
before they founded the capital of their empire in the lake oi' Mc:ic'.
The second is a Chronological Wheel, or Circle, rcprefcnitiigT the 111r11-
ner in which they computed and marked their cycle of fifty-tul) vi.:r-.
The former was given to him by Dr. Chrilloval de Guadlai;,,-;i, ii
the city of Los Angeles; the latter he received from Ion (arlo.,,; :
Siguenza y Gongorra. But as it tiems now to be a received o;'ini)
(founded I know not on what evidence) tlat Carreri was nevcr out (rt
Italy, and tlat his famous Giro dcl illltuno, is an account olf a ictitious
voyage, I have not mentioned tlefe paintings in the text. They
have, however, manifeflly the appearance of being Mexican produc-
tions, and are allowed to be so by Boturini, who was well qua-
lified to determine whether they were genuine or supposititious. 'The
flyle of painting in the former is considerably more pcrfeca, than
any other fpeciinen of Mexican design ; but as the original is said to ave
been much defaced by time, I suspect that it has been improved by
some touches from the hand of an European artist. Carerri, Churelcil,
iv. p. 487. The chronological wheel is a just delincation of the Mexi-
can mode of computing time, as described by Acoita, lib. vi. c. . It
feeims to resemble one which that learned Jesuit had fen; and if it he
admitted as a genuine monument, it proves, that the Mexicans had arti-
ficial, or arbitrary characters, which represented several tings befties
numbers. Each month is there represented by a yhlol expreclive (o
omec work or rite peculiar to it.

TH third fpcci eln of Mcxi can painting v,' ;s dific(-orced by ai iolI(er

Italian. In 1736, Lorenzo Boturi!ij ]3Cnati ii;. t C

t i'

Oi N. ' ; ;;ii,

and was led by s;everal incidents t 'K' tl l ,ic ]ig" 1C l e:i;':,
and to collec. the remains otf thliir lifloric;l 11 io!illnll31. rl

.rli. c

nine yuear ' in his rfealrches;, witll te ct.lil!',wl;n ol ia p r(),,'/ir, ; dIl.
the patience ()f i anti(uary. In 1746, ! 'l ;e' '

. 'iKl, .. I

lt ula N1'v., i I'i/ori: (Cn:rl dc

/ a A,. i a

'

du';i'': ,' '

:.i'in ', ;"

iccouA.t of thc relit o' Iis ilu iri s ; d !i .'.. !d to '. ; :; '.
,

. : ' !
.

I his American Htiftorical Mufeurn, arranged under thirty-fix different
heads. His idea of a New History appears to me the work of a whim-
fical credulous man. But his catalogue of Mexican maps, paintings,
tribute-rolls, calendars, &c. is amazing. Unfortunately a ship, in
which he had sent a considerable part of them to Europe, was taken
by an Englifl privateer in the war before last; and it is probable that
they perished by falling into the hands of ignorant captors. Boturini
himself incurred the displeasure of the Spanish court, and died in an
hospital at Madrid. The hiflory, of which the Idea, &c. was only a
P-rOfpcfus, was never published. The remainder of his Museum seems to
have been dispersed. Some part of it came into the possession of the pre-
fcnt archbishop of Toledo, when he was primate of New Spain, and he
published from it that curious tribute-roll which I have mentioned.

THE only other collection of Mexican paintings, as far as I can learn,

is in the Imperial Library at Vienna. By order of their Imperial Ma-
jefties, I have obtained such a specimen of these as I desired, in eight
paintings, made with such fidelity, that I am informed the copies could
hardly be diftinguifled from the originals. According to a note in this
Codex lMcxicanus, it appears to have been a present from Emmanuel
King of Portugal to Pope Clement VII. who died A. D. 533. After
passing through the hands of several illustrious proprietors, it fell
into those of the cardinal of Saxe Eisenach, who presented it to the em-
peror Leopold. These paintings are manifestly Mexican, but they
are in a flyle very different from any of the former. An engraving
has been made of one of them, in order to gratify such of my rea-
ders as may deem this an object worthy of their attention. Were
it an object of sufficient importance, it might be poflible, with some
attention, by rccourfe to the plates of Purchas, and the archbishop of
Toledo, as a key, to form plausible conjectures concerning the mean-
ing of this picure. Many of the figures are manifefly similar. A. A.
arc taricts and darts, almost in the fame sorn with those publifled by
Purchas, p. 107, 107, &c. . BB. are figures of temples, nearly
r-cfembling those which occur in Purchas, p. I lo9 and 1113, and in

I orenzana,
482

Lorenzana, Plate II. C. is a bale of mantles, or cotton cloths, the
figure of which occurs in almost every plate of Purchas and Loren-
zana. E. E. E. seem to be Mexican captains in tleir war dress, the
fantastic ornaments of which refcmble the figures in Purchas, p. l i o,
III, I 1I113. I iould suppose this picture to be a tribute-roll, as tlheir
mode of noting numbers occurs frequently. D. D. D. &c. Accord-
ing to Boturini, the mode of computation by the number of knots,
was known to the Mexicans as well as to the Peruvians, p. 85; and the
manner in which the number of units is represfnted in the Mexican
paintings in my pofleffion, seems to confirm this opinion. They plainly
resemble a string of knots on a cord or rope.

N O T E LV. p. 291.

T H E firif was called, the Prince of the deathful Lance; the second,
the Divider of Men; the third, the Shedder of Blood; the fourth, tlx:
Lord of the Dark-Houfe. Acofta, Lib. vi. c. .

NOT E LVI. p. 297.

T i

H E Temple of Cholula, whlich was deemed more holy tian any

in New Spain, was likewise the most considerable. But it was nothing
more than a mount of solid earth. According to Torquenmadi, it wa
above a quarter of a league in circuit at the base, and rose to tln.
height offorty fathoms. Mon. Ind. Lib. iii. c. 19.

FROM1 infpeCing various figures of Temples, vwhich occur in the

paintings engraved by Purchas, there fieems to be fomci reason for ul-
pcting that all tleir temples were conflructed in the lame mannler. ScC
vol. iii. p. 1109, 1 10, 1113.

N 0 T L IVII. p. 298.

N 1T only in Tlalfala, and Tepeaca, but ven in lexito ill !l
the houses of the people were nmcre huts built ilth turf, ou
mud, or the branches of trees. They wevre cstremely low, aind flight.
and without any furniture but a few carthen vc)il,'ls. Like the

n 11(le l

rudest Indians, several families resided under the fame roof, without
having any separate apartments. Herrera, Iec. ii. lib. vii. c. 13.
lib. x. c. 22. Dec. iv. lib. iv. c. 17. Torqueim, lib. iii c. 23.

N 0 T E LVIII. p. 298.

I A M informed by a person who resided long in New Spain, and
visited almost every province of it, that there is not, in all the extent
of that vast empire, any monument, or veitige of any building
more ancient than the conquest, or of any bridge, or highway,
except ome remains of the causey from Gaudaloupe to the gate of
Mexico, by which Cortes entered the city. MS. penes me. The au-
thor of another account in manuscript observes, " That at this day
there does not remain even the fnalleft vestige of the existence of
any antient Indian building, public or private, either in Mexico
or in any province of New Spain. I have travelled, fays he,
through all the countries adjacent to them, viz. New Galicia, New
Biscay, New Mexico, Sonora, Cinaloa, the New Kingdom of Leon,
and New Santandero, without having observed any monument worth
notice, except the ruins near an ancient village in the valley de Casas
Grandes, in lat. N. 30°. 46. longit. 258°. 24. from the Island of
Teneriffe, or 460 leagues N. N. W. from Mexico. He dfcribes
this minutely; and it appears to have been a paltry building of turf
and flone, plaistered over with white earth or lime. A mifiionary in-
formed that gentleman, that he had discovered the ruins of another set-
tlement similar to the former, about a hundred leagues towards N. W.
on the banks of the river St. Pedro. MS. penes mec.

TOSE teflimonies derive great credit from one circumilance, that

they were not given in support of any particular system or theory,
but as simple anlwers to queries which I had proposcd. It is pro-
bable, however, that when these gentlemen assert no ruins or
monuments of any ancient work whatever are now to be discovercd
in the Mexican Empire, they meant that there were no such ruins
or monuments, as conveyed any idea of grandeur or nmagn!'cence,

in
4484

in the works of its ancient inhabitants. For it appears from the tef-
timony of feverlJ Spaniih authors, that in Otumba, TlacaL, Ciiolula,
&c. some vftiges of ancient buildings are fill vifiblc. Villa Segnor
Theatro Aner. p. I43. 308. 353. D. Fran. Ant. Lorcnzana, formcrly
archbiflop of Mexico, and now of Toledo, in his iroducion to
that edition of the Cartas de Relacion of Cortes, which he publifhd
at Mexico, mentions ome ruins which are flill visible in fcvcral of
the towns, through which Cortes passId in his way to the capital, p.
4, &c. But neither of these authors give any description of them ;
and they seem to be so very inconsiderable, as to fllew only that tome
buildings had once been there. The large mount of earth at Cholula,
which the Spaniards dignify with the name of temple, ill remains,
but without any steps by which to ascend, or any facing of stone. It
appears now like a natural mount, covered with grass and shrubs,
and pofltbly it was never any thing more. Torquem. lib. iii. c. 9.
I have received a minute description of the remains of a temple near
Cuernavaca, on the road from Mexico to Acapulco. It is composed of
large stones, fitted to each other as nicely as those in the buildings of
the Peruvians, which are hereafter mentioned. At the foundation it
forms a square of :5 yards; but as it rifes in height, it diminishes in
extent, not gradually, but by being contraSted suddenly at regular dif.
tances, so that it muff have resembled the figure B in the Plate. It ter-
minated, it is said, in a fpirc.

N 0 T E LIX. p. 30.

111 E exaggeration of the Spanifl HIilftorians, with rc
to the number of human victims sacrificed in Mexico, appears to
be very great. According to Gomara, there was no year in whlich
twenty thousand human victims were not ofncrcd to the Mexican Di-
vinities, and in ome years they amounted to fifty thousand. Cron.
c. 229. The flkulls of those unhappy persons were ranged i order
in a building erected for that purpose ; and two of Cortes's officers, Cwho
had counted tlem, informed Com;ira that their number was a hun

dIred

485

drcd and thirty fix thousand. Ibid. c. 82. Herrera's account is frill
more incredible, that the number of victims was so great, that five
thousand have been sacrificed in one day, nay, on some occasions, no
]ess than twenty thousand. Dec. iii. lib. ii. c. 16. Torquemada goes
beyond both in extravagance, for he asserts that twenty thousand chil-
dren, exclusive of other viEtims, were slaughtered annually. Mon.
Ind. lib. vii. c. 2. The most refpetable authority in favour of such
high numbers is that of Zumurraga, the first bishop of Mexico,
who, in a letter to the chapter general of his order, A. D. 163,
asserts that the Mexicans sacrificed annually twenty thousand vicims.
Davila. Teatro Eccles. 126. In opposition to all these accounts, B.
de las Casas observes, that if there had been such an annual waste of the
human species, the country could never have arrived at that degree of
populousness, for which it was remarkable when the Spaniards first
landed there; and he positively asserts, that the Mexicans never fa-
crificed more than fifty or a hundred persons in a year. See his dif-
pute with Sepulveda, subjoined to his Breviffima Relacion, p. o0.
Cortes does not specify what number of victims was sacrificed annu-
ally; but B. Daz del Castillo relates, that an inquiry having been
made, with refped to this, by the Franciscan Monks who were sent
into New Spain immediately after the conquest, it was found that
about two thousand five hundred were sacrificed every year in Mexico.
c. 207.

NOTE LX. p. 304.

I T is hardly necessary to observe, that the Peruvian Chronology is
not only obscure, but repugnant to conclusions deduced from the
mofR accurate and extensive observations, concerning the time that
elapfcs during each reign, in any given succession of princes. The
mcdium has been found not to exceed twenty years. According to
Acofta and Garcilaffo de la Vega, Huana Capac, who died about the
year 1527, was the twelfth Inca. The duration of the Peruvian mo-
narchy ought not to have been reckoned above two hundred and forty
years; but they affirm that it had subsisted four hundred years.
Acofta, lib. vi. c. 19. Vega, lib. i. c. 9. By this account, each reign

is
d 6

is extended at a medium to thirty three years, inflead of twenty, the
number ascertained by Sir Isaac Newton's observations; but so in-
perfet were the Peruvian traditions, that though the total is boldly
marked, the number of years in each reign is unknown

N O T E LXI. p. 3o0.

M A N Y of the early Spanish writers assert, that the Peruvians of-
sered human sacrifices. Xerez. p. r9o. Zarate, lib. i. c. i.
Acofta, lib. v. c. 19. But GarcilafTo de la Vega contends, that
though this barbarous pradice prevailed among their uncivilized an-
ceftors, it was totally abolished by the Incas, and that no human
vitim was ever offered in any temple of the Sun. This assertion,
and the plausible reasons with which he confirms it, are sufficient to
refute the Spanish writers, whose accounts seem to be founded en-
tirely upon report, not upon what they themselves had observed.
Vega, lib. ii. c. 4. In one of their feflivals, the Peruvians offered
cakes of bread, moistened with blood drawn from the arms, the eye-
brows, and notes of their children. Id. lib. vii. c. 6. This rite seems
to have been derived from their ancient practice.

N O T E LXII. p. 315.

1THE Spaniards have adopted both those cutorns of the anticnt
Peruvians. They have preserved ome of the aqueducs or canals,
made in the days of the Incas, and have made new ones, by
which they water every field that they cultivate. UIlloa Voyage,
torn. i. 422, 477. They likewise continue to ut gnano, or the dung
of sea-fowls, as manure. Ulloa gives a description of the allmolt in
credible quantity of it in the finall islands near the coast. Ibid. 481.

N O T E LXII. p. 317.

1 It E temple of Cayambo, the palace of the Inca at Callo in tl.
plain of Lacatunga, and that of Atun-Cannar, are defclilcd I,'
Ulloa, toni. i. 286, &c. who infpeded them with great cs. M
de Condaminc published a curious memoir concerning the iui:; o.
Atun-Cannar. Mcmi. de 'Academic de Berlin, A. D. 1746, p. 4-35

VOL. II. 3 Q A,,,l

Acofta dcfcribes the ruins of Cuzco, which he had examined. Lib.
vi. c. 14. Garcilalfo, in his usual file, gives pompous and confused
dcfcriptions of several temples, and other public edifices. Lib. iii. c.
i. 21. lib. vi. c. 4. Don - Zapata, in a large treatise
concerning Peru, which has not hitherto been publifled, commu-
nicates some information with refpet to fcveral monuments of
the antient Peruvians, which have not been mentioned by other
authors. MS. penes me, Articulo xx. Ulloa describes ome of
the antient Peruvian fortifications, which were likewise works of
great extent and solidity. Tom. i. 391. Three circumstances struck
all those observers: the vass size of the stones which the Peruvians
employed in some of their buildings. Acofta measured one, which
was thirty feet long, eighteen broad, and fix in thickness ; and yet,
he adds, that in the fortress at Cuzco, there were flones considerably
larger. It is difficult to conceive how the Peruvians could move
these, and raise them to the height even of twelve feet. The second
circumtfance is, the imperfection of the Peruvian art, when applied
to working in timber. By the patience and perseverance natural to
Americans, flones may be formed into any hape, merely by rubbing
one against another, or by the use of hatchets or other instruments
made of stone; but with such rude tools, little progress can be made
in carpentry. The Peruvians could not mortize two beams together,
or give any degree of union, or flability to any work composed of
timber. As they could not form a centre, they were totally unac-
quainted with the use of arches in building; nor can the Spanish au-
thors conceive how they were able to frame a roof for those ample
ftrutures which they raised.

THE third circumflance is a firiking proof, which all the monuments

of the Peruvians furnish, of their want of ingenuity and invention, ac-
companied with patience no less astonishing. None of the stones em-
ployed in those works were formed into any particular or uniform
shape, that might render them fit for building. The Indians took
them as they fell from the mountains, or were raised out of the quar-

ries.

ties. Some were square, some triangular, some convex, some con-
cave. Their art and indufiry were employed in joining thenm to-
gether, by forming such hollows in tle one, as perfecly corrsfponded
to the projections or risings in the other. This tedious operation,
which might have been so easily abridged, by adapting the surface
of the stones to each other, either by rubbing, or by their hatchets
of copper, would be deemed incredible, if it were not put beyond
doubt, by infpecing the remains of tlofe buildings. It gives tle a
very singular appearance to an European eye. There is no regular
layer or stratum of building, and no one stone resembles another in
dimensions or form. At tle fame time, by the perfeverving, but ill-
diredted industry of the Indians, all are joined with that minute
nicety which I have mentioned. Ulloa made this observation con-
cerning the form of the stones in the fortress of Atun-Canar. Voy.
i. p. 387. Pineto gives a similar description of the fortress of Cuzco,
the most perse of all the Peruvian works. Zapata MS. pcnes me.
According to M. de Condamine, there were regular strata of building
in some parts of Atun-Canar, which he remarks as singular, and
proof of some progress in improvement.

NOTE LXIV. p. 320.

H E appearance of those bridges, which bend with their own

weight, wave with the wind, and are considerably agitated by the
motion of every person who passes along them, is very frightful at first.
But the Spaniards have found them to be the easiest mode of pafling the
torrents of Peru, over which it would be difficult to tlrow more solid
ftrudures either of stone or ti ber. They sorn those hanging bridges so
strong and broad, that loaded mules pass over thcm. All the trade of
Cuzco is carried on by mc'ls of such a bridge over the river Apurimlac.
Ulloa, tom. i. 358. A more simple contrivance was employed in pafling
smaller streams: a baiket, in which the traveller was placed, being
fulfended from a trong rope stretchcd across the ftrcaim, it was pulhed
or drawn from one fide to the other. Ibid.

N O'' F
3

4R:)

N O T E LXV. p. 329,

M Y information, with refpeEt to those events, is taken from Noticia
breve de la expedicion militar de Sonora y Cinaloa, fu exito feliz,
y vantojofo eftado, en que por confecuencia de ello, fe han puefto
ambas provincias, published at Mexico, June 7th, 1771, in order to
satisfy the curiosity of the merchants, who had furnifled the viceroy
with money for defraying the expence of the armament. The copies
of this Noticia are very rare in Madrid; but I have obtained one, which
has enabled me to communicate these curious fads to the public. Ac-
cording to this account, there was found in the mine Yecorato, in Cina-
loa, a grain of gold of twenty-two carats, which weighted sixteen marks
four ounces four ochavas; this was sent to Spain as a present fit for the
king, and is now deposited in the royal cabinet at Madrid..

N 0 T E LXVI. p. 329..

T H E uncertainty of geographers with refpet to this point is re-
markable; for Cortes seems to have surveyed its coasts with great
accuracy. The archbishop of Toledo has published, from the original,
in the possession of the Marquis del' Valle, the descendant of Cortes, a
map drawn in 1541, by the pilot Domingo Castillo, in which Cali-
fornia is laid down as a peninsula, firetching out nearly in the fame
direction which is now given to it in the befit maps ; and the point
where Rio Colorado enters the gulf is marked with precision. Hill
de Nueva Efpagna, 327.

N O T E LXVII. p. 332.

I AM indebted for this faE to M. L'Abbe Raynal, tom. iii. 103
and upon consulting an intelligent person, who having been long
fettled on the Mosquito shore, has been engaged in the logwood trade,.

I find
490

491

I find that ingenious author has been well informed. The logwood
cut near the town of St. Francis of Campeachy, is of much better
quality than that on the other ide of Yucatan, and the Englifl t:a(ic
in the Bay of Ionduras is alinoft at an end.

N O ' E LXVII. . 343.

P. Torribio de Bcnevente, or Motolinea, has enumerated ten caufi
of the rapid depopulation of Mexico, to which lie gives the name
of the ten plagues. Many of these are not peculiar to that province.
I. The introduction of the small-pox. This disease was first brought into
New Spain in the year 1520, by a negroe slave, who attended Narvacz.
Torribio affirms, that one half of the people, in the provinces visited
with this distemper, died. To this mortality occasioned by the fnall-
pox, Torqueinada adds the deftrutive effecds of two contagious dif-
tempers which raged in the years 1545 and 1576. In the former
800,000, in the latter above two millions perifled, according to an
exat account taken by order of the viceroys. Mon. Ind. i. 642. lThe
small-pox were not introduced into Peru for several years after the
invasion of the Spaniards, but proved very fatal to the natives. Garcia
Origen, p. 88. 2. The numbers who were killed, or died of famine
in their war with the Spaniards, particularly during the siege of Mexi-
co. 3. The great famine that followed after the reducion of Mexico,
as all the people engaged, either on one Fide or other, had neglc ect
the cultivation of their lands. Something similar to this happened i!
all the other countries conquered by the Spaniards. 4. The gricvou,
talks imposed by the Spaniards upon the people belonging to tlhei
Rcpartimientos. 5. The oppreflive burden of taxes, which the)y \cre
unable to pay, and from which they could hope for no exemption. (.
The numbers employed in collecting the gold, carried down by the tor-
rents from the mountains, who were forced from their own habitations.
without any provision made for their fubfiflence, and fubjedted to all
the rigour of cold in those elevated regions. 7. The inmlenfle labolr

<o.

of rebuilding Mexico, which Cortes urged on with such precipitate
ardour, as destroyed an incredible number of people. 8. The num-
ber of people condemned to servitude, under various pretexts, and
employed in working the silver mines. These, marked by each pro-
prietor with a hot iron, like his cattle, were driven in herds to the
mountains. 9. The nature of the labour to which they were fubjedcd
there, the noxious vapours of the mines, the coldness of the climate,
and scarcity of food were so fatal, that Torribio affirms, the country
round several of those mines, particularly near Guaxago, was covered
with dead bodies, the air corrupted with their stench, and so many
vultures, and other voracious birds, hovered about for their prey, that
the fun was darkened with their flight. o. The Spaniards, in the dif-
ferent expeditions which they undertook, and by the civil wars which
they carried on, destroyed many of the natives, whom they compelled
to serve them as Tamemes, or carriers of burdens. This last mode of
opprefion was particularly ruinous to the Peruvians. From the num-
ber of Indians who perished in Gonzalo Pizarro's expedition into the
countries to the east of the Andes, one may form some idea of what
they suffered, and how fast they wafted. Torribio, MS. Corita, in his
Breve y Summaria Relacion, illustrates and confirms several of Torri-
bio's observations, to which he refers. MS. penes me.

N O T E LXIX. p. 348.

EV EN Montesquieu has adopted this idea, lib. viii. c. 8. But
the paifion of that great man for iyftem, sometimes rendered him inat-
tentive to research; and from his capacity to refine, he was apt, in some
inflances, to overlook obvious and just causes.

N O T E LXX. p. 349.

A Strong proof of this occurs in the testament of Isabella, where he
discovers the most tender concern for the humane and mild usage of
the Indians. Those laudable sentiments of the queen have been

adopted
492

adopted into the public law of Spain, and serve as the introdution to
the regulations contained under the title of the good treat/mEn/ f tihe I.
dians. Recopil. lib. vi. tit. x.

N O T E LXXI. p. 351.

I N the seventh Title of the firfI book of the Recopilacion, which con-
tains the laws concerning the powers and funEtions of archbishops
and bishops, almost a third part of them relates to what is incumbent
upon them, as guardians of the Indians, and points out the various me-
thods in which it is their duty to interpose, in order to defend them
from oppreiflon, either with refpet to their person or property. Not
only do the laws commit to them this honourable and humane office,
but they actually exercise it.

INNUMERABLE proofs of this might be produced from Spanish au.

thors. But I rather refer to Gage, as he was not disposed to ascribe
any merit to the popish clergy, to which they were not fully entitled.
Survey, p. 142. I92, &c. Henry Hawks, an Englifl merchant, who
resided five years in New Spain, previous to the year 1572, gives the
fame favourable account of the'popih clergy. Hakluyt, iii. 466.
By a law of Charles V. not only bishops, but other ecclesiastics, are
impowered to inform and admonilh the civil magistrates, if any Indian
is deprived of his just liberty and rights. Recopilac. lib. vi. tit. vi.
ley. 14; and thus were constituted legal protetors of the Indians.
Some of the Spanilh ecclesiastics refused to grant absolution to such
of their countrymen as possessed Enconiendas, and confidered the
Indians as slaves, or employed them in working their mines. Gonz.
Davil. Fiatro. Eccles. i. 157.

NOTE

493

N O T E LXXII. p. 351.

A C C OR DI N G to Gage, Chiapa dos Indos contains 4000 fami-
lies, and he mentions it only as one of the largest Indian towns in
America. P. 1o4.

N O T E LXXIII. p. 351.

IT is very difficult to obtain an accurate account of the slate of po-
pulation in those kingdoms of Europe where the police is most per-
fe&, and where science has made the greatest progress. In Spanish
America, where knowledge is still in its infancy, and few men have
leisure to engage in researches merely speculative, little attention has
been paid to this curious inquiry. But in the year 741, Philip V.
enjoined the viceroys and governors of the several provinces in Ame-
rica, to make an actual survey of the people under their jurifdi&ion,
and to transmit a report concerning their number and occupations.
In consequence of this order, the Conde de Fuen-Clara, viceroy of
New Spain, appointed D. Jos. Antonio de Villa-Segnor y Sanchez, to
execute that commision in New Spain. From the reports of the ma-
giftrates in the several diftrias, as well as from his own observations,
and long acquaintance with most of the provinces, Villa Segnor pub-
lifhed the result of his inquiries in his Theatro Americano. His report,
however, is imperfect. Of the nine dioceses, into which the Mexican
empire has been divided, he has published an account only of five,
viz. the archbishopric of Mexico, the bishoprics of Los Angeles,
Mechoacan, Oaxaca, and Nova Galicia. The bihoprics of Yucu-
tan, Verapaz, Chiapa, and Guatimala, are -entirely omitted though
the two latter comprehend countries, in which the Indian race is more
numerous than in part of New Spain. In his survey of the exten-
five diocese of Nova Galicia, the situation of the different Indian vil.
lages is described; but he specifies the number of people only in a
mnlall part of it. The Indians of that vast province, in which the

Spanish
494

Spanish dominion is imperfetly etfabliihed, are not registered with
the fame accuracy as in other parts of New Spain. According to
Villa Segnor, the atual state of population in the five dioceses above
mentioned is, of Spaniards, negroes, mulattoes, and mestizos, in
the dioceses of

Mexico
Los Angeles
Mechoacan -

Oaxaca -
Nova Galicia
At the rate of five to a family, the total number is

Indian families in the diocese of Mexico
Los Angeles
Mechoacan -
Oaxaca
Nova Galicia

Families.
105,202
- 30,600

30,840
7,296
6,770

190,708

953,540

I19,511
88,240
36,196
44,222
- 6,222

294,391

AT the rate of five to a family, the total number is 1,471,955. We

may rely with greater certainty on this computation of the number of
Indians, as it is taken from the Matricula, or register, according to
which the tribute paid by them is collected. As four dioceses of nine
are totally omitted, and in that of Nova Galicia the numbers are im-
perfectly recorded, we may conclude, that the number of Indians in
the Mexican empire exceeds two millions.

T'IHE account of the number of Spaniards, &c. fceins not to be

equally complete. Of many places, Villa Scgnor observes in general
terms, that several Spaniards, negroes, and people of a mixed race,

VOL. II. 3 R rcfide

495

reside there, without specifying their number. If, therefore, we
make allowance for these, and all who reside in the four dioceses omit-
ted, the number of Spaniards, and of those of a mixed race, may
probably amount to a million and a half. In some places, Villa
Segnor distinguishes between Spaniards and the three inferior races of
negroes, Mulattos, and Meflizos, and marks their numbers separate-
ly. But he generally blends them together. But from the propor-
tion observable in those places, where the number of each is marked
as well as from the account of the state of population in New Spain
by other authors, it is manifest that the number of negroes and per-
sons of a mixed race far exceeds that of the Spaniards. Perhaps the
latter ought not to be reckoned above 500,000 to a million of the
former.

DEFECTIVE as this account may be, I have not been able to pro-

cure such intelligence concerning the number of people in Peru, as
might enable me to form any conjecture equally satisfying with rcfpet
to the degree of its population. I have been informed, that in the
year 1761, the protetor of the Indians in the vice-royalty of Peru
computed that 612,780 paid tribute to the king. As all females, and
persons under age, are exempted from this tax in Peru, the total
number of Indians ought, by that account, to be 2,449,120. MS.
penes me.

I SHALL mention another mode, by which one may compute, or at leafd
form a guess concerning the tate of population in New Spain and Peru.
According to an account which I have reason to confider as accurate,
the number of copies of the bull of Cruzada, exported to Peru on
each new publication, is 1,171,953; to New Spain 2,649,326. I am
informed, that but few Indians purchase bulls, and that they are fold
chiefly to the Spanish inhabitants, and those of mixed race; so that
the number of Spaniards, and people of a mixed race, will amount, by
this mode of computation, at least to three millions.

Tu-Ia
496

THE number of inhabitants in many of the towns in Spanilh Ane-

rica, may give us folne idea of the extent of population, and correct
the inaccurate, but popular notion entertained in Great Britain, con-
cerning the weak and desolate state of their colonies. lThe city of
Mexico contains at leat 150,000o people. Los Angeles contains above
6o,ooo Spaniards, and people of a mixed race. Villa Segnor, p. 247.
Guadalaxara contains above 30,000, exclusive of Indians. Id. ii. 206.
Lima contains 54,000. D. Cofme Bueno Defer. de Peru, 1764. Car-
thagena contains 25,000. Potofi contains 25,000. Bueno, 1767.
Popayan contains above 20,000. Ulioa, i. 287. Towns of a fccond class
are still more numerous. The cities in the molt thriving fettlemients
of other European nations in America cannot be compared with there.

THESE are such detached accounts of the number of people in fe-

veral towns, as I found scattered in authors whom I thought worthy
of credit. But I have obtained an enumeration of the inhabitants of
the towns in the province of Quito, on the accuracy of which I can re-
ly ; and I communicate it to the Public, both to gratify curiosity, and
to retify the mistaken notion which I have mentioned. St. Francisco
de Quito contains between 50 and 60,ooo people of all the different
races. Besides the city, there are in the Corregimiento 29 curacies efta-
blihed in the principal villages, each of which has smaller hamlets
depending upon it. The inhabitants of these are mostly Indians and
Mestizos, St. Juan de Paflo has between 6 and 8ooo inhabitants,
besides 27 dependent villages. St. Miguel de Ibarra 7000 citizens,
and ten villages. The diftria of Havala between 8 and 20,000
people. The diftrit of Tacunna between o and 12,ooo. The
diftri& of Ambato between 8 and o,ooo, besides 16 depending
villages. The city of Riobamba between 6 and 20,000ooo inhabitants,
and 9 depending villages. The diftric of Chimnbo between 6 and
8ooo. The city of Guaquil from 16 to 20,000 inhabitants, and 14
depending villages. The district of Atuafi bet,,.een 5 and 6oo000, and
4 depending villages. The city of Cuenza between 25 and 30,000

3 R 2 inhabitlants,

497

inhabitants, and 9 populous depending villages. The town of Laxa
from 8 to o,ooo inhabitants, and 14 depending-villages. This de-
gree of population, though slender, if we confider the vast extent of
the country, is far beyond what is commonly supposed. I have
omitted to mention, in its proper place, that Quito is the only pro.
vince in Spanifi America that can be denominated a manufacturing
country; hats, cotton fluffs, and coarse woollen cloths, are made
there in such quantities, as to be sufficient not only for the confump-
tion of the province, but to furnish a considerable article for exporta-
tion into other parts of Spanish America. I know not whether the
uncommon industry of this province hould be confidered as the cause
or. effect of its populousness. But among the ostentatious inhabitants
of the New World, the paflion for every thing that comes from Eu-
rope is so violent, that I am told the manufactures of Quito are so
much undervalued, as to be on the decline.

NOTE LXXIV. p. 356.

T H E S E are eftabliihed at the following places: St. Domingo in
the island of Hispaniola, Mexico in New Spain, Lima in Peru,
Panama in Tierra Firme, Santiago in Guatimala, Guadalaxara in New
Galicia, Santa Fe in the New Kingdom of Granada, La Plata in the
country of Los Charcas, St. Francisco de Quito, St. Jago de Chili,
Buenos Ayres. To each of these are fubjeEed several large provinces,
and ome so far removed from the cities where the courts are fixed,
that they can derive little benefit from their jurifdition. The Spanish
writers commonly reckon up twelve courts of Audience; but they in-
clude that of Manila in the Philippine Islands.

NOTE
498

N O T E LXXV. p. 3G2.

O N account of the distance of Peru and Chili from Spain, and the
difficulty of carrying commodities of such bulk as wine and oil across
the isthmus of Panama, the Spaniards in those provinces have been
permitted to plant vines and olives. But they are tfritly prohibited
from exporting wine or oil to Panama, Guatimala, or any province in
such a situation as to receive it from Spain. Recop. lib. vi. tit. xviii.
1. is-18.

NOTE LXXVI. p. 363.

T HIS computation was made by Benzoni, A. D. 550, fifty-
eight years after the discovery of America. Hill. Novi Orbis, lib. iii.
c. 21. But as Benzoni wrote with the spirit of a malcontent, disposed
to detrat from the Spaniards in every particular, it is poflible that his
calculation may be too low.

N O T E LXXVII. p. 365.

M Y information, with refpe& to the division and tranfinifion of
property in the Spanish colonies, is imperfect. The Spanish authors
do not explain this fully, and have not perhaps attended sufficiently to
the effecs of their own institutions and laws. Solorzano de jure Ind.
vol. ii. lib. ii. 1. 16. explains in some measure the introduction of the
tenure of Mayorafgo, and mentions some of its effects. Villa Segnor
takes notice of a singular consequence of it. He observes, that in
some of the befl situations in the city of Mexico, a good deal of
ground is unoccupied, or covered only with the ruins of the houses
once erected upon it; and adds, that as this ground is held by right

vt

499

of Malyorafgo, and cannot be alienated, that desolation and those ruins
become perpetual. Tieatr. Amer. vol. i. p. 34.

N O T E LXXVIII. p. 366.

T H E R E is no law that excludes Creoles from offices either civil
or ecclcfiaRic. On the contrary, there are many Ccdulas which re-
commend the conferring places of trust indiscriminately on the na.
tives of Spain and America. Betancurt y Figueroa Derecho, &c.
p. 5, 6. But notwithstanding such repeated recommendations, pre-
ferment in almost every different line is conferred on native Spaniards.
A remarkable proof of this is produced by the author last quoted.
From the discovery of America to the year 1637; three hundred and
fixty-nine bishops, or archbishops, had been appointed to the different
dioceses in that country, and of all that number only twelve were
Creoles, p. 40.

N O T E LXXIX. p. 371.

O D E R AT E as this tribute may appear, such is the ex.

treme poverty of the Indians, in many provinces of America, that the
exacting of it is intolerably oppreflive. Pegna Itiner. par Parochos de
Indios, p. 192.

N O T E LXXX. p. 372.

IN New Spain, on account of the extraordinary merit and services
of the first conquerors, as well as the finall revenue arising from
the country previous to the difcovcry of the mines of Sacatecas, the
encomiendas were granted for three, and sometimes for four lives. Re-
copil. lib. vi. tit. ii. c. 14, &c.

NOTE

N O T E LXXI. p. 373.

D. Ant. Ulloa contends, that working in the mines is not noxious,
and as a proof of this informs us, that many Mcftizos and Indians,
who do not belong to any Repartimiento, voluntarily hire themselves
as miners; and several of the Indians, when the legal term of their
service expires, continue to work in the mines of choice. Entretcn. p.
265. But his opinion concerning the wholesomeness of this occupa-
tion is contrary to the experience of all ages ; and wherever men are
allured by high wages, they will engage in any species of labour,
however fatiguing or pernicious it may be. D. Hern. Carillo Altemi-
rano relates a curious fad incompatible with this opinion. Wherever
mines are wrought, fays he, the number of Indians decreases; but in
the province of Campeachy, where there are no mines, the number of
Indians has increased more than a third since the conquest of America,
though neither the foil nor climate be so favourable as in Peru or
Mexico. Colbert. Collet. In another memorial presented to Philip
III. in the year 1609, Captain Juan Gonzalez de Azevedo asserts, that
in every diftric of Peru, where the Indians are compelled to labour in
the mines, their numbers were reduced to the half, and in foine
places to the third of what it was under the vice-royalty of Don Fran.
Toledo in 158 . Colb. Colled..

N O T E LXXXII. p. 373.

A S labour of this kind cannot be prcfcribed with legal accuracy,
the talks seem to be in a great measure arbitrary, and like the services
exacted by feudal superiors, in vinea, prato aut mefi, from their valf
fals, are extremely burdensome, and often wantonly oppressive. Pegna
Itiner. par Parochos de Indios.

NOT

501

NOTE LXXXIII. p. 373.

T H E turn of service known in Peru by the name of Mita, is called
'anda in New Spain. There it continues no longer than a week
at a time. No person is called to serve at a greater distance from his
habitation than 24 miles. This arrangement is less oppressive to the
Indians than that established in Peru. Memorial of Hern. Carillo Al-
tamirano. Colbert. Collet.

N O T E LXXXIV. p. 375.

T H E rongeft proof of this may be deduced from the laws them-
selves. By the multitude and variety of regulations to prevent abuses,
we may form an idea of their number. Though the laws have, wifely,
provided that no Indian hall be obliged to serve in any mine at a
greater distance from his place of residence than thirty miles, we are
informed in a memorial of D. Hernan Carillo Altimirano, presented to
the king, that the Indians of Peru are often compelled to serve in mines
at the distance of a hundred, a hundred and fifty, and even two hun-
dred leagues from their habitation. Colbert Colle&. Many mines
are situated in parts of the country, so barren and so distant from the
ordinary habitations of the Indians, that the neceflity of procuring la-
bourers to work there, has obliged the Spanish monarchs to dispense
with their own regulations in several intfances, and to permit the vice-
roys to compel the people of more remote provinces to resort to those
mines. Efcalona Gazophyl. Perub. lib. i. c. 6. But in justice to
them it ihould be observed, that they have been fludious to alleviate
this oppreflion as much as possible, by enjoining the viceroys to em-
ploy every method, in order to induce the Indians to fettle in some part
,wf the country adjacent to the mines. Id. ibid.

NOTE
501

N O T E LXXXV. p. 379.

T O RO QU E M A D A, after a long enumeration, vwhich has the
appearance of accuracy, concludes the number of monasteries in
New Spain to be four hundred. Mon. Ind. lib. xix. c. 32. The
number of monasteries in the city of Mexico alone was, in the year
1745, fifty-five. Villa-Segnor. Theat. Amer. i. 34. Ulloa reckons
up forty convents in Lima; and mentioning those for nuns, he fays,
that a small town might be peopled out of them, the number of
persons shut up there is so great. Voy. i. 429. Philip III. in a letter
to the viceroy of Peru, A. D. 1620, observes, that the number of
convents in Lima was so great, that they covered more ground than
all the reft of the city. Solonz. lib. iii. c. 23. n. 57. Lib. iii c. 6.
Torquem. lib. xv. c. 3. The first monastery in New Spain was
founded, A. D. 1525. four years only after the conquest. Torq.
lib. xv. c. 16.

ACCORDING to Gil Gonzalez Davila, the complete establishment

of the American church in all the Spanish settlements was, in the year
1649, I patriarch, 6 archbishops, 32 bishops, 346 prebends, 2 ab-
bots, 5 royal chaplains, 840 convents. Teatro Ecclefiatico de las
Ind. Occident. vol. i. Pref. When the order of Jesuits was expelled
from all the Spanish dominions, the colleges, profefcd houses, and re-
fidencies, which it possessed in the province of New Spain, were
thirty, in Quito sixteen, in the New Kingdom of Granada thirteen,
in Peru seventeen, in Chili eighteen, in Paraguay eighteen, in all a
hundred and twelve. Colleccion General de Provilencias hafta acqui
tomadas fobre eftranamento, &c. de la Compagnia, part i. p. 9.
The number of jeluits, priests and novices in all these amounted to
2245. MS. penes ime.

50
Vol.. I.

.3S

IN

IN the year 1644, the city of Mexico presented a petition to the

king, praying that no new monastery might be founded, and that the
revenues of those already established might be circumscribed, other.
wife the religious houses would soon acquire the property of the
whole country. They request likewise that the bishops might be laid
under restrictions in conferring holy orders, as there were at that
time in New Spain above fix thousand clergymen without any living.
Ib. p. 16. They must have been enormous abufcs indeed, when
the superstition of American Spaniards was thocked, and induced to
remonstrate againf them.

N O T E LXXXVI. p. 382.

T H I S description of the manners of the Spanish clergy, I hould not
have ventured to give, upon the teltimony of protestant authors alone,
as they may be fufpeced of prejudice or exaggeration. Gage,
in particular, who had a better opportunity than any protestant, to
view the interior state of Spanish America; describes the corruption
of the church, which he had forsaken, with so much of the acrimony
of a new convert, that I should have distrusted his evidence, though
it communicates ome very curious and striking facts. But Benzoni
mentions the profligacy of eclefiaftics in America at a very early pe-
riod after their settlement there. Hist. lib. ii. c. 9, o2. M. Frezier,
an intelligent observer, and zealous for his own religion, paints the
dissolute manners of the Spaniih ecclefiaflics in Peru, particularly
the regulars, in stronger colours than I have employed. Voy. p. 51.
215, &c. M. Gentil confirms this account. Voy. i. 34. Correal
concurs with both, and adds many remarkable circumstances. Voy.
i. 61. 155. 16x. I have good reason to believe, that the manners of
the regular clergy, particularly in Peru, are still extremely inde-
cent. Acofta himself acknowledges, that great corruption of man-
ners had been the consequence of permitting monks to forsake

the
504

the retirement and discipline of the cloifler, and to mingle again
with the world, by undertaking the charge of the Indian pa-
riflhes. Dc procur. Ind. Salute, lib. iv. c. 13, &c. He mentions par-
ticularly those vices, of which I have taken notice, and corifiders the
temptations to them as so formidable, that he leans to the opinion
of those who hold that the regular clergy should not be employed
as parifi priests. Lib. v. c. 20. Even the advocates for the regulars
admit, that many and great enormities abounded among the monks
of different orders, when ft free from the refiraint of monaltic dif-
cipline; and from the tone of their defence, one may conclude that
the charge brought against them was not destitute of truth. In the
French colonies, the slate of the regular clergy is nearly the fame as
in the Spanish settlements, and the fame consequences have followed.
M. Biet, superior of the secular priests in Cayenne, inquires, with
no less piety than candour, into the causes of this corruption, and
imputes it chiefly to the exemption of regulars from the jurifdidion
and censures of their diocesans; to the temptations to which they are
exposed; and to their engaging in commerce. Voy. p. 320. It is re-
markable, that all the authors, who censure the licentiousness of the
Spanish regulars with greatest severity, concur in vindicating the
condut of the Jesuits. Formed under a discipline more perfec than
that of the other monastic orders, or animated by that concern for
the honour of the society, which takes such full possession of every
member, the Jesuits, both in Mexico and Peru, it is allowed, have
maintained a most irreproachable decency of manners. Frezier, 223.
Gentil, i. 34. The fame praise is likewise due to the bishops and molt
of the dignified clergy. Frez. ibid.

NOTE
3S2

N O T E LXXXVIL p. 382.

S L OR Z A NO, after mentioning the corrupt morals of some
of the regular clergy, with that cautious reserve, which became a
Spanish layman, in touching on a subjed so delicate; gives his opi-
nion very explicitly, and with much firmncfs, against committing pa-
rochial charges to monks. He produces the teitimony of several
refpedable authors of his country, both divines and lawyers, in con.
firmation of his opinion. De Jure Ind. ii. lib. iii. c. 16. A itriking
proof of the alarm excited by the attempt of the Prince d'Efquilache
to exclude the regulars from parochial cures, is contained in the Col-
bert collection of papers. Several memorials were presented to the
king by the procurators for the monastic orders, and replies were
made to these in name of the secular clergy. An eager, and even ran-
corous, spirit is manifest on both fides, in the conduct of this dispute.

N O T E LXXXVIII. p. 386.

N OT only the native Indians, but the Mefizos, or children f
a Spaniard and Indian, were originally excluded from the priesthood,
and refused admission into any religious order. But by a law
issued Sept. 28th, 588, Philip II. required the prelates of America
to ordain such mestizos born in lawful wedlock, as they should find
to be properly qualified, and to permit them to take the vows in any
monastery where they had gone through a regular noviciate. Recopil.
lib. i. tit. vii. 1. 7. Some regard seems to have been paid to this
law in New Spain; but none in Peru. Upon a representation of this
to Charles II. in the year 1697, he issued a new edid, enforcing the
observation of it, and profefling his desire to have all his fubjets,.
Indians and mestizos, as well as Spaniards, admitted to the enjoyment.
of the fame privileges. Such, however, was the aversion of the Spa-

niards
5o6

niards in America to the Indians, and their race, that this seems to
have produced little effect; for, in the year 1725, Philip V. was
obliged to renew the injunction in a more peremptory tone. But so
unsurmountable are the hatred and contempt of the Indians among the
Peruvian Spaniards, that the present king has been constrained to en-
force the former edics anew by a law, published September i , 1774.
Real Cedula, MS. penes me.

N O T E LXXXIX. p. 389.

U Z TA R I Z, an accurate and cautious calculator, seems to ad-
mit, that the quantity of silver that does not pay duty may be
stated thus high. According to Herrera, there was not above a third
of what was extracted from Potofi that paid the king's fifth. Dec. viii.
lib. ii. c. 15. Solorzano asserts likewise, that the quantity of silver
which is fraudulently circulated, is far greater than that which is re-
gularly stamped, after paying the fifth. De Ind. jure, vol. ii. lib. v.
p. 846.

N O T E XC. p. 392.

W HE N the mines of Potofi were discovered in the year 1545,.
the veins were so near the surface, that the ore was easily extracted, and
so rich, that it was refined with little trouble, and at small expence,
merely by the aion of fire. This simple mode of refining by fusion
alone continued until the year 1574, when the use of mercury in refining
silver, as well as gold, was discovered. Those mines having been!
wrought without interruption for two centuries, the veins are now funk
so deep, that the expence of extracting the ore is greatly increased. Be-
fides this, the richness of the ore, contrary to what happens in most
other mines, has become less as the vein continued to dip, and has dimi-
nifhed to such a degree, that one is amazed that the Spaniards flould

persia

507

perflft in working it. Other rich mines have been successively disco-
vered; but in general the value of the ores has decreased so much,
while the expence of extracing them has augmented, that the court of
Spain, in the year 1736, reduced the duty payable to the king from a
Jffib to a tenth. Ail the quicksilver used in Peru, is extracted from the
famous mine of Gunacabelica, discovered in the year 1563. The
crown has reserved the property of this mine to itself; and the persons
who purchased the quicksilver, paid not only the price of it, but like-
wife afi/th, as a duty to the king. But, in the year I761, this duty on
quicksilver was abolished, on account of the increase of expence in
working mines. Ulloa, Entretenimientos, xii.-xv. Voyage, i. p.
505. 523. Any of my readers who are desirous of being acquainted
with the mode in which the Spaniards conduEt the working of their
mines, and the refinement of the ore, will find an accurate description
of it by Acoffa. Lib. iv. c. --3.

NOTE XCI. p. 393.

IN consequence of this abolition of the fiftb, and ome subsequent
abatements of price, which became necessary on account of the in-
creasing expence of working mines, quicksilver, which was formerly
fold at eighty pesos the quintal, is now delivered by the king at the
rate of sixty pesos. Campomanes Educ. Popul. ii. 32. Note. The
duty on gold is reduced to a twentieth, or five per cent.

N O T E XCII. p. 395.

M A N Y remarkable proofs occur of the advanced state of industry
in Spain, at the beginning of the sixteenth century. The number of
cities in Spain was considerable, and they were peopled far beyond
the proportion that was common in other parts of Europe. The causes
of this I have explained, Hist. of Cha. V. i. 158. Wherever cities are
populous, that species of induflry which is peculiar to them increases,
artificers and manufacturers abound. The effect of the American

trade
5:S3

trade in giving activity to these is manifelt from a singular fa&. In
the year 1545, while Spain continued to depend on its own industry,
for the supply of its colonies, so much work was befpole from the ma-
nufaturers, that it was supposed they could hardly finifl it in less than
fix years. Campom. i. 406. Such a demand muff have put much
industry in motion, and have excited extraordinary efforts. Accord-
ingly, we are informed, that in the beginning of Philip II's reign,
the city of Seville alone, where the trade with America centered, gave
employment to no fewer than i6,ooo looms in silk or woollen work,
and that above I30,000 persons had occupation in carrying on these
manufactures. Campom. ii. 472. But so rapid and pernicious was
the operation of the causes which I shall enumerate, that before
Philip III. ended his reign, the looms in Seville were reduced to 400.
Uztariz, c. 7.

N O T E XCIII. p. 402.

No bale of goods is ever opened, no chest of treasure is examined.
Both are received on the credit of the persons to whom they be-
long; and only one inflance of fraud is recorded, during the long pe-
riod in which trade was carried on with this liberal confidence. All
the coined silver which was brought from. Peru to Porto-bello in the
year 1654, was found to be adulterated, and to be mingled with a fifth
part of base metal. The Spanish merchants, with their usual integrity,
furtained the whole loss, and indemnified the foreigners, by whom they
were employed. The fraud was detected, and the treasurer of the re-
venue in Peru, the author of it, was publicly burnt. B. Ulloa Reta.
blif. de Manus. &c. b. ii. p. io2.

N O T E XCIV. p. 406.

M A N Y striking proofs occur of the scarcity of money in Spain
Of all the immense fums which have been imported from America,
the amount of which I shall afterwards have occasion to mention, Mon.

cada.

5o9

cada asserts, that there did not remain in Spain, in 1619, above two
hundred millions of pesos, one half in coined money, the other in plate
and jewels. Reftaur. de Efpagna, Disc. iii. c. i. Uztariz, who
published his valuable work in 1724, contends, that in money, plate,
and jewels, there did not remain a hundred millions. Theor. &c. c. 3.
Campoinanes, on the authority of a remonstrance from the university of
Toledo to Philip III. relates, as a certain proof how scarce cash had be-
come, that persons who lent money, received a third part of the fum
which they advanced, as interest and premium. Educ. popul. i. 417.

N O T E XCV. p. 409.

r H E account of the mode in which the fa&ors of the South Sea
Company conducted the trade in the fair of Porto-bello, which was
opened to them by the Affiento, I have taken 'from Don Alcedo y
Herrera, president of the court of Audience in Quito, and governor of
that province. Great credit is due to his testimony, as he was an eye-
witness of the tranfaEions which he relates, and often employed in de-
teEing and authenticating the frauds which he describes. It is proba-
ble, however, that his representation being composed at the commence-
ment of the war which broke out between Great Britain and Spain, in
the year 739, may, in some nftances, be exaggerated. His detail of
faEts is curious; and even Englifl authors confirm it in some degree,
by admitting both that various frauds were praftifed in the tranfafions
of the annual hip, and that the contraband trade from Jamaica, and
other Britiflh colonies, was become enormously great. But for the cre-
dit of the English nation it may be observed, that those fraudulent
operations are not to be confidered as deeds of the Company, but as
the diflonourable arts of their fators and agents. The Company it-
self sustained a considerable loss by the Alfiento trade. Many of its
servants acquired immenfc fortunes. Anderson. Chronol. deduct.
ii. 388.

NOTE
510t

N O T E XCVI. p. 414.

S E V E R A L sass, with refpec to the inflitution, the progress, and
the effeEts, of this company, are curious, and but little known to English
readers. Though the province of Venezuela, or Caraccas, extends four
hundred miles along the coast, and is one of the most fertile in Ame-
rica; it was so much neglected by the Spaniards, that, during the twenty
years prior to the eftabliflment of the company, only five ships failed
from Spain to that province; and during sixteen years, from 1706 to
1722, not a single ship arrived from the Caraccas in Spain. Noticias de
Real Compania de Caraccas, p. 28. During this period Spain must
have been supplied almost entirely with the large quantity of cocoa,
which it consumes, by foreigners. Before the erecion of the company,
neither tobacco nor hides were imported from Caraccas into Spain.
Id. p. I 17. But since the commercial operations of the company be-
gan in the year 1731 the importation of cocoa into Spain has increased
amazingly. During thirty years subsequent to 1701, the number of
fanegas of cocoa (each a hundred and ten pounds) imported from Ca-
raccas, was 643,215. During eighteen years subsequent to 1731, the
number of fanegas imported was 869,247; and if we suppose the im-
portation to be continued in the fame proportion during the remainder
of thirty years, it will amount to 1,448,746 fanegas, which is an
increase of 805,531 fanegas. Id. p. 148. During eight years fubfe-
quent to 1756, there has been imported into Spain by the Company
88,48z arrobas (each twenty-five pound) of tobacco; and hides to the
number of 177,354. Id. 61i. Since the publication of the Noticias de
Campania, in 1765, its trade seems to be on the increase. Iuring five
years subsequent to 1769, it has imported 179,156 fancgas of cocoa
into Spain, 36,2o8 arrobas of tobacco, 75,496 hides, and 221,432
pesos in specie. Campomancs, ii. 62. The last article is a proof of
the growing wealth of the colony. It receives cafli from Mexico ii
return for the cocoa, with which it supplies that province, and this ii.

VOL. II. 3 T rem1its,

511

remits to Spain, or lays out in purchasing European goods. But be-
fides this, the noft explicit evidence is produced, that the quantity of
cocoa raised in the province is double to what it yielded in 1731 ; the
number of its live-stock is more than treble, and its inhabitants much
augmented. The revenue of the bishop, which arises wholly from
tythes, has increased from eight to twenty thousand pesos. Notic. p.
69. In consequence of the augmentation of the quantity of cocoa
imported into Spain, its price has decreased from eighty pesos for the
fanega to forty. Id. 6.

N O T E XCVII. p. 49.

T H I S first experiment made by Spain of opening a free trade with
any of her colonies, has produced effects so remarkable, as to merit
some farther illustration. The towns to which this liberty has been
granted, are Cadiz and Seville, for the province of Andalusia; Alicant
and Carthagena, for Valencia and Murcia; Barcelona, for Catalonia
and Arragon; Santander, for Castile; Corugna, for Galicia; and
Gijon, for Asturias. Append. ii. a la Educ. popul. p. 41. These are
either the ports of chief trade in their refpetive diftrics, or those most
conveniently situated for the exportation of their refpetive produc-
tions. The following fads give a view of the increase of trade in the
settlements to which the new regulations extend. Prior to the allow-
ance of free trade, the duties colleced in the custom-house at the Ha-
vanna were computed to be 104,208 pesos annually. During the five
years preceding 1774 they rose t a medium to 308,000 pesos a year.
In Yucatan, the duties have risen from 8,000 to 15,ooo. In Hispaniola
from 2,5oo to 5,600. In Porto Rico from ,200 to 7,000. The
total value of goods imported from Cuba into Spain, was reckoned, in
1774, to be 1,5oo,ooo pesos. Educ. Popul. i. 450, &c.

NOTE

N O T E XCVIII. p. 424.

T H E two Treatifcs of Don Pedro Rodriguez Campomancs, Ffca!
del real conjo y Supremo (an office in rank and power nearly similar to
that of Attorney General in England), and Dirctor of the Royal Aca-
demy of History, the one intitled, Difcurfo fobre cl Fomento de la In-
duftria Popular; the other Difcurfo fobre la Educacion Popular de
los Artefanos y fu Fommnto; the former publifled in 1774, and the
latter in 1775, afford a striking proof of this. AlmofI every point of
importance with refped to interior police, taxation, agriculture, ma-
nufacares, and trade, domestic as well as foreign, is examined in the
course of tefe works; and there are not many authors, even in the
nations most eminent for commercial knowledge, who have carried on
their inquiries with more thorough knowledge of those various sub-
jets, and a more perfet freedom from vulgar and national prejudices,
or who have united more happily the calm researches of philosophy,
with the ardent zeal of a public spirited citizen. These books are in
high estimation among the Spaniards; and it is a decisive evidence of
the progress of their own ideas, that they are capable of rclifhling an
author whose sentiments are so liberal.

NOTE XCIX. p. 428.

T HE galeon employed in that trade, instead of the fix hundred
tons, to which it is limited by law, lecop. lib. xlv. 1. 5. is commonly
from twelve hundred to two thousand tons burden. The flip from
Acapulco, taken by Lord Anson, inflead of the 500,000 pesos permit-
ted by law, had on board 1,313,843 pesos, besides uncoincd fiver equal
in value to 43,611 pesos more. Anson's Voyage, 384.

NOTE

5i
3 ?,

NOTE C. p. 430.

T H E price paid for the bull varies according to the rank of differ-
ent persons. Those in the lowest order, who are servants or slaves,
pay two reals of plate, or one flilling; other Spaniards pay eight reals
and those in public office, or who hold encomiendas, sixteen reals.
Solorz. de jure Ind. vol. ii. lib. iii. c. 25. According to Chilton, an
English merchant who resided long in the Spanilh settlements, the bull
of Cruzado, bore an higher price in the year 57o, being then fold for
four reals at the loweRl. Hakluyt, iii. 461. The price seems to have
varied at different periods. That exaced for the bulls issued in the
last Predicacion, will appear from the ensuing table, which will give
some idea of the proportional numbers of the different classes of citi.
zens in New Spain and Peru.

There were issued for New Spain,

o pesos each
2 pesos each
i peso each
2 reals each

4

22,60
I64,220
- 2,462,500

2,649,325

For Peru,

at 16 pesos 4 - reals each
at 3 pesos, 3 reals each
at I peso, 5 reals
at 4 reals
at 3 reals

b-
. 14,202

78,822
410,325
668,6oi
1,171,953

NOTE

I
514

Bulls at

at

at
at

NOTE CI. p. 431.

A Villa Segnor, to whom we are indebted for this information,
was accomptant-general in one of the most considerable departments
of the royal revenue, and by that means had access to proper
information, his teflimony with refped to this point merits great cre-
dit. No such accurate detail of the Spanilh revenues, in any part of
America, has hitherto been published in the Engliflh language, and
the particulars of it may appear curious and interesting to some of my
readers.

FROM the bull of Cruzada, published every two years, there arises an
annual revenue in pesos

From the duty on silver
From ditto on gold
From tax on cards
From tax on Pulque, a drink used by the Indians
From tax on stamped paper
From ditto on ice -

From ditto on leather - - -
From ditto on gunpowder

From tax on salt - - -
From ditto on copper of Mechocan

From ditto on alum - -
From ditto on Juego de los Gallos
From the half of ecclesiastical annats
From royal ninth of bishoprics, &c.
From the tribute of Indians
From Alcavala, or duty on sale of goods
From the Almajorifafgo, custom-house
From the mint

150,000
700,000
6o,ooo
70,000
- 161,ooo

I61,000

41,000

5,522
2,500
71,550
32,000

1,000
6,500
21,100

49,000
68,800
650,000
72I,875
373,333
357,500
3,552,680

'rg
i

515

THIS fum amounts to 819,I6I1. Sterling, and if we add to it the

profit accruing from the sale of 5000 quintals of quicksilver, im-
ported from the mines of Almaden, in Spain, on the king's ac-
count, and what accrues from the Averia, and some other taxes
which Villa Segnor does not estimate, may well be reckoned above a
million pounds flerling money. Theat. Mex. vol i. p. 38, &c. Ac-
ccrding to Villa Segnor, the total produce of the Mexican mines,
amounts at a medium to eight millions of pesos in silver annually,
and to 5912 marks of gold. Ib. p. 44. Several branches of the re-
venue have been explained in the course of the history; some, which
there was no occasion of mentioning, require a particular illAffration.
The right to the tythcs in the New World is vested in the crown of
Spain, by a bull of Alexander VI. Charles V. appointed them to be
applied in the following manner : One-fourth is allotted to the bishop
of the diocese, another fourth to the dean and chapter, and other
officers of the cathedral ; the remaining half is divided into nine equal
parts. Two of these, under the denomination of los dos novenos reales,
are paid to the crown, and constitute a branch of the -royal revenue.
The other seven parts are applied to the maintainance of the parochial
clergy, the building and support of churches, and other pious uses.
Recopil. lib. i. tit. xvi. Ley. 23, &c. Avendano Tefaur. ndic.
vol. i. p. 184.

THE Alcavala, is a duty levied by an excise on the Tale of goods. In

Spain it amounts to ten per cent. In America to four per cent.
Solorzano Polit. Indiana, lib. vi. c. 8. Avendano, vol. i. 86.

TiE Alzmajorifafgo, or custom paid in America on goods imported

end exported, may amount on an average to fifteen per cent. Rocopil.
}ib. viii. tit. xiv. Ley. . Avendano, vol. i. 88.

THE Averia, or tax paid on account of convoys to guard the shipS

Tailing to and from America, was first imposed when Sir Francis Drake
iled te New World with terror by his expedition into the South Sea.

It
516

It amounts to 2 per cent. on the value of goods. Avindano, vol. i.
p. 189. Recopil. lib. ix. tit. ix. Ley. 43, 44.

I HAVE not been able to procure any accurate detail of the several

branches of revenue in Peru, later than the year 614. From a curi-
ous manuscript, containing a state of that vice-royalty in all its depart-
ments, presented to the Marquis of Montes-Claros, by Fran. Lopcz
Caravantes, accomptant-general in the tribunal of Lima, it appears,
that the public revenue, as nearly as I can compute the value of the
money in which Caravantes states his accounts, that the revenue col-
leted, amounted in ducats, at 4s. 1 1 d. to - 2,372,768

Expences of government - - 1,242,992

Net free revenue 1,129,776

The total in sterling money - - 583,303
Expences of government - 305,568

Net free revenue 277,735

BUT several articles appear to be omitted in this computation, such

as the duty on stamped paper, leather, ecclesiastical annats, &c. so
that the revenue of Peru may be well supposed equal to that of
Mexico.

IN computing the expence of government in New Spain, I may

take that of Peru as a flandard. There the annual eftabliflment for
defraying the charge of adiniftration, exceeds one half of tle
revenue collected; and there is no reason for supposing it to be less in
New Spain.

I HAVE obtained a calculation of the total amount of the public
revenue of Spain from America and the Philippines, which, as the

reader

517

reader will perceive from the two last articles, is more recent than any
of the former.

Alcavalas (Excise) and Aduanas pesos fuertes

(Customs), &c. . -2,500,000

Duties on gold and silver - - 3,000,000
Duty on coinage of, at the rate of one real de la Plata

for each mark 300,000

Bull of Cruzada - - - - ,ooo,ooo
Tribute of the Indians - - 2,000,000
By sale of quicksilver -300,000
Paper exported on the king's account, and fold in the

royal warehouses - - 300,000

Stamped paper, tobacco, and other small duties 1,000,000
From the trade of Acapulco, and the coasting trade

from province to province - - 500,00

Affiento of negroes - - 200,000
From the trade of Mathe, or herb of Paraguay, for-

merly monopolized by the Jesuits - - 500,000
From other revenues formerly belonging to that order 400,000

Total' 2,000,000

Total in flerling money 2,000,000
Deduce half, as the expence of adminifiration, and

there remains net free revenue - 1,350,000

N O T E CII. p. 43-I.

A N author, long conversant in commercial speculation, has com-
puted that from the mines of New Spain alone, the king receives
annually, as his fifth, the fum of two millions of our money. Harris
Collet. of Voy. ii. p. 64. According to this calculation, the total
produce of the mines must be ten millions flcrling; a fum so exor-

bitant,
518

bitant, and so little corresponding with all accounts of the annual im-
portation from America, that the information on which it is founded
muff evidently be erroneous. According to Caipomanes, the total
produc of the American mines may be computed at thirty millions
of pesos, which, at four flillings and fix pence a peso, amounts to
7,425,000 1. flerling, the king's fifth of which (if that were regularly
paid) would be 1,485,000.. But from this fum the expence of admi-
nifiration is to be deducted, which is very considerable, as appears from
the preceding note. Educ. Popular, vol. ii. p. 13 1. note.

N O T E CIII. p. 431.

A C C O R D IN G to Bern. de Ulloa, all foreign goods exported
from Spain to America pay duties of various kinds, amounting in
all to more than 25 per cent. As most of the goods with which
Spain supplies her colonies are foreign; such a tax upon a trade so cx-
tensive must yield a considerable revenue. Retablif. de Manus. & du
Commerce d'Efp. p. 15o. He computes the value of goods exported
annually from Spain to America, to be about two millions and a half
sterling, p. 97.

NOTE CIV. I. 433.

T H E Marquis de Serralvo, according to Gage, by a monopoly of
salt, and by embarking deeply in the Manilla trade as well as in that to
Spain, gained annually a million of ducats. In one year he remitted a
million of ducats to Spain, in order to purchase firom the Conde Olivares,
and his creatures, a prolongation of his govcrnment, p. 61. lie was
successful in his suit, and continued in office from 6'4 to 1635, dou.
ble the usual time.

s I 0 t '1

519
VOL. II.

3 U

# SHORT ACCOUNT OF What is contained in the LETTER sent to the EMPEROR, mentioned PREFACE, p. xi.

SHORT ACCOUNT

F
What is contained in the LETTER fcnt to the

EMPEROR, mentioned PREFACE, p. xi.

T HIS letter is dated July 6th, i519. Cortes, in his second
dispatch, takes notice that it was sent off on the 6th of July.

THE great objec of the persons who wrote this letter, is to

justify their own conduct in eltablifhing a colony independent on
the jurifdiaion of Velasquez. With this view they endeavour
to detrat from his merit, in fitting out the two former arma-
ments under Cordova and Grijalva, representing these as equipped
by the adventurers who engaged in the expedition, not by the
governor. They labour likewise to depreciate the services of
Cordova and Grijalva, in order to exalt the merit of their own ex-
ploits.

THEY contend, that the sole objeE of Velasquez was to trade or

barter with the natives, not to attempt the conquest of New Spain, or
the eftablifliment of a colony there. This is frequently mentioned by
B. Diaz del Castillo, c. 19. 41, 42, &c. But if Velaflucez had not
conquest and settlement in view, there seems to have been n!: reaiObn
for equipping such a considerable armain':nt.

T-Ie.y assert, that Cortes defiayed tlh greatefl part of the c:lcn;:

of fitting out the armament. But this does not agree witli tlhe aC(c ou';I
of his flendcr fortune given by Gomiara, Cron. c. 7. and B. Diaz, c.
20, or what I have mentioned Note iii. vol. ii.

U 2 'Ti!, v

THEY take notice, that though considerable numbers were wounded

in their different encounters with the people of Tabasco, not one of
them died, and all recovered in a short time. This seems to confirm
what I have observed, vol. ii. p. 39, concerning the imperfection of the
offensive weapons of the Americans.

THEY give some account of the manners and institutions of the

Mexicans. It is very short, and as they had resided but a short time
in the country, and had but little intercourse with the natives, it is
both defctive and inaccurate. They describe minutely, and with
great horror, the human sacrifices offered by the Mexicans to their
deities, and affirm that some of their number were eye-witnesses of
those barbarous rites.

THEY subjoin to their letter a catalogue and description of the

presents sent to the emperor. That published by Gomara, Cron. c.
29. seems to have been copied from it, and Pet. Martyr describes
many of the articles in his treatise De Infulis nuper inventis, p.
354, &c.

A CATALOGUE
22

# A CATALOGUE OF SPANISH Books and Manuscripts.

A
CATALOGUE

O F
S P A N I S H Books and Manuscripts.

A
ACARETE de Biscay, Relation des Voyages dans la Riviere de la Plata,

& dela par Terre au Perou. Exftat. Recueil de Thevenot, Part. IV.

A Voyage up the River de la Plata, and thence by Land to
Peru, 8vo. London, 1698.

Acotla (Joseph de) Hiftoire Naturelle & Moral des Indes tant Orientales qu'
Occidentales, 8vo. Paris, 1600.

Novi Orbis Hifloria Naturalis & Moralis. Exfl. in Collect.
Theod. de Bry, Pars IX.

De Natura Novi Orbis, Libri duo, & de procuranda Indorum
Salute, Libri ex, Salmant. 8vo. 1589.

- (Chriftov.) Tratado de las Drogas y Medecinas de las Indias
Occidentales, con sus Plantas Dibuxadas al vivo, 4to. Burgos, I578.

Acugna (P. Chrifloph.) Relation de la Riviere des Amazones, I2mo. Tom.
ii. Paris, 1682.

---- - A Relation of thc great River of the Amazons, in Sotl:h
America, 8vo. Lond. 1698.

Alarchon (Fern.) Navigatione a Scoprerc il Rcgno di fette Citta. Ramullo,
111. 363.

Albuquerque Coello (Duarte de) Memorial de Artcs de la Guerra del Brasil,
4to. Mad. 1634.

Alcnfaradlo

Alcafarado (Franc.) An Historical Relation of the Discovery of the Isle of
Madeira, 4to. Lond. 1675.

Alcedo y Herrera (D. Dionyfio de) Avifo Hiftorico-Politico-Geografico, con

las Noticias mas particulares, del Peru, Tierra Firme, Chili, y nuevo Reyno
dc Granada, 4to. Mad. 1740.

Compendio Hiflorico de la Provincia y Puerto de Guayaquil, 4to.
.Mad. 1741.

Ald.ima y Gucvara (D. Jos. Augurtin de) Arte de la Lengua Mexicana,

t2Imo. .Mexico, 754.

Alvarado (Pedro de) dos Relaciones a Hern. Cortes Referiendole sus Ex-

pediciones y Conquiflas en varias Provincias de N. Efpagna. Exfl. Barcia His-
turiad. Primit. tom. i.

Lcttere due, &c. Exft. Ramus. III. 296.

Aranzeles Reales de los Minftros de la Real Audiencia de N. Efpagna, fol.
Mlexico, 1727.

Argenfola (Bartolome Leonardo de) Conquifta de las Iflas Malucas, fol.
Mad. 1609.

Anales de Aragon, fol. Saragofs, 1630.

Arriago (P. Pablo Jos. de) Extirpacion de la Idolatria del Peru, 4to. Lima,
I621.

Avendagno (Didac.) Thesaurus Indicus ceu generalis InftruEtor pro Regimine
Confcientie, in is ifquae ad Indias fpeEtant, fol. 2 vols. Antwerp, 1660.

B

Barcia (D. And. Gonzal.) Hiftoriadores Primitivos de las Indias Occidentales,
fol. 3 vols. Mad. 1749.

Barco-Centincra (D. Martin di) Argentina y Conquifta del Rio de la Plata
Poema. Exfl. Barcia Hiftoriad. Primit. III.

Barros (Joao dc) Decadcs dc Asia, fol. 4 vols. Lifboa, 1628.
Bcllcftcros (D. Thomas de) Oidenan,,as del Peru, fol. 2 vols. Lima, 685.
Bcnzo (Hicron.) Novi Orbis Iiftoriac-De Bry America, Part IV, V, VI.
Betancurt y I'igucroa(Don Luis) Dcrccho de las Iglcfias M/etro Politanas de
laslndias, t40oM. Mad. 637.

Blanco (F. Matias Rui7.) Convcrfion de Piritu de Indios Cumanagotos y otros,
I2mo. Mad. 690.

Boturini Benaduci (Loren7.o) Idea de una nueva I-ifloria general dc la Ame-

rica Septentrional, fundada fobre material copiofa dti l;'igurs, Symnbolas Ca-
racercs, Cantares y MIanufcritos dt Autorc Idius, 4to. Mad. i ;-6.

Botello
,24

Botello de Moraes y Vafconccllos (D. Francisco de) El Nuevo Mundo Poema
Heroyco, 4to. Barcelona, 1701.

Botero Benes (Juan) Description de Todas las Provincias, Reynos, y Ciu-
dades dcl Mundo, 40o. Girona, 1748.

Brietius (Phil.) Paralela Geographix Vcteris & Novc, 4o. Paris, 1648.

C

Cabeza de Baca (Alvar Nugnez) Relacion de los Naufiagio. Exfl. Barcia
Hifl. Prim. Tom. i.

- Examen Apologetico dc la Iifloiica Narration d los Nan-
fragios. Exft. ibid.

-------- Commentarios de lo fuccedido duarante fu gubierno del Rio de
la Plata. Exft. ibid.

Cabo de Vacca Rclatione de. Exft. Ramufio, III. 31o.
Cabota (Sebaft.) Navigazione de. Exft. Ramus. II. 211.
Calancha (F. Anton. de la) Cronica moralizada del Order de San Auguftin en
dl Peru, fol. Barcelona, 1638.

California-Diario lHiiorico de los Viages de Mar y Tierra hechos en 1768,

al Norte de California, di orden del Marques de Croix, Vi-rey de Nueva Es-
pagna, &c. MS.

Calle (Juan Diaz, de la) Memorial Informatorio de lo que a fu Mageflad
Provicn de la Nueva Efpagna y Peru, 4to. 1645.

Caracas-Real Ccdula de Fundacion de la real Compagnia Guipuftoana dc
Caracas, I2mno. Mad. 1765.

Caravantes (Fr. Lopc1.z de) Rclacion de las Provincias cue ticnc el Govierno

del Peru, los Oicios que cn el fe Provien, y la Hacienda que alli ticne fu Ma-
ceflad, lo quc e Gafa de ella y le queda Libre, &c. &c. Dedicado al Marques
de Santos Claros, Agno. dc 1611. MS.

Caidenas y Cano (Gabr.) Enfaiyo Cronologico par la l-iloria general dc la
Florida, fol. Mad. 1733.

Caro de Torres (Franc.) Iifloria de las Ordcnec Militarcs de Sant lago, Cala.

ralva y Alcantara, fol. Maid. 1629.

Carranzn.ana (D. Gonc;lcs) A Geographlical Description of the Coafls, &c.
of hle Spanifli Weft-Indies, 8vo. ILond. 1740.

Casas (BaI. de las) lBrcvilfim:L Relacion de la Dcfllruycion de las Indias,
4to. 1 55'.

- Narralio Iconil)Lis llitlrinata per T'hcod. dc Bry. 40t. Oppclcnt. 16i.

]------ arl. 1'd lAi) An AcconI of the firsi VoyVa;geI') ;d DilcCvecrics of
the Spanillrds in Aricrii.ac, S vo. ILond. I(Tsj

C.,sir~in

Caflani (P. Joseph) Hifloria de la Provincia de Compagnia de Jesus del
Nuevo Revno de Granada, fol. Mad. 1741.

Caftanheda (Fern. Lop. de) Hiftoria do Defcobrimento & Conquitla de India
pelos Portugueses, fol. 2 vols. Lifboa, 1552.

Caftellanos (Juan de) Primera Parte de las Elegias de Varones Illuftres de
Indias, 4to. Mad. 1589.

Castillo (Bernal Diaz del) Hiftoria Verdadera de la Conquiffa de Nueva Es-
pagna, fol. Mad. 1632.

Cavallero (D. Jos. Garcia) Brieve Cotejo y Valance de las pefas y Medidas
di varias Naciones, reducidas a las que Corren en Castilla, 4to. Mad. 1731.

Cieca de Leon (Pedro de) Cronica del Peru, fol. Sevill. 1 553.
Cifneros (Diego) Sitio, Naturelcza y Propriedades de la Ciudad de Mexico,
4to. Mexico, 1618.

Cogullado (P. Fr. Diego Lopez) Hiftoria de Yucatan, fol. Mad. 688.
Collecao dos Brives Pontificos e Leyes Regias que forao Expedidos y Publi-

cadas defdc o Anno 1741, fobre a Liberdada des Peffoas bene e Commercio
dos Indos de Brcfil.

Coleccion General de las Providencias hafta aqui tomadas per el Gobierno fobre

el Eftragnimento, y Occupacion de Temporalidades de los Regulares de la
Compagnia, de Efpagna, Indias, &c. Partes IV. 4to. Mad. 1767.

Colon (D. Fernando) La Hiftoria del Almirante, D. Chrifloval Colon.
Exft. Barcia Hilt. Prim. I. .

Columbus (Christ.) Navigatio qua multas Regiones hatenus incognitas in-
venit. Exit. Nov. Orb. Grynaei, p. 90.

---- - (Ferd.) Life and A&ions of his Father Admiral Chrilloph. Co-
lumbus. Exlt. Churchill's Voyages, II. 479.

Concilios Provinciales Primero y Segundo celebrados en la muy Noble y muy
de la Ciudad de Mexico en los Agnos de 555 & 565. fol. Mexico, 1769.

Concilium Mexicanum Provinciale tertium celebratum Mexici, Anno 1 585,
fol. Mexici. 1770.

Corita (Dr. Alonzo) Breve y fumaria Relacion de los Segnores, mancra y

Differencia de ellos, quc havia en la Nueva Efpagna, y otras Provincias fius
Comarcanas, y de sus Leyes, Ufos y Coflumbres, y de la Forma quc tcnian cn
Tributas sus Vafallos en Tiempo de fu Gentilidad, &c. MS 4to. pp. 307.

Coronada (Fr. Vafq. de) Sommario di due fuc Lctterc del Viaggio fatto dcl
Fra Marco da Niz.a al fctte Citta de Cevola. Exit. Ramufio I11. 354.

- Relation del Viaggio alle fette Citta. Ramufio 11l. 3S9.

Cortes (Hern.) Quattro Cartas dirigidas al Emperadlor Carlos V. en quc lh.

Rzl;acion de sus Conquiflas cn la Nueva Efpagna. Exfl. Barcia I 1ilt. I':iin.
ton. i.

Cortcfii (Ferd.) Dc infulis nuper inventis Narrationcs ad Carolurn V. fol. 15 .2.

C(>nt cl
526

Cortefe (Fern.) Relationi, &c. Exif. Ramufio III. 225.
Cubero (D. Pedro) Peregrinacion del Mayor Pane del Mundo Zaragoff.
4to. 1688.

D

Davila PadiHa (F. Aug.) Hifloria de la Fundacion y Difcurfo de Provincl.i
de St. Jago de Mexico, fol. Brufs. 1625.

---- - (Gil. Gonzalez) Teatro Ecclefiaftico de la Primitiva Iglefia de
las Indias Occidentales, fol. 2 vols. 1649.

Documentos tocantes a la Perfecucion, que los Regulares de la Compagnia
fucitaron contra Don B.de Cardenas Obifpo de Paraguay, 4to. Mad. 1768.

E

Echavari (D. Bernardo Ibagnez de) El Reyno Jefuitico del Paraguay. Exfc.
tom. iv. Colleccion de Documentos, 4to. Mad. 1770.

Echave y Affu (D. Francisco de) La Eftrella de Lima convertida en Sol fobre
sus tres Coronas, fol. Amberes, 688.

Eguira el Egueren (D. Jo. Jos.) Bibliotheca Mexicana, five Eruditorum

Hiftoria Virorum in America Boreali natorum, &c. tor. Prim. fol. Mex. 1755-
N. B. No more than one volume of this work has been published.

Ercilla y Zuniga (D. Alonzo de) La Araucana Poema Eroico, fol. Mad.
1733.

Efcalona (D. Gaspar de) Gazophylacium Regium Peru-Vicum, fol. Mad.
1775.

F
Faria y Sousa (Manuel de) Hiftoria del Reyno de Portugal, fol. Amber. 1730

-- History of Portugal from the firif Ages to the Revolution under
John IV. 8vo. Lond. 1698.

Fernandez (Diego) Hiftoria del Peru, fol. Sevill. 1571.

(P. Juan Patr.) Relacion Hiflorial dc las Missiones de los Indios
que Claman Chiquitos, 4to. Mad. 1726.

Feyjoo (Benit. Geron) Espagnoles Americanos-Difcurfo VI. del tom. iv.
del Teatro Critico. Mad. 1769.

Solucion dcl gran Problema Hi-Torico, fobre la Poblacion de
la America-Difcurfo XV. del torn. v. del Teatro Critico.

- (D. Miguel) Rlacion Dccriptiva de la cuidad ) Provinci de
Truxillo dcl Peru, fol. Mad. 1763.

Freyre (Ant.) Piratas de la Amncrica, 4t0.
Fraffo (D. Pctro) De Regio Patronatu Ir:diarum, ful. vol.s. \I,,i;i, j , <.

Vol.. I1. 3 X (;l vao

527

G

Galvao (Antonio) Tratado dos Defcobrimentos antigos y Modernos, fol.
Lifboa, 1731.

Galvano (Ant.) The Discoveries of the World from the first Original unto
the Year 1555. Osborne's Collec. II. 354.

Garcia (Gregoria) Hifloria Ecclefiafica y Seglar de la India Oriental y Oc-
cidental, y Predicacion de la Santa Evangelia en ella, i2mo. Baeca, 1626.

(Fr. Gregorio) Origen de los Indios del Nuevo Mundo, fol. Mad.
1729.

Godoy (Diego de) Relacion al H. Cortes, que trata del Defcubrimiento de
liverfas Ciudades, y Provincias y Guerras que tuio con los Indios. Exit. Barcia
-lift. Prim. tom, i.

Lettera a Cortefe, &c. Exft. Rarmfio III. 300.
Gomara (Fr. Lopez de) La Hiftoria general de las Indias, 12mo. Any. 1554.

---- - - Hifloria general de las Indias. Exfl. Barcia Hiit. Prim. tom. ii

Chronica de la Nueva Efpagna o Conquifta de Mexico. Exit.
Barcia Hill. Prim. tom. ii.

Gumilla (P. Jos.) Hiftoire Naturelle, Civile & Geographique de l'Orenoque.
Traduite par M. Eidous, izmo. torn. iii. Avign. 758.

Gufman (Nugno de) Relacion fcritta in Omitlan Provincia de Mechuacan
dclla maggior Spagna nell 1530. Exft. Ramufio III. 33i.

H

Henis (P. Thadeus) Ephemerides belli Guaranici, ab Anno 1754. Exft.
Collccion general de Docum. tom. iv.

Hernandes (Fran.) Plantarum, Animalium & Mineralium Mexicanorur
IlIiforia, fol. Rom. 1651.

Herrera (Anton. de) I-ifloria general de los Hechos de los Caltellanos en las
Iflas y Tierra Firma del Mar Oceano, fol. 4 vols. Mad. 16o0.

- Hifloria General, &c. 4 vols. Mad. 1730.
General History, &c. Translated by Stephens, 8vo. 6 vol. Lond. 1740..
--- Dcfcriptio India Occidentalis, fol. Amll. 1622.

L

Lcon (Fr. Ruiz. dc) Hcrnandia Poema Heroyco de Conquifla de Mexico,
4to. Mad. 1755.

- (Ant. de) Epitome de la Bibliothcca Oriental y Occidental, Nau-
ti.a y Ccografica, fol. Mad. I 737.

Lima,
528

Lima, A true account of the Earthquake which happened there zSth Oc-
tober 1746. Translated from the Spanilh, 8vo. Lond. 748.

Lima Goi.ofa, Description de las feltibas Dcmonftrcioncs, con quc efla

ciudad Celebro la real Proclamacion de cl Nombre Auguflo dl Catolico Mo-
narcho D. Carlos III. Lima, 4to. 760.
Llano Zapata (D. Jos. Eufeb.) Preliminar al Tomo I. de las Memrorias His-
torico-Phyficas, Critico-Apologeticas de la America Meridional, 8vo. Cadiz.
1759.

Lope7. (Tliom.) Atlas Geographico de la America Septentrional y Meridional,
I2mo. Par. 1758.

Lorenzana (D. Fr. Ant.) Hifloria de Nueva Efpagna, cfcrita por fu Efcla-

recido Conquiflador Hernan Cortes, Aumentada con otros Documentos y
Notas, fol. Mex. 1770.

Lozano (P. Pedro) Description Chorographica, del Terretorios, Arboles,

Animales, del Gran Chaco, y de los ritos y Coflumbres, de las innumerabiles
Naciones que la Habitan, 4to. Cordov. 1733.

------ Hifloria de la Compagnia de Jesus en la Provincia del Paraguay,
fol. 2 vols- Mad. 1753.

M

Madriga (Pedro de) Description de la Gouvernment du Prou. Exit. Voy-
ages qui ont fervi a I'etabliffement de la comp. des Indes, tom. ix. ioS.

Mariana (P. Juan de) Difcurfo de las Enfermcdades de la Compagnia de
Jesus, 4to. Mad. 1768.

Martinez de la Puente (D. Jos.) Compendio de las Hiflorias de los Def-

cubrimientos, Conquiftas y Gucrras de la India Oriental, y sus Iflas, dcfde los
Tiempos del Infante Don Enrique de Portugal fu inventor, 4to. Mad. 681.

Martyr ab Angleria (Petr.) De Rebus Oceanicis & NovoOrbe Decades tres,
I2mo. Colon. 1574.

De Infulis nuper inventis, & de Moribus Incolarum. Ibid. p. 329.
Opus Epilfolarum, fol. Amfl. 1670.

·----- II Sommario cavato della fua Hiltoria del Nucvo Mundo. Ra-
mufio III. i.

Mechuacan-Relacion de las Ceremonias, Ritos y Poblacion de los Indios

de Mechuacan-hecha al I. S. D. Ant. de Mendoza Virrey de Nueva Eflagna,
fol. MS.

Melendez. (Fr. Juan) Teforos Verdadcros de las Indias Hifloria de la Provincia
de S. Juan Baptila dcl Peru, del Orden de Predicadores, fol. 3 vols. Rorn. 168 1.

3 X 2 Mcndoza

529

Mendozar (D. Ant. de) Lettera al Imperatore del Difcoprimento della Terra
Firma della N. Spagna verso Tramontano. Exft. Ramufio III. 355.

--- -- (Juan Gonz. de) Hiftoria del gran Reyno de China con un Itine-
rario del Nuevo Mundo, 8vo. Rom. 585.

Monardes (El Dottor) Primera y Segunda y Tercer Parte de la Hiftoria

Medicinal, de las Cosas que fe traen de nueftras Indias Occidentales, que
firven en Medecina, 4to. Sevilla I574.

Moncada (Sancho de) Reftauracion Politica de Efpagna y dcfcos Publicos,
410to. Mad. 1746.

N

Nizz.a (F Marco) Relatione del Viaggio fatta per Terra al Cevole, Regno
di cette Citta. Exft. Ramus. III. 356.

Nodal-Relacion del Viage que hicieron los Capitanes Barth. y Gornz. de

Nodal al defcubrimiento del Eftrecho que hoy es nombrado de Maire, y re-
conocimiento del de Magellanes, 4t0. Mad.

Nueva Efpagna-Hiftoria de los Indios de Nueva Efpagna dibidida en tres

Partes. ]Fn la primera trata de los Ritos, Sacrificios y Idolatrias del Tiempo
de fu Gentilidad. En la fegunda de fu maravillofa Conversion a la Fe, y modo
de celebrar las Fiestas de Nueftra Santa Iglefia. En la tercera del Genio y
Caracer de aquella Gente; y Figuras con que notaban sus Acontecimientos,
con otras particularidades; y Noticias de las principales Ciudades en aquel
Reyno. Efcrita en el Agno 1541 por uno de los doce Religiofos Franciscos que
primero Paflaron a entender en fu Conversion, MS. fol. pp. 618.

0

Ogna (Pcdro de) Arauco Domado. Poema, 2mo. Mad. 16o5.
Ordenanzas del Confejo real de las Indias, fol. Mad. 1681.
Ortega (D. Cafimiro de) Refumen Hiftorico del primer Viage hecho al re-
dedor del Mundo, 4to. Mad. 1769.

Offorio (Jerome) Hiflory of the Portuguese, during the Reign of Emmanuel,
8vo. 2 vols. Lond. 1752.

OfTorius (Hieron.) De rebus Emmanuelis Lufitanixa Regis, 8vo. Col. Agr.
1572.

Ovalle (Alonfo) Hiflorical Relacion del Reyno de Chili, fol. Rom. 1646.
.-... An liflorica Relation of the Kingdom of Chili. Exft. Churchill
Collea. III. .

Oviedo y Bagnos (D. Jos.) Hiftoria la Conquifta y Publacion de Venezuela,
fol. Mad. 1723.

Ovicilo

Oviedo (Alonfo) Sommaria, &c. Exff. Ramufio III. 44.
Oviedo (Gonz.. Fern. de) Relacion Sommaria de la Hiftoria Natural de las
Indias. Exfl. Barcia Hist. Prim. torn. i.

Oviedo HiRforia Gencrale & Naturale dell Indie Occidentale. Exft. Ra-
mufio. III. 74.

-Relatione della Navigatione per la Grandiffima Flume Maragnon.
Exft. Ramus. III. 415

P

Palafox y Mendoza (D. Juan) Virtudes del Indios o Naturaliza y Cos-
tumbres dc los Indios de N. Efpagna, 4to.

----Vie de Venerable Dom. Jean Palafox Eveque de l'Angelopolis,
i2mo. Cologe, 1772.

Pegna (Juan Nugnez de la) Conquifta y Antiguedades de las Iflas de Gran
Canaria, 4to. Mad. 1676.

Pena Montenegro (D. Alonfo de la) Itinerario para Parochos de Indios, en

que tratan las materias mas particulares, tocantes a ellos para fu buen adminif-
tracion, 4to. Amberes, 1754.

Peralta Barnuevo (D. Pedro de) Lima fundada o Conquifta del Peru Poema
Eroyco, 4to. Lima, 1732.

Peralta Calderon (D. Mathias de) El ApofRol de las Indias y nueves gentt:c

San Francisco Xavier de la Compagnia de efus Epitome de sus Apofftolicos
hechos, 4to. Pamp. 1665.

Pereira de Berrido (Bernard.) Annaes Hifloricos do eftado do Maranchao,
fol. Lifboa, 1749.

Peru-Relatione d'un Capitano Spagnuolo del Defcoprinento y Conquifla del
Peru. Exft. Ramus. III. 37I.

Peru-Relatione d'un Secretario de Franc. Pizzarro della Conquefla del Peru,
Exit. Ramufio III. 392.

----- Relacion del Peru, MS.

Pcfquifa de los Oydores de Panama contra D. Jayme Mugnos, &c. poi havclli,
Commerciado illicitamente en tiempo de Guerra, fol. 1755.

Philipinas-Carta que escribe un Religiofo antiguo de Philipinan, a un

Amigo su)o en Efpagna, que le pregunta el Naturel y Genio de los Indios Na-
turales de Eftas Iflas. MS. 4to.

Piedrahina (Luc. Fern.) Hiftoria general de las Conquiltas del Nuevo Reyno
de Granada, fol. Amlbres.

Pinelo (Ant. de Lcon) Epitome de la Bibliotheca Oriental y Occidental cn

que fe conticnen los Efcritorcs, dc ls Indias Orientalcs y Occidcntnles. fil.
2 vols. Mad. 1737.

Pin.oninlr

53j

Pinzonusoius focius Admirantis Columbi-Navigatio & res per cum reperta.
Exft. Nov. Orb. Grynaei, p. 119.

Pizarro y Orellana (D. Fern.) Varones illuflrcs del N. Mundo, fol. Mad.
1639.

Puente (D. Jos. Martinez de la) Compendio de las Hiftorias de los Def-
cubrirnientos de la India Oriental y sus Ias, 4to. Mad. i681.

Q

Quir (Ferd. de) Terra Aufiralis Incognita, or a new Southern Discovery,
containing a fifth Part of the World lately found out, 4to. Iond. 1617.

R

Real Compagnia Guipu7coana de Caracas, Noticias hiftoriales Praficas, de

lus Succcffos y Adelantamientos de efta Compagnia defde fu Fundacion en 1728
hafta 1764, 4to. 1765.

Recopilacion de Leyes de los Reynos de las Indias, fol. 4 vols. Mad. 1756.
Relatione d'un Gentilhuomo del Sig. Fern. Cortefe della gran Citta Temif-
tatan, Mexico, & delle altre cofe della Nova Spagna. Exft. Ramus. III. 304.

Remefal (Fr. Ant.) Hiftoria general de las Indias Occidentales y particular
de la Governacion de Chiapa y Guatimala, fol. Mad. 620.

Ribadeneyra (D. Diego Portichuelo de) Relacion del Viage defde que falio de
Lima, hafta que Ilego a Efpagna, 4t0. Mad. 1657.

Ribandeneyra y Barrientos (D. Ant. Joach.) Manuel Compendio de el Regio
Patronato Indiano, fol. Mad. 1755.

Ribas (Andr. Perez de) Hiltoria de les Triumphos de Nueftra Sta Fe, entre
Gentes las mas Barbaras, en las mifliones de Nueva Efpagna, fol. Mad. 1645.

Riol (D. Santiago) Reprefentacion a Philipe V. fobre el eLtado actual de los
Papeles universales de la Monarchia, MS.

Rocha Pitta (Sebaftiano de) Hiftoria da America Portougueza des de o Anno
de 5o de fu Defcobrimento ate o de 1724, fol. Lifboa 1730.

Rodriguez (Manuel,) Explicacion de la Bulla de la Santa Cruzada,- 4to.
Alcala, 1589.
---- --. (P. Man.) El Maragnon y Amazonas, Hiftoria de los Defcubri-
mientos, Entradas y Rcducion de Naciones, fol Mad. 1684.

Roman (Hieron.) Republicas del Mundo, fol. 3 vols. Mad. 1595.
Rofendc (P. Ant. Gonz. de) Vida del Juan de Palafox Arzobifpo de Mexico,
fol. Mad. 1671.

Ruii. (P. Ant.) Conquilta Epiritual hecha por los Religiofos de la Com-

pagnia de Jcfus, cn las Provincias dc la Paraguay Uragay, Parana y Tape,
4tu. Mad. 1639.

S Salazar

S

Salazar de Mendoza (D. Pedro) Monarquia de Efpagna, tom. i, ii, iii, fol.
Mad. 1770.

Salazar y Olarte (D. Ignacio) Hifloria de la Conquifia de Mexico-Segunda
parte-No place nor year.

Salazar y Zevallos (D. Alonz. Ed. de) Conflituciones y Ordenanzas anti-

guas Agnadidas y Modernas de la Real Univerfidad y efludio general de San
Marcos de la Ciudad de los Reyes del Peru, fol. En la Ciudad de los Reyes,
1735.

Sanchez (Ant. Ribero) Dissertation fur I'Origine de la Maladie Venerienne,

dans laquelle on prouve qu'elle n'a point ete portee de l'Amerique, 2mo. Paris,
1765.

Sarmiento de Gamboa (Pedro de) Viage al Efirecho de Magellanes, 4to.
Mad. 1768.

Santa Cruz (El Marques) Comercio Suelto y en Companias General, 2mo.
Mad. 1732.

Schemidel (Hulderico) HiRoria y Defcubrimiento del Rio de la Plata y Para-
guay. Exft. Barcia Hifl. Prim. tom. iii.

Sebara da Sylva (Jos. de) Recueil Chronologique & Analytique de tout cc

qu'a fait en Portugal la Societe dite de Jesus, depuis son entree dans ce Royaume
en 54ojufqu'a fonExpulfion en 1759, 12mo. 3 vols. Lifb. 1769.

Sepulveda (Genefius) Dialogus de julis belli cauils prefertim in Indos Novi
Orbis. MS.

Seyxas y Lovero (D. Fr.) Theatro Naval Hydrographico, 4to. 1648.

Defcripcion Geographica y Derrotero de la Region Aflral Ma-
gellanica, 4to. Mad. 1690.

Simon (Pedro) Noticias Hiftoriales de las Conquilas de Tierra Firme en la:,
Indias Occidentales, fol. Cuenca, 1627.

Solis (D. Ant. de) Hiftoria dc las Conquiflas de Mexico, fol. Mad. 1684.

-Hiflory of the conquest of Mexico.-Tranflatcd by Townsend,
fol. 1724.

Solorzano Pereirra (Joan.) Politica Indiana.

De Indiarum jure five de julia Indiarum Occidentalium Guber-
natione, fol. 2 vols. Lugd. 672.

De Indiarum Jure, fol Matriti, 2 vols. fol. 1629.

Suarez de Figucroa (Chriftov.) Hechos de D. Carcia Hlurtado de Mendoz..,
4to. Mad. 1613.

T Trrpca.olc,

533

T

Tarragones (Hieron. Gir.) Dos Libros de Cofmographia, 4to. Milan, 556.
Techo (F. Nichol. de) The History of the Provinces Paraguay, Tucuman,
Rio de la Plata, &c. Exit. Churchill's Coll. VI. 3.

Torquemada (Juan de) Monarquia Indiana, fol. 3 vols. Mad. 723.
Torres (Sim. Per. de) Viage del Mundo. Exft. Barcia Hilt. Prim. III.

--- (Franc. Caro de) Hiftoria de las Ordenes Militares de Santiago,

Calatrava y Alcantara, defde fu Fundacion hafta el Rey D. Felipe II. Ad-
miniflador perpetuo dellas, fol. Mad. 1629.

Torribio (P. F. Jos.) Aparato para la Hiftoria Natural Efpagna la fol. Mad.
1754.

Differtacion Hiftorico Politica y en mucha parte Geografica de
las Iflas Philipinas, i2mo. Mad. 1753.

U

Ulloa (D. Ant. de) Voyage Hiflorique de l'Amerique Meridionale, 4to.
2 tom. Paris, 1752.

- --- Noticias Americanas, Entretenimientos Phyficos Hifloricus,
fobre la America Meridional y le Septentrional Oriental, 4to. Mad. 1772.

(Franc.) Navigatione per fcoprire 1'Ifole delle Specierie fino al
Mare detto Vermejo nel 539. Exit. Ramus. III. 339.

-(D. Bernardo) Retabliffement des Manufa&ures & du Commerce
d'Efpagne, 2mo. Amft. 1753.

U7,tariz (D. Geron.) Theoria y PraEica de Commercio & de Marina, fol.
Mad. 1757.

The Theory and Pracice of Commerce, and Maritime Affairs,
8vo. 2 vols Lond. 1751.

V

Venegas (Migucl) A Natural and Civil Hiflory of California, 8vo. 2 vols.
Lond. 1759.

Varagcs (D. Thor. Tamaio de) Reftauracion de la Ciudad del Salvador y
Baia dt Todos San&os en la Provincia del Brasil, 4to. Mad. 1628.

Vargas Machuca (D. Bern. de) Milicia y Dcfcripcion de las Indias, 4to.
Mad. 1699.

Vega (L'Ynca Garcilaffo de la) -lifioirc dels Gucrrcs Civilcs des Espagnoles
dans tls Indes, par Laudouin, 4to. 2 lorn. Paris, 1648.

Vega
534

Vega (Garcilaffo de la) Hilfoire de la Conquete de la Floridc. Traduitc,
par Richelet, 2mo. 2 tom. Leyd. 1731.

Royal Commentaries of Peru, by Rycaut, fol. Lond. 68S.

Veitia Linage (Jos.) The Spanish Rule of Trade to the Weft Indies, Svo.
Lond. 1702.

-- Norte de la Contratacion de las Indias Oceidentales, fol. Scvill.
1672.

Verazzano (Giov.) Relatione delle Terra per lui Scoperta nel I524. Exfl.
Ramufio III. p. 420.

Viage deEfpagna, i2mo. 6 tom. Mad. 1 7 76.
ViEtoria (Fran.) Relationes Theologica de Indis & de jure belli contra eos,
4to. Mad. 1765.

Viera y Clavijo (D. Jos.) Noticias de la Hilloria general de las Iflas de Ca-
naria, 4to. 2 tom. Mad. 1772.

Villagra (Gasp. de) Hiltoria de Nueva Mexico Poema, 2mo. Alcala, 161o.
Villa Segnor y Sanchez. (D. Jos. Ant.) Theatro Americano. Description

general de los Reynos y Provincias de la Nueva Efpagna, fol. 2 tom. Mcx.
1746.

X

Xerez (Franc. de) Verdadera Relacion de la Conquifla del Peru y Provincia
de Cuzco, Embiada al Emperador Carlos V. Exit. Barcia Hist. Prim. tom. III.

Relatione, &c. &c. Exil. Ramuflo III. 372.

Z

Zarate (Aug. de) Hiftoria del Defcubrimiento y Conquifta de la Provincia
del Peru. Exft. Barcia. Hill. Prim. tom. III.

---- Hitloire de la Decouverte & de la Conquete du Perou, i2mo.
2 tom. Paris, 1742.

Zavala y Augnon (D. Migucl de) Reprefcntacion al Rcy N. Segnor D.
Philipe V. dirigida al mas fcguro Aumento del Real Erario. No place, 1732.

Zevallos (D. Pedro Ordogncz de) Hlifloria y Viage dcl Mundo, 4to. Mad.
1691.

VrOL. II. ' I N D E X

535

# INDEX.

I

N

D

E

X.
N. B. The Roman Numerals refer to the Volume, and the Figures to the Page.

A
A B SSINIA, an embassy lent to that

country by John II. King of Portugal,

i. 55.
Acapulca, the nature of the trade carried on

from thence to Manila, ii. 427. Amount
of the treasure on board the ship taken by
Lord Anson, 51.
Acoifa, his method of accounting for the dif-

ferent degrees of heat, in the old and new
continents, i. 448.
Adair, his account of the revengeful temper

of the native Americans, i. 475.
Adanfon, his justification of Hanno's account

of the African seas, i. 423.
Africa, the weifern coast of, first explored by

order of John I. King of Portugal, i. 40.
Is discovered from Cape Non, to Bojador,
42. Cape Bojador doubled, 46. The
countries southward of the River Senegal
discovered, 52. Cape of Good Hope seen
by Bartholomew Diaz, 55. Causes of the
extreme heat of the climate there, 254.
Ignorance of the antient astronomers con-
cerning, 423.
Agriculture, the lfate of, among the native

Americans, i. 328. Two principal causes
of the defecs of, 332.
1Aguada, is sent to Hispaniola, as a commis-

sioner to infpet the condua of Columbus,
i. 130.
Aguilar, Jerom de, is relieved from a long

captivity among the Indians at Cozumcl,
by Fernando Cortes, ii. o.

Albuquerque, Rodrigo, his barbarous treat-

ment of the Indians of Hispaniola, i. 214.
Alcavala, in the Spanifl customs, the term

explained, ii. 514.
Alexander the Great, his political chara&er, i.

14. His motive in founding the city of
Alexandria, 15. His discoveries in India,
16.
Alexander VI. Pope, grants to Ferdinand and

lfabella of Castile the right of all their
western discoveries, i. 113. Sends mif-
fionaries with Columbus on his second voy-
age, 114.
Almagro, Diego de, his birth and chara&er,

ii. 149. Associates with Pizarro and de
Luque, in a voyage of discovery, 50.
His unsuccessful attempts, 151. Is ne-
gleted by Pizarro in his Spanish negocia-
tion, 159. Is reconciled to him, 160.
Brings reinforcements to Pizarro at Peru,
178. Beginning of diffcnfions between
him and Pizarro, 192. Invades Chili, 195.
Is created governor of Chili, aind marches to
Cusco, I99. Seizes Cusco out of the hand,
of Pizarro, 20. ]Defeats Alvan.ldo, and
takes him prisoner, ibid. Is deceived by
the artful negociations of Francis Piarro,
203. Is defeated by the PIizarros, 206
Is taken prisoner, 207. Is tried and con-
demned, 208. Is put to death, 20.
Almiagro the son, affords refuge to his fatlheT '

followers at Lima, ii. ?.7. I-lis charascrI,
ibid. Heads a conspiracy againfl Frant is
Pizarro, 218. izarro aflaTinated, 21
Is acknowledged as his fiucccflir, .2,

3 Y

His precarious ituation, 221. Is defeated
lb Vaca de Cafiro, 223. Is betrayed and
executed, 224.

.'Ji.mal.7jirij , in the Spanish American cuf-

tomn, the amount of, ii. 514.
.'qairakic, Aloni.o, is ent fiom Lima, by

Francis Pi.arro, with a body of Spaniards
to relieve his brothers at Cusco, ii. 20o.
Is taken prifoncr by Almagro, 202. His
cfcape, 203.
...';..Id;r:, Pe.'ro de, is left by Cortes to com-

mand at Pi\exio, while he marched againfi
Naiv:ac7, ii. ',8. IIe is besiegcd by the
Mexicans, S. His imprudent conduct,
85. His expedition to Quito in Peru, 189.
/liazsns, a community of, said to exist in

South America, by Francis Orellana, ii. 215.
nmerica, the continent of, discovered by
Chrifiopher Columbus, i. 138. How it
obtained this name, 149. Ferdinand of
Caflile nominates two governments in,
192. The propositions offered to the na-
tives, ibid. Ill reception of Ojeda and
Nicueffa among them, 193. The South
Sea discovered by Balboa, 204. Rio de
Plata discovered, 213. The natives of,
injuriously treated by the Spaniards, 233.
The vast extent of, 248. The grand ob-
jets it presented to view, 249. The cir-
cumfances of, favourable for commerce
and civilization, 250. The climates of,
252. Various causes of the peculiarity of
its climates, 253. its rude and uncul-
tivated state when filft discovered, 257.
Its animals, 259. Its infeas and reptiles,
26r. Birds, 262. General account of its
foil, 263. Inquiry into the firit population
of, 264. Could not be peopled by civilized
nations, 270. The northern extremity of,
contiguous to Asia, 273. Probably peo-
pled by Asiatics, 280. Condition and cha-
iaecr of the native inhabitants inquired
Into, 281. Wcre more rude than the
natives of any other known parts of the
carth, 282. The Peruvians and MIexicans
excpted, 283. The firl' discoverers in-
capable of a judicious fpcculative exami-
nation, 285. The various systems of
'fhilfophers rcfpecing the natives, 286.
Methd obfcrvedl'in the present review of
ilcir bodily conflitution and circumflances,

288. The venereal disease derived from this
part of the woild, 307. Why so thinly
inhabited, 337. The country depopulated
by continual wars, 366. Cause of the ex-
treme coldness toward the southern ex-
tremity of, 451. The natural uncultivat-
ed slate of the country described, 453.
Bones of large extinEt species of animals
discovered under ground near the banks
of the Ohio, 454. Why European ani-
mals degenerate there, 455. Supposed to
have undergone a convulsive reparation
from Asia, 459. Causes of the depo-
pulation of, traced, ii. 346. This depopu-
lation not the result of any intentional sys-
tem of policy, 348. Nor the result of
religion, 350. Number of Indian natives
still remaining in Mexico and Peru, 351.
All the Spanish dominions there fubjeded
to two viceroys, 354. Its third viceroy-
alty lately eftabliffied, 355. See Mexico,
Peru, Cories, Pizarro, &c.
lrnericans, native, in Spanish America, their
bodily constitution and complexion, i. 289.
Their firength and abilities, 290. Their
insensibility with regard to their women,
292. No deformities in their frame, 296.
This circumrfance accounted for, 297.
Uniformity of their colour, 298. A pe-
culiar race of, described, 301. The Es-
quimaux, 302. Patagonians, 303. The
exifience of Patagonian giants yet remain-
ing to be decided, 305. Their diseases,
306. The venereal disease, peculiarly
theirs, 307. The powers and qualities of
their minds, 308. Are only solicitous to
supply immediate wcants, 310. The art
of computation, scarcely known to them.
ibid. Have no abftrat ideas, 312. The
North Americans much more intelligent
than those of the South, 313. Their
aversion to labour, 315. Their social
slate, 317. Domcflic union, ibid. The
women, 318. Their women not prolific,
321. Their parental affecion and filial
duty, 322. Their modes of subsistence,
324. Filhing, 325. Hunting, 325. Agri-
culture, 328. The various objec&s of their
culture, 329. Two principal causes of the
defects of their agriculture, 332. Their
want of tame animals, ibid. Their want

of

of useful metals, 334. Their political in-
flitutions, 336. \Vere divided into small
independent communities, ibid. Unac-
quainted with the idea of property, 337.
Their high sense of equality and indepen-
dence, 338. Their ideas of subordination
imperfec, 340. To what tribes there de-
scriptions apply, 341. Some exceptions,
343. Florida, ibid. The Natchez, 344.
The islands, 345. In Bogota, ibid. In-
quiry into the causes of these irregularities,
346. Their art of war, 349. Their
motives to hostility, 350. Causes of their
ferocity, 351. Perpetuity of their ani-
mofities, 352. Their modes of condut-
ing war, 353. Are not destitute of cou-
rage and fortitude, 355. Incapable of
miltary discipline, 356. Their treatment
of prisoners, 357. Their fortitude under
torture, 359. Never eat human flesh but
to gratify revenge, 361. How the South
Americans treated their prisoners, 362.
Their military education, 363. Strange
method of chufing a captain among the
Indians on the banks of the Orinoco, ibid.
Their numbers wafted by continual wars,
366. Their tribes now recruit their
numbers by adopting prisoners, 367. Are
never formidable in war, to more poliihed
nations, 368. Their arts, dress, And or-
naments, 369. Their habitations, 372.
Their arms, 374. Their domestic uten-
fils, 375. Contlrullion of their canoes,
376. The liftleffncfs with which they
apply to labour, 377. Their religion,
378. Some tribes altogether deflitute of
any, 381. Remarkable diversity in their
religious notions, 384. Their ideas of
the immortality of the foul, 387. Their
modes of burial, 388. \Vhy their phyfi-
cians pretend to be conjurors, 390. Their
love of dancing, 393. Their immolerate
paflion for gaming, 395. Arc extremely
addiced to clrunkenncll , 396. Put their
aged and incurable to death, 400. Ge-
neral eltimatc of their charadcr, 401.
Thcir intcllcatlal powers, 402. Their
political talcnts, 403. Powers of aflc't&ion,
404. Hardness of heart, ,o. Their in-
ecnfibility, 406. Taciturnity, 407. 'IThei
cunning, 408. Their virtues, 409. Their
spirit of independence, 41o. Fortitudc,

ibid. Attachment to their communit
411. Their fatifaiction with tlheir o.
condition, ibid. Gen:r..l caution with r-
spec to this inquiry, 414. To diDin-
guifhable claffTs of, 415. Exceptions as
to their character, 417. Their chaTac-
tcriftic features defcrilbe, s0o. Inflances
of their perfcverin fp'-d, 461. An an-
tipathy industriously encourai.ed between
them and the negroes in America, by the
Spaniards, ii. 369. Their present con-
dition, 370. How taxed, 371. Stated
services demanded from them, 372. Mode
of exacting these services, 373. -low go-
verned, ibid. Protctor of the Indians,
his function, 374. Rcafons why so finall
a progress is made in their conversion, 384.

lAmnrigo Vespucci, publifles the first written

account of the New world, and hence
gave name to America, i. 149. Ihis claim
as a difcovercr examined, 441.
/n]acrana, a female ca7ique of Hifi:iniola,

her base and cruel ufagc hy the Spaniard.,
i. 80.
Andcs, flupcndous height and extent of thai

range of mountains, i. 249. Their higt t
compared with other mountains, 446.
Gonzalo Pizarro's remarkable expeiition
over, ii. 213.
Allinials large, very few found in America al

its first discovery, i. 259.
Ilnticnts, cause of tlhe imlprfection of the lit

of navigation among t lm, i. 4. 'li.
geograpllical knowledge c \rl'mlly cn!fin-
ed, 22. 423, 424. 426.
Arabians, peculiarly attactlici to thie fUtd\i ol

geography, i. 27.
Argsnauts, the expedition of, \\ 'i f, -i'. u

anmonf the Greeks, i. 121.
Jri:nc/ic., or compulltatio, 11 t :m of. hirdl-
lv known to the nati\ve inmt ii n., i. ;, '.
Afiol;io, father, his extiraordin:u) nil ii( ,

the prince of the Tartai , i. ;2.
Afintic difcovcrics made by t!i- Rl!rfl.iin, i

273.

4Afit'to trade, the nature ,' xpliind, ii.

4.o8. The frauds in, nir, lit)I I'ut ll. entl
to, 409. 508.
/At/ia! lpa, is left by his fthller I l:i.lr IT :,

fucceifor in the kinledoin of QiI, i. i.-
Defeats Ilis brotlielr l iu.il;ar, tAil ii tlol
the cempire of It ru, i/:'. S: ., [i .

to Pizarro, 170. Visits Pizarro, 173. Is
perfidiously seized by' him, 176. Agrees
with Pizarro on a ransom, 177. Is refused
his liberty, 18o. His behaviour during
his confinement, 183. A form of trial
beflowed on him, 184. Is put to death,
185. Comparison of authorities relating
to his tranfaaions with, and treatment by
Pizarro, 468.
Audience of New Spain, board of, established

by the Emperor Charles V. ii. 143. Courts
of, their jurifdicion, 356.
Averia, a Spanish tax for convoy to and from

America, when firfl imposed, ii. 514. Its
rate, 515.
Azores, those islands discovered by the Por-

tuguefe, i. 50.

B
Balboa, Vasco Nugnez de, fettles a colony

at Santa Maria on the gulph of Darien,
i. 194. Receives intelligence of the rich
country of Peru, 200. His characer, 202.
Marches across the Ilthmus, 203. Dif-
covers the Southern Ocean, 204. Re-
turns, 205. Is superseded in his command
by the appointment of Pedrarias Davila,
207. Is fined by Pedrarias for former
tranfa&ions, 208. Is appointed lieutenant
governor of the countries on the South
Sea, and marries Pedrarias's daughter, 210.
Is arrested and put to death by Pedrarias,

211.
Bark, Jesuits, a produ&ion peculiar to Peru,

ii. 393.
Barrere, his description of the conltruction

of Indian houses, i. 482.
Behring and Tfchirikow, Ruffian navigators,

thought to have discovered the north-
weft extremity of America from the eafl-
ward, i. 275. Uncertainty of their ac-
counts, 458.
Benalcazar, governor of St. Michael, reduces

the kingdom of Quito, ii. 188. Is deprived
of his command by Pi7.arro, 213.
Bnijamin the Jew of Tudela, his extraordinary

travels, i. 31.
E tinaldes, inflance of the bravery of the Ca-

rihecs, mntioned by him, i. 487.
B!ethriroulrt, Jolln do, a Norman baron, con-

(iclb and poffcffcs the Canary Islands, i. 38.

Birds, an accou:.t of those natural to Ame-

rica, i. 262. The flight of, often firetch
to an immense distance from land, 431.
Bogota in America, some account of the in-

habitants of, i. 345. Causes of their tame
submission to the Spaniards, 348. Their
religious doctrines and rites, 386.
Bojador, cape, the firil discovery of, i. 42.

Is doubled by the Portuguese discoverers, 46.
Boffu, his account of the American war song,

i. 478.
Bovadilla, Francis de, is ent to Hispaniola

to inquire into the conduct of Columbus,
i. 154. Sends Columbus home in irons,
155. Is degraded, 158. 6i.
Bougainville, his defence of the Periplus of

Hanno, i. 422.
Bourger, M. his characer of the native Pe-

ruvians, i. 465.
Brasil, the coast of, discovered by Alvarez

Cabral, i. 151. Remarks on the climate
of, 451.

Bridges, Peruvian, described, ii. 489.
Buenos Ayres, in South America, some ac-

count of that province, ii. 336.
Bulls papal, of no force in Spanish Ame-

rica, before examined and approved by the
royal council of the Indies, ii. 377. See
Cruzado.
Burial of the dead, American mode of, i.

388.

C
Cabral, Alvarez, a Portuguese commander,

discovers the coafl of Brasil, i. 151.
Cacoa, the bell in quality, produced in the

Spanish American colonies, ii. 393. The
preparation of chocolate from, derived from
the Mexicans, 412.
Cadiz, the galeons and flota removed thi-

ther from Seville, ii. 401.
California, the peninsula of, discovered by

Fernando Cortes, ii. 144. The true slate
of this country long unknown, 329.
Why depreciated by the Jesuits, 330. Fa-
vourable account of, given by Don Jo-
feph Galve7., ibid.
Californians, the charaacr of, by P. Vencgas,

i. 467.
Campeachly, difcovcrcd by Cordova, who is

rcpulfed by the natives, i. 239.

Canmpoaanes,

Campomanes, Don Pedro Rodriguez, charac-

ter of his political and commercial writings,
ii. 511. His account of the produce of the
Spanish American mines, 516.
Canary islands erected into a kingdom by pope

Clement VI. i. 37. Are conquered by John
de Bethencourt, 38.
Cannibals, no people ever found to eat human

flesh for subsistence, though often for rc-
venge, i. 36. 478.
Canoes, American, the conftrution of, de-

fcribed, i. 376.
Caraccas, establishment of the company trad-

ing to that coast, ii. 413. Growth of the
trade, 509.
Caribbee islands, discovered by Columbus in

his second voyage, i. 1 14.
Caribbees, their spirit peculiarly fierce, i 417.

Their character by M. de Chanvalon, 466.
Probable conjecture as to the distinction in
character between them and the natives of
the larger islands, 488.
Carpini, his extraordinary mission to the prince

of the Tartars, i. 32.
Carthagena, the harbour of, the safest an d bell

fortified of any in all the Spanish American
dominions, ii. 339.
Carthaginians, state of commerce and naviga-

tion among, i. 8. The famous voyages of
Hanno and Himilco, 9.
Carvajal, Francisco de, contributes to Vaca

de Castro's viEtory over young Almagro, ii.
224. Encourages Gonzalo Pizarro to as-
fume the government of Peru, 238. Ad-
vises Pizarro to assume the sovereignty of
the country, 243. Is seized by Gafca and
executed, 257.
Caflillo, Bernal Diaz del, chara&cer of his

Hiftoria Verdadero de la Conquifta de la
Nueva Efpagna, ii. 444.
Centeno, Diego, revolts from Gonzalo Pi-

zarro to the viceroy of Peru, ii. 240. Is
defeated by Carvajal, and secretes himself in
acave, 242. Sallies out and feizcs Cuzco,
253. Is reduced by Pizarro, 254. Is em-
ployed by Gafca to make discoverics in the
regions about the river Plata, 262.
Chanvalon, M. de, his character of the native

Caribbees, i. 466.
Clapetones, in the Spanish American colonies,

who thus diflinguifled, ii, 366.
Charles 1II. king of Spain, cflablifllcs packet

boats between Spain ad the colonic-, ii.
415. Allows siee trad, to ihe: winjw irl
islands, 416. Grinib ti;c cul,.liie a free
trade v.ith each other, 1j8.
Charles V. emperor, fends Kcd. lizo d Si-

gucroa to Hispaniola, as chief judge, to i-e-
gulate the treatment of the Indian., i.
225. Causes this fubjca to be debated be-
fore him, 230. Equips a fquadion at the
solicitation of Ferdinand Mageilan, ii. 129.
Resigns his claim on the 1\olluccas to the
Portuguefc, 133. Appoints Cortes go-
vernor of New Spain, 135. Rewards him
on coming home, 142. Eftablifles a board
called the Audience of New Spain, 143.
His consultations on American affairs, 22.
Eflablifhes new regulations, 229.
Chili, is invaded by Almagro, ii. 195. How

fubje&ed by the Spaniards, 332. Excel-
lence of its climate and foil, 333. Cause
of its being negleced, 334. Prospect of
its improvement, 335.
Chiiquitos, political itate of that people, from

Fernandcz, i. 475.
Chocolate, the use of, derived from the Mexi-

cans, ii. 41 2..
Cholula, in Mexico, arrival of Cortes there,

with some account of the town, ii. 46. A
conspiracy againit Cortes discovered, and
the inhabitants destroyed, 48.
Cicero, inflance of his ignorance in geogra-

phy, i. 426.
Cinaloa, political slate of the people there, i.

474. Their mode of living, 481. Are
destitute of all religion, 484. Extraor-
dinary large grain of gold found there, ii
490.
Cincguilla, in the province of Sonora, late

(lifcoveries of ichi mines made there by the
Spaniards, ii. 328. Probable efl'cs of
there difcocvries, 329.
Clement VI. pope, erecs the Canary Islands

into a kingdom, i. 3.
Climates, influenced y a variety of catires, i.

252. Their operation on manlind, 4.i..
Inquiry into the cause of the diflerent de-
grees qs heat in, 448.
Cochineal, an important prodution, almoflpc-

culiar to New Spain, ii. 393.
Cold, extraordinary predominance of, in the

climates of America, i. 252. Causes ol
this peculiarity, 253.

,.'. , >i .

Clncs, Spanish American, view of the policy

and trade of, ii. 345. Depopulation the
lirit effet of them, ibid. Causes of this
(itpopulation, 346. The small-pox very
fatal to, 348. General idea of the Spanish
policy in, 352. arly interposition of the
rcyal authority in, 353. An exclusive
tlaid the first objec in, 360. Compared
with those of antient Greece and Rome,
361. The great refiriions they are sub-
jct to, 362. Slow progress or their po-
pulation from Europe, 363. Are difcou-
raged by the tate of property there, ibid.
And by the na'ure of their ecclesiastical po-
licy, 365. The various claffcs of people
in, 366. Ecclesiastical constitution of,
376. Form and endowments of the church
there, 377. Pernicious effecs of monaflic
intlitutions there, 378. Characer of the
ecclefiaiftics there, 379. Produtions of,
387. The mines, ibid. Those of Potofi
and Sacotecas, 388. The spirit with which
they arc worked, 39o. Fatal effets of this
ardour, 391. Other commodities that com-
pose the commerce of, 393. Amazing in-
crease of horned cattle there, 394. Ad-
vantages which Spain formerly derived
from them, ibid. Why the fame advan-
tages are not ill received, 396. Guarda
coflas employed to check the contraband
trade in, 409. The use of register ships
introduced, 410. And galeons laid aside,
411. Company of the Caraccas inltituted,
413. Eftabliflimnt of regular packet-
boats to, 415. Free trade permitted be-
tween them, 418. New regulations in the
government of, 420. Reformation of the
courts of justice, ibid. New distribution of
governments, ibid. A fourth viceroyalty
efiablifled, 421. Attempts to reform do-
mesic policy, 423. Their trade with the
Philippine islands, 426. Revenue derived
from, by Spain, 429. Expence of admi-
nifiration there, 432. State of population
in, 494. The number of monasterics there,
501. See Mexico, Peru, &c.
Colulinrs, Bartholomew, is sent by his brother

Chrifloplhei to negociate with Henry VII.
king of England, i. 70. The misfortunes
of his voy.gec, 73. Follows his brother to
llifpiniol:i, 123. Is vefled witii the admi-
niir;,.:ion of afitirs there by his brother on

his return to Spain, 131. Founds the town
of St. Domingo, 139.
Columbus, Christopher, birth and education

of, i. 59. His early voyages, 60. Mar-
ries and fettles at Lisbon, 6. His geo-
graphical reflecions, 63. Conceives the
idea of making discoveries to the westward,
65. Offers his services to the Genoese fe-
nate, 67. Cause of his overtures being re-
jced in Portugal, 69. Applies to the
courts of Castile and England, ibid. His
proposal how treated by the Spanish geo-
graphers, 71. Is patronised by Juan Perez,
74. His proposals again rejeEted, 75. Is
invited by Isabella, and engaged in the
Spanish service, 79. Preparations for his
voyage, 80. The amount of his equip-
ment, 81. Sails from Spain, 82. His
vigilant attention to all circumtiances dur-
ing his voyage, 84. Apprehensions of his
crew, 85. His address in quieting their
cabals, 87. Indications of their approach-
ing land, 89. An island discovered, 9o.
He lands, 91. His interview with the na-
tives, 92. Names the island San Salva-
dore, 93. Prosecutes his discoveries south-
ward, 94. Discovers and lands on the
island of Cuba, 95. Discovers Hispaniola,
96. Suffers hipwreck, but is saved by the
Indians, 99. Builds a fort, 102. Returns
to Europe, 104. His expedient to pre-
serve the memory of his discoveries during
a storm, o16. Arrives at the Azores, ibid.
Arrives at ifbon, 107. His reception in
Spain, o18. His audience with Ferdinand
and Isabella, og. His equipment for a
second voyage, 12. Discovers the Carib-
bee iflandb, 1 14. Finds his colony on His-
paniola destroyed, 115. Builds a city,
which he calls Isabella, 117. Visits the
interior parts of the country, 119. His
men discontented and factious, 20o. Dif-
covers the island of Jamaica, 122. Meets
his brother Bartholomew at Ifibella, 123.
The natives ill used by his men, and begin
to be alarmed, 124. He defeats the In-
dians, 127. Exacs tribute from them,
128. Returns to Spain to justify his con-
duc, 131. Is furnifihed with a more re-
gular plan for colonization, 133. His
third voyage, 136. Discovers the island
of Trinidad, 137. Discovers the con-

til tnll

tinent of America, 138. State of Hispaniola
on his arrival, 139. Compoes the mutiny
of Roldan and his adherents, 142. Is dif-
tressed by the faaious behaviour of his men,
152. Complaints carried to Spain against
him, 53. Is sent home in irons, j55.
Clears his conduct, but is not rflored to
his authority, 157. His solicitations ne-
glected, 61. Foims new schemes of dif-
covery, 162. Engages in a fourth voyage,
I64. His treatment at Hispaniola, ibid.
Searches after a paflage to the Indian ocean,
166. Is hipwrecked on the coast of Ja-
maica, 167. His artifice to secure the
friendship of the Indians, 170. Is deliver-
ed, and arrives at Hispaniola, 173. Re-
turns to Spain, 174. His death, 175. His
right to the original discovery of America
defended, 434.
Columbus, Don Diego, sues out his claims to

his father's privileges, i. 188. Marries
and goes over to Hispaniola, 89. Efta-
blifhes a pearl fishery at Cubagua, 9go.
Projecs the conquest of Cuba, 196. His
measures thwarted by Ferdinand, 213. Re-
turns to Spain, 214.
Commerce, the era from which its commence-

ment is to be dated, i. 2. Motives to an
intercourse among distant nations, 4. Still
flourished in the eaflern empire after the
subversion of the weflern, 26. Revival of,
in Europe, 28.
Compafi, mariner's, navigation extended more

by the invention of, than by all the efforts
of preceding ages, i. 35. By whom in-
vented, 36.
Condamine, M. his account of the country at

the foot of the Andes, in South America,
i. 453. His remarks on the charater of
the native Americans, 466.
Congo, the kingdom of, difeovered y the Por-

tugueze, i. 52.
ConJfantinople, the confcquence of removing

the feat of the Roman empire to, i. 24.
Continued a commercial city after the x-
tinction of the wcetcrn empire, 26. Be-
came the chief mart of l1t 1, 28.
Cordova, Francisco -lernarnd,/., discovers Yu-

catan, i. 238. Is repulfred at Canrpelchy,
and returnsto Cub'a, 239.
Corita, Alonzo, . his obfirvations on the

contraband trade of the Spanifil colonies,

VOL. 11.

ii. 425. Chara&er of his American me_
moirs, 475.
Cortes, Fernando, his birth, education, and

character, ii. 3. Is by Velafqucz appoint-
ed commander of the armament fittcd out
by him againfl New Spain, 4. Vclafquez
becomes jealous of him, 6. Velafque-c
fends orders to deprive him of his conimif-
sion, and lay him under arrest, 7. Is pro-
teted by his troops, 8. The amount ot
his forces, 9. Reduces the Indians at Ta-
bafco, i1. Arrives at St. Juan de Ulua,
ibid. His interview with two Mexican
commanders, 13. Sends presents to Mon-
tezuma, 15. Receives others in return,
16. His schemes, 2I. Eftabliflcs a form
of civil government, 24. Rcfigns his com-
mission under Vclafque7., and afiumcs the
command in the king's name, 27. His
friendlhip courted by the Zempoallans,
28. Builds a fort, 30. Concludes a for-
mal alliance with several ca7.iques, ibid.
Discovers a conspiracy among his men, and
defiroys his hips, 33. Advances into the
country, 35. Is opposed by the Tlafcalans,
37. Concludes a peace with them, 42.
His rash zeal, 44. Proceeds to Cholula,
46. Discovers a conspiracy againfl him
here, and deifroys the inhabitants, 48.
Approaches in fight of the capital city of
Mexico, 50. His firfl interview with
Montezuma, 51. His anxiety at his fitua-
tion in the city of Mexico, 56. Sei.cs
Montc7,uma, 60. Orders him to be set-
tered, 62. Reasons of his condu, 63.
Prevails on Montez.una to own himfclf a
vatfll to the Spanish crown, 66. Amount
and division of his treaftire, 67. FEnrages
the Mexicans by his impnudcnt ..al, 70.
An arlmiment sent by V lfquV',/. to fiqper-
fcdce imn, 74. I-is dtiibl)cratlc: s on tlis
event, 76. Advanc.es to meet Narvac,
79. Dc lats Narva.z, (nd tikes iil pli-
fioncr, 82. G aills over the S.nifli fol-
dier' to hi: in :rrl, 83. '. urtns lo Mexi-
co, 85. I-is improper condlul on his ar-
livAl, 86. \ refolu' lx atta;I ,c;l I)v the
Ml(l-xicI:m , 87. Atl tks t;hl.I ill tln n with
out cef,, 88. Di'i of'

MiU'n,

go. I i.s T rar li),r v

a iry c..:qc flon dcAlb,

y9 . Al mt,,ll' tl: cilv oi M cNxiC ', .( .
Is att(acked lby tilhe Mcicais.i, . l111:. ti

, ' l'l l; .
E X.

loses in the encounter, 94. Difficulties of
his retreat, 95. Battle of Otumba, 97.
Defeats the Mexicans, 98. Mutinous fpi-
rit of his troops, 1ol. Reduces the Te-
peacans, 102. Is strengthened by several
reinforcements, 104. Returns to Mexico,
lo5. Eflablifhes his head-quarters at Te-
7£uco, 107. Reduces, or conciliates the
surrounding country, o08. Cabals among
his troops, og9. His prudence in fuppref-
sing them, o. Builds and launches a
fleet of brigantines on the lake, 113. Be-
sieges Mexico, 115. Makes a grand as-
fault to take the city by storm, but is re-
pulscd, r 8. Evades the Mexican pro-
phecy, 121. Takes Gautimozin prisoner,
124. Gains pofleffion of the city, ibid.
And of the whole empire, 127. Defeats
another attempt to supersede him in his
command, 134. Is appointed governor of
New Spain, 135. His schemes and ar-
rangements, 136. Cruel treatment of the
natives, 137. His conduct subjected to in-
quiry, 140. Returns to Spain to juflify
himself, 141. Is rewarded by the emperor
Charles V. 142. Goes back to Mexico
with limited powers, 143. Discovers Ca-
lifornia, 144. Returns to Spain, and dies,
ibid. Inquiry into the nature of his letters
to the Emperor Charles V. 443. Authors
who wrote of his conquest of New Spain,
444.

Councilof the Indies, its power, ii. 358.
Creoles, in the Spanish American colonies,

characer of, ii. 367.
Croglan, colonel George, his account of the

discovery of the bones of large extinct
species of animals in North America, i. 454.
Crtfades to the Holy Land, the great political

advantages derived from, by the European
nations, i. 30.
Crusado, bulls of, publified regularly every

two years in the Spanish colonies, ii. 430.
Prices of, and amount of the sale at the last
publication, 512.
Cuba, the island of, discovered by Chriflopher

Columbus, i. 95. Is failed round by Ocam-
po, 188. The conquest of, undertaken
by Diego Vclafquecz, 96. Cruel treat-
ment of the cazique Hatucy, and his rc-
partee to a friar, 197. Columbus's cn-
thufiaflic description of a harbour in, 431.

The tobacco produced there the finest in
all America, ii. 393.
Cubagua, a pearl fishery etablifhed there, i.

I90.
Cumana, the natives of, revenge their ill-

treatment by the Spaniards, i. 233. The
country desolated by Diego Ocampo, 235.
Curo, the capital of the Peruvian empire,

founded by Manco Capac, ii. 164. Is
seized by Pizarro, 88. Is besieged by the
Peruvians, 198. Is furprized by Almagro,
201. Is recovered and pillaged by the
Pizarros, 207. Was the only city in all
Peru, 322.

D.
Dancing, the love of, a favourite paflion among

the Americans, i. 393.
Darien, the isthmus of, described, i. 201.

The increase of settlement there obftruAed
by the noxiousness of the climate, ii. 338.
De Solis, his unfortunate expedition up the

river Plata, i. 212.
De Solis, Antonio, charaEter of his Hitoria

de la Conquifta de Mexico, ii. 445.
D'Efquilache, prince, viceroy of Peru, his

vigorous measures for restraining the ex-
cesses of the regular clergy there, ii. 382.
Rendered ineffetual, 383.
Diaz, Bartholomew, discovers the Cape of

Good Hope, i. 55.
DiJcoveries, the difference between those

made by land, and those by sea, stated, i.
425.
Dodwell, his objecion to the Periplus of

Hanno exploded, i. 421.
Domingo, St. on the island of Hispaniola,

founded by Bartholomew Columbus, i. 139.
Dominicans, those in Hispaniola publicly re-

monftrate against the cruel treatment of
the Indians, i. 215. See Las Casas.
Drunkcnnefs, firong propensity of the Ameri-

cans to indulge in, i. 396.

E.
Earth, the globe, of, how divided into zones

by the ancients, i. 22.
E~cltians, ancient, slate of commerce and

navigation among them, i. 5.

El

El Dorado, wonderful reports of a country so

called, made by Francis Orellana, ii. 215.
Elephant, that animal peculiar to the torrid

zone, .455.
jEfquimaux Indians, resemblances between

them and their neighbours the Greenland-
ers, i. 278. Some account of, 362. 483.
Eugene IV. pope, grants to the Portugueie an

exclusive right to all the countries they
should discover, from Cape Non to the
continent of India, i. 49.
Europe, how affeced 'by the dismemberment

of the Roman empire by the barbarous na-
tions, i. 25. Revival of commerce and
navigation in, 28. Political advantages
derived from the crusades, 30.

F.
Ferdinand king of Castile. See Columbus and

Isabella. Turns his attention at length to
the regulation of American affairs, i. 184.
Don Diego de Columbus sues out his fa-
ther's claims againfl him, 188. Ereas two
governments on the continent of America,
192. Sends a fleet to Darien, and super-
fedes Balboa, 207. Appoints Balboa lieu-
tenant-governor of the countries on the
South Sea, 210. Sends Dias de Solis to
discover a western passage to the Moluccas,
212. Thwarts the measures of Diego Co-
lumbus, 313. His decree concerning the
treatment of the Indians, 216.
Fernandez, Don Diego, characer of his His-

toria del Peru, ii. 464.
Fernandez, P. his description of the political

slate of the Chiquitos, i. 475.
Figueroa, Roderigo de, is appointed chief

judge of Hispaniola, with a commiflion to
examine into the treatment of the Indian
natives, i. 225. Makes an experiment to
determine the capacity of the Indians, 234.
Florida discovered by Juan Ponce de Leon,

i. 197. The chiefs there hereditary, 341.
Account of, from Alvar Nugnez Cabeca
de Vaca, i.470.

Flota, Spanish, some account of, ii. 401.
onfeca, bishop of Badajos, minisler for In-
dian affairs, obftrut&s the plans of coloni-
zation and discovery formed by Columbus,

i. 28. 136. Patroni'es the cxpeditlio
of Alonzo d Ojeda, 148.

G.
Galcons, Spanifli, the nature and purpose of

there vcfecls, ii. 401. Arranigc.l;int of
their voyage, 402.
Galvcz, I)on Joseph, sent to discover the true

fate of California, ii. 330.
Gama, Vasco de, his voyage so: discovery, i.

144. Doubles the Cape of Good ope,
145. Anchors before the city of Melinda,
ibid. Arrives at Calecut in Malabar, 146.
Gaming, firange propcnfity of the Americans

to, i. 395.
Ganges, erroneous ideas of the ancients as to

the posit ion of that river, i. 424.
Gafca, Pedro de la, sent to Peru as president

of the court of Audience in Lima, ii. 246.
His characer and moderation, 247. The
powers he was veiled with, 248. Arrives
at Panama, 249. Acquires possession of
Panama with the fleet and forces there,
251. Advances towards Cuzco, 225.
Pizarro's troops desert to him, 256. His
moderate ue of the vi&ory, 257. Devises
employment for his soldiers, 261. His
division of the country among his followers,
262. Reflores order and government, 263.
His reception at his return to Spain, 264.
Gemimus, inltance of his ignorance in geo-

graphy, i. 426.
Geography, the knowledge of, extremely con-

fined among the ancients, i. 22. Became
a favourite study among the Arabians, 27.
Giants, the accounts of, in our early tra-

vellers, unconfirmed by recent difcovcries,
i. 35. 463.
Gioia, Flavio, the inventor of the mariner's

conpafs, i. 36.
Globe, its division into zones by the ancient.,

i. 22.
Gold, why the firpt metal with which man was

acquainted, i. 334. Extraordinary large
grain of, found in the mints at Cinalao, 490.
Gomara, charaac.r of his Cronica de a Nucva

Ei]pagna, ii. 444.
Good Hlpr, c.ape of, dilfovcrcd by Bartholo-

mew Diaz, i. 5.

Z ? Gove,',-

Gavernment, no visible form of, among the

native Americans, i. 340. Exceptions,
343.
Gran Chaco, account of the method of mak-

ing war among the natives of, from Lozano,
. 476.
Granada, new kingdom of, in America, by

whom reduced to the Spanifi dominion, ii.
341. Its climate and produce, 342. A
viceroy lately eflablifhed there, 355.
Greeks, ancient, progress of navigation and

discovery among them, i. i. Their com-
mercial intercourse with other nations very
limited, 13.
Greenland, its vicinity to North America, i.

278.
Grijalva, Juan de, fcts out from Cuba on a

voyage of discovery, i. 240. Discovers
and gives name to New Spain, 241. His
reasons for not planting a colony in his
newly discovered lands, 243.
Guarda Costas, employed by Spain to check

illicit trade in the American colonies, ii.
409.
Guatimala, the indigo there superior to any in

America, ii. 393.
Guatimozin, nephew and fon-in-law of Mon-

tezuma, succeeds Quetlavaca in the king-
dom of Mexico, ii. 107. Repulses the at-
tacks of the Spaniards in florming the city
of Mexico, I8. Is taken prisoner by
Cortes, 124. Is tortured to discover his
treasure, 126 Is hanged, 138.
Guiana, Dutch, cause of the excessive fertility

of the foil there, i. 457.

H.
Hanno, his Periplus defended, with an ac-

count of his voyage, i. 421.
Hatuiy, a caziquc of Cuba, his cruel treat-

ment, and memorable repartee to a Fran-
cifcan fiiar, i. 197.
Inawkr/worth's vovages, account of New

Holland, and the inhabitants from, i. 472.
Heat, the different degrees of, in the old and

new continents accounted for, i. 44.8.
Effimated, 456.
Henry, prince of Portugal, his characer and

fludics, i. 4.2. Expeditions formed by his

order, 44. Applies for a papal grant of his
new discoveries, 48. His death, 50.
Herrada, Juan de, assassinates Francis Pizar-

ro, ii. 219. Dies, 223.
Herrera, the best hiflorian of the conquef of

New Spain, ii. 446. His account of Or-
rellana's voyage, 473.
Hijpaniola, the island of, discovered by Chris-

topher Columbus, i. 96. His transactions
with the natives, 97. A colony left there
by Columbus, 103. The colony deflroy-
ed, 115. Columbus builds a city called
Itabella, 117. The natives ill-used, and
begin to be alarmed, 124. Are defeated
by the Spaniards, 127. Tribute exacted
from them, 128. They scheme to flarve
the Spaniards, 129. St. Domingo found-
ed by Bartholomew Columbus, 139. Co-
lumbus ent home in irons by Bovadilla,
155. Nicholas de Ovanda appointed
governor, 158. Summary view of
the conduct of the Spaniards towards
the natives of, I79. Unhappy fate of
Anacoana, 80o. Great produce from
the mines there, 182. The inhabitants
diminish, 185. The Spaniards recruit
them by trepanning the natives of the Lu-
cayos, 186. Arrival of Don Diego de Co-
lumbus, 189. The natives of, almofi ex-
tirpated by slavery, 195. 214. Contro-
verfy concerning the treatment of them,
215. Columbus's account of the humane
treatment he received from the natives of,
432. Curious inflance of fuperflition in
the Spanish planters there, 456.
Holquin, Pedro Alvarez, erects the royal ifan-

dard in Peru, in oppof.tion to the younger
Almagro, ii. 223. Vaca de Cafiro arrives
and assumes the command, ibid.
Homer, his account of the navigation of the

ancient Greeks, i. 12.
Honduras, the value of that country, owing

to-iLr.oduion of the logwood-tree, ii. 331.
Horned cattle, amazing increase of them in

Spanish America, i. 394..
Hgrtjs, afonifhment and miflakcs of the

Mexicans at the sirs fight of them ii. 451.
Expedient of the Peruvians to render them
incapable of aion, 472.
ltaana Capac, Inca of Peru, his chara&er and

family, ii. 166.

Illa a?

Hua/car Capac, Inca of Peru, disputes his

brother Atahualpa's fucceflion to Quito, ii.
167. Is defeated and taken prisoner by
Atahualpa, ibid. Solicits the assistance of
Pizarro againfl his brother, 169. Is put
to death by order of Atahualpa, 178.

I.
Jamaica, discovered by Christopher Colum-

bus, i. 122.
Jertome, St. three monks of that order ent

by Cardinal Ximenes to Hispaniola, to re-
gulate the treatment of the Indians, i. 220.
Their conduct under this commifiion, 222.
Are recalled, 225.
yefuits, acquire an absolute dominion over

California, ii. 329. Their motives for de-
preciating the country, 330.
Jews, ancient fIate of commerce and naviga-

tion among them, i. 7.
Incas of Peru, received origin of their empire,

ii. 65. 306. Their empire founded both
in religion and policy, 307. See Peru.
India, the motives of Alexander the Great in

his expedition to, i. 15. The commerce
with, how carried on in ancient times,
19. And when arts began to revive in
Europe, 28. The firfl voyage made round
the Cape of Good Hope, I45

Indians in Spanifl America. See Americans.
Indies, Weft, why Columbus's discoveries

were so named, i. Ir.
Innocent IV. pope, his extraordinary miflion to

the prince of the Tartars, i. 32.
Inquisition, court of, when and by whom firfi

introduced into Portugal, i. 429.
Injers and reptiles, why so numerous and

noxious in America, i. 261.
7ohn I. king of Portugal, the first who ent

ships to explore the western coafis of Africa,
i. 40. His on prince Henry engages in
these attempts, 42.
7fohl II. king of Portugal, patronises all at-

tempts towards discoveries, i. 52. Sends
an embassy to Abylfinia, 55. His unge-
nerous treatment of Columbus, 69.
Iron, the reason why lavage nations were un-

acquainted with this metal, i. 334.
Jfabella, queen of Caltilc, is applied to by

Juan 'ercz in behalf of Chriflopher Colum-

bus, i. 74. Is again applied to by Quin-
tanilla and Santangel, 77. Is prevailed
on to equip him, 8. Dies, 174. Her
real motives for cncouraring discoveries in
America, ii. 349.
jIahella, the city of, in Hispaniola, built by

Chriflopher Columbus, i. 17.
Italy, the firlf country in Europe where

civilization and arts revived after the over-
throw of the Roman empire, i. 28. The
commercial spirit of, aive and enterprif-
ing, 29.

L.
Ladrone islands, discovered by Ferdinand Ma-

gellan, ii. 131.
Lakes, amazing size of those in North Ame-

rica, i. 250.
Las Casas, Bartholomew, returns from His-

paniola to solicit the cause of the enslaved
Indians at the court of Spain, i. 219. Is
sent back with powers by cardinal Ximenes,
220. Returns dissatisfied, 223. Procures
a new commission to be ent over on this
subject, 225. Recommends the scheme
of supplying the colonies with negrocs,
226. Undertakes a new colony, 228.
His conference with the bishop of Darien
before the Emperor Charles V. 230. Goc'.
to America to carry his schemes into exe-
cution, 232. Circumflances unfavourable
to him, 234. His final miscarriage, 235.
Revives his representations in favour of the
Indians, at the desire of the emperor, ii.
227. Composes a treatise on the deftruc-
tion of America, 228.
Lcon, Pedro Cieza de, charactcr of his Chro

nica dcl Peru, ii. 464.
Lety, his description of the courage and fero-

city of the Toupinambos, i. 477.
Lima, the city of, in Peru, ounded by Pi-

z.arro, ii. I94.
Logwood, the commodity that gives import-

ances to the provinces of H-onduras anil
Yucatan, ii. 331. Policy of the Spairi-
ards to defeat the English trade in, 332.
Louis, St king of France, his emnbaly to

the chan of the Tartars, i. 32.
Lozano, his account of the method of mak.

ing war among the natives of Gran Chaco.
i. 4?6

I. r to '.
E X.

L:'iqi., Hernando de, a priest, associates with

Pizarro in his Peruvian expedition, ii. 50.

M.

.M17drira, the island of, first discovered, i. 45.
.ladsc, prince of North Wales, flory of his

vovage and discovery of North America
examined, i. 436.
Magllam, Ferdinand, his account of the gi-

gantic size of the Patagonians, i. 303.
The exifgence of this gigantic race yet to
be decided, 305. 463. His introduction to the
court of Castile, ii. 128. Is equipped with
a squadron for a voyage of discovery, 129.
Sails through the famous fitrait that bears
his name, 130. Discovers the Ladrone
and Philippine islands, 131. Is killed, ibid.
Magnet, its property of attracting iron known

to the ancients, but not its polar inclina-
tion, i. 4. Extraordinary advantages re-
fulting from this discovery, 35.
Malo St. account of its commerce with Spa-

nifh America, ii. 407.
Manco Capac, founder of the Peruvian em-

pire, account of, ii. 164. 306.
Mandeville, Sir John, his eaflern travels, with

a character of his writings, i. 34.
Manilla, the colony of, established by Philip

II. of Spain, ii. 426. Trade between,
and South America, 427.
Mankind, their disposition and manners form-

ed by their situation, i. 267. Hence re-
semblances to be traced in very distant
places without communication, 268. Have
uniformly attained the greatest perfection
of their nature in temperate regions, 415.
Marco Polo, the Venetian, his extraordinary

travels in the Eafl, i. 33.
Mareft Gabriel, his account of the country

between the Illinois and Machillimakinac,
i. 472.
Mariana, Donna, a Mexican slave, her history,

ii. 12.
Marinur Tyrius, his erroneous position of

China, i. 430.
Martyr, Peter, his sentiments on the firfl dif-

covery of America, i. 439.
Mqfizos, in the Spanish American colonies,

difiinaion between them and Mulattoes,
ii. 368.

Metals, useful, the original natives of Ame-

rica totally unacquainted with, i. 334.
Mxicans, their account of their own origin,

compared with later discoveries, i. 280.
Descriptions of their hiitorical pi&ures, 480.
Various exaggerated accounts of the num-
bers of human viEtims sacrificed by them,
483. Their language furnished with re-
fpectful terminations for all its words, ii.
477. How they contributed to the support
of government, 478.
Mexico, arrival of Fernando Cortes on the

coast of, ii. i1. His interview with two
Mexican officers, 13. Information sent
to Montezuma, with some Spanish presents,
15. Montezuma fends presents to Cortes,
with orders not to approach his capital, 6.
State of the empire at that time, 17, The
Zempoallons court the friendlhip of Cortes,
28. Several caziques enter into alliance
with Cortes, 30. Character of the na-
tives of Tlafcala, 36. The Tlafcalans re-
duced to sue for peace, 42. Arrival of
Cortes at the capital city, 51. The city
described, 52. Montezuma acknowledges
himself a vassal to the Spanish crown, 66.
Amount of the treasure collected by Cortes,
68. Reasons of gold being found in such
small quantities, 68. The Mexicans en-
raged by the imprudent zeal of Cortes, 70.
Attack Alvarado during the absence of
Cortes, 84. Their resolute attack on
Cortes when he returned, 87. Death of
Montezuma, o9. The city abandoned
by Cortes, 93. Battle of Otumba, 97.
The Tepeacans reduced, 102. Prepara-
tions of the Mexicans againfi the return of
Cortes, 105. Cortes besieges the city
with a fleet on the lake, x15. The Spa-
niards repulsed in orming the city, 8.
Guatimozin taken prisoner, 124. Cortes
appointed governor, 135. His schemes
and arrangements, 136. Inhuman treat-
ment of the natives, 137. Reception of
the new regulations there, 231. A retro-
spec into the form of government, policy,
and arts in, 267. Our information con-
cerning, very imperfeEt, 270. Origin of
the monarchy, 271. Number and great-
ness of the cities, 275. Mechanical pro-
fcfions there distinguished fiom each other,
276. Diftinftion of ranks, 277. Politi-

cal

cal institutions, 279. Power and splendor
of their monarchs, 282. Order of go-
vernment, ibid. Provision for the support
of it, 283. Police of, ibid. Their arts,
284. Their paintings, 286. Their me-
thod of computing time, 290. Their wars
continual and ferocious, ibid. Their fu-
neral rites, 292. Imperfetion of their
agriculture, ibid. Doubts concerning the
extent of the empire, 293. Little inter-
course among its several provinces, 294.
Ignorance of money, 295. State of their
cities, 296. Temples and other public
buildings, 297. Religion of, 302. Causes
of the depopulation of this country, 346.
The small pox very fatal there, 348.
Number of Indian natives remaining there,
351. Lift and character of those authors
who wrote accounts of the conquell of,
444. Description of the aqueduc for the
supply of the capital city, 479. See Colonies.
Michael, St. the gulph of, in the South Sea,

discovered and named by Balboa,i. 204. The
colony of, eflablifhed by Pizarro, ii. 163.
Migrations of mankind, why firfl made by

land, i x.
Mind, human, the efforts of, proportioned to

the wants of the body, i. 314.
Mines of South America, the great induce-

ment to population, ii. 327. Some ac-
count of, 387. Their produce, 389.
The spirit with which they are worked,
390. Fatal effects of this ardor, 391.
Evidence of the pernicious effets of la-
bouring in them, 500. Of Mexico, total
produce of to the Spanish revenue, 514. 5 6.
Molucca Islands, the Spanish claims on, fold

by the Emperor Charles V. to the Portu-
guefe, ii. 133.
Monaic institutions, the pernicious effets

of, in the Spanish American colonies, ii.
378. Number of convents there, 501.
Mnoons, the periodical course of, when

discovered by navigators, i. 19.
Monteino, a Dominican preacher at S. Do-

mingo publicly remonfirates against the
cruel treatment of the Indians, i. 215.
Montezuma, the firll intelligence received by

the Spaniards of this prince, i. 242. Re-
ceives intelligence of the arrival of Ser-
sando Cortes in his dominions, ii. 15.
Hlis prcfents to Cortes, 16. Forbids lim

to approach his capital, 17. State of his
empire at this time, ibid. His character,
18. His perplexity at the arrival of the
Spaniards, 19. His timid negociations
with Cortes, 20. His scheme for destroy-
ing Cortes at Cholula discovercd, 47. His
irresolute condut, 50. His first interview
with Cortes, 51. Is seized by Cortes and
confined to the Spanilh quarters, 60. Is
fettered, 62. Acknowleges himself a
valal to the Spanith crown, 66. Re-
mains inflexible with regard to religion,
70. Circumstances of his death, go. Account
of a gold cup of his, in England, 479.
Mulattoes, in the Spanish American colonies

explanation of this diflintion, ii. 368.

N.
Narvaez, Pamphilo, is sent by Velafqucz

with an armament to Mexico, to supersede
Cortes, ii. 74. Takes poffefiion of Zem-
poallo, 79. Is defeated and taken prisoner
by Cortes, 82. How he carried on his
correspondence with Monte7uma, 456.
Natchez, an American nation, their politicl

institutions, i. 344. Causes of their tame
submission to the Spaniards, 348. Their
religious dotr-ines, 385.
Navigation, the arts ot, very slowly improv-

ed by mankind, i. 2. The knowledge
of, prior to commercial intercourse, bid.
Impe;fcrtions of among the ancients, 4.
More improved by the invention of the
mariner's compass, than by all the efforts
of preceding ages, 35. 'he firfl naval
discoveries undertaken by Portugal, 40.
Niegroes, their peculiar ituation under the

Spanish dominion in America, ii. 369.

Vewfoundland, its ituation describcd, i. 448.
New Ilolland, some account of the country

and inhabitants, i. 472.
New Spain, discovercd and named by Juan

de Grijalva, i. 241. See M'xiuv.

Nigno, Alonfo, his voyage to America, i. 150.
Vorwucgians, might in antient times have

migrated to, and colonized America, i.
279. 438.
Nuignez Vela, Blasco, appointed viceroy o!

Peru, to enforce the new regulations, ii.
231. His character, 34. Commits Va-
ca d Caflro to prison, 235, Diifenfions

bettwet"

between him and the court of audience,
237. Is confined, 238. Recovers his li-
beity, 239. Resumes his command, 240.
Is pursued by Gonzalo Pizarro, 241. Is
defeated and killed by Pizarro, 242.

0.
Ocambo, Diego, lent with a squadron from

Hilpaniola to desolate the country of Cu-
mana, i. 233. 235.
Ocampo, Sebastian de, firit fails round Cuba,

and discovers it to be an island, i. 88.
Ocean, though adapted to facilitate the inter-

course between distant countries continued
long a formidable barrier, i. i. See Com-
pa/s and Navigation.
Ojeda, Alonzo de, his private expedition to

the Weft Indies, i. 148. His second
voyage, 159. Obtains a government on
the continent, 192.
Olmeda, Father Bartholomew de, checks the

rash zeal of Cortes at Tlafcala in Mexico,
ii. 45. Is sent by Cortes to negociate with
Narvaez, 77.
Orellana, Francis, is appointed to the com-

mand of a bark built by Gonzalo Pizarro,
and deserts him, ii. 214. Sails down the
Maragnon, 215. Returns to Spain with
a report of wonderful discoveries, ibid.
Herrera's account of his voyage, 473.
Orgognez, commands Almagro's party againit

the Pizarros, and is defeated and killed by
them, ii. 206.
Orinoco, the great river of, discovered by

Christopher Columbus, i. I38. The
amaz.ing plenty of fifli in, 469. Strange
method of chufing a captain, among the
Indian tribes on the banks of, i. 363.
Otahcite, the inhabitants of, ignorant of the

art of boiling water, i. 483.
Otronha, battle of, between Cortes and the

1\Mexicans, ii. 97.
Ovtiand, Nicholas de, is sent governor to -Iif-

paniola, i. 159. His prudent regulations,
161. Rtilufrcs admission to Columbus, on
his fourlh voyage, 164. His ungenerous
behaviour to Columbus on his hipwrcck,
169. 171. Receives him at length and
si. nds him I me, 173. Engages in a war
with the Indians, 178. His cruel treat-

ment of them, 179. Encourages cultivation
and manufacures, 183. His method of tre-
panning the natives of the Lucayos, 186. Is
recalled, 189.

P.
Pacific Ocean, why and by whom so named,

ii. 131.
Packet boats, firfl etablifhment of, between

Spain and her American colonies, ii. 415.
Panama, is fettled by Pedrarias Davila, i.

212.
Parmenides, the first who divided the earth

by zones, i. 427.
Patagonianr, some account of, i. 303. The

reality of their gigantic size yet to be de-
cided, 305. 463.
Pedrarias Davila, is sent with a fleet to

supersede Balboa in his government of
Santa Maria on the iflhmus of Darien, i.
207. Treats Balboa ill, 208. Rapacious
conduEt of his men, 209. Is reconciled
to Balboa, and gives him his daughter,
210. Puts Balboa to death, 211. Re-
moves his settlement from Santa Maria to
Panama, 212.
Penguin, the name of that bird not derived

from the Welsh language, i. 437.
Perez, Juan, patronises Columbus at the

court of Castile, i. 74. His solemn invo-
cation for the success of Columbus's voy-
age, 82.
Periplus of Hanno, the authenticity of that

work justified, i. 421.
Peru, the firfl intelligence concerning this

country received by Vasco Nugnez de
Balboa, i. 200. 205. The coast of, firif
discovered by Pizarro, ii. 156. Pizarro's
second arrival, 16. His hoflile proceed-
ings against the natives, 162. The colony
of St. Michael established, 163. State of
the empire at the time of this invasion,
ibid. The kingdom divided between Hu-
afcar and Atahualpa, 167. Atahualpa
usurps the government, 168. Huafcar
solicits afllance from Pizarro, 169. Ata-
hualpa visits Pizarro, 173. Is seized by
Pizarlo, 175. Agreement for his ransom,
177. Is refused his liberty, 180. Is cru-
elly put to death, 185. Confusion of the
empire on this event, 186. Quito reduced

by

by Benalcazar, 88. The city of Lima
founded by Pizarro, 194. Chili invaded
by Almagro, 195. InfurreEtion of the
Peruvians, 196. Almagro put to death
by Pizarro, 209. Pizarro divides the coun-
try among his followers, 211. Progress of
the Spanish arms there, 212. Francis
Pizarro afTafinated, 219. Reception of
the new regulations there, 232. The vice-
roy confined by the court of audience,
238. The viceroy defeated and killed by
Gonzalo Pizarro, 242. Arrival of Pedro
de la Gafca, 249. Reducion and death
of Gonzalo Pizarro, 257. The civil wars
there not carried on with mercenary fol-
diers, 258. But nevertheless gratified with
immense rewards, 259. Their profusion
and luxury, ibid. Ferocity of their con-
tefls, 260. Their want of faith, ibid.
Instances, 261. Division of by Gafca
among his followers, 262. A retrofpet
into the original government, arts, and
manners of the natives, 267. The high
antiquity they pretend to, 303. Their
records, 304. Origin of their civil po-
licy, 306. This founded in religion, 307.
The authority of the Incas absolute and
unlimited, ibid. All crimes there punished
capitally, 308. Mild genius of their re-
ligion, 309. Its influence on their civil
policy, 310. And on their military sys-
tem, 31 I. Peculiar state of property
there, 312. Diftin&ion of ranks, 313,
State of arts, 314. Improved slate of agri-
culture, ibid. Their buildings, 316. Their
public roads, 317. Their bridges, 319.
Their mode of refining silver ore, 320.
Works of elegance, 321. Their civiliza-
tion, nevertheless, but imperfe&t, 322.
Cuzco the only place that had the appear-
ance of a city, ibid. No perfec fepara-
tion of professions, 323. Little commer-
cial intercourse, ibid. Their unwarlike
spirit, 324. Eat their flesh and fish raw,
325. Brief account of other provinces
under the viceroy of New Spain, 326.
Causes of the depopulation of this country,
347. The small pox very fatal there, 348.
Writers who gave accounts of the con-
quell of, 463. Their method of build-
ing, 487. State of the revenue derived

VOL. II.

from, by the crown of Spain, 515. See
Colonies.
Peter I. czar of Russia, his extensive vieus

in prosecuting Asiatic discoveries, i. 273.
Phenicians, antient, (late of commerce and

navigation among them, i. 6. Their trade
how conduated, 421.
Philip II. of Spain, his tubulent disposition

aided by his American treaiures, ii. 396
Eflablifhes the colony of Manilla, 426.
Philip III. exhausts his country by inconfi-

derate bigotry, ii. 396.
Philippine islands, discovered by Ferdinand

Magellan, ii. 131. A colony eltablifhcd
there by Philip II. of Spain, 426. Trade
between, and America, 427.
Physic, the art of, in America, why conneted

with divination, i. 390.
Pinto, chevalier, his description of the cha-

racteriftic features of the native Americans,
i. 460.
Pinzon, Vincent Yanez, commands a vef-

fel under Columbus in his first voyage
of discovery, i. 81. Sails to America
on a private adventure with four ships, 180.
Discovers Yucatan, 88.
Pizarro, Ferdinand, is besieged in Cusco by

the Peruvians, ii. 198. Is surprised there
by Almagro, 201. Escapes with Alva-
rado, 203. Defends his brother at the
court of Spain, 210. Is committed to
prison, 211.
Pizarro, Francisco, attends Balboa, in his

settlement on the iflhmus of Darien, i. 194.
Marches under him across the iflhmus,
where they discover the South Sea, 204.
His birth, education, and character, ii .148.
Associates with Almagro ard De Luque,
in a voyage of discovery, 150. His ill
success, 151. Is recalled, and defeited
by most of his followers, 154. Remnains
on the island of Gorgona for supplies,
ibid. Discovers the coast of Peru, i56.
Returns to Panama, 157. Goes to Spain
to solicit reinforcements, 158. Procures
the fupremc command for himself, 159.
Is afiflted with money by Cortes, ibid.
Lands again in Peru, I61. His hoflile
proceedings againfi the natives, 162. Es-
tablifhes the colony of St. Miichael, 163.
State of the Peruvian empire at this tihn, ib.

4 A Caufc

Caule of his easy penetration into
the country, 168. Is applied to by Hu-
afcar, for assistance against his vitorious
brother Atahualpa, 169. State of his
forces, ibid. Arrives at Caxamalca, 171.
Is visited by the Inca, 173. His perfidious
feizu-e of him, 175. Agrees to Atahual-
pa's offer for his ransom, 177. Division of
their plunder, 179. Refuses Atahualpa
his liberty, 80. His ignorance exposed
to Atahualpa, 183. Beflows a form of
trial on the Inca, 184. Puts him to
death, 185. Advances to Cusco, 187.
Honours conferred on him by the Spanish
court, 19i. Beginning of dissensions be-
tween him and Almagro, 192. His civil
regulations, 193. Founds the city of
Lima, 194. Infurrecion of the Peru-
vians, 196. Cusco seized by Almagro,
201. Deludes Almagro by negociations,
203. Defeats Almagro, and takes him
prisoner, 206. Puts Almagro to death,
209. Divides the country among his fol-
lowers, 211. The impolitic partiality of
his allotments, ibid. Makes his brother
Gonzalo governor of Quito, 213. Is as-
faflinated by Juan de Herrada, 219.
Pizarro, Gonzalo, is made governor of Quito,

by his brother Francis, ii. 213. His ex-
pedition over the Andes, ibid. Is deserted
by Orellana, 214. His distress on this
event, 216. His difafirous return to Quito,
217. Is encouraged by the people to op-
pose Nugnes Vela, the new viceroy, 236.
Assumes the government of Peru, 238.
Marches against the viceroy, 240. De-
feats and kills him, 242. Is advised by
Carvajal to afflume the sovereignty of the
country, 243. Chufes to negociate with
the court ot Spain, 244. Consultations
of the court on his conduEt, 245. His
violent resolutions on the arrival of Pedro
de la Gafca, 250. Refolvesto oppofehim
by violence, 251. Marches to reduce
Centeno at Cusco, 253. Defeats him,
254. Is deserted by his troops on the ap-
proach of Gafca, 256. Surrenders and is
executed, 257. His adherents men of no
principle, 261.
Plata, Rio de, discovered by Dias de Solis,

i. 213. Its amazing width, 447.

Pliny, the naturalifi, inltance of his ignorance

in geography, i. 427.
Ponce de Leon, Juan, discovers Florida, i.

197. Romantic motive of his voyage,
198.
Population of the earth, flow progress of,

1. 1.
Porto Bello, discovered and named by Chris-

topher Columbus, i. 66.
Porto Rico, is fettled and fubjeaed by Juan

Ponce de Leon, i. 167.

Porto Santo, the firit discovery of, i. 44.
Portugal, when and by whom the court of

inquisition was firfi introduced into, i.
429.
PortuiueJe, a view of the circumstances that

induced them to undertake the discovery
of unknown countries, i. 39. 41. Sirs
African discoveries of, 42. Madeira dif-
covered, 45. They double Cape Bojador,
46. Obtain a papal grant of all the coun-
tries they hould discover, 49. Cape
Verd Islands and the Azores discovered,
50. Voyage to the Eaf Indies by Vasco
de Gama, 145.
Potofi, the rich silver mines there, how dif-

covered, ii. 388. The mines of, great-
ly, exhausted and scarcely worth working,
505.
Prioners of war, how treated by the native

Americans, i. 357.
Property, the idea of, unknown to the .ative

Americans, i. 337. Notions of the Bra-
filians concerning, 473.
Proteclor of the Indians, in Spanish America,

his funcion, ii. 374.
Ptolemy the philosopher, his geographical

descriptions more ample and exac than
thofc of his predecessors, i. 24. His Geo-
graphy translated by the Arabians, 27.
His erroneous position of the Ganges, 424.

Q_

tietlavara, brother of Montezuma, succeeds
him as king of Mexico, ii. Io5. Con-
ducts in person the fierce attacks which
obliged Cortes to abandon his capital, o15.
Dies of the fmali pox, o16.
Qqevcedo, bishop of Daricn, his conference

with

with Las Cafis o the treatment of the
Indians, in the presence of the emperor
Charles V. i. 230.
jii(kfilver, the property of the famous mines
of, at Guanacabelica, reserved by the
crown of Spain, ii. 506. The price of,
why reduced, ibid.
,itlqina, orJefiit's bark, a produ&ion pe-
culiar to Pe ru, ii. 393.
.i/os, or hiltoric cords of the Peruvians,

fomc account of, ii. 304.
Stit, the kingdom of, conquered by Huana

Capac, Inca of P'riu, ii. 166. Is left to
his son Atahualpa, 167. Atahualpa's ge-
nclal revolts after his death, 187. Is re-
duced by the Spaniards under Benalcazar,
iS8. Iucnalcaz.7r deprived, and Gonzalo
I'izarro made governor, 213.

R
Ranmflo, his defence of Hanno's account of

the coafl of Africa, i. 422.
Regi/icr flips, for what purpose introduced

in the trade between Spain and her co-
lonies, ii. 410. Supersede the use of the
galeons, 411.
Religion of the native Americans, an inquiry

into, i. 378.
Ribas, his account of the political ate of the

people of Cinaloa, i. 474. Of their want
of religion, 484.
Rio de la Plata, and Tucuman, account of

those provinces, ii. 335.
Rivers, the amazing size of those in America,

i. 249.
Robifion, professor, his remarks on the tem-

perature of various climates, i. 448.
Roldan, Francis, is left chief juflice in His-

paniola, by Christopher Columbus, i. 131.
Becomes ringleader of a mutiny, 140.
Submits, 143.
Romans, their progress in navigation and dif-

covery, i. 17. Their military spirit averse
to mechanical arts and commerce, 18.
Navigation and trade favoured in the pro-
vinces under their government, 19. Their
extensive discoveries by land, 20. Their
empire, and the fcicnces, dcllroyed together,
25.

Rubriquis, father, his embanfy from France

to the clian of the Tartars, i. 33.
Rujfans, Asiatic difcovcries made by them,

i. 273. Uncertainty of, 458.

S
Sacotrcas, the rich silver mines there, when

discovered, ii. 388.
San Salvador, discovered and named by Chris-

topher Columbus, i. 93.
Sancho, Don Pedro, account of his Hiflory of

the conquest of Peru, ii. 463.
Sandoval, the shocking barbarities executed by,

in Mexico, ii. 137.
-- Francisco Tello de, is sent by the

emperor Charles V. to Mexico, as vifita-
dor of America, ii. 231. His moderation
and prudence, ibid.

Savage life, a general eflimate of, i. 402.
Scalps, a motive of the native Americans for

taking them from their enemies, i. 477.
Serralvo, marquis de, his extraordinary gains

during his vice-royalty in America, ii. 516.
Seville, extraordinary increase of its manu-

faaures by the American trade, ii. 507.
Its trade greatly reduced, ibid. The Ame-
rican trade removed to Cadiz, 401.
Silver ore, method of refining it pra:ised by

the native Peruvians, ii. 320.
Sonora, late discoveries of rich mines made

there by the Spaniards, ii. 328.
Soul, American ideas of the immortality of, i.

387.
South Sea, firfi discovered by Vasco Nugncz

de Balboa, i. 204
Spain, general idea of the policy of, with re-

gard to the American colonies, ii. 352.
Early interposition of the regal authority
in the colonies, 353. All the American
dominions of, fubjeaed to two viceroys,
354. A third vice-royalty lately ftlablifll-
ed, 355. The colonies o, compared with
those of Greece and Rone, 361. Ad-
vantages he derived from lhcr colonies.
394. Whly she does not fill derive the
fame, 395. Rapid decline of trade, 397.
This decline increased by the mode ol
regulating the intercourse \with America,
400. E'mplo)s guarda coaflas to check illi-

4. A 2c t

cit trade, 409. The ulif of regifler ships
introduced, 410. Establishment of the
company of Caraccas, 413. Enlargement
of commercial ideas there, 414. Free
trade permitted to several provinces, 416.
Revenue derived from America, 429. Spe-
cification, 513.
Spaniards, their curious form of taking pof-

session of new discovered countries, i.
443.
Strabs, a citation from, proving the great

geographical ignorance of the ancients, i.
424. His own want of geographical know-
ledge, 427.
.Superlliiiw, always connected with a desire

of penetrating into the fcrets of futurity, i.
389.

T
Tapia, Chriftoval de, is sent from Spain

to Mexico, to supersede Cortes in his
command, but fails in the attempt, ii.
134.
'Tartars, the possibility of their migrating to

America, i. 277.
Tlajcala, in Mexico, character of the natives

of, ii. 36. Oppose the passage of the Spa-
niards, 37. Are reduced to sue for peace,
42.
Tobacco, that of Cuba the befl flavoured of

any in all America, ii. 393.
Toupinambos, account of their ferocious cou-

rage from Lery, i. 477.
Trade, free, opened between Spain and her

colonies, i. 416. Increase of the Spanish
customs from this measure, 51o.
Trade winds, the periodical course of, when

discovered by navigators, i. 19.
Travellers, ancient, chara&er of their writ-

lngs, 1. 35.
Trinidad, the island of, difcovcred by Chriflo-

pher Columbus on his third voyage, i.
137.
Ti'u/man, and Rio de In Plata, account of

those provinces, ii. 335.
Tyre, the commerce of that city, how con-

dulted, i. 421.
Ty/lhr of ':panifh America, how applied by

the court (,s Sp.in, ii. 514.

V.
Vaca de Cajlro, Chriftoval, is sent from Spain

to regulate the government of Peru, ii. 210.
Arrives at Quito, 221. Af'umes the fu-
preme authority, 222. Defeats young Al-
magro, 223. The severity of his proceed-
ings, 224. Prevents an insurrection con-
certed to oppose the new regulations, 234.
Is imprisoned by the new viceroy, 235.
Valverde, father Vincent, his curious ha-

rangue to Atahualpa, Inca of Peru, ii.
174. Gives his fan6cion to the trial and
condemnation of Atalualpa, 184.
Vega, Garcilafo de la, character of his com-

mentary on the Spanlif writers concerning
Peru, ii. 465.
Vegetables, their natural tendency to fertilize

the foil where they grow, i. 264.
Velasquez, Diego de, conquers the island of

Cuba, i. 196. 237. His preparations for
invading New Spain, ii. . His difficulty
in chufing a commander for the expedi-
tion, 2. Appoints Fernando Cortes, 3.
His motives to this choice, 4. Becomes
suspicious of Cortes, 6. Orders Cortes to
be deprived of his commission and arrested,
7. Sends an armament to Mexico after
Cortes, 72.
Senegas, P. his character of the native Cali-

fornians, i. 467.
Fenerealdifeafe, originally brought from Ame-

rica, i. 307. Appears to be wearing out,
308. Its firfl rapid progress, 464.
Venezuela, history of that settlement, ii.

340o.
Fenice, its origin as a maritime slate, i. 30.

Travels of Marco Polo, 33.
Verd, islands discovered by the Portuguese, i.

50.
Viceroys, all the Spanish dominions in Ame-

rica subjected to two, ii. 354. A third
lately eflablifhed, 355. Their powers,
ibid. A fourth eflablifhed, 421.
Villa, Segnor, lls account of the Ltate of po-

pulation in New Spain, ii. .195. I-is de-
tail of the Spanish American revenue,
51. Ville/gno, Antnrio, one of Cortcs's foldl.'

foments a m utiny among his troops, ii. :
Is discovered by Cortes, and hanged, 1 1

Ullka.

UlToa, Don Antonio, de, his description of

the chzra&eriftic features of the native
Americans, i. 460, 461. His reason for
the Americans not being so sensible of pain
as the reft of mankind, i. 479. His ac-
count of the gcods exported from Spain to
America, with the duty on them, 516.
Volcanos, remarkable number of, in the northern

parts of the globe discovered by the Ruf-
sians, i. 459.

W.
Wafer, Lionel, his account of a peculiar race

of diminutive Americans, i. 301. Com-
pared with similar producions in Africa,
302.
War song of the native Americans, the senti-

ments and terms of, i. 478.
Women, the condition of, among the native

Americans, i. 318. Are not prolific, 321.
Are not permitted to join in their drunken
feasts, 399. Nor to wear ornaments, 481.

X.
.Yeres, Francisco de, secretary to Pizarro,

the earliefl writer on his Peruvian expedi-
tion, ii. 463.
Ximenes, cardinal, his regulations for the

treatment of the Indians in the Spanish
colonies, i. 220. Patronises the attempt
of Ferdinand Magellan, ii. i28.

Y.
Tucatan, the province of, discovered by 'in..

zon and Diaz de Solis, i. 188. Described,
446. From whence that province derives
its value, ii. 331. Policy of the court of
Spain with refpec to, 332.

Z.
Zarate, Don Augufline, chara6cer of his

History of the conquest of Peru, ii. 464.
Zones, the earth how divided into, by the

geography of the ancients, i. 22. By whom
firfl so divided, 427.
Zummaraga, Juan de, firlt bishop of Mexico,

the deftroycr of all the ancient records of
the Mexican empire, ii. 27 1.
END OF THE SECOND VOLUME
