'1' H E

H IS T O RY

OF

A Mi E R IC A.

V O L. II.

THE

I ST OR Y

OF

C A.

By WILLIAM ROBERTSON, D.D.

pRINCIPAL OF THE UNIVERSITY OF EDINBURGH, HISTORIOGRAPHER

TO HIS MAJESTY FOR SCOTLAND) AND MEMBER OF THE

ROYAL ACADEMY OF HISTORY AT MA~DRID·

IN THREE VOLUME S.

V O L. II.

THE SIXTH EDITION.

L OND ON:

Prihted for A. STRAHANI T. CADELL, in the Strand;

and J. BBLyova, at Edinburgh.

MDCCXCII.

A ME R I

f es

I OR 2F O R T H S E .

~Cresaw

I :PI-

S on a SE A,

utorr of

America.

fquato or~pinocdaline Gz en e majes

eder Ga n s

BcvEanla inores o1·

Li~k~tPO Jonaanafas

tabs, . ,. Ms a :

#4a
ac 6 2,a , ya~UUU 3ar ia r;PoFo

drawranvr/A Advoyede a n'Sptge9, r tvasad:rwh ewd

# BOOK IV.

T IIE

HI STORY

B O OK IV.

TV E N T Y - S I X years had e laped a o a t
since Columbus conduated the people

of Europe to the New TVorld. During that o~~,,:~
pe~riod the Spaniards had made greatt prog~ress knwn
in exploring its various regions. They had
-vilited all the islands feattered in different
cluiters through that part of the ocean which
flows in between North and South America.
They had failed along the ealtern coast of the
continent from the river De la Plata to the
bottom of the M~exican gulf, and had found
that it firetched without interruption through
this vast portion of the globe. They had dif-
covered the great Southern Ocean, which
opened new profpeas in that quarter. - They
had acquired some knowledge of the coast of
Florida, which led them to observe the conti-

-Vor~. II. B nent

B op o nent as it extended in att opposite direaion;
t-1 and though they pushed their discoveries no

farther towards the north, other nations had
visited those parts which they negleaed. The
English, in a voyage, the motives and success
of which shall be related in another part of this
H-iffory, had failed along the coast of America
fromn Labr-ador to the confines of Florida; and
the Portuguese, in quelt of a thorter passage
to the East Indies, had ventured into the
northern seas, and viewed the f~ame regions ".
Thus, at the period where I have chosen to
take a view of the slate of the New World, its
extent was known almost from its northern
extremity to thirty-five degrees south of the
equator. The countries which .firetch from
thence to the southern boundary of America,
the great empire of Peru, and the interior slate
of the extensive dominions fubjeR to the fove-
reigns of Mexico, were still undis~covered.

*rete -HEN we contemplate the New World, the

Ne Worl'd. fir(1 circumitance that firikes us is its immense

extent. It was not a fmnall portion of the
earth, so inconsiderable that it might have
escaped the observation or research of former
ages, which C~olumbus discovered. He made

*Herrera, dec. r. lib. vi. c. r6.

knows

known a new hemisphere, larger than eithei- BO &
Europe, or Asia, or Africa, the three noted L~v
diviilons of the ancient continent, and not much
inferior in dimeniions to a third part of the
habitable globe.

AMERICA is remarkable not only for its mag-

nitude, but for its polition. It firetches from'
the northern polar circle to a high southern
latitude, above fifteen hundred miles beyond
the farthest extremity of the old continent on
that fide of the line. A country of such extent
passes through all the climates capable of be-
coming the habitation of man, and fit for
yielding the various produaions peculiar either
to the temperate or to the torrid regions of the
earth.

NExT to the extent of the Nevi World, the Grand ob.

grandeur of the objeas which it presents to view <ents pr
is most apt to frrike the eye of an observer. Na.
ture seems here to have carried on her opera-
tions upon a larger scale, and with a bolder hand,
and to have distinguished the features of this
country by a peculiar magnificence. The moun- Its moun-
tains of America are much superior in height to tams,·
those in the other diviflons of the globe. Even
the plain of qcuito, which may be considered as

B 2 the

B O O K the base of the Andes, is elevated farther above

C~L~3 the s~ea than the top of the Pyrenees. This flu-

pendous ridge of the Andes, no les~s remarkable
for extent than elevation, rises in different places
more than one third above the Pike of Tene.
riffe, the highest land in the atncient hemisphere.
The Arides may literally be said to hide their
heads in the clouds; the florms often roll, and
the thunder burits below their fumnmits, which,
though exposed to the rays of the fun in the
center of the torrid mone, are covered with
everlasting [nows b

re:ls . FRoin those 10sty mountai~ns des~cend rivers,

proportionally large, with which the fireams in
the ancient continent are not to be compared,
either for length of course, or.the vast body of
wvater which they roll towards the ocean. The
M2aragnon, the Orinoco, the Plata in South
America, the Miflifippi and St. Laurence in
North America, flow in s~uch [pacious ~channels,
that, long before they feel the influence of the
tide, they resemble arms of the sea rather than
rivers of fresh water c.

lakes, THE lakes of the New W~orld are no less

< conspicuous for grandeur than its mountains

SSee NOTE L e See NOTE II,

and

and rivers. "There is nothing in other parts of B OP K
the globe wvhich resembles the prodigious chain ccsl
o~f lakes in North Ameripa. They may pro-
perly be termed inland seas of fresh water; and
even those of the second or third clas~s in magni-
tude, are of larger circuit (the Cas~pian sea exe
cepted) than the greatest lake of the ancieht con,
tmnent.

THE Niew W~orld is of- a form extremely res form fa-

favourable to commercial intercourse. T When omre
a continent is formed, like Africa, of one
valk solid mass, unbroken by arms of the sea
penetrating into its interior parts, with few
large rivers, and thos~e at a considerable difiance
from each other, the greater part of it seems
<leftined to remain for ever uncivilized, and to
be debarred from any altive or enlarged com-
munication with the reft of mankind. WChen,
like Europe, a continent is opened by inlets of
the ocean of .great extent, such as the Mlediterra-
nean and Baltic; or when, like Asia, its coast
is broken by deep bays advancing far into the
country, such as the Black Sea, the gulfs of
Arabia, of Persia, of Bengal, of Siam, and ·of
Leotang; when the surrounding seas are filled
with large and fertile islands, and the continent
itself watered with a variety of navigable rivers,
those regions may be said to possess whbatever

B 3 ca0.

n a o K~ can facilitate the progress of their inhabitants

cc-----. in commerce and improvement, In all these

refpeats America may bear a conmpsrifon with
the other quarters of the globe. The gulf of
Mexico, which flows in between North and
South America, may be considered as a Medi.
terranean sea, which opens a maritime com-
merce with all the fertile countries by which
it is encircled. The islands scattered in it are
inferior only to those in the Indian Archipe-
lago, in number, in magnitude, and in value.
As we firetch along the northern divilion of
the American hemisphere, the Bay of Chefag-
peak pres~ents a spacious inlet, which conduats
the navigator far into the interior parts of pro-
vinces no less fertile than extensive ; and if ever
the progres~s of culture and population shall
mitigate the extreme rigour of the climate in
the more northern diffrias of America, flud-
fon's Bay may become as subservient to com-
mercial intercours~e in that quarter of the globe,
as the Baltic is in Europe. The other great
portion of the New World is encom~passed on
every fide by the sea, except one narrow neck,
which separates the Atlantic from the Pacific
Ocean; and though it ·be not opened by ~spa-
clous bays or arms of the sea, its interior parts
are rendered accellible by a number of large
Fivers, fed by so many auxiliary fireams, flow-

mng

ing in farch various direftions, that, almoit with. B ot 15
out any aid from the hand of induffry and art, 6--v--
an inland navigation may be carried on through
all the provinces from the river De la Plata to
the gulf of Paria. Nor is this bounty of Na-
ture confined to the southern diviflon of Ame+
rica; its northern continent abounds no less in
rivrers which are navig~able almost to their
sources, and by its immense chain of lakes
proviflon is made for an inland communication,
viore extensive and commodious than in any
quarter of the globe. The countries firetching
from the gulf of Darien on one fide, to that of
California on the other, which form the chain
that binds the two parts of the American conti-
nent together, are not deffitute of peculiar ad-
vantages. Their coast on one fide is washed by
the Atlantic Ocean, on the other by the Pacific.
Some of their rivers flow into the former, some
into the latter, and s~ecure to them aHl the com-
mercial benefits that may ref~Ilt from a commu-
alcation with both,

But what moRt liflinguifhes America from Temperature

other parts of the earth, is the peculiar tempe- a en.
rature ofits climate, and the different laws to
w·hich it is f~ubjeQt with refped to the diffribur
tion of heat and cold. We cannot determine
with precision the portion of heat felt in any

B 4 part

n 0 0 a part of the glo'oe, merely by meafulring its

t- ~~ difiance from the equator. The climrate of a

country is affeaed, in fame degree, by its ele-
vation above the sea, by the extent of continent,
by the nature of the foil, the height of adjacent
mountains, and many other circumflances. The
inlfluence of there, however, is, from various
causes, Icts. considerable in the g-reater part of
the ancient continent; anld from knowinge the
polition of any country there, wfe can pronounce
with greater certainlty, what will be the warmth
of its climate, and the nature of its produce
tions.

iTHE maxims which are founded upon obfer-

cold. vation of our hemisphere will not apply to the

other. In the Ne v World, cold predominates.
The rigour of the fri-gid zone ex:tends over half
of those regions, which thould be temperate by
their polition. Countries where the grape and
the figr thrould ripen, are buried under [now one
half of the year; and lands situated in the fame
parallel with the most fertile and best cultivated
provinces in Europe, are chilled with perpetual
froffs, which almost destroy the power of vege-
tation ". As we advance to thiofe parts of`
America which lie in the fame parallel with
provinces of Asia and Africa, blessed with an

See N OT E III.

uniform

aniform enjoyment of such genial warmth as is n 0~ 0
most friendly to life and to vegetation, the do-
minion of cold continues to be felt, and winter
reigns, though during a fhoi-t period, w~ith ex·
treme severity. If we proceed along the Ame-
rican continent into the torrid zone, wte shall
find the cold prevalent in the New World ex-
tending itself also to this region of the globe,
and mitigating the exces~s of its fervour. While
the negro on the coast of Africa is scorched with
unremitting heat, the inhabitant of Peru breathes
an air equally mild and temperate, and is per-
petually thaded under a canopy of grey clouds,
which intercepts the fierce beams of the fun,
without obffruaing his friendly infl uence e. Along
the eastern coast of America, the climate, though
more limilar to that of the torrid zone in other
parts of the earth, is nevertheless considerably
milder than in those countries of Asia and Africa
which lie in the fame latitude. If from the
southern tropic we continue our progress to the
extremity of the American continent, we meet
with frozen seas, and countries horrid, barren,
and fearcely habitable for cold, much sooner
than in the north F.

* Voyag~e de Ulloa, tom. i. p. 45~3. Anfon'S Voyage,

p. I 8 4.

f Anfon's Voy-agre, P* 74; and Voyage de Qui~ros, cher

Hist. Gen. des Voy·ages, tomn. xiv. p. 83. Richard Hist.
Natur. de P',ir, ii. 305, &c.

2 I VARroUs

B O O K ' VAR'oos causes combine in rendering the

Cc-- climate of America so extremely different from

Caukrs of
cns~. that of the ancient continent. · Though the ut-

most extent of America towards the north be
not yet discovered, we kinow that it: advances
much nearer to the pole than either Europe
or Asia. B~oth there have large seas to the
north, which are open during part of the year;
and even when covered with ice, the wind that
blows over them is less intens~ely cold than that
which blows over land in the fame high lati-
tudes, 13ut in America the larid firetches from
the river St. Laurence towards the pole, and
spreads out immensely to the Weft. A chain
of enormous mountains, covered with frtow and
ice, runs through all this dreary region. The
wind, in paiffig over such an extent of high
and frozen land, becomes so, impregnated witly
cold, that it acquires a piercing keeanefs, which
it retains in its prog-ef~s through warmer cli-
mates, and is not entirely mitigated until it
reach the Gulf of Mexico. Over all the con-
tinent of North America, a north-wefferly
wind and excefi~ve cold are synonymous terms.
Even in the most sultry weather, the moment
that the wind veers to that quarter, its pene-
trating influence is felt in a tradition from
heat to cold, no less violent than sudden. To
this powerful cauie we may alcribe the extrat-

ordiinary

ordinary dominion of cosld, and its violent in- a 0v 0 r
roads into the southern provinces in that part c&·-
of the globe .

OTHER causes, no less remarkrable, diminish

the a~ive power of heat in those parts of the
American continent which lie between the
tropics. In all that portion of the globe, the
wind blows in an invariable direaion from east
to weft. As this wind holds its course across
the ancient continent, it arrives at the countries
which firetch along the weffern shore of Africa,
inflamed with all the fiery particles which it
hath colleae4l from the s~ultry plains of Asia,
and the burning sands in the African deserts.
The coast of Africa is, accordingly, the region
of the earth which feels the most fervent heat,
and is ex-posed to the unmitigated ardour of
the torrid zone. But this [ame wind which
brings s~uch an accedion of warmth to the
countries lying between the river of Senegal
and Cafr-aria, travers~es the Atlantic Ocean, be-
fore it reaches the American shore. It is cooled
in its passage over this vast body of water, and
is felt as a refreshing gale along the coast of
Brasil 5, and Guiana, rendering there countries,

g Charlevoix Hist. de Nov. Fr. iii. 16j. Hist. generale

Voyages, tom. xy. 2<4, &c.

b See N O T E IV.

though

n qg 0 thoughi among the warmest in America, terr(.
- perate, when compared with those which lie

opposite to them in Africa i. AS this wind
advances in its course· across America, it meets
wi~th immense plains, covered with impene-
trable forests, or occupied by largne rivers,
marshes, and flagnating waters, where it can
recover no considerable degree of heat. At
length it arrives at the Andes, which run from
north to south through the whole continent.
JL1 passIng over their elevated and frozen fum.
mnits, it is so thoroughly cooled, that the
greater part of the countries beyond them
hardly feel the ardour to which they seem ex:
posed by their situation k. In the other pro-
vinces of America, from Tierra Ferm& weft-
ward to the Mlexican eynpire, the heat of the
climate is tempered, in some places, by the
elevation of the land above the sea, in others,
by their extraordinary humidity, and in all, by
the etnormous mountains scattered over this
traft. The islands of America in the Torrid
Zonre are eith~er finall or mountainous, and
are fan~ned alternately by refreshing sea and
land breezes.

i See NTO T E V.
* Acofa H-iil. Novi Orb'lis, lIb'. ii, c. 11. Euffoil HMl.

N;aturrelle, &ic. tom. ii. 5;2, &tc. ix. 107, &c. Ofb~orn's
Collec9. of Voggers, ii. p. 868.

Tax caus~es of the extraordinary cold towards a 0v 0 r

the southern limits of America, and in the seas N-r -
beyond it, cannot be ascertained in a manner
equally satisfying. It was long suppose~d that
a vast continent, diftinguithed by the name of
lerr-a Au/lraliJ Incogrnita, lay between the
southern extremity of America and the Ant-
araic pole. The fame principles which ac-
count for the extraor-dinary degree of cold inr
the northern regions of America, were em-
ployed in order to explain that which is felt at
Cape Hlorn and the adjacent countries. The
imnmenfe extent of the southern continent, and
the large rivers which it poured into the ocean,
were mentioned and admitted by philos~ophers
as caus~es f~ufficient to occasion the unusual fen-
fation of cold, and the still more uncommon
appearances of frozen seas in that region of the
globe. But the imaginary continent to which
such influence was aferibed, having been
fCearched for in vain, and the space which it
was fulppof~ed to occupy having been found to
be an open sea, new conjeatures must be formed
with refpeQ to the causes of a temperature of
climate, s~o extremely different from that which
we experience in countries removed at the fame
dillance from the opposite pole '

a See N OT E VL.

~AFTE14

B o 0 a ArrER contemplating thos~e permanent and

LI charaderiffic qualities of the American conti-

Condition
when firR nent, which arise from the peculiarity of its
dlrcovered,.

situation, and the dif~polition of its parts, the
next objea that merits attention is its condition
when firlt dis~covered, as far as that depended
upon the induffry and operations of man. The
effea-~s of human ingenuity and labour are more
extensive and considerable, than even our own
vanity is apt at first to imagine. W·hen wve
survey the. face of the habitable globe, no
small part of that fertility and beauty, which
we akcribe to the hand of nature, is the work
of'man. His efforts, when continued throug-h
a f~ucceiron of ages, change the appearance
and improve the qualities of the earth. As a
great part of the ancient continent has longs
been occupied by nations far advanced in arts
and indufkry, our eye is accuffomed to view
the earth in that form which it afifumes when
rendered fit to be the residence of a numerous
race of men, and to supply them with nourish.-
ment.

Rude9 and BUT in the New World, the slate of man-
uncultivat.
cd. kind was ruder, and the afped of Nature ex-

tremely different. Throughout all its vast re-
gions, there were only two monarchies remark-
able for extent of territory, or difting~uilhed by

any

any pro~gress in improvement. The refb· of B VO K
this continent was poffefied by finall inde- L--
pendent tribes, destitute of arts and induffry,
and neither capable to correc? the defefts, nor
desirous to meliorate the condition of that part
of the earth allotted to them for their habita-
ition. Countries, occupied by su~ch peo~ple,
were almost in the fame slate as if they had
been without inhabitants. Immnenf~e forests
covered a great part of the uncultivated earth;
and as the hand of induffry had not taught the
rivers to run in ·a proper channel, or drained
off the flagnating water, many of the molt
fertile plains were over-flowved with inundations,
or converted into marihes. In ~the southern
provinces, where the warmth ,of the fun, the
molflure of the climate, and the fertility of the
foil, combine in calling forth the most vigor-
ous powers of vegetation, the woods are so
choked with its rank luxuriance, as to be
almolt· impervious, .and the s~urface of the
ground is hid from the eye under a thick cover-
ing of tlhrubs and herbs and weeds. In this
itate of wild unassisted nature, a great part of
the large provinces in South America, which
extend from the bottom of the Andes to the
sea, still remain. The European colonies have
cleared and cultivated a few spots along the
coast, but the original race of inhabitants,

B Oy O as rude and indolent as ever, have done nothinen
LM~s to open or improve a fdountry, poffefling almoit

every advantage of situation an~d climate. As
wve advance towards the northern provinces of
A~merica, Nature continues to wear the fame
uncultivated afpeQ, and in proportion as the
kigour of the climate increases, appears more
desolate and horrid. There the forei~s, though
not encumbered with the fame exuberance of
vegetation, are of immense extent; prodigious
marshes overspread the plains, and few marks
appear of human adivity in any attempt to
cultivate or embellish the earth. No won~der
that the colonies sent from Europe were alto-
niflhed at their first entrance into the Ndew
W-orld. It appeared to them wvafte, solitary,
and uninviting. W~hen the Englifhh began to
fettle in America, they termed the countries of
which they took poffefi~on, Th3e WTi'lder-ne/s.
Nothing but their eager expe~ation of finding
mines of gold, could have induced the Spa-
niards to penetrate through the woods and
marshes of America, where, at every fiep, they
observed the extreme difference between the
uncultivated face of Nature, and that which
it acquires under the forming hand of induffry
and art m.

P1 See N OT E VII.

THE labour and operations of man not only B 0~ 0

improve and embellish the earth, but render J

Unwhoic-

it more wholesome, and friendly to life. WThen come.
any region lies negleated and destitute of culti-
vation, the air Rtagnates in the woods, putrid
exhalations arise from the waters; the surface of
the earth, loaded with rank vegetation, feels not
the pui-ifying influence of the fun or of the wind ;
the malignity of the diftempers natural to the
climate increases, and new maladies no less nox-
ious are engendered. Accordingly, all the pro-
vinces of America, when sirs1 discovered, were
found to be rernarkably unhealthy. This the
Spaniards experienced in every expedition into
the New World, whether destined for conquest
or settlement. Though by the natural confli-
tution of their bodies, their habitual temper-
ance, and the persevering vigour of their
minds, they were as much formed as any
people in Europe for aaive service in a sultry
climate, they felt s~everely the fatal and perni-
clous qualities of those uncultivated regions
through which they marched, or where they
endeavoured to plant colonies. Great numbers
were cut off by the unknown and violent dif~-
eases with which they were infeaed. Such as
survived the deffruaive rage of those maladies,
were not exempted from the noxious influence
of the climate. They returned to Europe, ac·

VoL. II. C cording

Bop O OK Crdig to the defeription of the early Spa-

Snifh hifforians, feeble, emaciated, ivith lan-

guid looks, and complexions of s~uch a sickly
yellow colour, as indicated the unwholesome
temperature of the countries where t~hey had re-
sided 11,

its animalj. THE uncultivated slate of the New WE~orld

affeaed not only the temperature of the air,
but the qualities of its produaions. The prin-
ciple of life seems to have been less a~ive and
vigorous there, than in the ancient continent.
Notwithflanding the vast extent of Aimerica,
and the. variety of its climates, the different
species of animals peculiar to it are much fewer
in proportioi· than those of the other hemi-
s~phere. In the islands, there were only four
kinds of quadrupeds known, the largest of
which did not exceed the size of a rabbit. On
the continent, the variety was greater; and
though the individuals of each kind could not
fail of multiplying exceedingly, when almost
unmolefied by men, who were neither so nume-
rous, nor so united in society, as to be for-
midable enemies to the animal creation, the
number of diftinQ s~pecies muff Rtill be confii
dered as extremely small, Of two hundred

n Gomara Hist. c. 20. 22. Oviedo Hist. lib. ii. c. I3.

tEb. v. c. 0. P. Mart. Epik* 545, Decad. p. 176.

diffceret -

different kinds of animals spread over the face EI o~ o
of the earth, only about one third existed iii cic
America, at the time of its dit'covery 0. Na·
ture was not only les~s prolific in the New
World, but the appears likewise to have been
less vigorous in her produaions. The animals
originally belonging to this quarter of the
globe appear to be of an inferior race, neither
so robust, nor so fierce, as those of the other
continent. America gives birth to no creature
of fitch bulk as to be compared with the ele-
phant or rhinoceros, or that equals the lion
and tyger in firength and ferocity p. 'The Tapyr
of Brasil, the largest quadruped of the ravenous
tribe in the New World, is not larger than a
calf of fix months old. The Puma and fa~guar,
its fiercest beasts of prey, which Europeans
have inaccu~rately denominated lIons and tygers,
possess neither the undaunted courage of the
former, nor the ravenous cruelty of the latter 5
They are inaaive and timid, hardly formidable
to tnan, and often turn their backs upon the
least appearance of refiffance '. The fame qua-

* Buffon Hist. Naturelle, tonri. ix. p. 86.
P See N OT E VIII.
9 Buffon Hist. Natur. tom. ix. p. 87. Margravii Hist.

Nat. Bralil, p. 229.

* Buffon Hist. Natur. ix. I3. 203. Acoffa Hist. lib. iv.

c* 34. Pifonis Hist. p.6. Herrera, dec* 4. lib. iv. c· r.
Eib. x. c. I3*

C 2 lities

a 0 a K lities in the climate of America which flinted

M the growth, and enfeebled the spirit, of its na-

tive animals, have proved pernicious to such as
have mig~rated into it voluntarily from the other
continent, or have been transported thither byt
the Europeans s. The bears, the wolves, the deer
of America, are not equal in size to those of the
Old World '. ' Most of the domeltic animals,
with which the Europeans have flored the pro·
vinces whereine they f~ettled, have degenerated
with· refpea either to bulk or quality, in a coun-
try whole temperature and foil seem to be less
fatvouritble to the firength and perfeaion of the
animal creation .,

Inteas and THE £8810 CRuiCS, which checked the growth

rple, and the vigour of the more noble animals, were

friendly to the propagation and increase of
reptiles and infeas. Though this is not pecu-
liar to the New World, and thos~e odious tribes,
nourished by heat, mnoiflure, and corruption,
infeit every part of the torrid zone; they mul-
tiply faster, perhaps, in America, and growY

* Churchill, v. p. 691. Ovalle Relat. of Chili, Church.

i~i. p. 10. Sommarie de Oviedo, c. 14-zz. Voy~age du
Des Marchais, iii. 299*

f Buffon Hist. Natur. ix. r03. Kalm's Tralvels, i. zoz.

B3iet. Voy. de France Equinox. P· 339-

SSee N OT E IX.

to a more monfirous bulk. As this country B o o I
is, on the whole, less cultivated, and less ~
peopled, than the other quarters of the earth,
the ac~ive principle of life wastes its force in
productions of this inferior form. The air is
often darkened with clouds of inf~eis, and the
ground covered with thock~ing and noxious
reptiles. The country around Porto -Bello
fwvarms with toads in s~uch multitudes, as hide
the surface of the earth. At Guyaquil, snakes
and vipers are hardly less numerous. Cartha-
gena is infefied with numerous flocks of bats,
which annoy not only the cattle but the inha-
bitants x. In the islands, legions of ants have,
.at different times, consumed every vegetable
producaion Y, and left the earth entirely bare,
as if it had been burnt with fire. The damp
forests, and rank foil of the countries on the
banks of the Orinoco and Maragnon, teem
with almost every offenfive and poisonous crea-
ture, which the power of a sultry fun can quicken
into life z

X Voyage de Ulloa, tom. i. p. 89. Id. p. 147. Herrera,

dec. 2 1. lib. iii. c. j. r9. y See N O TE X.

Z Voyage de Condamine, p. I67. Gumilla, iii. I20,

&c. Hist. gener. des Voy-ages, Hiv. 3r7. Dumont Mc-
moires fur la Louifiane, i. 108. Sommario de Oviedo,
c. 52-6z2.

C 3 THE

B o o y THE birds of the New World are not diftin.

LcrJ gulfhed by qualities To conspicuous and cha.
Bid. raaeriffical, as thos~e which we have observed

in its quadrupeds. Birds are more independent
of man, and less aff-eaed by the changes which
his induffry _ and labour make upon the slate
of the earth. They have a greater propensity
to rnigrate from one country to another, and
can gratify this inflina of their nature without
difficulty ok danger. Elence the number of
birds common to both continents is much
greater than that of quadrupeds ; and even such
as are peculiar to America nearljy resemble
those with which mankind were acquainted in
similar regions of the ancient hemisphere.
The American birds of the torrid zone, like
those of the fame climate in Asia and Africa,
are decked in plumage, which dazzles the eye
with the beauty of its colours; but nature,
satisfied with clothing them in this gay drers,
has denied most of them that melody of
found, and variety of notes, which catch and
delight the ear. The birds of the temperate
climates there, in the fame manner as in our
continent, are less s~plendid in their appear-
ance, but, in compensation for that defeQ,
they have voices of greater compass, and more.
rnelodious. In s~ome diffrias ofAmerica, the
unwholesome temperaturg of the air seems to

be unfavourable even to this part of the crea. B O O K

IV.

tion. The number of birds is less than in i~
other coun~tries, and the traveller is firuck w~ith
the amazing solitude and silence of its forests a.
It is remarkable, however, that America, where
the quadrupeds are so dwarfifh and daffardly,
jhould produce the Conzdor, which is intitled to
pre-eminence over all the flying tribe, in bulk,
in firength, and in courage ".

THE foil, in a continent t~o extensive as Ame. sonl. 1

rica, muff, of cour~e, be extremely various. In
each of its provinces, we find some distinguish-
ing peculiarities, the description of which
belongs to those who write their particular
hrillory. In general, we may obs~erve, that the
mloiflure and cold, which predominate so re-
markably in all parts ofAmerica, must have
great influence upon the nature of its foil;
countries lying in the fame parallel with those
regions which never feel the extreme rigour of
winter in the ancient continent, are frozen
over in America during a great part of the

D Bouguer Voy. au Pero--, I7. Chanvalon, Voyage 'a

la Martinique, p. 96. Warren Defeript. Surinam. Ofborn's
Collea. ii. 924. Lettre~s Edif. xxiv. P* 339. Charley.
Hist. de la Nouv. F~rance, iii. 155-

b Voyage de Ulloa, i* 363. Voyage de Condamine,
17j. Buffon Hist. Nat. xvi. 184. Voyage du Des Mar-
sihais, iii* 320.

C 4 year.

B O OK year. Chilled by this intense cold, the, ground

~ IYJ never acquires warmth f~uffcient to ripen the.

fruits, which are found in the corresponding
parts of the other continent. If we withh to
rear in America the produaions which abound
in any particula~r diffria of the ancient wforld,
we inuff advance several degrees nearer to the
line, than in the other hemisphere, as it requires
such an increas~e of heat to counterbalance the
natural frigidity of the foil and climate c. At
the Cape of Good Hope, several of the plants,
and fruits peculiar to the countries within the
tropics, are cultivated with s~ucces~s; whereas,
at St. Auguffine, in Florida, and C~harles·
Town, in South-Carolina, though considerably
nearer the line, they cannot be brought to
thrive with equal certainty d. BUt, if all0WanCe
be made for this diversity in the degree of heat,
the foil of America is naturally as rich and ser-
tile as'in any part of the earth. As the country
was thinly inhabited, and by a people of little
induffry, who had none of the dometic animals,
which civilized nations rear in such vast num-
bers, the earth was not exauffed by their
consumption. The vegetable produaions, to
which the fertility of the foil gave birth, often
remained untouched, and being fuffered to

a See N O T E XI. See N OT E XII.

corrupt

corrupt on its surface, returned with increaf'e B O O K
into its bosom ". As trees and plants derive a c~~-
great part of their nourishment from air and
water, if they were not destroyed by man and
other animals, they would render to the earth
more, perhaps, than they take from it, and
feed rather than impoveriih it. Thus the unoc-
cupied fail of America may have gone on en-
richingr for many ages. The vast number as
well as enormous size of the trees in America,
indicate the extraordinary vigour of the foil in
its native slate. When the Europeans first be-
gan to cultivate the New World, they were affo-
nifhedl at the luxuriant power of vegetation in
its v·irgrin mould; and in s~everal places the inge-
nuity of the planter is still employed in dimi-
nifhlingr and waffing its superfluous fertility, in
order to brings it down to a slate fit for profit-
able culture '.

IIA~VING thus surveyed the slate of the New now was

America

World at the time of its discovery, and COR- peopled I
fidered thle peculiar features and qualities
wfhich diflinguifh~ and chara~terife it, the next
inqu~iry that merits attention is, Flow was

e Em~ion, HflZ. N~atur. i. 242. Kiahn, i. 151.
f Challksoix, H~-ill. de Nouv. Fr-an. iii. 40s. Voy;age du

D.: Machai, ll. 22. Le ap de Bry, p~art iii. p. 174*

Rte NOTEC THI.

.America

B o~ 0 r America peopled ?By what course did man.

Ly kind migrate from the one continent to the

other ?and in what quarter is it most probable
that a communication was opened between
them

we treadion WVE know, with infallible~ certainty, that all
concemrnmg
it among~ the human race f pring from the fame source,

and that the des~cendants of ·one man, under
the protedion, as well as in obedience to the
command of Heaven, multiplied and reple·
nifhed the earth. But neither the annals nor
the traditions of nations reach back to those
remote ages, in which they took poffeffion
of the different countries, where they are now
fettled. W~e cannot trace the branches of this
first family, or point out with certainty the time
and manner in which they divided and spread
over the face of the globe. Even among the
most enlightened people, the period of authen-
tic hiflory is extremely sh~ort, and every thing
prior to that is fabulous or obscure. It is not
furprlfing, then, that the uInlettered: inhabitants
of America, w5ho have no solicitude about futu-
rity;, and little curoioity concerning what is pass,
thouldc!be altogether unacqluainted with their own
original. The people on the two opposite coasts
of Amer:ica, wh3o occupy thos~e countries in Ame-
ricai whl'ch approach neareit to the ancient con.

tmnent,

tinent, are so remarkably rude, that it is altoge- a 0o 0
ther vain to search among them for such in- ~
formation as might discover the place from
whence they camb, or the anceffors of whom
they are descended f. W;hatever light has been
thrown on this fuibjeat, is derived, not from the
natives of America, but from the inquisitive
genius of their conquerors.

WHEN the people of Europe unexpeaedly various theories.

discovered a New W~orld, removed at a vast
difiance from every part of the ancient conti-
nent which was then known, and filled with
inhabitants whole appearance and manners dif-
fered remarkably from the reft of the human
species, the question concerning their original
became naturally an objeat of curiosity and at-
tention. The theories and [~peculations of inge-
nious men with refpeQ to this f~ubjea, would
fill many volumes; but are often so wild and
chimerical, that I thould offer an ins~ult to the
underitanding of my readers, if I attempted el-
ther minutely to enumerate or to refute them.
Somle have presumptuously imagined, that the
people of America were not the offspring of the
fame common pa'rent with the reft of mankind,
but that they formed a separate race. of men,

f Vene~ga's H~it. 9f California, i. 60.

diftin-

a inp diitinguifhable by peculiar features in the confH.·

Stution of their bodies, as well as in the cha.

ra~eriffic qualities of their minds. Others
contend, that they are des~cended from some
remnant of the antediluvian inhabitants of the
earth, who s~urvived the deluge, which fwyept
away the greatest part of the human s~pecies in
the days of Noah ; and prepofferoufly suppose
rude, uncivilized tribes, scattered over an un-
cultivated continent, to be the most ancient
race of people on the earth. There is hardly
any nation from the north to the south pole, to
which some antiquary, in the extravagance of
conjenure, hais not ascribed the honour of
peopling America. " The Jews, the Canaanites,
the Phoenicians, the C; rthaginians, the Greeks,
the Sc~ythians in ancient times, are supposed
to have fettled in this wdilern world. The
Chinese, the Swvedes, the Norwegians, the
Welsh, the Spaniards, are s~aid to have s~ent
colonies thither in later ages, at different
periods, and on various occallons. Zealous
advocates flatnd fort-h to support the respective
claims of those people; and though they reft
upon no better foundation than the casual re-
s`emblance of some cuffoms, or the supposed
afnnity between a few words in their diff`erent
languages, much erudition and more zeal have
been employecd, to little purpole, in defence

of the opposite fyfiems. Thos~e regrions ofcon. B O O K
jecture and controversy belong not to the hillo- L
rian. His is a more limited province, con-
finled to what is established by certain or highly
probable evidence. Beyond this I sh~all not.
venture, in offering a few observations, which
may contribute to throw s~ome light upon this
curious and much agitated quefrion.

I. THERE are authors who have endeavoured Ought not

to be found-

by mere conjec~ures to account for the peopling ed on merc
of America. Some have su~pposed that it was
originally united to the ancient continent, and
disjoined from it by the fhockk of an earth-
quake, or the irruption of a deluge. Others
have imagined, that s~ome vessel being forced
from its course by the violence of a westerly
wind, might be driven by accident towards the
American coast, and have given a beginning
to population in that desolate continent 8. But
with refpec? to all those fy~flems, it is vain
either to reason or inquire, because it is im-
poifible to come to any decision. Such events
as they suppose are barely possible, and may
have happened. That they· ever did happen,
we have no evidence, either from the clear

a Parfon's Rema:ns of Japhet, p. 240. Ancient Uni-

verf. Hill. vol. xx. p. 164. P. Feyjoo Teatro Critico,
tom. v. p. 30o4, &ce. Acolka Hist. Moral. Novji Orbis,
lib. i. c. I6, I9.

teffimony

B 0~ 0 s teffimony ofhiffory, or from the obscure ind.·

LM ~ mations of tradition.

Or n erem- IZ. NOTHING can be more fr~ivoloi~s br un·
manaem, certain than the attempts to discover the origi·

nal of the Americans, merely by tracing the
res~emblance between their manners and those ors
any particular people in the anc~ient continent.
If we suppose two tribes,. though placed in the
most remote regions of the globe, to live in a
climate nearly of the fame temperature, to be fn
the fame slate of society, and to resemble each
other in the degree of their improvement~, they
muff feel the fame wants, and exert the fame en·
deavours to supply them. The fame objeas will
allure, the fame passions will animate them, and
the fame ideas and sentiments will arise in their
minds. The charaaer and occupations of the
hunter in America must be little diifferent fronti
those of an Asiatic, who depends for fubiffence
on the chace. A tribe of savages on th~e bankrs
of the D~anube muff nearly resemble 'one upon
the plains waihed by the Mifllfippi. Inflead
then of pres~uming from this similarity, that there
is any affinity between them, we should only
conclude, that the difpolition and manners of
men are formed by their situation, and arise front
the slate of society in which they livfe. The
moment that begins to vary, the charaner of

a people

a people muit change. In proportion as it ad. B O~ K
vances in improvement, their manners refine, cc-z
their powers and talents are call~ed forth. In
every part of the earth the progress of man hath
been nearly the fame, and we can trace him in
his career from the rude simplicity of savage
life, until he attains the induffry, the arts, and
the elegance of polished society. There is no-
thing wonderful then in the similitude between
the Americans and the barbarous nations of our
continent. Had Lafitau, Garcia, and many
other authors, attended to this, they would not
have perplexed a fubjea which they pretend to
illuffrate, by their fruitless endeavours to efta-
bl~ih an affinity between various races of people
in the old and new continents, upon no other
evidence than such a resemblance in their man-
ners as necessarily arises from the limilarity of
their condition. There are, it is true, among
every people, some cuffoms, which, as they do
not flow from any natural want or desire pe-
culiar to their situation, may be denominated
usages of arbitrary inflitution. If between two
nations fettled in remote parts of the earth, a
perfeQ agreem-ent with refpea to any of these
thould be dil~covered, one might be led to s~us.
peat that they were conneaed by some affinity.
If, for example, a nation were found in Ame-
rica that consecrated the seventh day to religious
n orlhip and reft, we might juffly fuppole that it

had

r Oo O K had derived its knowledge-of thlis usage, wchich

rc Is of arbitiagry in~titution, from thle Jews. BIut,

if it were discov\ered tha;t another nation cele·
brated then sirs ap;pear~ance of every new moon
with extraor-dinary demonfirations of joy, we
fhlould not be entitled to conclude that the obfer.
vation of this monthly fe~ival was borrowed fromn
the Jews, but ought to conl~der it merely as the
expression of that joy which is nat~ural to man on
the return of the planet which guides and cheers
him in the night. The inflanecs of cuffoms,
Inerely arbitrary, common to the inhabitants of
both hemispheres, are, indeed, so few and so equi·
vocal,that no theory concerning the populat-ionof
the New World ought to be founlded upon them.

or or repi 3. TF-IE theories which have been formed
otlS rtHes with ref~peat to the original of the Americans,

from obs~erv-ation of their religious rites and
pra~tices, are no less fanciful, and dcflitute of
s~olid foundation. Wihen,th~e religious opinions
of any people are neither the res~ult of rational
inquiry, nor derived fromn the inltruc~ions of
revelation, they muti needs be wild and extra·
vagant. Barbarous .nations are incapable of
the~former, and have not been blessed with the
advantages arising from the latter. Still, how·
ever, the human mind, even where its operations
appear most wild and capricious, holds a course
so regular, that in every age and country the

2 x dominion

dominion of particular pafflons will be attended a qy K
with similar effeas. The savage of Europe or cM
America, when filled with fuperflitious dread of
invisible beings, or with inquilitive s~olicitude to
penetrate into the events of futurity, trembles
alike with fear, or glows with impatience. He
has recourse to rites and pratices of the fame
kind, in order to avert the vengeance which he
s~upposes to be impending over him, or to divine
the secret which is the objea of his curiosity.
Accordingly, the ritual off~uperflition, in one
continent, seems, in many particulars, to be a
tranfecript of that eliablifhed in the other, and
both authorise similar inflitutions, sometimes io
frivolous as to excite pity, s~ometimes to bloody
and barbarous as to create horror. But without
s~upposing any consanguinity between s~uch dif-
tant nations, or imagining that their religious
ceremonies were conveyed by tradition from the
one to the other, we may ascribe this unifor-
mity, which in many instances s~eems very amaz-
ing, to the natural operation of fuperltition and
enthusiasm upon the weaknes~s of the human
mind.

4* WE may lay it down as a certain prinelple or p~eo)pt

in this inquiry, that America was not peopled by spr~~h
any nation of the ancient continent, which had
made considerable progi-efs in civilization. The

Vol.. II. D inhabi-

B O OK inhabitants of the New W~orld were in a slate of
~ZZL~~j iociety so extremely rude, as to be unacquainted

with those arts which are the first essays of hu·
man ingenuity in its advance towards improve.
ment. Even the most cultivated nations of lme.
rica were firangers to many of those simple in·
ventions, which were almolk coeval with society
in other parts of the world, and were known in
the earliest: periods of civil life with which we
have any acquaintance. From this it is manifefr,
that the tribes which originally migrated to
America, came off from ·nations which musE
have been no less barbarous than their pofferity,
at the time when they were first dis~covered by
the Europeans. For, although the elegant and
refined arts may decline or perish, amidst the
violent shocks of those revolutions and difafiters
to which nations are exposed, the necessary arts
of life, when once they have been introduced
among any people, are never loft. None of the
vicifirtudes in human affairs affeat there, and they
continue to be pratifed as long as the race of
men e~xists.· If ever the use of iron had been
known to the savages of America, or to their
progenitors, if ever they had employed a plough,
a loom, or a forge, the utility of thos~e inven·
tions would have preserved them, and it is im-
possible that they thould have been abandoned or
forgotten. WLe may conclude then, that the

Americans;

Americans sprung from some people, who were B O 0 K
themselves in such an early and unimproved flage CC;;
of society, as to be unacquainted with all those
necessary arts, which continued to be unknown
among their pofferity, when first visited by the
Spaniards.

5. IT appears no less evident, that America nor from the

southern re-

was not peopled by any colony from the more gions of our

CORCHiCRC.

southern nations of the ancient continent. None
of the rude tribes fettled in that part of our he-
mif~phere can be s~upposed to have visited a coun-
try so remote. They posses fed neither enterprise,
nor ingenuity, nor power, that could prompt
them to undertake, or enable them to perform,
such a difiant voyage. That the more civilized
nations in Asia or Africa are~not the progenitors
of the Americans is manifell, not only from the
observations which I have already made con-
cerning their ignorance of: the most simple and
necessary arts, but from an additional circum-
flance. Whenever any people have experienced
the advantages which men enjoy, by their do-
minion over the inferior animals, they can neither
subsist without the nourithment which these as-
ford, nor carry on any considerable operation in-
dependent of their miniffry and labour. Accord-
ingly, the first care of the Spaniards, when they
fettled in America, was to flock it with all the

D 2 domeltic

B O O domestic animals of Europe; and if prior to

Iy them, the Tyrians, the Carthaginians, the Chi-

nef~e, or any other polished people, had taken
poffeflion of that continent, we thould have
found there the animals peculiar to thos~e regions
of the globe where they were originally seated
In all America, however, there is not one animal,
tame or wild, which properly belongs to the
\varm, or even the more temperate countries of
the ancient continent. The camel, the drome-
dary, the horse, thetow, were as much unknown
in America, as the elephant or the lion. From
which it is obvious, that the people who firit s~et-
tied in the weffern world did not iss~ue from the
countries where those animals abound, and where
men, from having been long accuffomed to their
aid,would naturally confider it, not only as benefi·
cial, but as indispensably necessary to the improve·
ment, and even the preservation, of civil society.

**);,6. FROM considering the animals with which

'".jng; America is flored, we may conclude that the
2,$h: t!" nearest point of contaat between the old and new
newsh.6j6.h continents is towards the northern extremity of

both, and that there the communication was
opened, and the intercourse carried on between
them. All the extensive .countries in America
which lie within the tropics, or approach near to
them, are filled with indigenous animals of vari-

BUS

eus kinds, entirely different from those in the B o~ a
corresponding regions of the ancient continent. c-
But the northern provinces of the New World
abound with many of the wild animals which
are common in such parts of our hemisphere as
lie in a similar situation. The bear, the wolf,
the fox, the hare, the deer, the roebuck, the
elk, and several other species frequent the so-
rests of North America, no les~s than those in
the north of Europe and Asia b. It seems to be
evident then, that the two continents approach
each other in this quarter, and are either united,
or so nearly adjacent, that these animals might
pals from the one to the other.

7. THE a~ual vicinity of the two continents ·This areer-

tained by dif.

is to clearly established by modern discoveries, covrry.
that the chief difficulty with refped to the peo-
pling of America is removed. While those im-
mens~e regions, which firetch eastward from the
river Oby to the sea of Kamchatka were un-
known, or imperfealy explored, the north-east
extremities of our hemisphere were supposed to
be to far difiant from any part of the New
World, that it was not eafyr to conceive how any
communication Ihould have been carried on be-
tween them. But the Ruffians, having f~ubjeaed
the weltern part of Siberia to their empire, gra,

b Buffoq Hist. Nat. ix. p. 97, SES,.

- D3 dually

8 O O K dually extended their knowledge of that vast

·cc country, by advancing towards the east into un·

kn~own provinces. These were dilcovered by
hunters in their excurflons after game, or by
soldiers employed in levying the taxes, and the
court of Moscow effimated the importance of
those countries only by the fhiall addition which
they made to its revenue. At length, Peter the
Great ascended the Ruffian throne. His enlight-
ened, comprehensive mind, intent upon every
circumffance that could aggrandize his empire,
or render his reign illuffrious, dis~cerned confe·
quences of those discoveries,· which had escaped
the obs~ervation of his ignorant predecessors. He
perceived, that in' proportion as the regions of
Asia extended towa~rds the east, they must ap-
proach nearer to America; that the communi-
cation between the two continents, which had
long been s~earched for in vain, would probably
be found in this quarter, and that by ojpening it,
iome part of the wealth and commerce of the
weffern world might be made to flow into his
dominions by a new channel. Such an obje61
suited a genius that delighted in grand s~chemes.
Peter drew up infiructions with his own hand
for pros~ecuting this design, and gave orders for
carryintg it into execution i.

1 Muller Voyages et Decouvertes par les Ruffes, tom. i.

P* 4> 5. 141.

Hrs s~uccessors adopted his ideas, and purfixed a 0~ K

his plan. The officers whom the Ruffian court ·&u
employed in this s~ervice, had to firuggle with so
many difficulties, that their progress was ex-
tremely flow. Encouraged by some faint tradi-
tions among the people of Siberia, concerning a
fuccefsful voyage in the year one thousand fix
hundred and forty-eight, round the north-east
promontory of Asia, they attempted to follow
the fame course. Vessels were fitted out, with
this view, at different times, from the rivers
Lena and Kolyma;i but in a frozen ocean, which
nature seems not to have destined for navigation,
they were expos~ed to many disasters, without be-
ing able to accomplish their purpos~e. No vessel
fitted out by the Ruffian court ever doubled this
formidable Cape k ; we are indebted for what is
known of those extreme regions of Asia, to the
discoveries made in excurflons by land. In all
those provinces an opinion prevails, that there
are countries of great extent and fertility, which
lie at no conflderable difiance from their own
coasts. There the Rudiians imagined to be part
of America; and several circumitances concur-
red not only in corifirming them in this belief,
but in persuading them that some portion of
that continent could not be very remote. Trees
of various kinds, unknown in thos~e naked re-
gions of Asia, are driven upon the coalk by an

L See N O T E XIV.

easterly

D 4

a ov 0 K easterly wind. By the fame wind, floating ice is

MC1~ brought thither: in a few days; flights of birds

arrive annually from the fame quarter; and a
tradition obtains among the inhabitants, of an
intercours~e formerly carried on with some coun-
tries situated to the east.

AFTER weighing all there particulars, and

comparing the position of the countries in Asia
which had been dis~covered, with such parts in
the north-west of America as were already
known, the Rufiian court formed a plan, which
would have hardly occurred to a nation less
accuffomed to engage in arduous undertaktings,
and to contend with great: difficulties. Orders
were iffiued to build two vessels at the small village
of Ochotz, situated on th~e sea ofgamchatka,
to fail on a voyage of discovery. Though that
dreary uncultivated region furnished nothing that
could be of use in conftru~ting them, but some
larch trees; though not only the iron, the cor-
dage, the fails, and all the numerous articles re-
quirite for their equipment, but the provisions
for viatualling them, were to be carried through
the immense deserts of Siberia, down rivers of
difficult navigation, and along roads almost int.
passable, the mandate of the [overeign, and the
perseverance of the people, at last surmounted
every obltacle. Two vessels w~ere finished, and,

under

under the command of the captains Behring and B 0 0 m
Tf~chirikow, failed from Kamchatka, in quclt of ccl
the New World, in a quarter where it had never
been approached. They shaped their course to-
wards the east; and though a florm soon f~epa-
rated the vessels, which never rejoined, and many
disasters befel them, the expeatations from the
voyage were not altogether frustrated. Each of
the comnmanders discovered land, which to them
appeared to be part of the American continent;
anld, according to their observations, it seems to
be 11tuated within a few degrees of the north-
weft coast of California. Each set some of his
people ashore; but in one place the inhabitants
fled as the Ruifians approached; in another, they
carried off those who landed, and destroyed their
boats. The violence of the weather, and the
diffrers of their crews, obliged both captains to
quit this inhospitable coast. In their return they
touched at s~everal islands, which firetch in a
chain from east to wef1 between the country
which they had discovered and the coast of Asia.
They had some intercourse with the natives,
who seemed to them to res~emble the North Ame-
ricans. They presented to the Ruflians the calu-
met, or pipe of peace, which is a symbol of
friendship universal among the people of North
America, and an usage of arbitrary inflitution,
peculiar to them.

THOUGH

B pV K Twoven the islands of this New Archipelago
4.---***-J have been frequented since that time by the Ruf.

fian hunters, the court of St. Peterfburgh, dur)
ing a period of more than forty years, seems to
have relinqulfhed every thought of prosecuting
discoveries in that quarter. But in the year one
thousand ~seven hundred and fixty-eight, it was
unexpeaedly resumed. The Sovereign, whohad
been lately s~eated on the throne of Peter the
Great, poffeffed the genius and talents of her
illuffrious predecessor. During the operations of
the most arduous and extensive war in which the
Ruffian empire was ever engaged, she formed
·schemes and executed undertakings, to which
more limited abilities would have been incapable
of attending but amidit the leis~ure of pacific
times. A new voyage of discovery from the
eastern extremity of Asia was planned, and cap-
tain Krenitzin and lieutenant Levafheff were
appointed to command the two vessels fitted out
for that purpose. In their voyage outward they
held nearly the fame course with the former navi-
gators, they touched at the fame islands, oblerved
their situation and produtions more carefully,
and discovered s~everal new islands, with which
Behring and Tfchirikow had not fallen in.
Though they did not proceed to far to the east
as to revisit the country which Behring and
Tfchirikow supposed to be part of the Ameri-

can continent, yet, by returning in a course con. B Op K
fiderably to the north of theirs, they correaed ~
foime capital mif takes into which their predecef-
fors had fallen, and have contributed to facilitate
the progrrefs of future navigators in thos~e feas'.

THus -the psflibility of a communication be-

tweert the continents in this quarter rests no
longer upon mere conjeaure, but is established
by undoubted evidence". Some tribe, or some
families of wandering Tartars, from the restless
spirit peculiar to their race, might migrate to
the nearest islands, and, rude as their knowledge
of navigation was, might, by pafling from one
to the other, reach at length the coalk of
America, and give a beginning to population
in that continent. The difiance between the
Marian or Ladrone islands and the nearest land
in Asia, is greater than that between the part of
America which the Ruflians discovered, and
the coast of Kamchatka; and yet the inhabit-
ants of those illands are manifestly of Asiatic
extraQ. If, notwithffanding their remote fitua-
tion, we admit that the Marian islands were
peopled from our continent, difiance alone is
no reason why we should hesitate about admit-
ting that the Americans may derive their ori-

I See N O TE XV.
m 1\fuller's Voyages, tom. i. 248, &c. 267, 276.

. 2 xginal

B O, K ginal from the fame source. It is probable that
t..--v-- future navigators in thos~e seas, by fleering

farther to the north, may find that the conti-
nent of America approaches still nearer to Asia.
According to the information of the barbarous
people, who inhabit the country about the
north-ealt promontory of Asia, there lies, off
the coast, a finall island, to which they fail in
less than a day. From that, they can descry a
large continent, which, according to their de.
Scription, is covered with forests, and poffeffed
by people whose language they do not under-
fland ". By them they are s~upplied with the
ikins of martens, an animal unknown in the
northern parts of Siberia, and which is never
found but in countries abounding with trees.
If we could rely on this account, we might con-
clude, that the American continent is s~eparated
fromn ours only by a narrow firait, and all the
difliculties with refpeat to the communication
between them would vanish. What could be
offered only as a conjeature when this Hiltory
was sirs1 publ~ihed is now known to be certain.
The near approach of the two continents to
each other has been discovered and traced in a
voyage undertaken upon principles to pure and
to liberal, and conduated with so much profef-
fional fikill, as reflea lustre upon the reign of

a Muller's Voyages et Decouv. i. r66.,

the Sovereign by whom it was planned, and do B O O K
honour to the offcers entruffed with the execu- cc
tion of it 9

I'r is likewrife evident from recent discoveries, Another·

Cc~mrn Dica*

that an intercourse between our continent and lion s ·h.

nor th wcht.

America might be carried on with no les~s faci-
lity from the north-west extremities of Europe.
As early as the ninth century, the Norwegians A.D. 830.
dis~covered Greenland, and planted colonies
there. The communication with that country,
after a long interruption, was renewed in the
last century. Some Lutheran and Moravian
millionaries, prompted by zeal for propagating
the Christian faith, have ventured to fettle in
this frozen and uncultivated region P. To them
we are indebted for much curious information
with refpeQ to its nature and inhabitmr~ts. WYe
learn, that the north-welt coast of Jreenland
is separated from America by a very narrow
firait; that, at the bottom of the bay into
which this firait conduas, it is highly probable
that they are united s; that the inhabitants of
the two countries have s~ome intercourse with
one another ; that the Efquimaux of America
perfealy resemble the Greenlanders in their
afped~, dres~s, and mode of living; that some

*See NOTE XVL.

P Crantz' Hill, of Green1. i. 242* 244. Prevot Hill.

Gen. des Voyages, tom. xy, 152, not. (96.)

5 Eggede, p. 2, 3*

ailiors,

B O O K [ailors, who had acquired the knowledge of a

CMs few words in the Greenlandifh language, re.

ported that these were underflood by the Efqui-

A.,o. I764. maux ; that, at length, a Moravian mifllonary,

well acquainted with the languag e of Greenland,
having visited the country of the Ef~quimaux,
found, to his affonifhment, that they spoke
the fame language with the Greenlanders, that
they were in every refpeQ the fame people, and
he was accordingly received and entertained by
them as a friend and a brother s.

BY there decisive faas, not only the confan.

guinity of the Efquimaux and Greenlanders is
establish~ed, but the poirbility of peopling
America from the north of Europe is demon-
firated. If the Norwegians, ~in a barbarous
age, when* science had not begun to dawn in
the north of Europe, poffeff~ed sauch naval fkiill
as to open a communication with Greenland,
their anceffors, as much addiaed to roving by
sea, as the Tartars are to wandering by land,
might, at some more remote period, accom-
plifh the fame voyage, and fettle a colony there,
whose descendants might, in progress of time,
migrate into America. But if, inficad of v~en-
turing; to fail direaly from their own coast to
Greenland, we s~uppose that the Norwegians
held a more cautious course, and advanced from

n Crantz' Hist. of Greenl. p. 261, 262.

Shetland

Shetland to the Feroe Islands, and from them a 0~ 0 r
to Iceland, in all which they had planted colo- 4..--v-.
nies, their progress. may have been to gradual,
that this navigation cannot be considered as either
longer or more hazardous, than those voyages
which that hardy and enterprising race of men
is known to have performed in every age.

8. THocon it be poflible that America may Probably

peopled fromt

hatve received its firit.inhabitants from our con. the north-
tinent, either by the north-west of Europe or
the north-east of Asia, there seems to be good
reason for supposing that the progenitors of all
the American nations, from Cape Horn to the
s~outhern confines of Labrador, migrated fronx
the latter rather than the former. The Efqui-
maux are the only people in America, who, in
their afpe~t or charaaer, bear any res~emblance
to the northern Europeans. They are mani-
feftly a race of men, diftina from all the
nations of the American continent, in lan-
guage, in disposition, and in habits of life.
Their original, then, may warrantably be traced
up to that source, which I have pointed out.
But, among all the other inhabitants of Ame-
rica, there is such a firiking similitude in the
form of their bodies, and the qualities of their
minds, that, notwithstanding the diversities oc-
cationed by the influence of climate, or unequal
progress in improvement, we must pronounce

them

B O O K them to be descended from one source. There

CY~may be a variety in the shades, but we can every

where trace the fame original colour. Each
tribe has something peculiar which distinguishes
it, but in all of them we discern certain features
common to the whole race, It is remarkable,
that in every peculiarity, whether in their per-
sons or difpolitions, which charaaerife the Arne-
ricans, they have some resemblance to the rude
tribes feattered over the north-east of Asia,
but almost none to the nations f~ettled in the
northern extremities of Europe. We may, there-
fore, refer them to the former origin, and con.
clude that their Asiatic- progenitors, having
fettled in those parts of America, where the
RufiTans have! discovered the proximity of the
two continents, spread gradually over its various
regions. This account of the progress of po·
pulation in America, coincides with the tradi.
tions of the Mexicans concerning their ow~n
origin, which, imperfea as they are, were pre-
s~erved with more accuracy, and merit greater
~credit, than those of any people in the New
W~orld. According to them, th'eir anceffors
came from a remote country, situated to the
north-west of-Mexico. The Mexicans point
out their various flations as they advanced front
this, into the interior provinces, and it is pre-
cifely the fame route which they must have held,
if they had been emigrants from Asia. The

Mexicans,

Mexicans, in describing the appearance of their B O O K
progenitors, their manners, and habits of life L
at that period, exaaly delineate those of the
rude Tartars, from whom I s~uppos~e them to
have sprung r.

THUS haVe I finished a dis~quisition which has

been deemed of s~o much importance, that it
would have been improper to omit it in writing
the hiffory of America. I have ventured to
inquire, but without pres~uming to decide. Sa-
tisfied with offering conjeaures, I pretend not
to eftabliih any fyfitem. · When an investigation
is, from its nature, so intricate and obscure,
that it is impofirble to arrive at conclusions
which are certain, there may be s~ome merit in
pointing out such as are probable ".

THE condition arnd chara~er of the American Condition

and charac-

nations, at the time when they became known ter of the

AmenlcaDs*

to the Europeans, deserve more attentive con-
fideration, than the inquiry concerning their
original. The latter is merely an objea of cu-
iiofity, the former is one of the most important

r Acofia HiRt. Nat. & Mor. lib. vii. c. 2, &c. Garcia
Origen de los Indios, lib. v. c. 3. Torquemada Monar. Ind.
lib. i. c. 2, &c. Boturini Benaduci Idea de una Hifl. de la
Amer. Septentr. ( xvii. p. 127.

* Memoirers fur la Louifiane, par Dumont, tom. i. p. I I9.
VoL. II. E as

a o 0 K as well as infiruaive researches which can oc·
bcls cupy the philosopher or hifforian. In order to

complete the hiffory of the human mind, and
attain to a perfed knowledge of its nature and
.operations, we must· contemplate man in all
those various situations wherein he has been
placed. We must follow him in his progress
through the, different flages of society, as he
gradually advances from the infant slate of civil
life towards its maturity and decline. We muff
observe, at each period, how the faculties of his
underflandingr unfold, we must attend to the
efforts of his adive powers, watch the various
movements of desire and affeaion, as they rif~e in
his breast, and mark whither they tend, and with
what ardour they are exerted. The philosophers
and historians of ancient Greece and Rome, our
guides in this as well as every other disquisition,
had only a limited view of this f~ubjea, as they
had hardly anly opportunity of surveying man in
his rudest and most early slate. In all thos~e re-
gions of the earth with which they were well
acqluainted, civil society had made considerable
advances, and nations had finished a good part
of their career b~efore they began to observe them.
The Scythians and Germans, the rudest people
of whom any ancient author has transmitted to
us an authentic account, poffeffed flocks and
herds, had acqluired property of various kinds,

and,

and, when compared with mankind in their B O OK
primitive itate, may be reckoned to have at- Ly~
tained to a great degree of civilization.

But the discovery of the N~ew~orld enlarged Lers im-

proved than

the [phere of contemplation, and presented na- in aY Parh
tions to our view, in flages of their progress,
much less advanced than those wherein they have
been observed in our continent. In America,
man appears under the rudest form in which we
can conceive him to ~ublift. WNebehold commu-
nities juff beginning to unite, and may examine
the s~entiments and aaions of human beings in
the infancy of social life, while they feel but im-
perfeatly the force of its ties, and have fearcely
relinquilhed their native liberty. That slate of
primaval simplicity, which was known in our
continent only by the fanciful defecription of
poets, really existed in the other. The greater
part of its inhabitants were firangers to induffry
and labour, ignorant of arts, imperfealy ac-
quainted with the nature of property, and enjoy-
ing almost without refrriaion or controul the
blessings which flowed spontaneously from the
bounty of nature. There were only two nations
in this vast continent which had emerged from
this rude slate, and had made any considerable
progress in acquiring the ideas, and adopting the
inflitutions, which belong to polished societies.

E 2 Their

B OnO K Their government and manners will fall naturally

Cr~v~s~ under our review in relating the discovery and

conquest of the Mexican and Peruvian empires;
and we shall have there an opportunity of con-
templating the Americans in the slate of high~est
improvement to which they ever attained.

TIis in- AT present, our attention and res~earches shall
tiecd o? te be turned to the finall independent tribes which
rudeR
triws. occupied every other part of America. Among

ther~e, thouigh with frome diversity in their cha·
ra0aer, their manners, and inflitutions, the slate
of society wvas nearly similar, and so extremely
rude, that the denomination of Sauage may be
applied to them all. In a general hillory of
America, it would be highly improper to de-
s~cribe the condition of each petty community,
or to invefitigate every minute circumitance
which contributes to form the chara3ter of its
members. Such an inquiry would lead to details
of immeasurable and tiresome extent. The qua-
lities belonging to the people of all the different
tribes have such a near resemblance, that they
may be painted ·with the fame features. Where
any circumstances seem to conflitute a diversity
in their charaaer and manners worthy of atten-
tion, it will be fufficient to point these out as
they occur, and to inquire into the causes of such
peculiarities.

Lr is exrtremelyr difficult to procure satisfying B O O K

and authentic information concerning nations c<.--

. . . i~ficulty of

while they remain uncivihized. To discover ohraining

. information,

their true charaaer under this rude form, and
to fele8 thie features by which they are diftin-
guilhed, requires an observer poffeffed of no
les~s impartiality than dis~cernment. For, in
every flage of society, the faculties, the senti-
ments and desires of men are so accommodated
to their own slate, that they become standards
of excellence to themselves, they affx the idea
of perf'eaion and happiness to those attainments
which resemble their own, and wherever the
objeas and enjoyments to which they have been
accuffomed are wanting, confidently pronounce
a people to be barbarous and miserable. Hence
the mutual contempt with which the members
of communities, unequal in their degrees of im-
provement, regard each other. Polifhedd na-
tions, conscious of the advantages which they
derive from their knowledge and arts, are apt
to view rude nations with peculiar scorn, and,
in the pride of superiority, will hardly allow
either their occupations, their feelings, or their
pleasures, to be worthy of men. It has seldom
been the lot of communities, in their early and
unpolifh~ed slate, to fall under the obs~ervation
of persons endowed with force of mind fu-
perior to vulgar prejudices, and ckpable of con-

E 3 templating

B Op K templating man, under whatever aspect he ap-

Spears, with a candid and discerning eye.

n s7 THE Spaniards, who first viirted America,

or ervr, and who had opportunity of beholding its va-

rious tribes, while entire and unfubdued, and
before any change had been made in their ideas
or manners by intercourse with a race of men
much advanced beyond them inl improvement,
were far from poff`efirng the qualities requisite
for obrerving the firiking· fpeaacle presented to
their view. Neither the age in which they; lived,
nor the nation to which they belonged, had
made such progres~s in true science, as inspires
enlarged and liberal s~entiments. The con-
querors of the New World were mofily illiterate
adventurers, destitute of all the ideas which
thould have direc~ed them in contemplating
objeas, so extremely different from those with
which they were acquainted. Surrounded con-
tinually with da-?ger, or firuggling with hard-
thips, they had little leisure, and less capacity,
for any s~peculative enquiry. Eager to take pof-
f~efiron of a country of s~uch extert and opulence,
and happy in finding it occupied by inhabitants
to incapable to defend it, they haltily pronounced
them to be a wretched order of men, formed
merely for servitude; and were more employed
in computing the profits of their labour, than in

inquiring

inquiring into the operations of their minds, or B O O K
the reasons of their cuffoms and institutions. c...---.
The persons who penetrated at subs~equent periods
into the interior provinces, to which the know-
ledge and devaffations of the first conquerors did
not reach, were generally of a similar charaater;
brave and enterprising in an high degree, but so
uninformed as to be little qualified either for ob-
serving or deferibing what they beheld.

NOT only the incapacity, but the prejudices and their

prejudices j

of the Spaniards, render their accounts of the
people of America extremely defeaive. Soon
after they planted colonies in their new con-
quests, a diff~erence in opinion arose with ref~pec?
to the treatment of the natives. One party,
solicitous to render their servitude perpetual, re-
presented them as a brutish, obitinate race, in-
capable either of acquiring religious knowledge,
or of being trained to the fundions of social life.
The other, full of pious concern for their convrer-
sion, contended that, though rude and ignorallt,
they were gentle, affeationate, docile, and by pro-
per infiruc?ions and regulations might be formed
gradually into good Christians and useful citi-
zens. This controversy, as I have already re-
lated, was carried on with all the warmth which
is natural, when attention to interest on the one
hand, and religious zeal on the other, animate
the difputants. Mioft of the laity efpoured the

E .4 former

B 07 0 former opinion; all the ecclefiaftics were advo.

c-J cates for the latter; and we sh~all uniformly find

that, accordingly as an author belonged to either
iof these parties, he is apt to mag~nify the virtues
or aggravate the defeas of the Americans far
beyond truth. Those repugnant accounts in-
crease the difficulty of attaining a perfeA know.
ledge of their charaaer, and render it necessary
to perus~e all the descriptions of them by Spanish
writers with diffruft, and to receive their infor.
mation with some grains of allowance.

and somtt~n ALMOST two centuries elapsed after the dib
or ~h~iloro, covery of America, before the mnanners of its in·

habitants attraaed, in any considerable degree,
the attention of philosophers. At leng-th, they
dif'covered that the contemplation of the condi-
tion and charaaer of the Americans in their ori·
ginal slate, tended to complete our knowledge
of the human species, might enable us to fill up
a considerable chasm in the hiss ory of its progress,
and lead to speculations no less curious than im·
portant. TIhey entered upon this new field of
fludy with great ardour; but, inficad of throw-
ing light upon the fubjeat,'they have contributed,
in some degree, to involvre it in additional obfcu-
rity. Too impatient to inquire, they hastened
to decide; and began to erea fyfiems, when
they thould have been fTearching for ha~s on
which to eliablifh! their fouixdations. Struck

witly

with the appearance of deg~eneracy in the human B ov o i
sp~ecies throughout the New W~orld, and affo-
nifhed at beholding a vast continent occupied
by a naked, feeble, and ignorant race of men,
some authors of great name have maintained,
that this part of the globe had but lately
emerged from the sea, and become fit for the
refidnce of man; that every thing in it bore
marks of a recent original; and that its inha-
bitants, lately called into existence, and still at
the beginning of their career, were unworthy to
be compared with the people of a more ancient
and improved continent '. Others have ima-
gined, that, under the influence of an unkindly
climate, which checks and enervates the prin..
ciple of life, man never attained in America
the perfeaQion which belongs to his nature, but
remained an animal of an inferior order, de-
fetQive in the vigour of his bodily frame, and
destitute of s~ensibility, as well as of force, in
the operations of his mind ". In opposition to
both these, other philosophers have supposed
that man arrives at his highest dignity and ex-
cellence long before he reaches a slate of refiner
ment; and, in the rude finaplicity of s~avage
life, display·s an elevation of sentiment, an in-

SM. de Buffon His1. Na~tiii. 484, acc. ix. 103. 114*
U M. de· P. Recherches Philof. fur les Americ. passim.

21 dependence

B O O K dependence of nsind, and a warmth of attach·

Sment, for which it is vain to search among the

-members of polished societies x. They seem to
confider that as the most perfec? slate of man
which is the least civilized. They deferibe the
manners of the rude Americans with flich rap·
ture, as' if they proposed them for models to the
reft of the species. These contradiaory theo.
ries have been propoedb w~ith equal confidence,
and uncommon powers of genius and eloquence
have been exerted, in order to clothe them with
an appearance of truth.

As all those circumitances concur in render·

ing an inquiry into the slate of the rude nations
in America intricate and obscure, it is necess~ary
to carry it on with caution. Wihen guided in
our researches by the Tntellige~nt oblervations of
the few philofophiers who have visited this part
of the globe, we may venture to decide. WIhen
obliged to have recourse to the ifperficial re.
marks of vulgar travellers, of sailors, traders,
b~accaneers, and mifflonaries, we muff often
paus~e, and comparing detached faas, endeavour
to discover what they wanted sagacity to ob.
serve. W~ithout indulging conjeaure, or be.
trayring a propensity to either s~ystem, w~e muff

r blI. Rousseau.

fludy

fludy with equal care to avoid the extremes of v K
extravagant admiration, or of supercilious con- L~I
tempt for those manners which we deferibe.

IN order to condua this inquiry with greater Method ob-

served in the

accuracy, it thlould be rendered as simple aS inquiry.
possible. Man exified as an individual,before
he became~ the member of a coinmunity; and
the qualities which belong to him under his
former capacity thould be known, before we
proceed to examinle those which arise from the
latter relation. This is peculiarly necessary in
inveffigating the maniners of rude nations.
Their political union is so incomplete, their
civil inflitutions and regulations so few, so
simple, and offuch slender authority, that men
in this slate ought to be viewed rather as inde-
pendent agents, than as members of a regular
society. The charater of a savage results al-
most entirely from his sentiments or feelings as
an individual, and is but little influenced! by his
imperfeQ fubjetion to government and order.
I thall condua my researches concerning the
manners of the Americans in this natural order,
proceeding gradually from what is simple to
what is more complicated.

I SHALL confider, I. The bodily conflitution

of the Americans in those regions now under

review.

B O O K reniew. II. The qualities of their minds. III.

L Their domeffic slate. IV. Their political state

and inflitutions. V. Their fyfiem of war, and
public security. VI. The arts with which they
were acquainted. VII. Their religious ideas
and inititutions. VIII. Such singular detached
cuffomns as are not reducible to any of the for,
mer heads. IX. I th~all conclude with a ge.
neral review and effimate of their virtues and
defeas~.

The confi.- I. THE bodily conflitution of the Americans,
:M od~ies. --The human body is less affeaed by climate

than that of any other animal. Some animahs
are confined to a particular region of the globe,
and cannot exist beyond it ; others, though they
mnay be brought to bear the injuries of a c.i·
mate foreign to them, ceas~e to multiply when
carried out of that diffria which Nature
destined to be their manflon. Even such as
seem capable of being naturalized in various
climates, feel the effeat of every remove from
their proper station, and gradually dwindle and
degenerate from the vigour and perfedian pe-
culiar to their species. Man is the only living
creature whose frame is at once so hardy and 10
flexible, that he can spread over the whole earthl,
become the inhabitant of every region, and
thrive and multiply under every climate. Sub-

j e 8,

jLc?, howfever, to the general law of Nature, B pff g
the human body is not entirely exempt from the c
operation of climate; and when exposed to the
e··tremes either of heat or cold, its size or vigour
diminish~es.

THE firil appearance of the inhabitants of the Complexion,

New WYorld, filled the discoverers with such .
allonifh~ment, that they were apt to imagine
them a race of men different from those of the
other hemisphere. Their complexion is of a
reddifih brown, nearly res~embling the colour of
copper '. The hair of their heads is always
black, long, coarse, and uncu~rled. They have no
beard, and every part of their body is perfeatly
fmlooth. Their perfrons are of a full size, ex-
tremely firaight·, and well proportioned ". Their
features are regular, though often diflorted by
abfulrd endeavours to improve the beauty of
their natural form, or to render their afpeQ
more dreadful to their enemries. In the islands, More feeble.
where four-footed animals were both few and
fmnall, and the earth yielded her produaions
almost Ipontaneoufly, the conflitution of the
natives, neither braced by the aaive exercises
of the chace, nor invigorated by the labour of

u Oviedo Somar~io, P* 46, D. ~ife of Columbus, c.

SSee NOTE XVII~. cuhtivation,

a ov sc cultivation, was ex~tremely feeble: and languid.

tc3 On the continent, where the forests abound

with game of various kinds, and the chief oc.
cupation of many tribes was to pursue it, the
human frame acquired greater firmness. Still,
however, the Americans were more remarkiable
for agility than firengrth. They resembled
beasts of prey, rather than animals formed for
labour a. They were not only avers~e to toil,
but incapable of it ; and when touzed by force
from their native indolence, and compelled to
work, they funk under tasks which th~e people
of the other continent would have performed
with ea~e b. This feeblenes~s of confitution
was universal among the inhabitants of those
regions in America which we are surveying,
and may be considered as charaateriffic of the
species there c.

TH-E beardless cauntenance and [mooth skin

of the American seems to indicate a defe61 of
vigour, occasioned by some vice in his frarne.
He is deffitute of one fgrn of manhood and of

a See N O TE XVIII.
b Oviedo Somn. p. 5x, C. Voy. de Correal, ii. I381

Wafer's Defeription, p. 13I-

C B. Las Cafas Brev. Relac* P, 4. T'orquem, Monar,

i. 580. Oviedo Somario, p. 4 £. Hiffor. lib. iii. c. 6.
Herrera, dec. I. lib. ix. c. 5. Simon, p. 4.I

firength.

strength. This peculiarity, by which.the inha- a 0~ 0
bitants of the New WTorld are d~itinguifhed from c
the people of all other nations, cannot be attri-
buted, as some travellers have fuppofced, to their
mode of fubiff ence d, For though the food of
many Americans be extremely inlipid, as they
are altogether unacqluainted with the use of salt,
rude tribes in other parts of the earth have sub-
sifted on aliments equally simple, without this
mark of degradation, or any apparent fyrmptom
of a diminution in their vigour.

As the external form of the AnTrericans leads Les appe-

us to fuf~peQ that there is some natural debility
in their frarne, the smallness of their appetite for
food has been mentioned by many authors as a
confirmation of this suspicion. The quantity of
food which men consume varies according to the
temperature of the climate in which they live,
the degree of acdivity which they exert, and the
natural vigour of their conflitutions. Under the
enervating heat of the torrid zone, and when
men pass their days in indolence and ease, they
require less nourithment than the aaive inhabi-
tants of temperate or cold countries. But neither
the warmth of their climate, nor their extreme la-
pinef~s, will account for the uncommon defea of

d Charley. Hill. de Nouv. Fr. Hi*i 3ro.

appetite

B O O K appetite among the Americans. 'The Spaniaids

-·were affonifhed with obfbrving this, not only in

the mfands, but in s~everal parts of the continent.
The conflitutional temperance of the natives
far exceeded, in their opinion, the abitinence
of the most mortified hermits e g while, on the
other hand, the appetite of the Spaniards ap.
peared to the Americans insatiably voracious;
and they affirmed, that one Spaniard devoured
more food in a day than was fufficient for ten
Americans '.

L'~ eke- A PROOF of s~ome feebleness in their frame

mence of
desr still more striking, is the ins~ensibility of the

Americans to the charms of beauty, and the
power of love. That passion which was deflined
to perpetuate life, to be the bond of fociai
union, and the source of tendernes~s and joy, is
the most ardent in the human breait. Though
the perils and hardships of the savage slate,
though exceirve fatigue, on s~ome occasions,
and the difficulty at all times of procuring sub·
fiftence, may seem to be adverse to this paffon,
and to have a tendency to abate its vigour, yet
the rudest nations in every other part of the
globe s~eem to feel its influence more powerfully

* Ramufio, iti. 304., F. 306, A. Simon Conquifia, &c.

p. 39. Hakluyt, iii. 468, 508.(

f Herrera, dec. I. lib. ii. c. I6.

than the inhabitants of the New Wo~7rld. The n 0 0K

IV.

negro glows with all the warmth of desire ·na- c+~
tural to his climate; and the most uncultivated
Asiatics discover that s~ensibility, which, from
their situation on thle globe, we thould expecT
them to have felt. B~ut thle Aimericans are, in
an amazing degree, firangrers to the force of
this first infline? of nature. In every part of the
New Wi[orld the natives treat their women with
coldness and indifference. They are neither
the objecls of that tender attachment which
takes place in civilized society, nor of that ar-
dent desire conspicuous among rude nations.
Even in climates where this pairon usually ac-
quires its greatest vigour, the savage of America
views his female with disdain, as an animal of
a less noble species. He is at no pains to win
her favour by the assiduity of courtship,, and
skill less solicitous to preserve it by indulgence
and gentlenes~s %. Mflionaries themselves, not-
wiithflanding· the aufferity of monastic ideas,
cannot refrain from expreifing their affonifh-
mlentr at the difpaflionate coldness of thle A~meri-

r Hennepin Moeurs des Saucagres, 32, &c. Rochefort

Hist. des Isles Antilles, p. 46r. 1 oyager de Coreal, ii.
14'. Rantufo, iii. 309. F. Lozano Defer. del Gran
Chaco, 71. Falkner's Defcr'. of Patagon. p. I25.· Let-
tere di P. Cataneo ap. Muratori 11 Christian. Felice, i.
305-

Vot. II. F can

B 6V K can young men in their intercourse with the

LM- other sex ". Nor is this res~erve to be akcribed

to any opinion which they entertain with refpe8
Sto the merit of female chastity. That is an idea
too refined for a savage, and fuggefied by a de-
licacy of s~entiment and affeaion to which he is
a firanger.

Refleations BUT in inquiries concerning either the bodily
with refped
to thre. Or mental qualities of particular races of men,

there is not a more common or more s~educing
error, than that of as~cribing to a single cause,
those charaaerifitc peculiarities, which are the
effeai of the combined operation of many causes
The climate and foil of America differ, in to
mnany refpeas, from those of the other hemi.
sphere, and this difference is so obvious and
firikiing, that philos~ophers of great eminence
have laid hold on this as fufficient to account
for what is peculiar in the conflitution of its in-
habitants. They 2-eft on physical causes alone,
and confider the feeble frame and languid desire
of the. Americans, as consequences of the tem-
perament of that portion of the globe which
they occupy. But the influences of political

h Chanvalon. P. 5'. Lettr. Edif. tom. xxiv* 3 *·

Tertre, ii- 377. Veneg~as, i. 81. Ribas Hist. de los
Triumf. p. Ir.

and moral causes ought not to have been over. B or o i
looked. Ther~e operate with no less effeR than Lc--
that on which many philosophers reit as a full
explanation of the singular appearances which
have been mentioned. Wherever the state of
fociety'is such as to create many wants and de-
fires, which cannot be satisfied without regular
exertions of induffry, the body accuffomed to
labour becomes robust and patient of fatigue.
In a more simple Rtate, where the, demands of
men are s~o few and so moderate, that they may
be gratified, almost without any effort, by the
spontaneous produaions of nature, the powers
of the body are not called' forth, nor can they
attain their' proper firength. The natives of
Chili and of North-America, the two temperate
regions in the New World, who live by hunt-
ing, may be deemed an aaive and vigorous
race, when compared with the inhabitants of
the isles, or of those parts of the continent
where hardly any labour is requisite to procure
subsistence. The exertions of a hunter are not,
however, so regular, or So continued, as those
of persons employed in the culture of the earth,
or in the various arts of civilized life, and
though his agility may be greater than theirs,
his firength is on the whole inferior. If another
direaion were given to the aaive powers of
man in the New World, and his force aug.

F 2 mented

B O O K mented by exercise, he might acquire a deg~ree

c-J of vigour which he does not in his pre~sent slate

possess. The truth of this is confirmed by ex.
perience. Wherever the Americans have been
gradually accuffomed to hard labour, their
conflitutions become robfuft, and they have been
found capable of performing s~uch tasks, as
feemned not only to excee~d the powers of such a
feeble frame as has been deemed peculiar to
their country, but to equal any effort of the
natives, either of Africa or of Europe i

THE: fame reasoning will apply to what has

been obs~erved concerning their slender demand
for food. As a proof that this should be ascribed
as much to their extreme indalence, and often
total n ant of occupation, as to any thing pecu-
liar in the physical firuaure of their bodies, it
has been obs~erved, that in thos~e diffrias, where
the people of America are obliged to ex;ert any~
unusual effort of aaivity, in order to procure
f~ub~lifence, or wyherever they are employed in
severe labour, their appetite is not inferior to
that of other men, and, in some places, it has
firuck obfewers as remarkably voracious k.

SSee NOTE XIX.
G umilla, ii. I2. 70. 237. Lafitau, i* 5'5~. Ovalle

Church. iii. 8r. Muratori, i. 295*

Taxe

THE operation of political and moral caules B O O K

is still more conspicuous, in modifying the de- +-
gree of attachment between the sexes. In a
slate of high civilization, this pafiron, inflamed
by restraint, refined by delicacy, and cherished
by fafhlion, occupies and engroffes the heart.
It is no longer a simple infindt of nature; fen-
timent heightens the ardour of desire, and the
molt tender emotions of which our frame is s~us-
ceptible, soothe and agitate the foul. This
description, however, appies only to those,
who, by their situation, are exempted from
the cares and labours of life. Among persons
of inferior order, who are doomed by their con-
dition to incessant toil, the. dominion of. this
passion is less violent ; their solicitude to procure
fubfiffence, and to provide for the first demand
of nature, leaves little leisure for attending to
its second call. But if the nature of the inter-
course between the fexves varies -so much in per-
sons of different rank in polished s~ocieties, the
condition of man, while he remains uncivilized,
must occaflon a variation skill more apparent.
WVe may well suppose, that amnidfl the hard-
thips, the dangers, and the Clmplicity of savage
life, where fubfiffence is always precarious, and
often scanty, where men are almost continually
engaged in the pudhit of their enemies, or in
guardingr agarinfl their attacks, and where neither

F 3 dress

B Op K dress nor reserve are employed as arts of female

L allurement, that the attention of the Americans

to their women would be extremely feeble,
without imputing this solely to any physical de-
felt or degradation in their frame.

IT is accordingly observed, that in those

countries of America, where, from the fertility
of the foil, the mildness of the climate, or
fame farther advances which the natives have
made in improvemerit, the means of fubliffence
are more abundant, and the hardships of savage
life are less severely felt, the animal passion of
the sexes becomes more ardent. Striking ex-
amples of this occur among some tribes seated
on the banks of great rivers well flored with
food, among others who are masters of hunting-
grounds abounding so much with game, that
they have a regular and plentiful supply of
nourishment with little labour. The superior
deg~ree of security and affluence which ther~e
tribes enjoy, is followed by their natural effe61s.
The pafirons implanted in the human frame by
the hand of nature acquire additional force;
nlew tastes and desires are formed; the women,
as they are more valued and admired, become
more attentive to dress and ornament; the
men, beginning to feel how much of their own
hiappinefs depends upon them, no longer dis~dain

21 the

the arts of winning their favour and affeaion. B O O K
The intercourse of the sexes becomes very dif- 4.-v--.
ferent from that which takes place among their
ruder countr) men ; and as hardly any reffraint is
imposed on the gratification of desire, either by
religion, or laws, or decency, the dissolution of
their manners is excefirve'.

NorwrraTSArNwoN the feeble make of the wone of

them de-

Americans, hardly any of them are deformed, formed,
6r mutilated, or defeaive in any of their senses.
All travellers have been firuck with this cir-
cumffance, and have celebrated the uniform
symmetry and perfeaion of their external figure.
Some authors search for the cause of this ap-
pearance in their physical condition. As the
parents are not exhauffed or over-fatigued with
hard labour, they s~uppose that their children
are born vigorous and found. They imagine,
that in the liberty of savage life, the human
body, naked and unconfined from its earliest
age, preserves its natural form; and that all
its limbs and members acquire a juffer propor-
tion, than when fettered with artificial reffraints,
which flint its growth, and diltort its thape .

I Biet* 389. Charley. iii. 423. Dumont Mem. fixr

Louifiane, i. 155*

m Pifo, p. 6.

Something,

F 4

B I K Something, without doubt, may be ascribed

cv to the operation of there causes; but the true

reasons of this apparent advantage, which is
comnmon to all savage nations, lie deeper, and
are closely interwoven with the nature and ge·
nius of that slate. * The infancy of man is so
long and so helplelfs, that it is extremely difli.
cult to rear children among rude nations. Their
means of fubliffence are not only scanty, but
precarious. Such as live by hunting muff
range over extensive countries, and thift often
from place to place. The care of children, as
well as every other laborious task, is devolved
upon the women. The diffreffies and hardships
of the savage life, which are often s~uch as can
hardly be s~upported by persons in full vigour,
must be fatal to thos~e of more tender age.
Afraid of undertakings a tafke so laborious, and
of fach long duration, as that of rearing their
offspring, the wlomen, in some parts of Ame·
rica, procure frequent abortions by th~e us~e of
certain herbs, and extinguiflh the first s~parks of
that life which they are unable to cherifhn.
Sensible that only flout and well formed children
have force of conflitution to fIruggle through
s~uch an hard infancy, other nations abandon or

n Ellis's Voyage to Hudfon's Bay, 198. Herrera, dec.

7. lib. ix. c* 4*

dleflroy

deflroy such of their progeny as appear feeble or B o~ o i
defeaive, as unworthy of attention o. Even when -s
they endeavour to rear all their children without
diftinclon, so great a proportion of the whole
number periihes under the rigorous treatment
which must be their lot in the savage slate, that
few of those who laboured under any original
frailty attain the age of manhood p. Thus, in
polished societies, where the means of fubliftence
are secured with certainty, and acquired with
ease; where the talents of the mind are often
of more importance than the powers of the
body; children are preserved notwithffanding
their defeas or deformity, and grow up to be
useful citizens. In rude nations, such person~s
are either cut off as soon as they are born, or
becoming a burden to thems~elves and to the
community, cannot long protraa their lives.
But in thos~e provinces of the New World
where, by the estab~lishment of the Europeans,
more regular proviflon has been made for the
fulbfdtence of its inhabitants, and they are re-
firained from laying violent hands on their
children, the Americans are so far from being
emninent for any superior perfeaion in their
form, that one sh~ould rather ufupec? some pe.

O Gumilla Hist. ii. 234. Techo'q Hist. of Paraguay,

&ic. Churchill's Colled. vi. 108.

p Creuxii Hist. Canad. P* 57-

cu tar

I 00 culiar imbecillity in the race, from the extraordi.

Ly nary number of individuals who are deformed,

dwarfifh, mutilated, blind, or deafs,

unisomaty How feeble soever the constitution ofthe

at teirap~;;~.i Antericans may be, it is remarkable, that

there is les~s variety in the human form through.
out the New W~orld,. than in the ancient con.
tinent. WChen Columbuis and the other dif.
coverers frirf vi~ted the different countries of
`America which lie within the torrid zone, they
naturally expeaetd to find people of thle fame
complex~ion wit-h thiofe in the corresponding
regions of the. otiher hemisphere. To their
amazemenlt, howe-ver, they discovered that
America contained no negroes r; and the caule
o~f this singular appearance became as much the
obj~eB of curiosity, as the ~faa itself was of
wronder. In what part or membrane of the
body that hum~our rcfides ·awhich tinges the
complexion of th~e negro with a deep black, it
is the business of anatominis to inquire and.
dcfe~ribe. The powerful operation of heat ap·
pears manifell~y to be the cause which pro.
duces this firik~ing variety in the human fpe
cies. All Eu~rope, a great part of Asia,
and the temperate countries of Africa, are

SVoyd6ge de U~loa, i. 23'· r P. M~artj r, dec. p. p~.

in~habited

inhabited by men of a white complexion. All B 0v K
the torrid zone in Africa, some of the warmer cMuc
regions adjacent to it, and several countries in
Asia, are filled with people of a deep black
colour. If we survey the nations of our conti-
nent, making our progres~s from cold and tem-
perate countries towards those parts which are
exposed to the influence of vehement and un-
remitting heat, we shall find, that the extreme
wvhitenef~s of their skin soon begins to diminish;
that its colour deepens gradually as we ad-
vance; and after paifing through all the fuc-
cefirve gradations of shade, terminates in an
uniform unvarying black. But in America,
where the agency of heat is checked and
abated by various causes, which I have already
explained, the climate seems to be destitute of
that force which produces s~uch wonderful effeas
on the human frame. The colour of the na-
tives of the torrid zone, in America, is hardly
of a deeper hue than that of the people in the
more temperate parts of their Bontinent. Ac-
curate observers, who had an opportunity of
viewing the Americans in very different cli-
mates, and in provinces far removed from each
other, have been itruck with the amazing fimi.
larity of their figure and afpea '.

See N OT E XX.

BUT

B O~ O; K UT though the hand of Nature has deviated
4..-v--... to little fromn one flandard in fashioning tht

human form in America, the creation of fancy
hath been various and extravagant. The fame
fables that wvere current in the ancient conti.
nent, have been revived with refped to the
New W~lorld, and America too has been peopkid
with human beings of inonfirous and fantaic
appearance. The inhabitants of certain pro·
vinces were deferibed to be pigmies of three
feet high; thos~e of others to be giants of an
enormous size. Some travellers publish~ed ac·
counts of people with only one eye, othen
pretended to have discovered men without
heads, whose eyes and mouth's were planted in
their breasts. The variety of Nature in her
produ~tions is, indeed, so great, that it is pre-
s~umptuous to set bounds to her fer~tilityr, and
to rejeat indiscr~iminately every relation that
does not perf~ealy accord with our ow~n limited
observation and experience. But the other ex-
treme, of vielding a hasty ass~ent, on the flighteit
evidence, to wh~atever has the appearance of
being strang-e and marvellous, is itill more
unbecoming a philos~ophical inquirer, as, in
every period, men are more apt to be betrayed
into error, by their weakness in believing too
much, than by their arrogance in believing
too little. In proportion as s~cience exitendr,

and nature is exaniined with a dis~cerning eye, a 0 O K
the w~onders which amused ages of ignorance <.-7--
disappear. The tales of credulous travellers
concerning America are forgotten; the mnon-
fiers which they deferibe have been searched
for in vain; and those provinces ivhere they
pretend to have found inhabitants of singular
forms, are now known to be poffeffed by peo-
ple no wife different from the other Ameri-

cans.

THOUGH those relations 1 ly, wvithout dif-

cuffion, be rejeaed as fabulous, there are other
accounts of varieties in the human species in
fame parts of the New World, which reft upon
better evidence, and merit more attentive exa-
mination. This variety has been particularly
observed in three different diffrias. The first
of there is situated in the isthmus of Darien,
near ·he centre of America. Lionel Wafer, a
traveller poffeff~ed of more curiosity and intel-
ligence than we thould have expeaed to find
in an associate of Buccaneers, discovered there
a race of men few in number, but of a singular
make. T'hey are of low stature, according to
his defeription, of a feeble frame, incapable of
enduring fatigue. Their colour is a dead milk
n hite s not res~embling that of fair people among

Europeans,

B 0 a re Europeans, but without any tinaure of a bludb

wv.. c-J or sanguine complexion. Their skin is covered

with a fine hairy down of a chalky white, the
hair of their heads, their eye-brows, and eye.
lashes, are of the fame hue. Their eyes are ofa
singular form, and so weak, that they can hardly
bear the light of the fun; but they fee clearly
by moon-light, and are most adive and gay in
the night ·. No race limilar to this has been
discovered in any other part of America.
Cortes, indeed, found some persons exaalg
resembling the white people of Darien, among
the rare and monfirous animals which Monte.
zuma had colleaed w. But as the power of
the Mexican empire extended to the provinces
bordering on the isthmus of Darien, they
were probably brought thence. Singular as
Sthe appearance of those people may be, they
cannot be considered as conflituting a diftinal
species. Among the negroes~ of' Africa, as well
as the natives of the Indian islands, nature
sometimes produces a fmnall number of indivi-
duals, with all the charaaeriffic features and
qualities of the white people of Darien. Tke
former are called Albinos by the Portuguele,

U Wafer Defeript. of Ifth. ap. Dampier, iii. p* 346.
rr Cortes ap. Ramus. iii. p. 241, E.

the latter Kakerlak~es by the Dutch. In Darien B O O K
the parents of those Whiltes are of the fame Wc~
colour with the other natives of the country;
and this observation applies equally to the
anomalous progeny of the negroes and Indians.
The fame mother who produces some children
of a colour that does not belong ~to the race,
brings fortl> the reft with the cpmplexion pecu-
liar to her country '. One conclusion may
then be formied with refped to the ,people de-
fcribed by Wafer, the Albinos and the Ka~cker-
lakes; they are a degenerated breed, not a
separate class of men; and from some disease
or defed of their parents, the peculiar colour
and debility which mark their degradation are
transmitted to them. As a decisive proof of
this, it has been obs~erved, that neither the
white people of Darien, nor the Albinos of
Africa, propagate their race: their children
are of the colour and temperament peculiar to
the natives· of their ref~pedive countries y.

THE second diffria that is occupied by in-

habitants differing~ in appearance from the other
people of America, is situated in a high north-
ern latitude, extending from the coast of

a Margray. Hilt. Rer. Nat. Bras. lib. viii. c. 4-
S7 Wafer, p. 348. Demanet HiRt de P' Afrique, ii. 234-

Recherchl. Philof. fur kts Amer. ii. r, &c. NOTE XXI.

Labrador

B ~pK Labrador towards the pole, as far as the

C ~~country is habitable. The people scattered

over those dreary regions, are known to the
Europeans by the name of Efguimaucx. They
themselves;, with .that idea of their own f~upe.
riority, which consoles the rudest and moit
wretched nations, aiffime the narne ofKeralit
or Men. They are of a middlE size, and robust,
with heads of a difproportioned bulk, and feet
as remarkably finall. Their complexion,
though twarthy, by being continually exposed
to the rigour of a cold climate, inclines to the
European white, rather than to the copper
colour of America, and the inen have beards
which are sometimes buihy and long Z. From
thes~e marks of diftinaion, as well ·as from one
still less equivocal, the affinity of their lan-
guagae to that of the Greenlanders, which I
have already mentioned, we may conclude,
with some degree of confidence, that the Es-
quimnaux are a race different from the reft of
the Americans.

WE cannot decide with equal certainty con-

cerning the inhabitants of the third diffric?,

Z Ellis Voy. to Hudf. Bay, p. 131. 39. De la Po-

therie, tom. i. p. 79. Wales' Joun. of a Voy. to Chur-
chill River. Phil. Trant. vol. lx. I09.

situated

situated at the southern extremity of America. B O O~ K
There are the famous Patatgonzians, who, du- ·~
ring two centuries and a half, have afforded a
f~ubjet of controversy to the learned, and an
objeQ of wonder to~ the vuilgar. They are
supposed to be one of the wandering tribes,
which occupy that vast, but least kitown region
of America, which extenlds from the river De
la Plata to the Straits of Magellan. Their
proper flation is in that part of the interior
country which lies on the banks of the river
Negro; but in the hunting season they often
roam as far as the firaits iv~hich separate Tierra
del Fuego from the main-land. The first ac-
counts of this people were brought to Europe
by the companions of MI/agellan a, who de-
f~cribed them as a gigantic race,. above, eight
feet high, and of firength in proportion to
their enormous size. Among several tribes of
animals, a disparity in bulk, as considerable,
may be observed. Some large breeds of horses
and dogs exceed the more diminutive races in
stature and firength, as far as the Patagonian
is ftbppofed to rife above the usual flandard
of the human body. But animals attain the
highest perfeaion of their species, only in mild
climates, or where they find the most nutritive

* Falkner's Defeription of Patagonia, p. 102.

VoL. II. G food

B O O K food in greatest abundance. It is not then in

I~~the uncultivated waite of the Magellanic re-

gions, and among a tribe of improvident fa-
vages, that we should expea to find man,
poffeffing the highest honours of his race, and
distinguish~ed by a superiority of size and vigour,
far beyond what he has reached in any other
part of the earth. The most explicit and un.
exceptionable evidence is requisite, in order to
eltablifh a fad, repugnant to thos~e general
principles and laws, which seem to affea the
human frame in every other instance, and to
decide with refpea to its nature and qualities.
Such evidence has not hitherto been produced.
Though several persons, to whos~e teffimony
great refped is due, have visited this part of
America since the time of Magellan, and have
had interviews with the natives; though some
have affirmed, that such as they saw were of
gigantic stature, and others have formed the
fame conclusion from measuring their footiteps,
or from viewing the skeletons of their dead;
yet their accounts vary from each other in to
many essential points, and are mingled with so
many circumfiances manifestly false or fabu-
lous, as detra8 much from their credit. On
the other hand, some navigators, and those
among the most eminent of their order for
dik~ernment and accuracy, have asserted that

the natives of Patagonia, with whom they had B O O K
intercours~e, though flout and well-made, are ~-
not of s~uch extraordinary size as to be diftin-
guifhed from the reft of the human species b
The exriffence of this~ gigantic race of men
s~eems, then, to be one of those points in
naturalhiffory, with refpeQ to which a cautious
inquirer will hesitate, and will chufe to fulpend
his assent until more complete evidence shall
decide, wvhether he ought to admit a faB,
s~eemingly inconsistent with what reason and
experience have discover~ed concerning the
firuaure and condition of man, in all the
various situations in which he has been ob-
served,

IN order to fortn a cornplete idea with re. nehir at~e

fpeB to the conflitution of the inhabitants of
this and the other hemirphere, we thould
attend not only to the make and vigour of
their bodies, but confider what degree of health
they enjoy, and to what period of longevity·
they usually arrive. In the simplicity of the
savage slate, when man is not oppressed with
labour, or enervated by luxury, or difquieted
with care, we are apt to imagine that his life
will flow on almost untroubled by diseas~e or

SSee N O TE XXII.

G 2 fuffering,

B O O K fuffering, until his days be terminated, in ex·

cz~-v~jtreme old age, by the gradual decays of nature.

'We find, accordingly, among the Americans, as
well as among other rude people, persons, whole
decrepit and thrivelled form seems to indicate an
extraordinary length` of life. But as most of
them are unacquainted with the art of number-
ing, and all of them as forgetful of what is pass,
as they are improvident for what is to come, it
is impossible to ascertain their age, with anyde·
gree of precision b. It is evident? that the pe-
riod of their longevity must vary considerably,
according to the diversity ofclimates, and their
different modes of fubifitence. They s~eem, how.
ever, to be every where exempt from many of
the diftempers which affia polished nations.
None of the maladies, which are the immediate
offspring of luxury, ever vilited them; and they
have no names in their languages by which to
dillinguifh this numerous train of adventitious
evils.

Dieares. BuT, whatever be the situation in which man

is placed, he is born to fuffer; and his dis~eases,
in the savage state, though fewer in number,
are, like those of the animals whom he nearly

b Ull02 Notic. Amelic. 323. ERalCroft Nat. Ni. cf

Guiana, 334*

resembles

resembles in his mode of life, more violent, B 0~ 0 r
and more fatal. If luxury engenders and nou- J
rithes diftempers of one species, the rigour and
diff resses of savag~e life bring on those of another.
As men, in this state, are wonderfully improvi-
dent, and their means of ~ubliftence precarious,
they often pass from extreme want to exuberant
plenty, according to the vicissitudes of fortune
in the chace, or in consequence of the various
degree of abundance with which the earth as-
fords to them its produaions, in different sea-
sons. Their inconsid~erate gluttony in the one
situation, and their severe abitinence in the other,
are equally pernicious. For, though the human
conflitution may be accuffomed by habit, like
that of animals of prey, to tolerate long famine,
and then to gorge voraciou~sly, it is not a little
affeaed by such s~udden and violent transitions.
The firength and vigour of savages are, at
some s~easons, impaired by what they f~uffer
from fearcity of food; at others they are
afflic~ed with disorders arising from indigeflion
and a superfluity of gross aliment. Thes~e are
so common, that they may be considered as
the unavoidable consequence of their mode of
fublifting, and cut off considerable numbers in
the prime of life. They are likewise extremely
fubjec to cons~umptions, to pleuritic, althmatic,

G 3 and

B OpK and paralytic· diforders', .brought on by the
4..v--... immoderate hardships and fatigue which they

endure in hunting and in war; or owing to
the inclemency of the seasons to which they
are continuall~y exposed. In the savage slate,
hardships and 'fatigue violently assault the con-
flitution. In polished societies, intemperance
undermines it. It is not easy to determine
which of: them operates with moilk fatal effe8,
or tends most to abridge human life. The
influence of the former is certainly most exten-
five. The pernicious consequences of luxutry
reach only a few members in any community,
the diffreffes of savage life are felt by all. As
far as I can judge, after very minute inquiry,
the general period of human life is shorter among
savages, than in well-regulated and induffrious
societies.

ONE dreadful malady, the severest (courge,

with which, in this life, offended Heaven
chaftens the indulgence of criminal desire,
seems to have been peculiar to the Americans.
By communicating it to their conquerors, they
have not only amply avenged their own wrongs,
but by adding this calamity to those which

C Charley. N. Fr. iii. 364. Lafitau, ii* 360. De la

pptherie, ii. 37*

formerly

formerly imbittered human life, they have, B O: O
perhaps, more than counterbalanced all vthe clMI
benefits which Europe has derived front the
discovery of the New World. This distemper,
from the country in which it first raged, or
from the people by whom it was suppos~ed to
have been [pread over Europe, has been s~ome-
times called the Neapolitan, and s~ometimes
the French disease.\ At its first appearance,
the infeaion was so malignant, its fyrmptoms
to violent, its operation so rapid and fatal, as
to baffle all the efforts of medical fkiill. Altoc
nilhment and terror accompanied this unknown
afflition in its progress, and men began to
dread the extinaion of the human race by such
a cruel visitation. Experience, and the inge·
nuity of physicians, gradually discovered reme-
dies of such virtue as to cure or to mitigate the
evil. During the course of two centuries and
a half, its virulence seems to have abated confi-
derably. Ait length, in the fame manner with
·the leprosy, which raged in Europe for some
centuries, it may waffe its force and disappear;
and in some happier age, this wellern infeaion,
like that from the East, may be known only by
defeription .

SSee N OT E XXIII.

II. AFTER

G 4

B OJO K II. AFTER Canfidering what appears to be

LMv peculiar in the bodily conflitution of the Ameri.

fiu~auites ors cans, our attention is naturally turned towards

ihcr ins.the powers: and qualities of their minds. As

the individual advances from the ignorance and
imbecillity of the infant slate, to vigour and
maturity of underffanding, faomething similar to
this may be observed in the progress of the fpe-
cies. With refpea to it, too, there is a period
of infancy,~ during which several powers of the
mnind are not unfolded, and all are feeble and
def-eaive in their operation. In the early ages
of society, while the condition of man is simple
and rude, his reason is but little exercised, and
his defiires move within a very narrow [phere.
Hence arise two remarkable charadteriftics of
the human milid in this slate. Its intelle~tual
powers are extremely limited; its emotions
and iefforts are few and languid. Both these
difti.- aions are conspicuous among the rudest
and moss unimproved of the American tribes,
and conflitute a firiking· part of their deferip.
tion.

Intelneaual WJ~HAT, among polithed nations, is called
veucisZruy Hmited. speculative reasoning or res~earch, is altogether

unknown in the rude slate of society, and
never becomes the occupation or amus~ement
of the human faculties, until man be so far

2 x improved

improved as to have secured, with certainty, B O~ K
the means of thbliffence, as well as the posses- I--
sion of leith~re and tranquillity. The thougrhts
and attention of a savage are confined wiithin
the fmnall circle of ob~jeas, immediately con-
ducive to his preservation or enjoyment. Every
thing beyond that, escapes his obs~ervation, or
is perfeatly inditferent to him. Like a mere
animal, what is before his eyes interests and
affeas him; what is out of fight, .0r at a
diffance, makes little impreflion·. There are
leveral people in America whose limited under-
flanding~s seem not to be capable of forming an
arrangement for futurity; neither their folici-
tude nor their foreig~ht extend so far. They
follow blindly the impuls~e of the appetite
which they feel, but are entirely regardless of
diltant confeqluences, and even of thos~e re-
moved in the least degree from immediate
apprehension. While they highly prize such
things as serve for present use, or miniffer to
present enjoyment, they set no value upon those
which are not the objeQ of some immediate
want s. When, on the approach of the even-
ing, a Carib~bee feels himself disposed to go to

' Ulloa Noticias Americ. 222.
* Veneg~as Hlift. of Calif. i. 66. Supp. Church. Coll.

v. 693. Dorde Defer. des Caraibes, p. !6. Ellis Voy.

B O O K ref}-, no consideration will tempt him tci fel

·CII his hammoc. But, in the morning, when he

is sal~lying· out to the business or pastime of the
day, he will part with it for the slightest toy
that catches his fancy '. At the close of winter,
while the impreifion of what he has fuffered
from the rigour of the climate is fresh in the
mind of the North American, he sets himself
with; vigour to prepare materials for erecting a
comfortable hut to protea him against the
inclemency of the facceeding f'eafon; but as
soon as the weather becomes mild, he forgets
what is past, abandons his workc, and never
thinkls of it more, until the return of cold
compels himt, whenl too late, to resume it ..

IF inl concerns the mofti interesting, and

feerin;glyr the moss simple, the reason of man,
while r-ude and defitute of culture, differs to
little from thle thoughtless levity of children,
o~r th~e imnprov~ident infinQ of animals, its
exert-ions in other direations cannot be very
colfrideranble. The ojbjeas towrards wh~ich rea·
son turns, an~d the difquifitions in which it en·
g~ages, muff depend upon the state in which
Inan is placed, and are f~uggefied by his ne.

SLe.';t Voyages, 11. I14, rIS5. Tertre, ii. 385*
I Adtahl's II'it. of Amer. Indians, 4'7.

ceflitie,

ceffities and desires. Difquifitions, which ap- B ] OK
pear the moit necessary and important to men c~-
in one slate of society, never occur to thos~e in
another. Among civilized nations, arithmetic,
or the art of numbering, is deemed an essential
and elementary s~cience, and in our continent,
the invention and use of it reaches back to a
period so remote as is beyond the knowledge of
hiffory. But among savages, who have no
property to effimate, no hoarded treas~ures to
count, no variety of objeas or multiplicity of
ideas to enumerate, arithmetic is a s~uperfluous
and dfelefs art. Accordingly, among some
tribes in America it seems to be quite unknown.
T'here are many who cannot reckon farther than
three; and have no denomination to distinguish
any number above it x. Several can proceed
as far as ten, others to twenty. When they
would convey an idea of any number beyond
there, they point to the hair of their head, in-
timating that it is equal to them, or with won-
der declare it to be so great that it cannot be
reckoned 7. Not only the Americans, but all
nations, while extremely rude, s~eem to be

X Conrdam. p. 67. Stadius ap. de Bry, ix. rz23.

Lery. ibid. sp. B~iet. 362. Lettr. Edif. 23- 3r4-

Y Dumont Louis. i. r87. Hgrrera, dec. I. lib. iii. c.

3. Biet* 39c6. Borde, 6.

unacquainted

Bqq o unacquainted w~ith the art of computations.

L~J As soon, however, as they acquire fulch ac.

quaintance or conneaion with a variety of ob.
jeas, that there is frequent occaflon to combine
or divide them, their knowledge of numbers
increas~es, so that the state of this art among
any Eeople may be considered as one flanclard,
by which to eflimate the degree of their im.
provement. The Iroquois, in North America,
as they are much mnore civilized than the rude
inhabitants of Brasil, Paraguay,~ or Guiana,
have likewise made greater advances in this
ref~peQ; though even their arithmetic does not
extend beyond a thousa3nd, as in their petty
tranfaaions they have no occailon for any
higher number a. The Cherok~ee, a less con.
fiderable nation on the fame continent, can
reckon only as far as a hundred, and to that
extent have names for the several numbers; the
s~maller tribes in their neighbourhood can rife
no higher than tenl 5

'This is the cafe with the Greenlanders, Crantz. i.

Z225. and with Kiamchatkadales, M. P'Abbi Chappe, 11

a Charley. Nouv. Franc. ifi- 402.
* Adair's H-iit. of Amer. Ind~ians, 77. See N0 TE

XXIV.

IN other refpec~s, the exercise of the under. B O K

flanding among rude nations is· still more li- ---Jr

No abticad

mited. The firit ideas of every human being ideas.
must be such as he receives by the fenires. But,
in the mind of man, while in the favagne fate,
there seem to be hardly any ideas but what
enter by this avenue. The objec~s arouqd him
are presented to his eye. Such as may be s~ub-
servient to his use, or can gratify any of his ap-
petites, attraQ his notice; he views the reft
without curiosity or attention. Satisfied with
considering them under that limple mode, in
which they appear to him, as separate and de-
tached, he neither combines them so as to form
general classes, nor contemplates their qualities
apart from the fubjea in which they inhere,
nor beffows a thought upon the operations of
his own mind concerning them. Thus, he is
unacquainted with all the ideas which have
been denominated universal, or abJfrad,: or of
refellion. The range of his underitanding
mult, of course, be very confined, and his
reasoning powers be employed merely on what
is sensible. This is so remarkably the cafe
with the ruder nations of America, that their
languages (as we shall afterwards find) have not
a word to express any thing but what is ma-
terial or corporeal. Trime, /pace, SubJfance, and
a thousand other terms which reprefeat abitraQ

and

B O O K and universal ideas, are altogether unk~nown to
...---..J them c. A naked savage, cowering over the

fire in his miserable cabbin, or firetched under
a few branches which afford him a temporary
thelter, has as little inclination as capacity for
useless s~peculation. His thoughts extend not
beyond what relates to animal life, and when
they are not direaed towards some of its con·
cerns, his mind is totally inaaive. In fitua·
tions where no extraordinary effort either of in.
genuity or labour is requisite, in order to satisfy
the simple demands of nature, the powers of
the mind are so seldom roused to any exertion,
that the rational faculties continue almost dor-
mant and unexercifed. The numerous tribes
scattered over the rich plains of South-America,
the inhabitants of some of the islands, and of
several fertile regions on the continent, come
under this defecription. Their vacant coun·
tenance, their staring unexpreifive eye, their
listless inattention, and total ignorance of sub.
jeas, which seem to be the firit which should
occupy the thoughts of rational beings, made
such i~mpreflion upon the Spaniards, when they
first beheld those rude people, that they con-
fidered tliem as animals of an inferior order,
and could not believe that they belonged to the

C Condam. p. 54*

human

human species ". It required the authority of a B O OK
papal bull to counteraQ this opinion, and to c
convince them that the Americans were capable
of the fundtions, and intitled to the privileges
of humanity '. Since that time, persons more
enlightened and impartial than the dis~coverers
or conqluerors of America, have had an oppor-
tunity of contemplating the mnoft savage of its·
in~habitants, and they have been astonished and
humbled, with obfervingr how nearly ~man, in
this condition, approaches to the brute creation.
But in Severer climates, where fubifftence can-
not be procured with the fame ease, where men
muff unite more closely, and aQ with greater'
concert, necessity calls forth their talents, and
sharpens their invention, so that the intelleaual
powers are more ex~ercised and improved. The
North-American tribes and the natives of Chili,
who inhabit the temperate regions in the two
great diffrias of America, are people of culti-
vated and enlarged underitandings, when viewed
in compayrion with some of those seated in the
islands, or on the banks of the M'aragnon and
Orinoco. Their occupations are more various,
their fyrtem of policy, ; well as of war, more
consplex, their arts more numerous. ]But, even

SHerrera, dec. 2. lib. 11. c. i5*
* Torquem. Mon. Ind. iii. 198.

among

B O O K among them, the intelleacual powers are ex·

c~-~ tremely limited in their operations, and unleis

when turned direaly to thos~e objeas which in·
terelt a savage, are held in no eflimation. Both
the North-Americans and Chilef~e, when not
engaged in some of the funaions belonging to
a warrior or hunter, loiter away their time in
thoughtless indolence, unacquainted with any
other f~ubjea worthy of their at~tentio'n, or ca.
pable of occupying their minds '. Ifeven among
them, reason is so much circums~cribed in its
exertions, and never arrives, in its highest at·
tainments, at the knowledge of thos~e general
principles and maxims, which serve as thle foun·
dation of science, we may conclude, that the
intelleaual powers of man in the savage slate
are destitute of their proper objjea, and cannot
acquire any considerable degree of vigour and
enlargement.

Aaa;e er. FRou the fame. caules, the a~ive efforts of
forts of the.
Inind few the mmnd are few, and, on most occasions,
and Languid. languid. If we examine into the motives

which rouze men to aaivityr in civilized life,
and prompt them to persevere in fatiguing
exertions of their ingenuity or firength, we
shall find that they aris~e chiefly from acquired

' Lafitau, ii. 2

wants

wants and appetites. These are numerous and B Ov K
importunate; they keep the mind in perpetual c-r
agitation, and, in order to gratify them, inven-
tion muff be always on the firetch, and induffry
must be incessantly employed. But the desires
of simple nature are few, and where a favour-
able climate yields almoff spontaneously what
fuffices to gratify them, they fecarcely flir the
foul, or excite any violent emotion. Hence the
people of several tribes in America waffe their
life in a listless indolence. To be free from oc-
cupation, seems to be all the enjoyment towards
which they aspire. They will continue whole
days firetched out in their hammocs, or seated
on the earth, in perfeat idleness, without chang-
ing their posture, or raising their eyes from the
ground, or uttering a single word B.

SUCH is their averflon to labour, that neither Improvi-

dent,

the hope of future good, nor the apprehension
of future evil, can s~urmount it. They appear
equally indifferent to both, discovering little
solicitude, and taking no precautions to avoid
the one, or to secure the other. The craving~s
of hunger may rouse them; but as they de-
vour, with little diftinaion, whatever will ap-
peas~e its initindive demands, the exertions

a Bouguer Voy. au Perou, rto. Borde, 'f5*

VoL. II. H which

B O OK which there occallon are of short duration.
a..-v-.. Destitute of ardour, as well as variety of desire,

they feel not the force of those powerful springs
which give vigour to the movements of the
mind, and urge the patient hand of induffry
to persevere in its efforts. Man, in some
parts of America, appears in .a form so rude,
that we can discover no effeas of his a~livity,
and the principle of underitanding which
flhould direa it, seems hardly to be unfolded.
Like the other animals, he has no fixed refl.
dence; he has ereaed no habitation to shelter
himt from the inclemency of the weather; he
has taken no measures for s~ecuring certain
fubilfence; he neither fows nor reaps; but
roams about as led in search of the plants and
fruits which the earth brings forth in fuccef-
sion; and in quest of the game which he kilks
in the forests, or of the fiih which he catches
in the rivers.

sqmevaricy TmIs description, however, applies only to
to an us. f iome tribes. Man cannot continue long in

this slate of feeble and uninformed infancy.
H-e was made for induffry and aaion, and the
powers of his nature, as well as the necellity
of his condition, urge him to fulfil his defliny.
ALccordingly, among most of the American
nations, especially those seated in rigorous

climates,

climates, some efforts are employed, ,and fbme n ov o t
previous precautions are taken, for securing aL~
fubliftence. The career of regular indufftry is
begun, and the laborious arm has made the
firit essays of its power·. Still, however, the
improvident and slothful genius of the savage
fitte predominates. Even among those more
improved tribes, labour is deemed ignominious
and degrading. It is only to work of a certain
kind that a man will deign to put his hand.
The greater part is devolved entirely upon the
women. One half of the c~ommunity remains
inadtive, wvhile the other is oppressed with the
multitude and variety of its occupations. Thus
their induffry is partial, and the foresight which
regulates it, is no less limited. A remarkable
idltance of this occurs in the chief arrangement
with refpea to their rnanner of living. They
depend for their subsistence, during one part
of the year, on fishing; during another, on
hunting; during a third, on the produce of
their agriculture. Though experience has
taught them to fores~ee the return of thos~e va-
rious seas~ons, and to make s~ome provision for
the refpetive exigencies of each, they either
want sagacity to proportion this provision to
their confilmption, or are so incapable of any
command over their appetites, that, from their
inconsiderate walte, they often feel the calami-

H 2 ties

B O O K ties of famitle as severely as the rudeit of the

savas~ i~,ge tribes. What they f~uffer one year does
not augment their induffry, or render them more
provident to prevent similar diitreffesh Th i
inconsiderate thoughtleifnefs about futurity, the
effeat of ignorance and the cause of sloth, ac·
companies and charadterizes nian in every flage
of savage life '; and, by a capricious singularity
in his operations, he is then leait solicitous about
supplying his wants, when the means of satisfy·
ing them are moRt precarious, and procured with
the greateit difficulty k

nleir. rocial III. AFTErR Viewing the bodily conflitution

of the Americans, and contemplating the
powers of their minds, we are led, in the na.
tural order of inquiry, to confider them as
united together in s~ociety. Hitherto our re-
s~earches have been confined to the operations
of underltanding refpeaing themselves, as in.
dividuals, now they will extend to the degree
of their sensibility and affetion towards their
species.

a Charley. N. Fr. iii. 338. Lettr. Edif. 23* 298.

Dercript. of N. France, Oiborn's Colledt. ii. 880. De b
Potherie, ii. 63-

S1 Bancroft's Nat. Hist. of Guiana, 325* 333*
a See 7 O TE XXV.

THE domeltic slate is the first and most B OO K

simple form of human ariociation. The union Dkn;M
of the sexes, among different animals, is of Union".
longer or thorter duration in proportion to the
ease or diFficulty of rearing their offspring.
Among thos~e tribes where the season of infancy
is thort. and the young soon acquire vigour or
agility, no permanent union is formed. Na-
ture commits the care of training up ti's
offspring to the mother alone, and her tender-
ness, without any other affiltance, is equal to
the task. But where the slate of infancy is
long and helpless, and the joint assiduity of
both parents is requisite in tending their feeble
progeny, there a more intimate connec~ion
takes place, and continues until the purpose of
nature be accomplished, and the new race grow
up to full maturity. As the infancy of man is
more feeble and helpless than that of any; other
animal, and he is dependent, during a much
longer period, on the care and foresight of his
parents, the union between husband and wife
came early to be considered, not only as a so-
lemn, but as a permanent contract. A ge-
neral slate of promiscuous intercours~e between
the s~exes never existed but in the imagination
of poets. In the infancy of society, when men,
destitute of arts and induffry, lead a hard pre-
carious life, the rearing of their progeny de-

H 3 mands

a 0~ 0 mands the attention and efforts of both parents;

C-s and if their union had not been formed and

continued with this view, the race could not
have been preserved. Accordingly, in Ameri.
ca, even among the rudest tribes, a regular
union between husband and wife was universal,
and the rights of marriage were underltood and
recognized. In those diffrias where fuibfiftence
was scanty, and the difficulty of maintaining a
family was great, the man confined hims~elf to
one wife. In warmer and more fertile provinces,
the facility of procuring food concurred with the
influence of climate, in inducing the inhabitants
to increas~e the number of their wives '. In some
countries, the marriage union fabfifted during
life; in others, the impatience of the Americans
under restraint of any s~pecies, together with their
natural levity and caprice, prompted them to
dissolve it pa very flight pretexts, and often
without afirgning any cause ",

cothanaio BUTr in whatever light the Americans con-
of WOmen. fidered the obligation of this contradt, either as

SLettr. Edif, 23. 318. Lafitau Maeurs, i* 554. Lery

ap. de Bry, iii, 234. Journal de Grillet et Bechamel,
F. 88.

. Lafitau, i* 580. Joutel Journ. Hiffor* 345. Lozano

Defer. del Gran Chaco, 70. Hennepin 1Woesrs des Sau-
valges, ;p. 3o. 33·

perpetual,

perpetual, or only as temporary, the condition a o o t
of women was equally humiliating and mile- Csys
rable. Whether man has been improved by the
progres~s of arts and civilization in society, is a
question, which, in the wantonness of difputa-
tion, has been agitated among philosophers.
That women are indebted to the refinements
of polished manners for a happy change in their
state, is a point which can admit of no doubt.
To despise and to degrade the female sex, is
the charaderiffic of the savage slate in every
part of the globe. Man, proud of excelling
in firength and in courage, the chief marks
of pre-eminence among rude people, treats
woman, as an inferior, with disdain. The
Americans, perhaps from that coldness and in-
s~ensibility which has been considered as peculiar
to their conflitution, add neglea and harshness
to contempt. The most intelligent travellers
have been firuck with this inattention of the
Americans to their women. It is not, as I
have already observed, by a fludied display of
tendernels and attachment, that the American
endeavours to gain the heart of the woman
whom he withes to marry. Marriage itself,
instead of being an union of affeaion and in-
terefts between equals, becomes, among them,
the unnatural conjundion of a master with his
slave. It is the oblervation of an author, whose

H1 4 opiniofis

B Op O opinions are des~ervedly of great weight, that

c~lr wherever wives are purchas~ed, their condition is

ex~tremely depressed ". They become the pro·
perty and the slaves of those who buy them. In
whatever part of the globe this cuffom prevails,
the observation holds. In countries where re-
finement has made some progress, women, when
purchased, are excluded from society, shut up in
sequestered apartments, and kept under the vigi.
lant guard of their masters. In ruder nations,
they are degraded to the meanest fun~ions.
Among many people of America, the marriage·
contraQ is properly a purchas~e. The man buys
his wife of her parents. Though unacquainted
with the use of money, or with s~uch commercial
tranfaaions as take place in more improved so-
ciety, he knows how to give an equivalent for
any objea which he desires to possess. In some
places, thefiuit~or devotes his service for a certain
time to the parents of the maid whom he courts;
in others, he hunts for them occafionally,0r assists
in cultivating their fields, and forming their ca-
noes; in others,heoffers pres~ents of such things as
are deemed most valuable on account of their use-
fulnels or rarity ". In return for thes~e, he receives
his wife ; and this circumilance, added to thelow

SSketches of Hist. of Man, i. 184*
* Lafitau Maeurs, &c. i. 560, &c. Charley. iii. 28$,

Ac. Herrera, dec* 4. lib. iv. c. 7. Dumont, 11. 156.

eftimatioa

eltimation of won> a among savages, leads him to a qo re
confider her as a female s~ervant wr' om he has LCMI
purchased, anld whom he has a title to treat as
an inferior. In all unpolifhed nations, it is true,
the funalons in domeffic <economy, which fall
naturally to the share of women, are to many,
that they are fubjefted to hard labour, and must
bear more than their full portion of the com-
mon burden. But in America their condition
is t~o peculiarly grievous, and their depreflion
so complete, that servitude is a name too mild
to deferibe their wretched slate. A wife,
among moss tribes, is no better than a beast of
burden, deffined to every office of labour and
fatigue. While the men loiter out the day in
sloth, or spend it in amusement, the women
are condemned to inceffadnt toil. Tasks are
imposed upon them without pity, and services
are received ~iithout complacence or gratitude .
Every circumitance reminds women of this
mortifying inferiority. They must approach
their lords with reverence; they must regard
them as more exalted beings, and are not per·
mitted to eat in their presence 4. There are

P Tertre, li* 382. Borde Relat. des 1V~curs des Ca-

raibes, p.~ 21. iet- 357. Condamine, p. I10. Fermin.

4 Gumilla, i. I53. Barrere, I64. Labat, Voy. 11.

78. Chanvalon, 51. Tertre, ii. 300.

diffrifts

B 0O K diitrifts in America where tl~s dominion is so

Ly grievous, and so f~ienibly felt, that some women,

in, a wild emotion of maternal tenderness, have
destroyed their female children in their infancy,
in order to deliver them from that intolerable
bondage to which they knew they were doomed'.
Thus the sirs1 inflitution of social life is per.
verted. That slate of domeltic union towards
which nature leads the human species, in order
to soften the heart to gentlenes~s and humanity,
is rendered so unequal, as to establish a cruel
diftinalion between the sexes, which forms the
one to be harsh and unfeeling, and humbles
the other to servility and fuubjeaion.

Thrir wo. IT is owing, perhaps, in some mleafure, to
"i~ffo this slate of depreifion, that women in rude na.

tiohs are far from beingcr prolific". The vigour
of their conflitution is exhauffed by excellive
fatigue, and the wants and diffre~ffes of savage
life are so numerous, as to force them to take
various precautions in order to prevent too rapid
an increas~e of their progeny. Among wan·
dering tribes, or such as depend chiefly upon
hunting for subsistence, the mother cannot at·
tempt to rear a second child, until the firit has

r Gum;Ila, ii. 233. 238. Herreca, dec. 7. lib. ix. c .(
S Lafitau, i. 590.o Charlevoix, iii. 304*

attained

attained s~uch a degree of vigour as to be in rAme B 0~ o i
measure independent of her care. From tlus ccs
motive, it is the universal pradice of the
American women to suckle their children during
leveral years ; and as they seldom rnarry early,
the period of their fertility is over, before they
can finish the long but necessary attendance
upon two or three children U. Among some
of the least polished tribes, whos~e induffry
and foresight do not extend to far as to make
any regular provision for their own subsistence,
it is a maxim not to burden themselves with
tearing more than two children x; and no such
numerous families, as are frequent in civili~sed
societies, are to be found among men in the
fagvage slate y. When twins are born, one of
them commonly is abandoned, because the
mother is not equal to the talk of rearing
both ". WThen a mother dies while the is
nursing~ a child, all hope of pres~erving· its life
fails, and it is buried together with her in the

SHerrera, dee. 6. lib. i. c. 4*
* Charley. iii. 303. Dumont Mem. fur Louifiane, ii.

syo. Denys Hist. Natur. de P'Amerique, &rc. ii- 365*
Charley. Hist. de Parag. ii. 422*

STecho's Account of Paraguay, &c. Church. Colle61.

vi. Jo8. Lett. Edif. 24.200. Lozano Defer. 92.

I Maccleur's Journal, 63*
rLett. Edf.x. 200. See N OT E XXVI.

fame

B O OK fame graVea. As the parents are frequentlp

c~expofed to want. by their own improvident in·

dolence, the difficulty off~uftaining their children
becomes so great, that it is not uncommon to
abandon or destroy them b. Thus their expe.
rience of the difticulty of training up an infant
to maturity, amidst the hardships of savage life,
often fifl~es the voice of nature among the Ame·
ricans, and suppresses the fitiong emotions of
parental tenderness.

Prvenniala. But, though necefi~ty compels the inhalit.
feation and
fdial duty, RTntS of America thus to s~et bounds to the

increase of their families, they are not deficient
in affeation and attachment to their offspring.
They feel the power of this infcina in its full
force, and as long as their progeny continue
feeble and helplers, no people exceed thein in
tenlerneefs and care c. But in rude nations,
the dependence of children upon their parents
is of shorter continuance than in polithed 10-
cleties. W~hen men must be trained to the
various funaions of civil life by previous dif.
cipline and education, when the knowledge of

a Charley. iii. 368. Lett. Edif. x. zoo. P. Mekkh

Hernandez Memor. de Cheriqui. Colbert, ColleBL Odg.,
Pap. i.

SVenegas Hist. of Californ. i. 82.
C Gulmilla, i. 2nI. Biet. 390.

abffrule

abffrule sciences must be taught, and dexterity a q O K
in intricate arts must be acquired, before a 1&
young man is prepared to begin his career of
aecion, the attentive feelings of a parent are
not confined to the years of infancy, but ex-
tend to wvhat is more remote, the eliabliih-
ment of his child in the world. Even then,
his solicitude does not terminate. His pro-
teaion may still be requisite, and his wif~dont
and experience itill prove useful guides. Thus
a permanent conne~ion is formed; parental
tenderness is exercised, and filial refped re-
turned, throughout the whole cours~e of life.
But in the simplicity of thq s~avage slate, the
affetion ofparents, like the inflinaive fondness
of animals, ceas~es almost entirely as Toon as
their offspring attain maturity. Little infiruaion
fits them for that mode of life to which they are
dellined. The parents, as if their duty were
accomplished, when they have conduaed their
children through the helpless years of infancy,
leave them afterwards at entire liberty. Even in
their tender age, they s~eldom advise or admoniih,
they never chide or chaltife them. They f~uffer
themn to be absolute masters of their own
a~ions b. In an American hut, a father, a

b Charley. 111. 27z. Biet. 390. Gumilla, i. 212.

Lafitau, i. 60z. Creuxii Hist. Canad. p. c/I. Fernandez,
Relac. Hist. de los Chequit* 33*

mother,

B VK mother, and their posterity, live together like

c~rperf~ons assembled by accident, without seem.

ing to feel the obligation of the duties mutually
arising from this conneaion 5. As filial love
is not cherished by the continuance of atten·
tion or good offices, the recolleaion of bene.
fits received in early infancy is too faint to
excite it. Cons~cious of their own liberty, and
impatient of reffrainlt, the youth of America
are accuitomed to a~t as if they were totally
independent. Their parents art not objeth
of greater regard than other persons. They
treat them always with neglea, and often with
such harfhnef's and insolence, as to fill those
who have been witness~es of their condua with
horror d. Thus the ideas which seem to be
natural to man in his fagvage slate, as they
result necessarily from his circumitances and con·
dition in that period of his progress, affe8 the
two capital relations in domestic life. They ren-
der the union between husband and wife unequal.
They shorten the duration, and weaken the
force, of the conneaion between parents and
children.

c Charley. Hill. N. Fr. 11!. 273*
d Gumilla, i. 212. Tertre, ii. 376. Charley. Hil. de

N. France, iii. 309. Charley. Hist. de Parag. i. I q.
Lozano, Deferip. del Gran Chaco, p. 68~. 100, IoI. Ser.
nand. Relac. Hifter. de los Chequit. 426.

IV. FROM

17. FROM the domeffic slate of the Ameri- B O O K

cans, the transition to the consideration of their 1

. . . . Political in-

civil government and political maittutions is mentuions.
natural. In every enquiry concerning the
operations of men when united together in
society, the first objeQ of attention thould be
their mode of subsistence. Accordingly as that
varies, their laws and policy must be different.
The inflitution s~uited to the ideas and exigen-
cies of tribes, which sublist chiefly by fishing
or hunting, and which have as yet acquired bui:
an imperfe6L conception of any species of pro-
perty, will be much more simple than those
which must take place when the earth is cul-
tivated with regular induffry, and a -right of
property not only in its produtions, but in
the foil itself, is completely ascertained.

ALL the people of America, now under re- node of

fub~ittenec.

view, belong to the former class. But though
they rnay all be comprehended under the gene-
ral denomination of savage, the advances which
they had made in the art of procuring to them-
selves a certain and plentiful fubifiitnce, were
very unequal. On the extensive plains of South-
America, man appears in one of the rudest
slates in which he has been ever observed, or,
perhaps, can exist. Several tribes depend en-
tirely upon the bounty of nature for fubifitence.

They

B OVO K They dis~cover no solicitude, they employ little

L- foresight, they fearcely exert any induflry, to

s~ecure what is necessary for their su~pport. The
Topayers of Brasil, the Guaxeros of Tierra Firme,
the Caiguas, the Moxos, and several other peo.
ple of Paraguay, are unacquainted with every
[pecies of cultivation. They neither sow nor
plant. Even the culture of the manioc, of
which caffada bread is made, is an art too in,
tricate for their ingenuity, or too fatiguing to
their indolence. The roots which the earth
produces spontaneously, the fruits, the berries,
and the feeds, which they gather in the woods,
together with lizards and other reptiles, which
multiply amazingly with the heat of the climate
in a fat foil, moistened by frequent rains, sup·
ply them with food during fomne part of the

By fiihing. year e. At other times they f~ubiift by fishing;

and nature seems to have indulged the laziness
of the South-American tribes by the liberality
with which the miniffers, in this way, to their
wants. The vast rivers of that region in Ame·
rica abound with an infinite variety of the
most delicate fish. The lakes and madhles,

* Nieuhoff. Hist. of Brasil. Church. Coll. ii. 44.

Simon, Conquilla de Tierra Firmi·, p. 166. Techo, Ac.
count of Paraguay, &c. Church. vi. 78. Lettr. Edif.
23* 384. 10. 190. Lozano, Deferip. del Gran Chaco,
p. 8I. Ribas, Hiftor. de los Triumofos, &c. p. 7.

2x formed

formed by the annual overflowing of the waters, a 0v 0
are filled with all the different species, where c
they remain shut up, as in natural reservoirs,
for the use of the inhabitants. They swarm in
such shoals, that in some places they are
catched without art or induffry '. In others,
the natives have discovered a method of in-
sea ~ng the water with the juice of certain
plants, by which the fish are so intoxicated,
that they float on the surface, and are takren
with the hand e. Some tribes have ing~enuity
enough to prefervre them without salt, by drying
or smoking them upon hurdles over a flow fire h
The prolific quality of the rivers in South-
America induces many of the natives to resort
to their bankrs, and to depend almost entirely
for nourifhme ;t on what their waters s~upply
with such profusion i. In this part of the globe,
hunting seems not to have been the frirt em-
ployment of men, or the first effort of their in-
vention and labour to obtain food. They were
fishers before they became hunters; and as the
occupations of the former do not call for equal
exertions of aaivity, or talents, with those of
the latter, people in that slate appear to possess

* See NOTE XXVII. g See NOTE XXVIII.
h Condam. I59. Gumilla, ii. 37. Lettr Edif. r4*
199* 23- 328. Acugana, Relat. de la Riv. des Amaz. r38*

1 Barrere, Relat. de Fr. Equin. p. r55*

Vot. II. I seither

B KqI neither the fame degree of enterprise nor of

C- ingenuity. The petty nations, adjacent to

the Mlaragnon and Orinoco, are manifestly the
molt inaaive and least: intelligent of all the
Americans.

Bg mntang. NONE but tribes contiguous to great rivers

can fuffain thems~elves in this manner. The
greater part of the American nations, dispersed
over the forests with which their country is
covered, do not procure s~ubsistence writh the
fame facility. For although these forests, efpe·
cially in the s~outhern continent of America,
are stored plentifully with game k, considerable
efforts of aaivityr and ingenuity are requisite in
pursuit of it. Necessity incited the natives to
the one, and taught them the other. Hunting
became their principal occupation; and as it
called forth firenuous exertions of courage, of
force, and of invention, it was deemed no
less honourable than necessary. This occu-
pation was peculiar to the inen. They were
trained to it frorn their earliest youth. A bold
and dextrous hunter ranked next in fame to
the distinguished warrior, and an alliance with
the former is often courted in preference to

k P. Martyr, Decad. P* 324. Gumilla, iit 4, &c.

Acugrna, i. I56.

one with the latter I. Hardly anly device, Ba 0 K
which the ingenuity of man has discovered for ~
ensnaring or destroying· wild animals, was un-
known to the Americans. While engaged in
this favourite exercise, they shake off the indo-
lence peculiar to their nature, the latent powers
and vigour of their minds are roused, and they
become a~ive, pers~evering, and indefatigable.
Their sagacity in finding their prey, and their
address in killing it, are equal. Their reason
and their sens~es being confltantly direded to-
wards this one objea, the former displays s~uch
fertility of invention, and the latter acquire
such a degree of acuteness, as appear almost:
incredible. They discern the footfieps of a
uild beast, which es~cape every other eye, and
can follow them with certainty through the
pathliefs forest. If they attack. their game
openly, their arrow seldom errs from the
mark m if they endeavour to circumvent it by
art, it is almost i upoflible to avoid their toils.
Among several tribes, their young men were
not permitted to marry, until they had given
such proofs of their skill in hunting as put it
beyond doubt that they were capable of pro-
viding for a family. Their ingenuity always

SCharley. Hiffoire de la N. France, iii. I I5-
= Biet. Voy. de France Equin. 357. Davies' Dikcov. of

the River of Aklaz. Purchaf. iv. p. 1287.

s I 2on

B O O K on the stretch, and sharpened by emulation,

Lc~s~ as well as necefirty, has` firuck out manyf in·

ventions, which greatly facilitate success in
the chafe. The most singular of these is the
discovery of a pois~on in which they dip the
arrows employed in hunting. The flig~htelt
wound with those envenomed shafts is mortal.
If they only pierce the sk~in, the blood fixes
and congeals in a moment, and the fironget
animal falls motionles~s to the ground. Nor does
this pois~on, notwithstanding its violence and sub.
tlety, infea the flesh of the animal which it kills.
That may be eaten with perfea safety, and re-
tains its native relish and qualities. All the na·
tions situated upon the banks of the Maragnon
and Orinoco are acquainted with this compo·
fition, the chief ingredient in which is the
juice extradted from the root of the cur~are, a
species of withe n. In other parts of America,
they employ the juice of the manchenille for the
fame purpole, and it operates with no, less
fatal adivity. To people poffeffed of those Fe·
crets, the bow is a more deftruaive weapon than
the mufkiet, and, in their fkiilful hands, does
great execution among the birds and beasts
which abound in the fores~ts of America.

n Gumilla, ii. I, &c. Condam. 208. Recherch. Phdlof

ii. 239. Bancroft Nat. Hist. of Guiana, 282, &c.

But the life of a hunter gradually leads man B O O K
to a slate more advanced. The chafe, even c~
where prey is abundant, and the dexterity of ture.agiu
the hunter much improved, affords but an
uncertain maintenance, and at s~ome seasons it
muff be flifpended altogether. If a savage
trilts to his bow alone for food, he and his
family will be'often reduced to extreme diffrefs o.
Hardly any region of the earth furnishes man
spontaneously with what his wants require.
In the mildest climates, and most fertile foils,
his, own induffry and foresight muff be exerted,
in some degree, to secure a regular supply of
food. Their experience of this s~urmounts the
abhorrence of labour natural to savage nations,
and compels them to have recourse to culture,
as subsidiary to hunting. In particular fitua-
tions, some fmlall tribes may f~ub~ift by fishing,
independent of any produaion of the earth,
raised by their own induffry. But throughout
all America, we fearcely meet with any nation
of hunters, which does not pra~ise some species
of cultivation.

THE agriculture of the Americans, however, The various

fr uits of

is neither extensive nor laborious. As game their cul-

ture.

and fish are their principal food, all they aim at

* See N OT E XXIX.

B O Op K by cultivation, is to supply any occaflonal defe8

c- of these. In the southern continent of America,

the natives confined their induffry to rearing a
few plants, which, in a rich foil and wann
climate, were easily trained to maturity. The
chief of these is Maize, well known in Europe
by the name of Turkey or Indian wheat, a
grain extremely prolific, of simple culture,
agreeable to the taste, and affording a firong
hearty nourishment. The second is the Manioc,
which grows to the size of a large thrub, or
sm~all tree, and produces roots somewhat re-
f~einbling parfnips. After. carefully s~queezing
out the juice, ther~e roots are grated down to a
fine powder, and formed into thin cakes, called
Cafadar bread, which, though insipid to the
taste, proves no contemptible food P. As the
juice of the manioc is a deadly poison, s~ome
authors have celebrated the ingenuity of the
Americans, in converting a noxious plant into
wholesome nourishment. But it thould rather
be considered as one of the del'perate expe-
dients for procuring subsistence, to which ne-
cefl~ity reduces rude nations; or, perhaps, men
were led to the use of it by a progress, in which

P Sloane H~it. of Jam. Introd. p. IS. Labat. i* 394-

Acota Hit. Ind. Occid. Natur. lib. iv. c. 17. Ulloa, i.
62. Aublet Mlem. fur le Magnioc. Hist. des Plantes, tom.
ii. p. 65, &c.

there

there is nothing marvellous. One species of B O O K
manioc is altogether free of any poisonous 4..c--.
quality, and may be eaten without any prepa-
ration but that of roalting it in the embers.
This, it is probable, was first used by the
Americans as food; and necefIity having gra-
dually taught them the art of separating its
pernicious juice from the other species, they
have by experience found it to be more pro-
lific as well as more nourishing 9. The third
is the plantain, which though it rises to the
height of a tree, is of such quick growth, that
in less than a year it rewards the induffry of
the cultivator, with its fruit. This, when
roalted, s~upplies the place of bread, and is
both palatable and nourishing '. The fourth
is; the potatoe, wvhof~e culture and qualities are
too well known to need any des~cription. The
fifth is pimento, a fmnall tree, yielding a flrong
aromatic s~pice. The Americans, who, like
other inhabitants of warm climates, delight in
whatever is hot and of poignant flavour, deem
this feafroning a necessary of life, and mingle
it copiously with every kind of food they
take i.

n Martyr Decad. 30'- Labat. I. 4rI. Gumilla, fii.
192. Machucha Milic. Indiana, r64. See NOT'E XXX.

r See NOTE XXXI.
* Gumilla, iii. I7r. Acola, lib. iv. c. zo.

I 4 SucuI

B O O K Secu are the various produaions, which
br were the chief objea of culture among the

hunting tribes on the continent of America,
and with a moderate exertion of ac~ive and
provident induffry, these might have yielded
a full supply to the wants of a numerous people.
But men, accuffomed to the free and vagrant
life of hunters, are incapable of regular appli.
cation to labour;i and confider agriculture as a
secondary and inferior occupation. Accord-
ingly, the provision for fubfillence, arising
from cultivation, was s~o limited and ~Scanty
·among the Americans, that, upon any acci·
dental failure of their us~ual fauccefs in hunting,

Sthey were often reduced to extreme diffrefs.

IN the islands, the mode of f~ub~ifting was

considerably different. None of the large ani-
mals which abound on the continent wNere
known there. Only four species of quadru-
peds, besides a kind of fmnall dumb dog, existed
in the islands, the biggest of which did not
exceed the size of a rabbit 6. To hunt such
diminutive prey, was an occupation which
reqluired no effort either of adivity or courage.
The chief employment of a hunter in the illes
was to kill birds, which on the continent are

" Oviedo, lib. xii. in proem.

deerned

deemed ignoble game, and left chiefly to the B 0 0 I
purfeit of boys x. This want of animals, as vr
well as their peculiar situation, led the islanders
to depend principally upon fishing for their
fubfillence V. Their rivers, and the sea with
which they are surrounded, supplied them with
this ipecies of food. At some particular s~ea-
sons, turtle, crabs, and other fhell-fifh~, abound-
ed in such numbers, that the natives could
ilpport themselves with a facility in which
their indolence deligfhted z. At other times,
they ate lizards, and various reptiles of odious
forms ·. To fishing, the inhabitants of the
islands added s~ome degree of ag~riculture.
M~aizeb, manioc, and other plants, were cul-
tivated in the fame manner as on the conti-
nenlt. But all the fruits of their induffry, to. Their agri.

cuk~ure very

get >er with what their foil and climate prO. klnuted.
duced spontaneously, afforded them but a
fcanlty maintenance. Though their demands
for iood were very s~paring, they hardly raised
what was f~ufficient for their own coniumlption.
If a few Spaniards f~ettled in any diffria, such
a imall adtdition of supernumerary mouths soon

SRibas Hist. de los Triumph. p. I3. .De la Patherie,

n- 33. m.· 20.

r Ovitdo, lib. xili. c. I. Gomara Hist Gener. c. 28.
Z G-oraara Hill. GLener. c. 9. Labat. ii. 22I, &c.
a Oviedo, lib. xiii. c. 3- b See N O TE XXXII.

exhauffed

m O O K eXhauffed their scanty flores, and brought out

Sfamine.

*rwo caures~qns Two circumstances, common to all the savage
fealon. nations of America, concurred with those which

I have already mentioned, not only in rendering
their agriculture imperfe £, but in circums~cribing
their power in all their operations. They hadno
tame animals ; and they were unacquainted with
the useful metals.

In wga~ or IN other parts of the globe, man, in hk

ma" rudest itate, appears as lord of the creation,

giving law to various tribes of animals, which
he has tamed and reduced to fubjeion. The
Tartar follows his prey on the horse which he
has reared; or tends his numerous herds, which
furnish him both writh food and clothing; the
Arab has rendered the camel docile, and availk
himself of its persevering fireng~th; the Lap-
lander has formed the rein-deer to be fubler·
vient to his will ; and even the people of Kam-
chatka have trained their dogs to labour. Thil
command over the inferior creatures is one of
the noblest prerogatives of man, and among
the greateit efforts of his wifdlom and power.
W'ithout this, his dominion is incomplete.
He is a monarch, who has no fubje~ts; a
master, without s~ervants, and muff perform

every operation by the fIrength of his own arm. B 0v 0
Such was the condition of all the rude nations L---
in America. Their reason was so little im-
proved, or their union so incomplete, that
they seem not to have been conscious of the
fTuperiority of their nature, and fuffered all the
animal creation to retain its liberty,. wthout
eltablifhing their own authority over any one
[pecies. Most of the animals, indeed, which
have been rendered domeltiic in our continent,
do not exist in the New World; but those
peculiar to it are neither s~o fierce, nor so for-
midable, as to have exempted them from ser-
vitude. There are some animals of the fame
species in both continents. But the rein-deer,
which has been tamed and broken to the yoke
in the one hemisphere, runs wild in the other.
The bpon of America is manifefily of the fame
species with the horned cattle of the other he-
mifp'here C. The latter, even among the rudest
nations in our continent, have been rendered
domeffic; and, in consequence of his dominion
ov~er them, man can accomplish works of
labour with greater facility, and has made a
great addition to his means offubifftence. The
inhabitants of many regions of the New World,
where the bison abounds, might have derived

c Buff~ou, Artic. Bison.

n O O K the [ame advantages from it. It is not of a na.

Sture so indocile, but that ·it might have been

trained to be as futbf~ervient to man as our cattle'.
But a savage, in that uncultivated slate wherein
the Amlericans were discovered, is the enemy of
the other animals, not their superior. He wastes
and deflroys, but knows not how to multiply or
to govern them e.

THIs, pecrhaps, is the most notable diftinttian

between the inhabitants of the Ancient and New
W~orlds, and a high pre-eminence of civilized
men above such as continue rude. The greatell
operations of man in changing and improvingo
the face of nature, as well as his most: confider·
able efforts in cultivating the earth, are accom·
plifhed by means of the aid which he receives
from the animals whom he has tamed and em·
ploys in labour. It is by their fIrength that he
subdues the flubborn foil, and converts the de-
fert or marsh into a fruitful field. But man, in
his civilized slate, is so accuffomed to the ser·
vice of the domeffic animals, that he seldom
refleas upon the vast benefits which he derives
from it. If we were to suppose: him, even when

d Nouv. Decouverte par Hennepin, p. Ib2. Kalm.i.

207-

e Buffon HiR. Nat. ix. 85. HIRi. Philof. et Poilt. d.

Etabliffem. des Europ. dans les deux Indes, vi. 364 -

moss improved, to be deprived of their us~eful B Op O K
ministry, his empire over nature must in some -Vc
measure cease, and he would remain a feeble
animal, at a 10fs how to f~ubfiit, and incapable
of attempting such arduous undertakings as their
flilitance enables him to execute with eas~e.

IT is a doubtful point, whether the dominion want or me

useful me-

of man over the animal creation, or his ac. tals,
quiring the die of metals, has contributed most
to extend his power. The era of this import-
ant discovery is unknown, and in pur hemi-
iphere very remote. It is only by tradition, or
by digging up some rude infiruments of our
forefathers, that we learn that ~mankind were
originally unacquainted with the us~e of metals,
and endeavoured to supply the want of them by
employing flints, thlells, bones, and other hard
fubitances, for the fame purposes which metals
serve among poliihed nations. Nature com-
pletes the formation of some metals. Gold,
fiver, and copper, are found in their perfedt
slate in the clefts of .rocks, in the sides of
mountains, or the channels of rivers. These
wvere accordingly the metals first known, and
frirt applied to use. But iron, the moss s~er3
viceable of all, and to which man is most in-
debte~d, is never discovered in its perfea form;
its gross and flubborn ore must feel twice the

force

B q a force of fire, and go through two laborious pro.

v ceffes, before it become fit for use. Man was

long acquainted with the other metals, before
he acqluired the art of fabricating iron, or at.
tained such ingenuity as to perfea an invention,
to which he is indebted for thos~e infiruments
wherewith he subdues the earth, and commands
all its inhabitants. But in this, as well as in
many other refpeas, the inferiority of the
Americans was confrpicuous. Aill the favagoe
tribes, s~cattered over the continent and islands,
were totally unacquainted with the metals w~hidh
their foil produces in great abundance, if we
except s~ome trifling quantity of gold, whidb
they picked up in the torrents that descended
from their mountains, and formed into orna·
ments. Their devices to supply this want of
the serviceable metals, were extremely rude and
awkward. The most simple operation was to
them an undertaking of immense difficulty and
labour. To fell a tree with no other infhru.
ments than hatchets of itone, was employment
for a month f. To form a canoe into shape,
and to hollow it, consumed years; and it fres
quently began to rot before they were able to
finish it k. Their operations in agriculture were

r Gurnilla, iii. 196.
s Borde Relat. des Caraibes, p. 22.

equally

equally flow and defeaive. In a country B 0v 0(
covered with woods of the hardest timber, the 4..-v- .
clearing of a finall field deffined for culture re-
quired the united efforts of a tribe, and was a
work of much time and great toil. This was
the bufiners of the men, and their indolence
was satisfied with performling it in a very
flovrenly manner. The labour of cultivation
was left to the women, who, after digging, or
rather ltirring the field, with wooden mattocks,
and (takes hardened in the fire, f~owed or planted
it ; but they were more indebted for the increas~e
to the fertility of the foil, than to their own
rude induffry B

AGRICULTURE, even when the firength of

man is seconded by that of the animals which
he has fubjeaed to the yoke, and his power
augmented by the use of the various infiruments
wfith which the discovery of metals has furnished
him, is flill a work of great labour; and it is
with the fiveat of his brow that he renders the
earth fertile. It is not wonderful, then, that
people deititute of both there advantages thould
have made t~o little progress in cultivation, that
they muit be considered as depending for sub-

SGumilla, iii. I66, &c. Lettr. Edif. xii. 10.

fiftence

B 0 0I)K fiftence on fishing and hunting, rather than on

~cy-~the fruits of their own labour.

routca n- ROM this defecription of the mode of sub.

0ing jgm sifting among the rude American tribes, the

form and genius of their political inflitutions
may be deduced, and we are enabled to trace
various circumstances of diftinflion between
them and more civilized nations.

I. Divicied J. THEY were divided into small indepen~dent
into small
comnmuni- communities. While hunting is the chief

source of f~ubfiffence, a vast extent of territory
is requisite for supporting a finall number of
people. In proportion as men multiply and
unite, the wild animals, on which they depend
for food, diminish, or fly at a greater diffance
from the haunts of their enemy. The increake
of a society in this slate is limited by its own
nature, and the memb~ers of it mufft either dil-
pers~e, like the game which they pursue, or fall
upon some better method of proc uring food, than
by hunting. Beasts of prey are by nature fol·
tary and unsocial, they go not forth to the chir
in herds, but delight in those recesses of the forelt
where they can roam and destroy undiflurbed.
A nation of hunters resembles them both in
occupation and in g-nius. They cannot form

2r I 181

into large communities, because it would be im. B od: K
possible to find f~ubflitence ; and they must drive to 1M~
a diffance every rival who may incroach on those
domains, which they confider as their own. This
was the slate of all the American tribes, the num-
bers in each were incolnfiderable, though scattered
over countries of great extent ; they were far remo-
ved from one anoth~er, and engaged in perpetual
hollilities or rivalfh~ip'. In America, the wrord nation
is not of the fame import as in other parts of the
globe. It is applied to fmlall s~ocieties, not exceeding,
perhaps, two or three hundred persons, but occupy-
ing pro~vinces greater than some kingdomnsin Europe.
The country of Guiana, though of larger extent
than the kingdom of Fr-ance, and divided among
a great number of nations, did not contain above
twenty-five thousand inhabitant-sk. In the pro-
vinces which border on the Orinoco, one may tra-
vel several hundred miles in diffe;rent dire~ions,
without finding a single hut, or obf~ervingr the
footfieps of a human creature '. In North Ame-
rica, where the climate is more rigorous, and the
foil less fertile, the desolation is flill greater.
There, journeys of some hundred leagues have
been made through uninhabitedi plains and forefts"

I Lozano, Deferip. del Gran Chaco, 39. 62. Fernandez,

Relac. Hist. de los Chliquit. 162.

k Voyages de Mlarchais, iv. 353*

m M. Fabry, quo'ed by B~uffon, ill. 488. Lafitau, 11. 179-

B 'fu, Travels through Louiliana, i. Irr. See N OT E
XXXIII.

VoL. II. Ki As

B O O K As long as hunting continues to be the chief em-

bCIP3ployment of man to which he truits for f~ubfilb·

ence, he can hardly be said to have occupied the
earth a.

f gg1":b 2. NATIONs which depend upon hunting are, in

<P:;u pro- a great measure, firangrersuo the idea of property.

As the animals on which the hunter feeds are not
bred under his infpe~tion, nor nourished by his
care, he can claim no right to them, while they run
wild in the forest. Where game is so plentifulthat
it may be catched with little trouble, men never
dream of appropriating what is of fmlall value,
or of easy acquisition. Where it is to rare, that the
labour or danger of the chaf~e requires the united
efforts of a tribe, or village, what is killed is a
common flock, belonging equally to all, who, by
their fkiill or their courag-e, have contributed to the
s~uccess of the excurflon. The forest, or hunting-
grounds, are deemed the property of the tribe,
from which it has a title to excludle every rival na·
tion. But no individual arrogates a right to any
diffriQ of there, in preference to his fellow citi·
zens. They belong alike to all; and thither, as
to a general and undivided flore, all repair in quest
of fuffenance. The fame principles by which they
regulate their chief occupation, extend to that
which is s~ubor~dinate. Even agriculture has not
inltroduced among them a complete idea of pro-

n See N O TE XXXIV.

perty.

pertyr. As the rnen hunt, the women labour t-ogc. a 0 P Re
ther, and af'tcr they have shared the toils of the C
feeld-time, they enjoy the harvelt in common o
Among some tribes, the increase of their cut~ivated
lands is deposited in a public granary, and divided
among them, at slated times, according to their
wants P. Among others, though they lay up fepa-
rate flores, they do not acquire s~uch an exclusive
right of property, that they can enjoy f~uperfuity,
while thofei around them fuffezr want 9. Thus the
diftinalons arising from the inequality of posses-
fions are unknown. The terms rich or poor enter
not into their language, and being fkrangers to pro-
perty, they are unacquainted with what is the great
objee? of laws and policy, as well as the chief mo-
tive which induced mank~ind to efcablifh the various
arrangements of regular government r.

3. PEOPLE in this state retain a high sense of upg rense

01 equanlty

equality and independence. W~herever the idea of and in e-

pendenc.

property is not efrablifhed, there can be no diT-
tinCtion among men, but what arises from personal
q''alities. Thcle can be conspicuous only on s~uch
occasions as rall them forth into exertion. In
times of danger, or in affhirs of intricacy, the
wisdom and experience of age are consulted, and

* Dr. Fergufon's Ess~ay, 123.
P Guml?, i. 265. Brickell, Hilt. of NJ. Catrol. 327. See

NOTE XXXV.

s Denys, Hist. Natur. ii. 333, 393-
rP. Mar tyr, Decad. P- 45. V'eneg H~it. of Califors. i.

66. Lery, Navigr. in Brasil, c. I7.·

Kt z preferibe

B O 9 K prescribe the measures which ought to be pursued.

cl-~When a tribe of savages takes the field against the

enemies of their country, the warrior of molt ap.
proved courage leads the youth to the combat'.
If they go forth in a body to the chafe, the most
expert and adventurous hunter is foremost, and
direas their motions. But during seasons of tran·
quillity and inaaion, when there is no occasion to
dis~play those talents, all pre-eminence ceases.
Every circumffance indicates, that all the mem-
bers of the community are on a level. They are
clothed in the fame rimple g~arb. They feed on the
fame plain fare. Their houses and furniture are ex.
aaly similar. No diftinaion can arise from the in·
equality of poffefirons. Whatever forms depend-
ence on one part, or conflitutes superiority on the
other, is unknown. All are freemen, all feel them·
s~elves to be s~uch, and assert with firmnels the rights
which belong to that condition t. This s~entiment of
independence is imprinted to deeply in their nature,
tha tno change of conditioncan eradicate it, and bend
their minds to servitude. Accuff omed to be abs~olute
mast~ers of their own conduat, they disdain toexecute
the orders of another; .and having never knowln
controul, they will not s~ubmit to correL~ion "
Many of the Americans, when they founld that they

* Acoila, Hist. lib. vi. c. 19. Stadius, Hlift. Brafil,1lib. ii.

c. 13. De Bry. iii. p. 110. Biet. 36r.

SLrbat vi. I 24. Brickell, H-ist. of' Carol. 310.
u See NOTE XXXVI.

were treated as slaves by the Spaniards, died of B O O K

IV.

grief ; many destroy;ed themselves in despair x c -

4. ARmoNo people in this sl~ate, government can sence of~ra.

ordination

assume little authority, ac i the sense of civil sub- imperlfe&.
ordination muff remain very imperfeat. While the
idea of property is unknown, or incompletely con-
ceived; while the s~pontaneous produaions of the
earth, as well as the fruits of induffry, are confi-
dered as belonging to the public flock, there can
hardly be any s~uch f~ubjeQ of difference or discus~-
sion among the members of the fame community,
as will require the hand of authority to interpos~e in
order to adjuff it. Where the right of separate and
exclusive poff~effion is not introduced, the great ob-
jea of law and jurif~diaion does not ex~ist. When
the niembers of a tribe are called into the field, el-
ther to invade the territories of their enemies, or to
repel their attacks, when they are engaged together
in the toil and dangers of the chafe, they then per-
ceive that they are part of a political body. They
are conscious of their own connedion with the com-
panions in conjunation with whom they ac?; and
they follow and reverence such as excel in conduc?
and valour. But, during the intervals between
such common efforts, they seem fecarcely to feel the
ties of political union y. No visible form of go-

I Oviedo, lib. iii. c. 6. p. 97. Vega, Conqulfit. de la Flo-

r'da, i*30. ii*416. Labat. ii. 138. Benzo Hist. Nov. Orb.
lib. iv. c. 29.

r L~oano, D~efer. del Gran Chaco, 93. Melendez T'eforos

Verddder~os, ii. 23. See NTOTE XXXVII.

K 1 vernment

B O Oo K vernment is established.. The names of magg~rate

a- nd fubje~ are not in use, Every one seems to en·
joy his natural independence almost entire. Ifa
s~cheme of public utility be proposed, the members
of the community are left at liberty to chufe whether
they will or will not assist in carrying it into execu·
tion. No statute imposes any service as a duty, no
compulsory laws oblige them to perform it. All
their resolution~s are voluntary, and flow from the
impulse of their own minds e. The firit: flep to·
wards eflablifhling a public jurifdli~ion has not been
takien in thofre rude societies. The right of reveng~e
is left in private hands": If violence is committed,
or blood is fhled, the community does not aiffine
the power either of' inflialing or of m~oderating the
punilhment. It belongs to the family and friends of
the person injured or slain to avenge the wrong, or
to accept of the reparation offered by the aggressor.
If the elders interpos~e, it is to advise, not to decide,
and it is felldom their counsels are listened to; for as
it is deemed pusillanimous to f~uffer an offender to
escape with impunity, refeatment is implacable and
everlasting b. The objea of government among
savages is rather foreign than domeffic. They do
not aim at maintaining interior order and police by
public regulations, or the exertions of any perma·
nent authority, but labour to preserve such union
among the members of their tribe, that they may

a Charley. HIlk. NLouv. Fr~ance, iii. 266. ;368.
a Herrera, dec. 8. lib. iv. c. 8.
* Charley. Hist. N. F~rance,iii. 271, 2 . Las~t. i*486.

Caffani H-ilt. de Nuevo Reyno de Granad·, 226.

watch

watch the motions of their enemies, and aa against B O O K
them with concert and vigour. ~-L

Suca was the form of political order established To what

among the greater part of the American nations. deferilptions
In this slate were almost all the tribes, spread over apy
the provinces extending eastward of the Miifilippi,
fromn the mouth of the St. Laurence to the confines
ofFlorida. In a similar condition were the people
of Brasil, the inhabitants of Chili, several tribes in
Paraguay and Guiana, and in the countries which
firetch from the mouth of the Orinocr a the penia-
fula of Yucatan. Among such an ir -inite number
~of petty associations, there may be peculiarities
which conflitute a diftinaion, and mark the various
deg7reesof their civilization and improvement. But
an attempt: to trace and enumerate these would be
vain, as they have not been observed by persons ca-
pable of discerning the minute and delicate circum-
flances, which s~erve to dis~criminate nations refem-
bling one another in their general charaaer and
features. The defeription which I have given of the
political inflitutions that took place among thos~e
rude tribes in America, concerning which we have
received moit complete information, will apply,
with little variation, to every people, both in its
northern and southern divilion, who have advanced
no farther in civilization, than to add some slender
degree of agriculture to fishing and hunting.

IMPERFECT RS those inflitutions may appear,

several tribes were not to far advanced in their po-
litical progress. Among all thos~e petty nations

K 4 which

B O~ O which truffed for fubxiffence entirely to fishing and

lL hunting without any s~pecies of cultivation, the

union was s~o incomplete, and their s~ens~e of mu.
tual dependence fop feeble, that hardly any appear·
ance of government or order can be discerned in
their proceedings. Their wants are few, their ob-
jeas of pursu~it simple, they form into se~parate
tribes, and at together, from inflina, habit, or
conveniency, rather than from any formal concert
and association. To this clas~s belong the Califor-
nians, several of the fmnall nations in the extensive
country of Parag~uay, s~ome of the people on the
banks of the Orinoco, and on the river St. M'agda·
lene, in the new kingdom of Granada b,

som 'eirreg- But though amoner ther~e laft-mentioned tribes
alCeS. there was hardly any th~adow of regular g-overnment,

Sand ev~en among those which I first des~cribed, its
authority is slender and confined within narrowa
bounds, there were, however, s~ome places in Ame-
rica where governmrent was carried far beyond the
degree of perfeaion which fejems natural to rude na·
tions. In surveying the political operations osman,
either in his savage or civilized slate, we discover
singular and eccentric inflitutions, which start as it
were from their flation, and fly off so wide, that we
labour in vain1 to bring them within the general lawsa
of any system, or to account for them by those
principles which influence other communities in a

bVenegas, i. 68. Lettr. Edif.ii. I76. TechoHift.of

Parag. Churchill, vi. 78. Hist. Gen. des Voyages, xiv.lq.

similar situation. Some inflances of this occur n O o x
among those people of America, whom I have in- tA
cluded under the common denomination of savage.
These are so curious and important that I thall de-
[cribe them, and attempt to explain their origin.

IN the New WiTorld, as well as in other parts of Parhacularl

in some of

the g~lobe, cold or temperate countries appear to be are warmer
the favourite feat of freedom and independence. resons.
There the mind, li'ke the body, is firm and vigo-
rous. Ther.e men, conscious of their own dignity,
and capable of the gleateft efforts in asserting it,
aspire to independence, and their flubborn spirits
sloop with relu~tance to the yoke of servitude. In
wfarmer climates,by whose influence thewhole frame
is so much enervated, that present pleas~ure is the
supreme felicity, and mere repose is enjoyment,
men acquies~ce, almolk without a struggle, in the
dominion of a superior. A~ccordingly, if we pro-
ceed from north to s~outh along the continent of
America, we shall find the power of thos~e vefied
with authority g~radually increalmng, and the [pirit
of the people becoming more tame and paffve. In
Florida, the authority of the sachems, caziques, or
chiefs, was not only permanent, but hereditary.
They were diftingu shed by peculiar ornaments, they
enjoyed prerogatives of various k:nlds, and were
treated by their fub~jeas with that reverence, which
people accustomed to fubhjeaion pay to a master ".
Among the Natchez, a pow~erful tribe now extina, m am:5,'h

C Cardenas y Cano Enfayo Chrono1 'a la Hist. de Florida,

P- 46. Le May·ne de Morgues Icones F~lorida. Ap. de Bry.
p. I. 4, &c. Charley. Hilt.h N. Fr-ance, iii. 467, 468.

formerly

B O O K formerly situated onl the banks of the Mifilippi,z

C~~3 difekrenlce of rank took; place, with wvhich the north.

ern tribes were alt~ogether unacquainted. Some fa·
milies were reputed noble, and enjoyed hereditary
dignity. The body of the people was considered as
vile, and formed only for f~ubjeaion. 7 his dilinc.
tion was markted by appellations which intim1ated
the high elevation of the one slate, and the igno·
minious depreflion of the other. TIhe former were
calledRcfpc£1able; thelatter, the Stinkards. The
great Chief, in whom the su~preme authority wes
vested, is reputed to be a being of su~perior na·
ture, the brother of the Sun, the sole objea of their
worship. They approach this great Chiefw~ith re.
Jigious veneration, and honour him as the repre·
fentative of their deity. H~is will is a law, to which
all submit wcith~ implicit obedience. T'he lives of
his fubjeas are so absolutely at his diifpofal, that if
any one has incurred his dirpleafure, the orTender
comes with profound humility and offers him his
head. Nor does the dominion of the Chiefs end
with their lives; their principal officers, their fa-
vourite wives, together with many domeffics ofin-
ferior rank, are facrificedl at their tombs, that they
may be attended in the nex~t world by the fam~e per·
s~ons who served them in this; and such is the reve·
rence in whiigh they are held, that th~ose vic~ims wfel-
come deathwith exultation, deemingit arecompence
of their fidelity, and a mark of diffinalon, to be fe-
leaed to accompany their deceased maller d. Thus

d nUmnont Menoir. H~il. filr Louifiane, i. zy. Charksr

Bill. N. I'rance, iii. 419, &rc. Lettr. Edif. 20. 106. ml.

a per.

a pe'rfe ct efotifmn, with its full train of fuperiktiton, a o~ o i
a r ·al e, and cr uelty, is eltablifhled among the Lc----v'-.
h itchez, an3 by a singular fatality, that people h~as
tl~ded of tFe wforft calamities incident to polish~ed
SIvt'ons, though they thems~elves are not faradvanced
beyond the tribes around them in civility and im-
provement. In Hispaniola, Cuba, and t-he larger In the
ifands, their caziqlueIs or chiefs poff~effed extensive inands.
powrer. Thle dignity wNas tranfinitted by hereditary
right from fathler to son. Its honours and preroga-
tlves wrere conf~dcrable. Their fubjeas paid great
r, iea to thet caziqjues, anci executed their orders
withoult belt~tion or rererve . They were diflin-
gatih-L by pecid!iar ornlaments, and in order to pre-
serve or augmnent the veneration of the people, they
hal the adldrels to call in the aid of fuperrtition to
uphloldl their authority. They delivered their man-
dates as the oracles of heaven, and pretended to
p rfefs the power of regTulating the seasons, and of
dilpenfiing rain or sunshine, according as their s~ub.
jcas flood in need of them.

IN some parts of the s~outhern continent, the In sogola.

power of the caziques s~eems to have been as exten-
five as in the itles. In Bogota, which is now a pro-
vince of the nlew kingdom of Granada, there was set-
tied a nation, more considerable in number and
more improved in the various arts of life, than any
in America except the Mfexicans and Peruvians.
TIhepcople of B~ogrota subsisted chiefly by agriculture.
The idea of property was introduced among them,

e Herrera, dec. I. lib. i. c. 16. lib. iii. c. 44- P.88. Life

or Colo~ b. cl * 2*

B O Oo K and its rights, secured by laws, handed down by tra.

~Jdition, an;d obiferved with great care'. They liveth~

towns which may be termed large, when com~pared
with those in other parts of Amnerica. They were
clothed in a decent manne~r, anld their houses may
be termed commodiou~s, when com~pared nit'l
those of the fmail tribes around them. The effe6l
of this uncommon civilization were confpicuov.
G~overnmen~t had affumled a reg-ular form. A jurii.
dialion was eilablifhed, which took cognizance of
different crimes, and punished themn with rigour. A
dirtinc~ion ofrank~swls known; their chief, to whom
the Sp;"an-iars gave th~e title of monarIch, and alh
merited that nam~e on account of his fplendocr as
well as powrer, re~igned w~ith aboljute authority. 11-
was attended by of~jcers of various conditions; he
never appeared in public without a num·erous reti-
nue; he was car-ried in a f~ort of palanquin niid
much pomp, and harbingers went before him: to
fiveep the road and fIrew it with flowers. This
uncomlmon pom-p was flipported by presents or
taxFes TreceIIT ivedfrm his fubjecc~r s, to w~hom thdir
prince was fiich an objject of v-eneration, that none
of them presumed to look him direcaly in the face,
o~r evrer appiroached himn but w~ith an averted coun-
tenance i. There were other tribes on the fame con-
tinent, among- which, though far less advanced than
the people of E~ogota in their progress towrards re·

r Fkdrahita Hill. de las Conquite del NJ. *Ryno de Gra.

g HT1·er co, d ·c. h. lib7. ;. c. 2. lIb. v. c. 56. Piedrahita,

c. 5* P.4j, &c. Gomara Hist. c. 72.

finement,

finement, the freedom and independence, natural B O O K;
to man in his s~avage slate·, was much abridged, and . "
their caziques had aframed extensive authority.

IT is not easy to point out the circumitances, or ur ar, or

todifrcover the causes which contributed to introduce ~, Q."~~
and eltablifh among each of thofec people a form of anC'".
grovrernmnent so different from that of the tribes
around them, and so repugnant to the genius of
rude nations. If the persons who had an opportu-
nity of oblerving- them in their origPinal slate, had
b~en more attentive and more dif~cerningo, we might
have received information fromltheirconquerors sus-
ficient to guide us in this enquiryr. If the tranfac-
tions of people, unacquainted with the use- of let-
ters, w~ere not inlvolved in impenetrable obs~curity,
w~e might have derived forne information from this
domreftic source. But as nothin~g fatisfadfory can
Le gathered, either fromn the accounts of the Spa-
nliards, or from their own traditions, we must have
recourse to conje~tures, in order to explain the irre-
6ular appearances in the political slate of the people
whomlI have mentioned. As all thos~e tribes which
had loit their native liberty and independence were
se~ated in the TIorrid Zone, or in countries approach-
ing to it, the climnate may be s~upposed to have had
fomne influence in forming their minds to that fervi-
tudie, which f~eemus to be the destiny of man in those
regions of the globe. But though the influence of
climate, more powerful than that of any other na-
tural caus~e, is not to be overlooked; that alone
canlnot be admitted as a solution of the point in
quellionl. The operations of men are so complex-,

that

B O O K that we muff not attribute the form which thept.

~t~-Lfume, to the force of a single principle or ca'ae.

Although delpotifm be confined in America to the
Torrid Zone, and to the warm regions borderine
upon it, I have already observed that these coun·
tries contain various tribes, som~e of which pofelnrs
high degree of freedom, .and others are altogether
unacqluainted with the refiraints of gTovernment.
The indolence and timidity peculiar to the inhabit·
ants of the islands, render them so incapable of
the sentiments or efforts necessary for maintaining
independence, that there is no occasion to fearchfor
any other cause of their tame fubmiiTon to the
will of a s~uperior. The f~ubjeaion of the Natchez,
and of the people of Bogota, seems to have been
the consequence of a difference in their slate from
that of the other Americans. They were fettked
nations, refidingr constantly in one place. Huntins
was not the chief occupation of the former, and
the latter seem hardly to have truffed to it for
any part of their s~ubsistence. Both had made foch
progress in agriculture and arts, that the idea of
property was introduced in some degree in the one
community, and fully established in the other.
Among people in this slate, avarice and ambition
have acquired objeas, and have begun to exert
their power; views of interest allure the felfith;
the desire of pre-eminence excites the enterprising;
dominion is courted by both; and pafflons unknowm
to manin his savage slate prompt the interefred and
ambitious to encroach on the rights of their fellow-
citizens. Motives, with which rude nations are

equallg

equ 11y unacqluainted, induce the people to submit B O Oo K
ta nely to the usu~rped authority of their superiors. L
But even amorg nations in this slate, the spirit of
fub,Las co uld not have been renldered so ob~e~quious,
or the power of rulers so unbounded, without the
inlte-vention of superstition. By its fatal influnce,
the human mnind, in every flage of its progress, is
dcpreffed, and its native vig~our and independence
subdued. WC~hoever can acquire the dire~tion of
this formidable engine, is secure of dominion over
his species. Unfortunately for the people whos~e in-
flitutions are the fabjea of inquiry, this power was
in the hands of their chiefs. The caziques of the
illes could put what~ refpIonfes they pleased into the
muouths of' their Cemris or gods ; andl it was by their
interpolition, and in· their nam3e, that they im-poied
any tribute or burden on their people h. The fame
power an~d prero,-ative wa~s exercised by th~e great
chief of the ILathez as the prinicipal minir er as well
as the representative of the Sun, their deity. T'he
refpec1 which the people of Bogota paid) to theLir mo-
narchs, was likewrife in-cpired by religion, and the
heir apparent of the kingdomz was educated in the
innerrnoft recess of their principal temple, under
such aultere discipline, and with such peculiar rites,
as tended to fill his f~ubjets with high sentiments
concerning the fana~ity of his charaater, and the
dignity of his flation '. Thus fuperltition, which,
in the rudest period of society, is either altogreth~er
unknown, or wastes its force in childish unmeaning
prad~ices, had acquired fa~ch an arcendant over those

Hcrrt~ra, dec. i. lib. iii. c. 3* i Piedrahi~ta, p. 27,

people

B q o K people of America, who had made some little pro.

g,

~ ref~s towards refinement, that it became the chief

infirument of bending their minds to an untimely
servitude, and fubjeaed them, in the beginning of
their political career, to a defpotifmn hardly less ri.
gorous, than that which awaits nations in the lail
flage of their corruption and decline.

'Iheir at or V. AFTER eXamining the political inflitutions
war. of the rude nations in America, the next obje~of

attention is their art of war, or their provision for
public security and defence. The iimall tribes
dispersed over America are not only independent
and unconneeaed, but engaged in perpetual halth
lthics with one another k. Though moRtly fIrangiers
to the idea of separate property vested inl anly indi-
vidual, the rudest of the American nations are
well acquainted with the rights of each commu-
nity to its own domains. This right they hold to
be perfedt and exclusive, entitling th~e poffeffrcl to
oppos~e the encroachynent of neighibour-ing tribes.
As it is of the utmaoft confeqluence to prevent them
from destroying or disturbing· the game in their
hunting grounds, they guard this national pro.
perty with a jealous attention. But as their turrb
tories are extensive, and the boundaries of them not
exaaly as~certained, innumerable fubjeats of disp~ute
arise, which s~eldom terminate without bloodshed.
E;ven in this simple and primitive slate of society,
interest is a source of discord, and often prompts
savag~e tribes to take arms; in order to repel or pu·

SRibas Hist. de los Triumph~. p. 9.

21 x nill

nifh such as encroach on the forests or plains, to a 0 0 re

IV.

wihich they trust for ulbliftence. I ,

BUT interest is not either the most frequent or Their mo-

the most powerful' motive of the incessant hoffili- ' ny n.
ties among rude nations. TPhefe muff be imputed war.
to the paflion of revenge, which rages with such
violence in the breast of fadvages, that eagerness to
gratify it may be considered as the diftingauilhing
charaderiflic of men in their uncivilized slate.
Circumitances of powerfill influence, both in the
interior government of rude tribes, and in their
external operations against foreign enemies, con-
cur in cherishing and adding firength to a paifion
fatal to the general tranquillity. When the righlt
of redressing his own wrongs is left in the hands of
every individual, injuries are felt with exquisite
sensibility, and vengeance exrercifed with unrelent-
ing rancour. No time can obliterate the memory
of an offence, and it is seldom that it can be ex-
plated but by the blood of the offender. In car- From the
rying on their pubhic wars, savage nations are in- ven~geance.
fluenced by the fame ideas, and animated with the
fame spirit, as in pros~ecuting private vengeance.
In imall communities, every man is touched with
the injury or affr-ont offered to the body of which
he is a member, as if it were a personal attack
upon his own Itonour or safety. The desire of re-
venge is communicated from breast to b~reaff, and
soon kindles into rage. As feeble societies can
take the field only in fmnall parties, each warrior is
conscious of the importance of his own arm, and

VoL. II. L feels

B O O K feels that to it is committed a considerable pordion
4------... of the public vengeance. War, which between

extensive kingdoms is carried on with little ani·
mofity, is prosecuted by fmnall tribes with all the
rancour of a private quarrel. The resentment of
nations is as implacable as that of individuals. It

Hce the may be dissembled or suppress~ed, but is never ex.

17,',ix tinguinhed; and often, when least expeded or

dreaded, it burits out with redoubled fury '. When
polifhedd nations have obtained the glory of vic·
tory, or have acquired an addition of territory,
they mlay terminate a war with honour. But fa.
vages are not satisfied until they extirpate the
community which is the objea of their hatred.
T'hey f~ight not to conq~uer, but to destroy. If
they engag~e in hoffilities, it is with a resolution
never to fee the face of the enemy in peace, but to
profrecute the quarrel with imraortal enmity*.
Tlhe desire of vengeance is the firit, and almoll
the- only principle, which a savage inflils into the
m~inds of his children ". This grows up with him
as he_ advrances in life; anld as his attention is di.
r-ted! to few objeas, it acquires a deg~ree of force
unk~nown among mnen, whose passions are diflipated
and w-eakzened by the variety of their occupations

r Boucher HjR. Nart. de N. France, P. 93. Charley. Hill.

de Nr. r·?nce, iii. 215- 251. Lery ap. de B3ry, iii. 204. Creur.
HIil. Canac'. p. 7z. Lozano Defer. del Gran Chaco, 95.
Henntp. Mvoeurs des Sauv. 4,o.

nl Cha~rley. Hiiit. N. F~r. iii. 25'. Colden, i. 108. 11. 126.

Darrere, p,. r70. 173-

n Chlarley. Hist. N". Fr. iii. 326. Lery ap. de Bry, ii. 236.

Lozano Hist. de· Parag. i. r44-

ind pursuits. The desire of vengeance, which B O O K
takes poffefflon of the heart of savages, resembles ~~
the infinctive rage of an animal, rather than the
pallion of a man. It turns, with undif~cerning fury,
even against inanimate objeas. If hurt accidentally
by a stone, they often seize it in a transport of
anger, and endeavour to wreak their vengeance
upon it o. If firuck with an arrow in abattle, they
wfill tear it from the wound, break and bite it with
their teeth, and dash it on the ground P. WVith re-
fpea to their enemies, the rage of vengeance knows
no bounds. W~hen under the dominion of this
patlion, man becomes the most cruel of all animals.
He neither pities, nor forgives, nor spares.

THE force of this patiron is to well underflood

by the Americans themfielves, that they always ap-
ply to it, in order to excite their people to take
arms. If the elders of any tribe attempt to rouze
their youth from sloth, if a chief withes to allure a
band of warriors to follow him inl invading an
enemy's country, the most perfulafive topics of
their martial eloquence are drawn from revenge.
" The bones of our countrymen," fay they, " lie
uncovered; their bloody bed has not been washed
clean. Their spirits cry againfi: us ; they must be
appeased. Let us go and devour the people by
whom they were slain. Sit no longer inadtive
upon your mnats; lift the hatchet, console the

* Lery ap. de Bry, ill. I90.
· Lery ap. de Bry, iii. 208. Herrera, dec. x. lib. vi. c. 8.

L 2 spirits

B qv a spirits of the dead, and tell them that they shall be

CL4I) avenged 4."

and their ANIMATED with s~uch ex~hortations, the youth
perpetuity. snatch their artns in a transport of fury, raise the

song of war, and burn with impatience to embrue
their hands in the blood of their enemies. Pri·
vate chiefs often assemble fnall parti~es, and invade
a hofitie tribe, without cons~ulting the rulers ofthe
community. A single warrior, prompted by ca-
price or revenge, will take the field alone, and
march several hundred miles to surpris~e and cut
off a ftragrgling enemy '. The exploits of a noted
warrior, in s~uch solitary excursions, often form
thle chief part in the hiffory of an American cam-
paign s ; and their elders connive at s~uch irregular
Edllies, as they tend to cherish a martial spirit, and
accuffom their people to enterprise and danger'.
But when a war is national, and undertaken by
publick authority, the deliberations are formal and
flow. The elders assemble, they deliver their
opinions in solemn speeches, they weigh with ma·
turity the nature of the enterprise, and balance its
beneficial or disadvantageous consequences with no
inconsiderable portion of political dificernment or
sagacity. Their priests and soothsayers are con-

s Charley. Hill. N. Fr. iii. 216, 2I7. Lery ap. de Bry,

iHl. 204.

I See NOTE XXXVIII. * See NOTE XXXIX.
SBoffu, i. r40. Lery ap. de Bry, 215. Hennepin Moeurs

des Saur. 4x. Lafatau, ii. 169.

fulted,

felted, and sometimes they afki the advice even of B O O K
their women ". If the determination be for war,
they prepare for it with much ceremony. A leader
offers to condua the expedition, and is accepted.
But no man is confirained to follow him; the re-
solution of the community to commence hoffilities,
impos~es no obligation upon any member to take
part in the war. Each individual is still master of
his own conduQ, and his engagement in the service
is perfealy voluntary x.

THE maxims by which they regulate their mi. Mode or

carrymng on

litary operations, though extremely different firom war.
thos~e which take place among more civilized ah~d
populous nations, are well fauited! to their own po-
litical slate, and the nature of the country in which
they a8t. They never take the field in numerous
bodies, as it would reqluire a greater effort of fore-
fight and induffry, than· is ufutal among fadvages,
to provide for their fub~iftence, during a march of
some hundred miles through dreary forests, or
during a long voyage upon their lakes and rivers.
Their armies are not encumbered with baggage or
military flores. Each warrior, besides his arms,
carries a mnat and a finall bag of pounded maize,
and with these is completely equipped for any ser-
vice. While at a difiance from the enemies fron-
tier, they disperse through the woods, and support
themselves with the game which they kill, or the

e Charley. Hist. N. Fr. iii. 215. 268. Biet> 367- 380.
SCharley. Hist. N. Fr. 2·r7, 2r8.

L3 si

a 02 O K fish which they catch. As they approach nearer to

~ the territories of the nation which they intend to

attack, they colled their troops, and advance
with greater caution. Even in their hottest and
most aaive wars, they proceed wholly by firatagem
and ambuscade. They place not their glory in at-
tacking their enemies with open force. To surprise
and destroy is the greatest merit of a commander,
,and the highest pride of his followers. War and
hunting are their only occupations, and they con-
dua both with the fame spirit and the fame arts.
They follow the track of their enemies through the
forest. They endeavour to discover their haunts,
they lurk in some thicket near to these, and, with
the patience of a [portfmlan lying in wait for game,
will continue in their flation day after day, until
they can rulh upon their prey when mofl s~ecure, and
least able to resist them. If they meet no firaggling
party of the enemy, thley, advance towards their
villages, but with s~uch solicitude to conceal their
own approach, that they often creep on their hands
and feet through the woods, and paint their skins of
the fame colour with the withered leaves, in order
to avoid dete~ion y. If so fortunlate as to remain
unobserved, they set on fire the enemies huts in the
dead of night, and nr,.l~icre the inhabitants, as
they fly naked and defenceless from the flames. If
they hope to effedt a retreat without being pur-
sued, they carry off some prisoners, whom they re-

r Charicy. Hit. N, Fr. iii. 2371 238. Hennep. Moeurs

des Sauv. p. 59*.

fervefor a more dreadful fate. But if, notwith. n o 0 K

IV.

flanding all their address and precautions, they Lr
find that their motions are dis~covered, that the
enemy has takren the alarm, and is pr~epared to
oppole them, they usually deem it most prudent to
retire. Theyr regard it as extreme folly to meet
an enemy who is on his guard, upon equal terms,
or to give battle in an open field. TIhe most dif-
tingulfhed success is a disg~race to a leader, if it has
been purchased with, any considerable loss of his fol-
lowers, I and they never 'ooaft of a viaory, if
flained with the blood of their own countrymnen ".
To fall in battle, inficad of being reckroned an ho-
nourable death, is a misfortune which fubjeas the
memory of a warrior to the imputation of rafllmefs
or imprudence b

TmIs fyfiem of war was universal in America, ~ot owingc

and the fmlall uncivilized tribes, difrperfed throug~h $1"Of a"yPe'C
all its different regions and climates, display more
craft than boldness in carrying on their hoftiities.
Struck with this condua, to opposite to the ideas
and maxims of Europeans, several authors contend
that it flows from a feeble and dastardly spirit pe-
culiar to the Americans, which is incapable of any
generous or manly exertion·. But when we refleQ

Z See NOTE XL.
aCharley. HiR. N. Fr. it;. 238* 30;. Biet. 381. Lafitan

Moeurs des Sauv. ii. 248.

b Charley..iii.37i6. See NOTE XLI.
C Recherches Phlilof. fur le-s Amerlic. i. I19. Voyage de

March. iv. 410.

L a that

B O O K that many of there tribes, on occasions which call

rc~r for extraordinary efforts, not only defend them-

selves with obstinate resolution, but attack their
enemies with the most daringa courage, and that
they posses~s fortitude of mind superior to the
sense of danger or the fear of death, we muff
ascribe their habitual caution to some other cause
than conflitutional timidity . The number of
men in each tribe is so fmnall, the difficulty ofrear.
ing new members, amidst the hardships and dan.
gers of favagoe life, t~o great, that the life of a ci.
tizen is extremely precious, ·and the preservation
of it becomes a capital objee? in their policy. Had
the point of honour been the fame among the
feeble American tribes as among the powerful
nations of Europe, had they been taught to court
fame or viaory in contempt of danger and death,
they mult have been ruined by maxims so ill
adapted to their condition. Bu; wherever their
communities are more populous, so that they can
aQ with considerable force, and can fulfain the
loss of s~everal of their members, without being
sensibly weakened, the military operations of the
Americans more nearly resemble thos~e of other na-
tions. The Brafilians, as well as the tribes situated
upon the banks of the river De la Plata, often
take the field in such numerous bodies, as deserve
the name of armies e- They defy their enemies

SLafitau Moeurs des Sauv. ii. 248, 249. Charley. N'. Fr.

iii. 307-

SFabri Veriff. Deferip. Indise ap. de B~ry, vii. p. 42.

to the combat, engage in regular battles, and B O O K
maintain the conflia with that desperate ferocity, fJ
which is natural to men, who, having no idea of
war but that of exterminating their enemies, never
give or take quarter f. In the powerful empires of
Mv·exico and Peru, great armies were assembled,
frequent battles were fought, and the theory as
well as pra~ice of war were different from what
took place in those petty s~ocieties which affhume
the name of nations.

But though vigilance and attention are the qua- Incapable of

lities chiefly requisite, where the objet of war iS uor ~,qdif-
to deceive and to f~urprize; and though the Ame-
ricans, when aaing singly, display an amazing de-
gree of address in concealing their own motions,
and discovering thos~e of an enemy, yet it is re-
markable that, when they take the field in parties,
they can. seldom be brought to obs~erve the pre-
cautions most essential to their own security. Such
is the difficulty of accuffoming savages to fubor-
dination, or to aQ in concert ; flich is their impa-
tience under reffraint, and such their caprice and
prefamption, that it is rarely they can be brought
to conform themselves to the cpunfels and di-
reaions of their leaders. They never Ila~tion cen-
tinels around the place where they reft at night,
and after marching some hundred miles to s~urprise
an enemy, are often s~urprised themselves, and cut

* See NOTE XLII.

B O O K off-, while funk in as profound sleep as if they were

IV. c~not within reach of danger B.

IF, notwithstanding this negligence and fcu-

rity, which often fruffrate their most artful
schemes, they catch the enemy unprepared, they
ruth upon them with the utmost ferocity, and
tearing off the scalps of all those who fall vi8ims
to their rage h, they carry home those firange tro.
phies in triumph. Thes~e they preserve as monu.
ments, not only of their own prowess, but of the
vengeance which their arm has infliaed upon the
people who were objeas of public refentment'.
They are flill more solicitous to s~eize prisoners.
During their retreat, if they hope to effeQ it una
molested, the prisoners are commonly exempt from
any insult, and treated with some degree of huma-
nity, though guarded with the moit firiQ attention.

Treatment Bxrr after this temporary fuIfpenfion, the rage of
of prisoners...

the conquerors rekmndles with new fury. As soon as
they approach their own frontier, some of their num-
ber are dispatched to inform their countrymen with
ref~peQ to the s~ucces~s of the exipedition. Then the
prisoners begin to feel the wr-etchedness of their
condition. The women of the village, together
with the youth wvho have not attained to the age
of bearing arms, assemble, and forming themfehves

g Ch~arley. N. Fr. ill. 236, 237. L~ettr. Edif. 17- 3cS* zb

130. Lafit. Ma~urs, ii. 247. Lahonltan, ii. rS6.

h See NOTE XLIII. I LarTtau Mcaurs, it. ?6.

into two lines, through which the prisoners mutL B O Op K
pass, beat and bruise them with flicks or stones in c-
a cruel manner k. After this first gratification of
their rage against their enemies, follow lamenta-
tions for the loss of such of their own countrymen
as have fallen in the service, accompanied with
words and aalions which s~eem to express the ut-
most anguish and grief. But, in a moment, upon
a figonal given, their tears cease; they pas~s, with a
sudden and unaccountable transition, from the
depths of sor~row to transports of joy; and begin
to celebrate their viatory with all the wild exulta-
tion of a barbarous triumph '. The fate of the
prisoners remains still undecided. The old men
deliberate concerning it. Some are destined to be
tortured to death, in order to satiate the revenge
of the conquerors; some to replace the members
which the community has loft in that or former
wars. They who are reserved for this milder fate,
are led to the huts of those whose friends have
been killed. The women meet them at the door,
and if they receive them, their Tiufferings are at an
end. They are adopted into the family, and, ac-
cording to their phrase, are seated upon the mat
of the deceased. They affirme his name, they
hold the fame rank;, and ar·e treated thenceforward
with all the tenderness due to a father, a brother,
a husband, or a friend. ' But if, either from ca-
price, or an unrelentingr desire of rev-enge, the

Lanhontan, it. i84*

I Chrle. Iia.N. r. iL 41.L~S-athau Meur ii. 264-

women

a o0 women of any family refuse to accept of the pri.

f ioner who is offered to them, his doom is fixed. No
power can then save him from torture and death.

Their in- WHIL.E their lot is in sus~pens~e, the prisoners
concermnin themselves appear altogether unconcerned about
their fate, 'what may befal them. They talk, they eat, they

sleep, as if they were perfe~tly at ease, and no
danger impending. When the fatal sentence isin-
timnated to them, they receive it with an unaltered
countenance, raise their death-fong, and prepare

pad forti- to f~uffer like men. Their conquerors affernble as
tude under
emrure. to a solemn festival, resolved to put the fortitude

of the captive to the utmost proof. A fecene en·
sues, the bare defeription of which is enough to
chill the heart-with horror, wherever men have
been accuffomed, by milder infcitutions, to refpett
their species, and to melt into tenderness at the
fight of human fufferings. The prisoners are tied
naked to a flake, but so as to be at liberty to
move round it. All who are present, men, wo-
men, and children, rush upon them like furies.
Every species of torture is applied that the rancour
of revenge can invent. Some burn their limbs
with red-hot irons, fame mangle their bodies with
knives, oth~ers tear their fiefh~ from their bones,
pluckr out their nails by the roots, and rend and
twist their fmnewst. The~v vie with one anotherin
refinemnents of torture. Nothing sets bounds to
their ragre but the dread of abridging the duration
of their·: ve ngreance by hallening the death of the sus-

ferers ;

ferers; and fatch is their cruel ingenuity in tor. B O O K
menting, that by avoiding induffrioufly to hurt
any vital part, they often prolong this scene of
anguish for s~everal days. In spite of all that they
fuffer, the vic~ims continue to chant their death-
song with a firm voice, they boast of their own
exploits, they insult their tormentorsc for their
want of skill in avenging their frien~ds and rela-
tions, they warn them of the vengeance which
awaits them on account of what they are now doing,
and excite their ferocity by the most provoking re-
proaches and threats. To display undaunted forti-
tude in such dreadful situations, is the noblest
triumph of a warrior. To avoid the trial by a vo-
luntary death, or to thrink under it, is deemed
infamous and cowardly. If any one betray f~ymp-
toms of timidity, his tormentors often dispatch him
at once with contempt, as unworthy of being
treated like a man m. Animated with those ideas,
they endure, without a groan, what it seems almoit
impossible that human nature thould fultain. They
appear to be not only in~enfble of pain, but to
court it. " Forbear," said an aged chief of the
Iroquois, when his insults had provoked one of his
tormentors to wound him with a knife, "C for-
bear these slabs of your knife, and rather let me
die by fire, that those dogs, your allies, from be-
yond the sea, may learn by my example to fuffer
like men ·." This magnanimity, of which there

= De la Potherie, ii. 237* iii- 48*
*I Coldtn, Hist. of Five Nations, i. 200.

B O O K are freqluent inflances among the American war·

IV. S, riors, instead of exrciting admiration, or calling

forth fyrmpathy, exas~perates the fierce s~pirits of
their torturers to fresh ads of cruelty ". Weary at
length of contending with men, whose conflancy
of mind they cannot vanquilh, some chief in a
rage puts a period to their f~uff'erings, by dispatch·
ing them with his dagger or club >.

someuimes TmIs barbarous scene is often succeeded by one
eat their
prironers. no0 les~s shocking. As it is impossible to appease

the fell spirit of revenge which rages in the heart
of a savage, this frequently prompts the Ameri-
cans to devour thos~e unhappy persons, who have
been the viaims of their cruelty. In the ancient
world, tradition has preserved the memory ofbar-
barous nations of cannibals, who fed on human
fielh. But in every part of the N~ew World there
were people to whom this cultom was familiar.
It prevailed in the southern continent 9, in several
of the islands r, and in various diffrias of North
America ". Even in those parts, where circum·

* Voyages de Lahont. i. 236.
P Chdrley. Hist. N. Fr. 111. 243, &c. 385.· Laf'ta MaEurS,

11. 265.· Creuxij H~is. Canad* P* 73. Henn"ep. M(eurs des
Sauv. p. 64, &ce Lahont. i. 233, &c. Tertre, ii. 405. De
la Potherie, ii. 22, &c.

n Stadius ap. de Bry, iii. Izg. Lery, ibid. 2I0. Biet. 384*

Lettr. Edif. 23* 34'. Pifo, 8. Condam. 84* 97. Ribis, Hill.
de los Triumph. 473*

I Life of Columb. 529. Mart.- Dec. p. r8. Tertre, ii* 40;.
* Dumont, Mem. i. 254. Charlcy. HIil. N. Fr. i. 259.ii.

14* iii. 21. Ce la POtherie, ifi* 50.

Itances,

flances, with which we are unacquainted, had in a n a o K

IV.

great measure abolish~ed this praaice, it seems for-
merly to have been so well known, that it is
incorporated into the idiom of their lang~uage.
Among the Iroquois, the phras~e by which they
express their resolution of making war against an
enemy is, " L~et us go and eat that nation." If
they solicit the aid of a neighbouring tribe, they
invite it to '' eat broth made of the flesh of their
enemies'." Nor was the praaice peculiar to rude
unpolilhed tribes ; the principle from which it took
rife is to deeply rooted in the minds of the Ame·
ricans, that it fublifted in 1\lexico, one of the
civilized empires in the New World, and relics of
it may be dis~covered among the more mild inha-
bitants of Peru. It was not scarcity of food, as
some authors imagine, and the importunate cray-
ings of hunger, which forced the Americans to
those horrid repalls on their fellow-creatures. Hu-
man fielh was never used as comlmon food in anly
country, and the various relations concerning
people who reckoned it amnong the slated means
offubilfence, flow from the credulity and mif-
takes of travellers. The rancour of revenge first
prompted men to this barbarous aAionu. The
fiercelt tribes devoured none but prisoners taken
in war, or such as they regarded as enemies x,

f Charley. Hist. N. Fr. iii. 208, 209. Lettr. Edif. ,23- P* 277-

Dela Potherie, ii. 298. See NTO T E XLIV.

Y Biet. 383. Blanco, Converflon de Piritu, p. 28. Bancroft,

Nat. Hill. of Guiana, p. 259, &c.

See NOTE XLV.

21 W~omen

B O O K T~omen and children who were not the objeasol'

1 I'',,enmaty, if not cut off in the fury of their firfl in.

road into an hoffile country, s~eldom fuffered by
the deliberate effeas of their revenge u.

THE people of South America gratify their re.

venge in a manner somewhat different, but with
no less unrelenting rancour. There prisoners,
after meeting at their first entrance with the fame
rough teception as among the North Americans",
are not only exempt from injury, but treated with
the greatest kindness. They are feasted and ca.
reffed, and some beautiful young women are ap.
pointed to attend and solace them. It is not ealy
to account for this part of their condua, unlef
we impute it to a refinement in cruelty. For,
while they s~eem fludious to attach the captives to
life, by supplying them with every enjoyment
that can render it agreeable, their doom is irrevo.
cably fixed. On a day appointed, the vidorious
tribe assembles, the pris~oner is brought forth with
great solemnity, he views the preparations for the
sacrifice with as much indifference as if he himself
were not the vidim, and meeting his fate with un.
daunted firmners, is dispatched with a single blow.
The moment he falls, the women seize the body,
and dress it for the feast. They befmnear their chil·
dren with the blood, in order to kindle in their

r Biet. 382. Bandini, Vita di Americo, 84. Tertre, 40j·

Fermin. Deferip. de Surin. i. 54*

SStadius ap. de Bry, iii* P* 40. Iz3-

bosoms

bofems a hatred of their enemies, which is never a o o K
extinguished, and all join in feeding upon the L
fleib with amazing greediness and exultation ". To
devour the body of a slaughtered enemy, they
deem the most complete and exquli~te gratification
of revenge. Wherever this pradice prevails, cap-
tives never es~cape death, but they are not tor-
tured with the fame cruelty as among tribes which
are less accuffomed to such horrid feasts b

As the conflancy of every American warrior may

be put to s~uch s~evere proof, the great objea of mi-
litary education and dis~cipline in the New World is
to form the mind to sustain it. When nations
carry on war with open force, defy their enemies
to the combat, and vanquilh them by the f~upe-
riority of their sk~ill or courage, soldiers are trained
to be a~tive, vigorous, and enterprising. But in
America, where the genius and maxims of war
are extremely different, passi~ve fortitude is the
quality in highest effimation. Accordingly, it is
early the fludy of the Americans to acquire senti-
ments and habits, which will enable them to behave
like men, when their resolution shall be put to the
proof. As the youth of other nations exercise them-
selves in feats of a~ivity and force, thos~e of Ame-
rica vie with one another in exhibitions of their pa-
tience under fufFerings. They harden their nerves
by those voluntary trials, and gradually accustom

a Stadius ap. de Bry, iii. 128,&c.r Lery, ibid. 210.
* See NOTE XLVI.

VoL. II. 1VI thems~elves

B Glir K themselves to endure the sharpest pain, without

~rlcomplaining. A boy and girl will bind their naked

arms together, and place a burning coal between
them, in order to try who first discovers such impa-
tience as to thake it off· All the trials, cuffom-
ary in America, when a youth is admitted into the
class of warriors, or when a warrior is promoted
to the digrnity of captain or chief, are accommo-
dated to this idea of manlines~s. They are not dif.
plays of valour, but of patience; they are not ex-
hibitions of their ability to offend, but of their ca.
pacity to f~uffer. Among the tribes on the banks
of the Orinoco, if a warrior aspires to the rank of
captain, his probation begins with a long fast, more
rigid than any ever observed by the most abite·
mious hermit. At the close of this, the chiefs as-
femble, each gives him three lashes with a large
whip, applied so vigorously, that his body is al-
most flayed, and if he betrays the least fyrmptom
of impatience or even sensibility, he is disgraced for
ever, and rejeaed as unworthy of the honour to
which he aspires. After some interval, the con·
flancy of the candidate is proved by a more excru.
ciating trial. He is laid in a hammoc with his
hands bound fast, and an innumerable multitudeof
venomous ants, whose bite occasions exquisite pain,
and produces a violent inflammation, are thrown
upon him. The judges of his merit fland around
the hammoc, and, while these cruel infeds fallen
upon the most sensible parts of his body, a sigh, a

C Charley. Hist. N. Fr. iii. 307.

groan,

groan, an involuntary motion expressive of what B O Or K
he ifufers, would exclude him for ever from the L-
rank of captain. Even after this evidence of his
fortitude, it is not deemed to be completely af~cer-
tained, but muff fland another test more dreadful
than any he has hitherto undergone. He is again
ifupended in his hammoc, and covered with leaves
of the palmetto. A fire offltinking herbs is kin-
died underneath, so as he may feel its heat, and be
involved in its smoke. Though scorched and al-
most fuffocated, he must continue to endure with
the fame patient in~sensibility. Many perish in this
rude ess~ay of their firmness and courage, but such
as go through it with applause, receive the ensigns
of their new dignity with much solemnity, and are
ever after regarded as leaders of approved refolu-
tion, whose behaviour, in the most trying fitua-
tions, will do honour to their country d. In North
America, the previous trial of a warrior is neither
so formal, nor so s~evere. Though even there, be-
fore a youth is permitted to bear arms, his patience
and fortitude are proved by blows, by fire, and by
insults, more intolerable to a haughty spirit than
both e.

THE amazing fleadinef~s with which the Ame.
ricans endure the most exquisite torments, has in-
duced some authors to suppose that, from the pe.
culiar feebleness of their frame, their s~ensibility is

* Gumilla, ii. 286, &c. Biet, 376, &c.
*Charley. Hist. N. Fr. iii. zz9.

M 2 not

B O O K not so acute as that of other people; as women,

L and persons of a relaxed habit, are observed to be

less affeaed with pain than robust men, whole
nerves are more firmly braced. But the confitu.P
tion of the Americans is not so different, in its
texture, from that of the reft of the human fpe.
cies, as to account for this diversity in their beha·
viour. It flows from a principle of honour, in-
stilled early and cultivated with furch care, as to
inspire man in his rudest state with an heroicmag·
nanimity, to which philosophy hath endeavoured,
in vain, to form him, when more highly improved
and polished. This invincible constancy he has
been1 taught to confider as the chief diftin~ion of
a man, and the highest attainment of a warrior.
The ideas which influence his condua, "and the
pafflons which t~ake poffeffionn of his heart, are
few. They operate of course with more decisive
effea, than when the mind is crowded with a mul·
tiplicity of objets, or diffraaed by the variety of
its pursuits; and when every motive that ads~
with any force in forming the sentiments of a fa
vage, prompts him to fuffer with dignity, he will
bear what might seem to be impofirble for human
pa"tience to fultain. But wherever the fortitudeof
the Americans is not routed to exertion by their
ideas of honour, their feelings of pain are the
fame with thos~e of the reft of mankind '. Nor
is that patience under fufferings for which the

' See N OT E XLVII.

Americans

Americans have been so juffly celebrated, an uni. B OVO K
versal attainment. The constancy of many of the M-~
vidims is overcome by the agonies of torture.
Their weaknes~s and lamentations complete the
triumph of their enemies, and refleQ disgrace upon
their own country B.

THE perpetual hoffilities carried on among the Wasted by

their perpe-

American tribes are produaive of very fatal es- tual wars.
seas. Even in seasons of public tranquillity, their
imperfeQ induffry does not supply them with any
superfluous flore of proviflons; but when the irrup-
tion of an enemy desolates their cultivated lands, or
diflurbs them in their hunting excursions, s~uch a
calamity reduces a community, naturally unpro-
vident and deffitute of resources, to extreme want.
All the people of the diftria that is invaded, are
frequently forced to take refuge in woods or moun-
tains, which can afford themlittle fubifitence, and
where many of them perith. Notwithstanding
their excellive caution in conduating their mili-
tary operations, and the solicitude of every leader
to preserve the lives of his followers, as the rude
tribes in America s~eldom enjoy any interval of
peace, the loss of men among them is considerable
in proportion to the degree of population. Thus
famine and the fwYord combine in thinning their
numbers. All their communities are feeble, and

a Charley. Hist. N. Fr. iii. 248- 385. De la Path~erie, i;i.

.nothing

\f3

B O O K nothing now remains of several nations, which

Swere once considerable, but the name h,

Recruit their SENSIBLE of this continual decay, there are
numbers by
adopting tribes which endeavour to recruit their national
priloners. force when exhauffed, by adopting prisoners taken

in war, and by this expedient prevent their total
extinaion. The praaice, however, is not uni.
verfally received. Resentment operates more
powerfully among savages, than considerations of
policy. Far the greater part of their captives
was anciently sacrificed to their vengeance, and it
is only since their numbers began to decline fall,
that they have generally adopted milder maxims.
But such as they do naturalize, renounce for ever
their native tribe, and assume the manners as well
as passions of the people by whom they are adopted'
so entirely, that they often join them in expeditions
against their own countrymen. Such a sudden
transition, and so repugnant to one of the moll
powerful inflinas implanted by nature, would be
deemed fkrange among many people; but, among
the members of fmnall communities, where national
enmity is violent and deep-rooted, it has the ap·
pearance of being still more unaccountable. It
seems, however, to result naturally from the prin-
ciples upon which war is carried on in America.
Wjhen nations aim at exterminating their enemies,

SCharley. Hist. N. Fr. iii. zo2, 203- 429. Gumilla, 11

2z7, &c.

i Charley. Hist. N. Fr. iii. 245, &c. Lafit. ii* 308.

no exchange of prisoners can ever take place. a 0 p K
From the moment one is made a prisoner, his cy
country and his friends confider him as dead".
He has incurred indelible disgrace by fuffering
himself to be' surprised or to be taken by an
enemy; and were he to return home, after such a
slain upon his honour, his nearest relations would
not receive or even acknowledge that they knew
him '. Some tribes were still more rigid, and if a
prisoner retur~ned, the infamy which he had brought
on his country was ex~piated, by putting him in-
flantly to death m. As the unfortunate captive is
thus an outcast from his own country, and the
ties which bound him to it are irreparably broken,
he feels less reludance in forming a new conneaion
with people, who, as an evidence of their friendly
sentiments, not only deliver him from a cruel
death, but offer to admit him to all the rights of
a fellow-citizen. The perfea similarity of man-
ners among fadvage nations facilitates and com-
pletes the union, and induces a captive to transfer
not only his allegiance, but his affeaion, to the
community into the bosom of which he is re-
ceived.

BUT though war be the chief occupation of meR Their infe-

riority mn

in their rude slate, and to excel in it their highest wartfo p-o-
dillinflion and pride, their inferiority is always tions.
manifeit when they engage in competition with

k See N O TE XLVIII.
1 Lahont. ii. 185, 186.
ol Herrera, dec. 3. lib. iv. c. 16. p. 173*

M 4 polished

a 0 0 K polished nations. Destitute of that foresight which

Lc~L3 discerns and provid~es for remote events, firangers

to the union and mutualconfidencerYequifite inform·
ing any extensive plan ofoperations, and incapable
of the s~ubordination no less requisite in carrying
such plans into execution, savage nations may affo-
nifh a dis~ciplined enemy by their valour, but fel.
dom prove formidable to him by their conduat;
and whenever ~the contest is of long continuance,
must yield to s~uperior art ". The empires of Pern
and M'exico, though their progress in civilization,
when meafulred by the European or Asiatic fland·
ards, was inconsiderable, acquired s~uch an ascend-
ancy over the rude tribes around them, that they
fubjeated most of them with great facility to their
power. Wi~hen the people of Europe over-ran the
various provinces ofAmerica, this s~uperiority was
flill more conspicuous. Neither the courage nor
number of the natives could repel a handful of in.
vaders. The alienation and enmity, prevalent
amongr barbarians, prevented them from uniting
in any common scheme of defence, and while each
tribe fought s~eparately, all were subdued.

nheir arts. VI. THE arts of rude nations unacquainted with

the use of metals, hardly merit any attention on their
own account, but are worthy of some notice, as far
as they serve to display the genius and manners of
man in this flage of his progres~s. The firit diltrefs a

D See NOTE XLIX.

savage

savage must feel, will arise from the manner in a odV we
which his body is affeaed, by the heat, or cold, c--·
or moiflure, of the climate under which he lives;
and his first care will be to provide some covering ,U"^n^~
for his own d-fcnce. In the warmor and more
mild climates of America, none of the rude tribes
were clothed. To moss of them N~ature had not
even fuggefled any idea of impropriet y in being
altogether uncoveored d. As under a mild climate
there was little need of any defence from the inju-
ries of the air, ·andi their extreme inidolence thun-
ned every [pecies of labour to which it wfas not
urged by absolute neceility, all the inhabitants of
the illes, and a considerable part of the people on
the continent, remained in this Riatc; ofnakrec' im-
plicity. Others were satisfied with some flight
covering, such as decency required. But though
naked, they were not unadorned. They dressed
their hair in many different forms. They faffened
bits of gold, or thells, or thining st~ones, in their
ears, their nos~es, and cheeks e. They stained their
fkrins with a great variety of figures; and they
Spent much time, and submitted to great pain, in
ornamenting their persons in this fanta~tic manner.
Vanity, however, which finds endless occupation
for ingenuity and inveittion, in nations where
dress has become a complex and intricate art,
is circumscribed· within so narrow bounds, and

d Lery Navigat. ap. de Bry, Hi.p. 164. Life of Colum-

bus, c. 24. Venegas iift. of Californ. p. 70.

* Lery ap. de Bry, iii. r65. Lettr. Edifiantes, 20. 223*

confined

B O O K COnfined to so few articles among naked savages,

C~hl that they are not satisfied with those simple decora.

tions, and have a wonderful propensity to alter the
natural form of their bodies, in order to render it
(as they imagine) more perfea and beautiful.
This pradice was universal among the rudest of the
American tribes. Their operations for that pur.
pofCe begin as s~oon as an infant is born. By com·
prefirng the bones of the fkiull, while still soft and
flexible, some flatten the crown of their heads;
some s~queeze them into the shape of a cone; others
mould them as much as pofirble into a square
figure '; and they often endanger the lives of
their posterity by their violent and absurd efforts
to derange the plan of Nature, or to improve
upon her designs. But in all their attempts either
to adorn or to new-model their pers~ons, it seems
to have been less the objedt of the Americans to
pleas~e, or to appear beautiful, than to give an air
of dignity and terror to their afpea. Their atten·
tion to dress had more reference to war than to gal.
lantry. The difference in rank and effimation be·
twreen the two sexes was so great, as seems to have
extinguitihed, in fCome measure, their solicitude to
appear mutually amiable. The man deemed itbe.
neath him to adorn his person, for the fake of one
on whom he was accuffomed to look down as a slave.
It was when the warrior had in view to enter the
council of his nation, or to take the fi~eld againlt

* Oviedo Hist. lib. iii. c. 5·. U~lloa, i. 329. Voyage de

Labat. ii. ·j2. Charlevoix, iii. 323. Gumilla, i. 197, acc.
Acugna Relat. de la Riv. des Amaz. ii. 83. Lawfon's Voy.
to Carolina, p* 33*

its enemies, that he assumed his choicest orna. B a~ o
ments, and decked his person with the nicest <.--v---
care s. The decorations of the women were few
and simple; whatever was precious or splendid was
reserved for the men. In several tribes the women
were obliged to s~pend a considerable part of their
time every day in adorninlg and painting their hus-
bands, and could beffow little attention upon or-
namenting themselves. Among. a race of men so
haughty as to despise, or so cold as t~o neglea
them, the women naturally became careless and
slovenly, and the love of finery arid thew, which
has been deemed their favourite paflion, was con-
fined chiefly to the other sex h. To deck his person
was the diftinaion of a warrior, as well as one of
his molt serious occupations i. In one part of their
dress, which, at first fight, appears the moss fin-
gular and capricious, the Americans have dirco-
vered considerable sagacity in providing against
the chief inconveniencies of their climate, which is
often sultry and moist to excess. All the different
tribes, which remain unclothed, are accuffomed to
anoint and rub their bodies with the grease of ani-
mals, with vis~cous gums, and with oils of different
kinds. By this they check that profus~e perfpira-
tion, which, in the torrid zone, wastes the vigour

5 Wafer'sl Voyage, p. 142. Lery ap. de Bry, iii. 167*

Charley. Hist. N. Fran. iii. 216. z22.

h Charley. Hist. de la Nouv. France, iii. 278. 327. Lafitau,

ii 53. Kalm's Voyage, iii. 273. Lery ap.de Bry, iii. I69,
I70. Purch. Pilgr. iv. I287. Ribas Hist. de los Triumph.
&c. 472*

* See N OT E L.

B O O K of the frame, and abridges the period of human

IV. c-~ life. By this too, they provide a defence againit

the extreme moiflure during the rainy season .
They likewise, at certain seasons, temper paint of
different colours with tho~e' un~uous substances,
and bedaub themselves plentifully with that compo-
fition. Sheathed with this impenetrable varnish,
their sk~ins are not only proteated from the pene.
trating heat of the fun, but, as all the innlume-
rable tribes of infeats have an antipathy to the
finell or taste of that mixture, they are delivered
from their teazing persecution, wvhich aminidt so.
rests and marshes, especially in the warmer regions,
would have been altogether intolerable in a slate of
perf'ed nakednef '.

Habitations. THE next objea to dress that will engage the

attention of a savag~e, is to prepare some habitation
which nmay afford him thelter by day, and a retreat
at night. W~hatever is conneaed with his ideas of
personal dignity, w-hatever bears any reference to
his military charaaer, the savage warrior deenu
an objec? of importance. Whatever relates only
to peaceable and ina~tive life, he views with
indifference. Hence, though finically attentive
to dres~s, he is little s~olicitous about the elegance
or dis~position of his habitation. Savage nations,
far from that slate of improvement, in which

" See NOTE LL.
i Labat, ii. 73. Gumilla, i. 190. 202. Bancroft Nat.

Hist. of Guiana, 81. 280.

the mode of living is considered as a mark of B O O K
diitinaion, and unacquainted with those wants, eJ
wfhich require a variety of accommodation, regu-
late the confiruaion of their hous~es according
to their limited ideas of necefirty. Some of the
American tribes were so extremely rude, and had
advanced so little beyond the primeval simplicity
of nature, that they had no houses at all. During
the day, they take thelter from the scorching rays
of the fun under thick trees; at night they form a
thed with their branches and leaves m. In the
rainy season they retire into coves, formed by the
hand of Nature, or hollowed out by their own
induffry ". Others, who have no fixed abode, and
roam through the forest in quelt of game, sojourn
in temporary huts, which they erea with little la-
bour, and abandon without any concern. The
inhabitants of those vast plains, which are deluged
by the overflowing of rivers during the heavy rains
that fall periodically between the tropics, rais~e
houles upon piles fastened in the ground, or place
them among the boughs of trees, and are thus
safe amidst that wide extended inundation which
surrounds them o. Such were the firfi slays of the
rudest Americans towards providing themselves

* See NTOTE LII.

* Lettres Edif. v. 273. Venegas HiRt. of Califor. I 76.

Lozano Deferip. del ·Gran Chaco, P. 59. Lettres Edif. iL.
r76. Gumilla, i. 383. Bancroft N\at. Hit. of Guiva, 277.

* Gumilla, i. 221. Herrera, dec. I. lib. ix. c. 6. Oviedo
Sommar, p. 53, C.

with

B o~ o i with habitations. But even among tribes which

c- are more improved, and whose residence is be.

come altogether fixed, the~ firuaure of their houses
is extremely mean and simple. They are wretched
huts, sometimes of an oblong and sometimes of
a circular form, intended merely for shelter, with
no view to elegance, and little attention to con-
veniency. The doors are s~o low, that it is ne·
ceffary to bend or to creep on the hands and feet
in order to enter them. They are without win.
dows, and have a large hole in the middle of the
roof, to convey out the fmnoke. To follow tra.
vellers in other minute circumffances of their de-
scription, is not only beneath the dignity of his.
tory, but would be foreign to the obje8 of my re-
searches. One circumitance merits attention, as
it is singular, and illuffrau~s the charater of the
people. Some of their hous~es are so large as to
contain accommodation for fourscore or a hundred
persons. These are built for the reception of if-
ferent families, which dwell together under the
fame roofP, and often around a common fire,
without separate apartments, or any kind of screen
or partition between the spaces which they refpec-
tively occupy. As s~oon as men have acquired
diftina ideas of property; or when they are to
much attached to their females, as to watch thern
with car and jealousy; families of course divide
and fettle in separate houses, where they can fe

* See N OT E LIII.

cute and guard whatevier they with to preserve. B O O K
This singular mode of habitation among s~everal
people of America, may therefore be considered not
only as the effea of their imperfea notions con-
cerning property, but as a proof of inattention
and indifference towards their women. If they
had not been accuffomed to perfeQ equality, such
an arrangement could not have taken place. If
their sensibility had been apt to have taken alarm,
they would not have truffed the virtue of their
women amidirt the temptations and opportunities
of such a promiscuous intercourse. At the fame
time, the perpetual concord which reigns in habi-
tations where to many families are crowded toge-
ther, is s~urprising, and affords a striking evidence
that they must be people of either a very gentle, or
of a very phlegmatic temper, who, in such a litua-
tion, are unacquainted with animosity, brawling,
and discord 9.

AFTER making s~ome provilion for his dress and nbeir rm..

habitation, a s~avage will perceive the necessity of
preparing proper arms with which to as~sault or re-
pel an enemy. This, accordingly, has early exer-
cifed the ingenuity and invention of all rude na-
tions. The first offenfive weapons were doubtless
such as chance pres~ented, and the first efforts of

9 Journ. de Grillet & Bechamel dans la Goyane, p. 65*·
Lafitan Moeurs, ii. 4. Torquem. Monarq. i. 247. Journal
Hist. de Joutal, 217. Lery Hist. Brasil, ap. de Bry, iii. 238*
Lozano Defer. del Gran Chaeo, 67.

B OVO K art to improve upon there, were extremely awuk·

c ward and simple. Clubs made of some heavy

wood, flakes hardened in the fire, lances whole
heads were armed with flint or the bones offome
animal, are weapons known to the rudest nations.
All thefie, however, were of use only in close en·
counter. But men wished to annoy their enemies
while at a distance, and the bow and arrow is the
most early invention for this purpose. This wvea·
pon is in the hands of people, whose advances in
improvement are extremely inconsiderable, and is
familiar to the inhabitants of every quarter of
the globe. It is remarkable, however, that some
tribes in America were so de~itute of art and in.
g~enuity, that they had not attained to the dif.
covery of this simple invention ", and seem to have
been unacquainted with the use of any miirve wea.
·pon. The fling, though in its confirution not
more complex than the bow, and among many
nations of equal antiquity,' was little known to
the people of North America P, or the islands,
but appears to have been used by a few tribes in
the southern continent 9. The people, in some
provinces of Chili, and those of Patagonia, to.
wards the southern extremity of America, use a
weapon peculiar to themselves. They fasten stoneS,
about the size of a sift, to each end of a leather
thoug of eight feet in length, and fwyinging theke

* Piedrahita Conq. del Nuevo Reyno, ix. 12.
r Nauf. de Aly. Nun Clabeca de vaca, c. x. p. I2.
t Piedrah. p. x6. See NOTE LIV.

round their heads, throw them with such dexte- a 0 0 rc

IV.

ritr, that they seldom miss the objea at which c
they aim I.

ANIONG people who had hardly any occupation Tmheir, do

but war or hunting, the chief exertions of their in, sits.
vention", as well as induffry, were naturally di-
reaed towards there objeas. WVith ref~pec? to
every thing else, their wants and delires were to
limited, that their invention was not upon the
fIretch. As their food and habitations are per-
sealy simple, their domeffic utensils are few and
rude. Some of the southern tribes had discovered
the art of forming velfels of earthen ware, and
baking them in the fun, s~o as they could endure
the fire. In North America, they hollowed a
piece of hard wood into the form of a kettle,
and filling it. with water, brought it to boil, by
putting red-hot itones into it '. Thes~e vefrels Dremlnq

their fodcd

they used in preparing part of their provilions;
and this may be considered as a flep towards
refinement and luxury, for men in their rudest
slate were not acquainted with any method of
drelling their viatuals, but by roasting them on
the fire; and among several tribes in America,
this is the only species of cookery yet known ".

I Ovalle's Relation of Chili. Church. Colleft. iii. 82.

Falkner's Defeript. of Patagon. p. 130.

* See N O TE LV.
SCharley. Hist. N. Fr. iii* 332*
* See N OT E LVI.

VOL. II. N But

B O OP K B3ut thec master-piece of art, among the savages of

Mc~ America, in the confiruaion of their canoes. An
ton f hir Efkiimaux, sh~ut up in his boat of whalebone, co·

canoes. vered with the skins of seals, can brave that

flormy ocean, on which the barrenness of his
country compels him to depend for the chief part
of his subsistence x. The people of Canada ven-
ture upon their rivers and lakes, in boats made of
the bark of trees, and s~o light that two men can
carry them, wherever fhiallowvs or cataraAs ob·
firua the navigation Y. In these frail vessels they
undertak~e and accomplish long voyagesz. The
inhabitants of the isles and of the s~outhern conti·
nent form their ce .oes by hollowing the trunk of
a large tree, with infinite labour, and though in
appearance they are extremely aukward and un.
wieldy, they paddle and fleer them with such dex-
terity, that Europeans, well acquainted with all the
improvements in the science of navigation, have
been affonifhed at the rapidity of their motion, and
the quicknes~s of their evolutions. Their pirop2er,
or war-boats, are so large as to carry forty or fifty
men; their canoes employed in fithing and in
short voyages are les~s capacious a. The form, as
well as materials of all these various kinds of vel.
fels, is well adapted to the service for which they
are deffined; and the more minutely they are exa.
mined, the mechanifin of their firuc~ure, as well

X Ellis Voy. I33. ' See N OTE LVII.
Z Lafitau Moeurs, &rc. ii. 213-
e Labat Voy~ages, ii. 91, &c. 31r.

cs neatness of their fabric, will appear the more B o, O
surprising. cc

But, in every attempt towards induffry among L b;~

the Americans, one firiking quality in their cha- :," "~Pply
rater is conspicuous. They apply to work with-
out ardour, carry it on with little a~livity, and,
like children, are easily diverted from it. Even
in operations which s~eem the most interesting, and
where the most powerful motives urge them to vi-
gorous exertions, they labour with a languid lift-
leflhefs. Their work advances under their hand
with s~uch flowner~s, that an eye-witness compares
it to the imperceptible progress of vegetation b.
They will s~pend so many years in forming a ca-
noe, that it often begins to rot with age before
they finish it. They will f~uffer one part of a roof.
to decay and perish, before they complete the
other c. The slightest manual operation cons~umes
an amazing length of time, and what in polithed
nations would hardly be an effort of induffry, is
among savages an arduous undertaking. This flow-
ness of the Americans in executing works of every
kind may be imputed to various causes. Among
savages, who do not depend for f~ubfiffence upon
the efforts of regular induffry, time is of so little
importance, that they set no value upon it; and
provided they can finish a design, they never re-
gard how long they are employed about it. The

SGumilla, it 297. E Bo0rde Relat. des Caraibes, p. 22.

N 2 tools

B O O K tools which they employ are so aukward and de.

S"- festive, that every work in which they engage

muRl necessarily be tedious. The hand of the
most induffriou~s and fkcilful artist, were it furnished
with no better initrument than a stone hatchet, a
shell, or the bone of foome animal, would find it dif-
ficult to perfeQ the most simple work. It is by
length of labour, that he mult endeavour to sup.
ply his defea of power. But above all, the cold
phlegmatic temper peculiar to the Americans ren·
ders their operations languid. It is almost im·
poirble to rouze them from that habitual indo.
lence in which they are funk; and unless when
engaged in war or hunting, they s~eem incapable of
exerting any vigorous effort. Their ardour of ap-
plication is not so great as to call forth that in-
ventive s~pirit which su~ggests expedients for facili·
tating and abridging labour. They wvill return to
a task~ day after day, but all their methods ofexe·
cuting it are tedious and operose e. Even since
the Europeans have communicated to them the
knowledge of their infiruments, and taught them
to imitate their arts, the peculiar genius of the
Americans is conspicuous in every attempt they
make. They may be patient and assiduous in l.
'bour, they can copy with a servile and minute ae·
curacyi, but discover little invention, and no ta·
lents for dis~patch. In spite of infiruition and
example, the spirit of the race predominates;

e See N OT E LVIII.

their motions are naturally tardy, and it is vain to a o~ K
urge them to quicken their pace. Among the cr
Spaniards in America, the weork of an Indian is a
phrase by which they deferibe any thing, in the
execution of which an immens~e time has been em-
ployed, and much labour walled '.

V(II. No circumffance refpeaing rude nations *rheir reni-

has been the objea of greater curiosity than their p'on.
religious tenets and rites; and none, perhaps, has
been so imperfealy underflood, or represented
w~ith 10 little fidelity. Priests and missionaries are rP~~eona
the persons who have had the best opportunities dais inquiry.
of carrying on this inquiry, among the most un-
civilized of the American tribes. Their minds,
engrossed by the do~rines of their own religion,
and habituated to its institutions, are apt to dilco-
ver fomethingr which resembles those objeats of
their veneration, in the opinions and rites of every
pe:ople. Whatever they contemplate, they view
through one medium, and draw and accommo-
date it to their own fyfitem. They fludy to recon-
cile the inflitutions, which fall under their ob-
servation, to their own creed, not to explain them
according to the rude notions of the people them-
selves. TJ~hey ascribe to them ideas which they
are incapable of forming, and suppose them to be
acquainted with principles and faas, which it is
impoflble that they should know. Hence, some

' 1oya-ges de Ulloa, i* 335. Lettr. Edif. &tc. 15*34 *

N 3 miironaries

B o~ o miilionaries have been induced to believe, that

G Y even among the most barbarous nations in Ame.

rica, they had discovered traces, no less diftind
than amazing, of their acquaintance with the fu·
blime mysteries and peculiar inflitutions of Christ-
ianity. From their own interpretation of certain
expref~ions and ceremonies, they have concluded
that thnefe people had some knowledge of the doc·
trine of the Trinity, of the incarnation of the Son
of God, of his e~xpiatory s~acrifice, of the virtue of
the cros~s, and of the efficacy of thle f~acraments',
In s~uch unintelligent and credulous guides, wie can
place little confidence.

BUr, even when we mak~e our choice of con·

duaors, with the greatest care, we must not followu
them with implicit faith. An inquiry in~to the reli·
gious notions of rude nations is involvesl in pecu-
liar intricacies, and we must often pause in order
to s~eparate the faats which our informers rehate,
from the reafouing's with which they are accompa·
nied, or the theories which they build upon them.
Several pious writers, more attentive to the im.
portance of the fubjeQ than to the condition of
the people whole sentiments they were endeavour.
ing to discover, have beffowed much unprofitable
labour in researches of this nature h.

6 Venegas, i. 88. 92. Torquemada, it 445.· Garcia

Cligren. l22. Herrera, dec. 4. lib. ix. c. 7. dec* 5. lib. iv,

SSee NOTE LIX.

THERE

THERE are two fundamental do~rines, upon B a~~ 0 p

which the whole fyrtem of religion, as far as it can LM--

Confined to

be dis~covered by the light of nature, is eftablifhled. tw anricea.
The one refpeas the being of a God, the other
the immortality of the foul. To discover the
ideas of the uncultivated nations under our review
with regard to those important points, is not only
an objea of curiosity, but may afford infiruaion.
To these two articles I shall confine mly res~earches,
leaving subordinate opinions, and the detail of
local s~uperstitions, to more minute inquirers.
WVhoever has had any opportunity of examining Thebeingof
into the religious opinions of persons in the in- God.
ferior ranks of life, even in the most enlightened
and civilized nations, will find that their fyfitem
of belief is derived from infiruaion, not disco-
vered by inquiry. That numerous part of the
human species, whole lot is labour, whole prin-
cipal and almost sole occupation is to secure s~ub-
fiftence, views the arrangement and operations of
nature with little refle~tion, and has neither leisure
nor capacity for entering into that path of refined
and intricate speculation which conduats to the
knowledge of the principles of natural religion.
In the early and most rude periods of savage life,
such dif~quifitions are altogether unknown. When
the intelleatual powers are just beginning to un-
fold, and their first feeble exertions are dire~ed
towards a few objeats of primary necefirty and use;
when the faculties of the mind are so limited, as

N 4 not

B 1V K not to have formed abffraa or general ideas; when

Lc language is to barren, as to be deffitute ofnamesto

distinguish any thing that is not perceived by some
of the senses; it is prepofferous to exped that man
thould be capable of tracing with accuracy the re·
lation between cause and effea ; or to s~uppose that
he should rife from the contemnplation of the one
to the knowledge of the other, and form just con·
ceptions of a Deity, as the Creator and Governor
of the universe. The idea of creation is so fami·
liar wherever the mind is enlarged by science, and
illuminated with revelation, that we seldom refka8
how profound and abftrule this idea is, or confider
what, progress man mult have made in observation
and research, before he could arrive at any know·
ledge of this elementary principle in religion. Ac.
cordingfly, s~everal tribes have been discovered in
America, which have no idea ·whatever of a Su·
preme Being, and no rites of religious worship.
Inattentive to that magnificent fpeaacle of beauty
and order presented to their view, unaccuffomed
to refleat either upon what they themselves are,
or to inquire who is the author of their exiilb
ence, men, in their savage slate, pass their days
like the animals round them, without knowledge or
veneration of any superior power. Some rude tribes
have not in their language any narne for the Deity,
nor have the mcEt accurate observers been able to
dis~cover any praflice or infitution which seemed
to imply that they recognised hlis authority, or

were

were solicitous to obtain his favour i. It is however a 0 0 sc

1v,

only among men in the moss uncultivated slate of lJ
nature, and while their intelleatual faculties are So
feeble and limited as hardly to elevate them above
the irrational creation, that we dif'cover this total in-
sensibility to the impreflions of any ii , ifble power.

BU'r the humnan mind, formed for religion, soon

opens to the reception of ideas, which are deflined,
when corre~ted and refined, to be the great source
of cons~olation amidst the calamities of life.
Among some of the American tribes, still in the
infancy of improvement, we dis~cern apprehenflons
of some invisible and powerful beings. There ap-
prehenflons are originally indiftina and perplexed,
and seem to be fuggefied rather by the dread of
impending evils, than to flow from gratitude for
blessings received. While Nature holds on her
course with uniform and undiflurbed regularity,
men enjoy the benefits resulting from it, without
inquiring concerning its cause. But every devia-
tion from this regular course rouzes and aitonifhes
them. When they behold events to which they

SBiet, 539. Lery ap. de Bry, ill. 22I. Nieuh~off. Church.

Coll. ii. 132. Lettr. Edif. 2. l'77. Id. I2, '3.. Venegas, i.
87. Lozano Defeript. del Grand Chaco, 59. Fernand. Miffian.
de Chiquit. 39. Gumnilla, it. 156. Rochefort Hist. des A~n-
ti~lks, p. 468. Margrazve Hilt. in Append. de Chilienfibus,
286. Uollho2 aic. Almeric. 335, &c. Barrere, 218, 219.
Harcourt Voy. to Guiana. P'urch. Pilgr. iv. p. 1273. Ac-
count of Brasil, by a Portuguese. Ibid. p. I289. Jones's
Journal, p. 59. See NOTE LX.

a o~ o r<are not accuffomed, they s~earch for the reasons of

1' them with eager curiosity. Their undferflanding is

un~able to penetrate into these; but imagination, a
more forward and ardaent faculty of the mind, de.
cides without hesitation. It ascribes the extraordi-
nary occurrences in nature to the influence of in.
visible beings, and s~uppos~es that the thunder, the
hurricane, and the earthqluake, are efecas of their
interposition. Some falch confused notion of fpi-
ritual or invisible power, fuzperintending~ over those
natural calamities which frequently desolate the
earth, and terrify its inhabitants, may be traced
among many rude nationS k. 3u~t besides this, the
disasters and dangers of savage life are so tnany,
and men often find themfielves in situations Co
formidable, that the mind, sensible of its own
weak~nes~s, has no resource but in the guidance and
protehtion of wisdom and power s~uperior to what
is human. Dejeaed with calamities which opprels
him, and exposed to dangers which he cannot re·
pel, the savage no longer relies upon hims~elf ; he
feels his own impotence, and fees no profped of
being extricated, but by the interposition of fotne
uns~een arm. Hence, in all unenlightened na·
tions, the first rites or pradices which bear anyr re-
semblance to aas of religion, have It for their ob·
jeQ to avert evils which men fuffer or dread. The
'Manitous or Okkis of the North Americans were
amulets or charms, which they imagined to be of
such virtue, as to preserve the persons who reposed

" See N OT E LXL.

confidence

confidence in them from every difaffrous event, or B O O K
they were considered as tutelary s~pirits, whos~e aid c
they might implore in circumstances of diitrefs i
Th" Ccmis of the islanders were reputed by them to
be the authors of every calamity that amills the
human race; they were represented under the most
frightful forms, and religious homage was paid
to them with no other view than to appeas~e these

furousdetie=.Even among those tribeswhe

religious ryfem was more enlarged, and who had
fonned some conception of benevolent b~eings,which
delighted in conferring benefits, as well as of ma-
licious powers prone to inflia evil; fulperfition
itill appears as the off~spring of fear, and all its
efforts were employed to avert calamities. They
were persuaded that their good deities, prompted
by thle beneficence of their nature, would beffowv
every blessing in their power, without solicitation
or acknowledgment; and their only anxiety was
to soothe and deprecate the wrath of the powers
whom they regarded as the enemies of mankind ".

SUCa were the imperfea conceptions of the
greater part of the Americans with respect to the
interpofitions ofinvifible agents, and such, ahinoft

I Charley. N. Fr. iii. 343, &~c. Creuxii Hist. Canad.

p. 82, &c.

m Oviedo, lIb. iii. c. I. p. 111. P. Martyr, decad. p. I02,

* Tertre, ii. 365. Borde, p. r4. State of Virginia, by a
N'ative, book iii. p. 32, 33. Dumont, i. I65. Bancroft Nat.
Hill. of Guiana, 309. umiverfally,

B qO K universally, was the mrean and illiberal objee? of

c- their fuper~itiions. W'ere we to trace back the

ideas of other nations to that rude slate in which
hillory first~ presents them to our view, wre -fhond!
discov;er a f~urprifmg refemnblance in their tenets
and prac?ices; and thould be convinced,-that, in
similar circumfitances, the faculties of the human
mind hold nearly the fame course in their progrdls,
and arrive at almost the fame conclusions. The
imprefiions of fear are cocFpicuous in all the sys.
tems of ifuperfltitio~n formed in this situation. Thle
most exalted notions of me'n mrie nohiertno
a perplexed apprehenflon of certain beings, whole
powfer, thlough supernatural, is limnited as wfellas
parti a:.

Remrrahle BTrr, among other tribes, which have been

,te flonger· united, or hlave made greate-r progress in

nourloins. improvemenlt, we dircern some feebule pointing to·

wards more juff and· adequa-.te corrncepins of the
powler th~at pr'efides in nature. They se~em to per·
ceive that there mluft be fomne univ·ersal caufre to
whom all thingrs are: indebted for th~eir being. if
we may judge by fomne of their expressions they
appear to ack~nowledge a div:ine pow~er to be t'le
maker of the -orl·d, and the difp~o!`er of all eventc.
They denominate him the Great Sptirito. B9
thefte id~eas ar~e faint anld confused, and then
they attempt to explain th-emn, it is man~ifell, tht;

d Charkyt~. N;. Fr. fil. 343. Sagard., Voy. du Pays depia.

rons, 226.

amorr

among them the w~ord/pirit has a meaning very n < 0 a
different from that in which we employ it, and ch
that they have no conception of any deity but
what is corporeal. They believe their gods to
be of the human form-, though of a nature more
excellent than rnan, and retail such wild incohe·
rent fables concerning their funalions and opera-
tions, as are altog~ether unworthy of a place in
hillory. Even among thes~e tribes, there is no
eftabhfihed form of public wforfhip; there are nio
temples ereaed in honour of their deities; and
sto mniniffers peculiarly consecrated to their service.
They have the knowledge, however, of se~veral ful-
perflitious ceremonies and pradices handed down
to thern by tradition, and to there they have re-
course with a childithl credulity, when rouzed by
any emergence from their usual infenfibiity, and
excited to acknowledge the power, and to implore
the proteaion of superior beings p.

THE tribe of the Natchez, and the people of svrtem or

. the Natcher.

Bogota had advanced beyond the other unculti-
vated nations of America in their ideas of religion,
as well as in their political inflitutions; and it
'4 no less difficult to explain the caule of this
diftinaion than of that which we have already
considered. The Sun was the chief objea of re-
ligious w~orthip among the Natchez. In their
temples, which were conitruaed with some mag-

r Charley. N`.Fr. ilk 345i. Colden, i. q.

nii;cence,

B O O K n81 Cence, and decorated with various ornaments,

~-~r3according to their mode of ar-chiteAure, they pre-

served a perpetual fire, as the purest emblem of
their divinity. Mlinifters were appointed to watch
and feed this sacred flame. The first fune~ion of
the great chief' of thle nation, every morning, wNas
an aQ of obeijance to the Sun;j and feffivals re-
turned at slated seasons, which were celebrated by
the whole community with solemn but unbloody
rites 4. This is the mos1 refined species of super·
ftition kinown in America, and, perhaps, one of
the moit n~atural as well as most s~educing. The
Sun is the apparent source of the joy, fertility,
and life, difiied throug~h nature; and while the
human mind, in its early essays towards inquiry,
contemplates and admires his univerfacl and ani·
mating energy, its admiration is apt to flop fhlort
at what is v~iible, without reaching to the unseen
caus~e; and pays that adoration to the most glo·
rious and beneficial work of God, which is due
only to him who formed it. As fire is the purdi
and most aaive of the elements, and in some of
its qualities and effeas resembles the Sun, it was,
not improperly, chose~n to be thle embliem of his
powerful operation. The ancient P-ersians, a
people far superior, in every refpea, to that rude
tribe whos~e rites I am def'cribing, founded their
religious fyfiem on similar principles, and eira-
blithed a form of public worflhip, less gross and

9 Dumont, i. 158, &~c. Charley. N. Fr. iii. 41I7, &~c. 429.

Lafitau, i. I-67.

17 exceptionable

eixceptionable than that of any people destitute of a 0l a s
guidance from revelation. This surprising co-in- ~
cidence in s~entiment betwveen two nations, in such
different slates of improvement, is one of the
many singular and unaccountable circumstances
which occur in the hiflory of human affairs.

AnowsG the people of Bogota, the Sun and
Xloon were, likewise, the chief objeas of venera-
tion. Their fyfitemn ofreligoion was more regular
and complete, though less pure, than that of the
Natchez. They had temples, altars, pr-iests, f~a-
crifices, and that long train of ceremonies, which
fuperflition introdutces wherever the has fully eita-
blithled her dominion over the minds of men. But
the rites of their worsh~ip were cruel and bloody.
They offered human vidims to their deities, and
many of their pratices nearly res~embled the bar-
barous inflitutions of the Mexicans, the genius of
which we shall have an opportunity of considering;
more attentively in its proper place '.

WrraT refped to the other great doarine of re- nheir idam

ligion, concerning the immortality of the foul, the hZ"Y~mmo-
felntiments of the Americans were more united : rtlYof

, h

the human mind, even when least improved and
intigorated by culture, thrinks from the thoughts
of annihilation, and lookis forward with hope and
expe~ation to a slate of future exiffence. This
sentiment, res~ulting from a secret consciousness of

r Piedrahlita, Conq. del N. Reyno, p. 17. Helr~rea, dec. 6.

lib. v. c. 6,

rm O~ O its own dignity, from an inflindive longing after

L-L immortalit-y, is universal, andl may be deemedna.

tural. Upon this, are founded the molt exalted
hopes of man in his highest slate of improvement;
nor has nature withheld from him this s~oothing
consolation, in the most early and rude period of
his progrels. W;Ee can trace this opinion from one
extremity of America to the other. In some re.
gions more faint and obscure, in others more per.
sealy developed, but no where unknown. The
mos1 uncivilized of its savage tribes do not appre.
hend death as the extinaion of being. All enter-
tain hopes of a future and more happy Rtate, where
they shall be for ever exempt from the calamities
which imbitter human life in its prelent condition.
This future slate they conceive to be a delightful
country, blessed with perpetual fpringo, whole so.
rests abound with game, whose rivers swarm with
fish, where famine is never felt, and uninterrupted
plenty sh~all be enjoyed without labour or toil.
But as men, in forming their first imperfe8 ideas
concerning the invisible world, suppose that there
they iIhall continue to feel the fame desires, and to
be engaged in the fame occupations, as in the
present world; they naturally ascribe eminence
and diftinaion, in that state, to the fame quali·
ties and talents which are here the objea of their
esteem. The Americans, accordingly, allotted
the highest place, in their country of spirits, to
the fkiilful hunter, to the adventurous and sus
cefsful warrior, and to such as had tortured the

2 x greardl

greatest number of captives, and devoured their n 0 O K
fielh ". These notions were so prevalent, that they i<-~v~3;
gave rife to an universal custom, which is, at to bury

armS, &cC.

once, the firongeft evidence that the Americans be- with tile

dead.

lieve in a future slate, and the best illuffration of
what they exped there. As they imagine, that de-
parted spirits begin their career anew in the world
whither they are gone, that their friends may not
enter upon it defenceless and unprovided, they bury
together with the bodies of the dead their bow, their
arrows, and other weapons us~ed in hunting or war;
they deposit in their tombs the skins or fluffs of
which they make garments, Indian corn, manioc,
venison, domeffic utensils, and whatever is reckon-
edamong the necefiaries in their fimplemode of lifet.
In forne provinces, upon the decease of a caziqlue or
chief, a certain number of his wives, of his favour-
ites, and of his slaves, were put to death, and in-
terred together with him, that he might appear
with the fame dignity in his future flation, and be
wRaited upon by the fame attendants ". This per-

*Lery ap. de Bry, iii. 222. Charley. N. Fr. iii. 35x', &c.

De la Potherie, ii. 45, &c. iii. 5*

SChronica de Cieca de Leon, c. 28. Sagard, 288. Creux.

Hist. Canad. 'p. 91. Rochefort. Hist. des Antilles, 568.
Biet, 391. De la Potherie, ii* 44. iii. 8. Blanco, Converf,
de Piritu, P* 35*

* Dumont, Lou;fiane, `i. 208, &ce. Oviedo, lib. v. c. 3*

Gomara, Hist. Gen. c. 28. P. Mart. decad. 304. Charley.
N. Fr. iii* 421. Herrera, dec. I. lib. iii. c. 3. P. Mlelchior
Hernandez, Memor. de Chiriqui. Coll. Orig. Papers, i.
Chron. de Cieca de Leon, c. 33-

VoL. II. fulaflon

B O O K 1 laton is so deep-rooted, that many of the de.
I MU ' ceased perfon's retainers offer themselves as volun-

tary viaims, and court the privilege of accompa·
nyiing their departed master, as an high diflin8ion.
It has been found difficult,. on s~ome occasions, to
set bounds to this enthusiasm of affeaionate duty,
and to reduce the train of a favourite leader to
s~uch a nutuber as the tribe could afford to fpare'.

Supernition AhlNow the Americans, as well as other unci.
wavo dvo- vilized nations, many of the rites and obs~ervances

wyhich bear s~ome resemblance to aas of religion,
have no conneaion, with devotion, but proceed
from a fond desire of prying into futurity. The
human mind is most apt to feel, and to discover
this vain curiosity, when its own powers are mRno
feeble and uninformed. Affonifhed with occur.
rences, of which it is unable to comprehend the
cause, it naturally fancies that there is some-
thing myf~erious and wonderful in their origin.
Alarmed at events of which it cannot discern
the ilfue or the consequences, it has recourse to
other means of difoovering them, than the exercise
of its own s~agacity. Wherever fuperitition is 0
eliabliked as to form a regrular fyfitem, this desire
of penetrating into the secrets of futurity is con·
neAed with it. Divination becomes a religious
at4.. Priests, as the ministers of Heaven, pretend
to deliver its oracles to men. They are the only

X See N O TE LXII.

21 soothsayers,

soothsayers, augurs, and magicians, who profess a o~ o r
the sacred and important art of disclosing what is 1"-
hid from other eyes.

BUT, among rude nations, who pay no venera- mThsdbeepart-

tion to any f~uperintendingr power, and who have nO longs to their

phylicians.

eitablifhed rites or miniffers of religion, their cu-
riofity to discover what is future and unknown is
cherished by a different principle, and derives
firength from another alliance. iAs the diseas~es of
men,in the savage slate, are (as has been already ob-
served) like thos~e of the animal creation, few but
extremely violent, their imlpatience under what they
fuffer, and solicitude for the recovery of health, soon
inspired them with extraordinary reverence for such
as pretended to understand the nature of their mala-
dies, and to be poffeffe~d of knowledge fufficient to
preserve or deliver thern from their s~udden anld fa-
tal effeas. These ignorant pretenders, however,
were such utter firangers to the firuature of the hu-
man frame, as to be eqlually unacquainted with the
caules of its disorders, and the manner in which
they will terminate. Superflition, mingled fre-
quently with some portion of craft, s~upplied what
they wanted in Science. They imputed the origin
of diseases to s~upernatural influence, and prescribed
or performed a variety of myfierious rites, which
they gave out to be of such efficacy as to remove
the most dangerous and inveterate maladies. The
credulity and love of the marvellous, natural to
uninformed men, favoured the deception, and

O 2 prepared

a 0 o re prepared them to be the dupes of those impoflors.

1 IV _ 1Among savages, their first physicians are a kind of

conjurers or wizards, who boalt that they know
what is past, and can foretell what is to come.
Incantations, sorcery, and mummeries of diverle
kinds, no less firange than frivolous, are the
means which they employ to expel the imaginary
causes of malignity Y ; and relying upon the eff.
cacy of these, they predia with confidence what
will be the fate of their deluded patients. Thus
fuperflition, in its earliest form, flowed from the
solicitude of man to be d~elivered from pres~ent dif
tres~s, not from his dread of evils awaiting him
in a future life, and was originally ingrafted on
medicine, not on religion. One of the firit, and
most intelligent hifforians of America, was firuck
with this alliance between the art of divination and
that of physic, among the people of Hifpanich\!
But this was not peculiar to them. The Alexis, the
Piayas, the AultlOin2S, or whatever was the dillin·
guilhing name of their diviners and charmers in
other parts of America, were all the physicians of
their refpeaive tribes, in the fame manner as the
Buhlitor of His~paniola. As their fundion led them
to apply to the human mind when enfeebled by
sickness, and as they found it, in that season of
dejeaion, prone to be alarmed with imaginary
fears, or amused with vain hopes, they easily in

v P'. Melch. Hernandez, Mernorial de Chiriqui. ColkiS

Orig. Pap,. i.

* Oviedo, lib. v. c. i.

duced it to rely with implicit confidence on the a qo a~v
virtue of their spells, and the certainty of their
predi8ions ".

WHENEVER men acknowledge the reality of fu· ggl'y

pernatural power and dis~cernment in one inflance,
they have a propensity to admit it in others. The
Americans did not long suppose the efficacy of
conjuration to be confined to one faubjea. They
had recourse to it in every situation of danger or
diitrefs. When the events of war were peculiarly
difaltrous, when they met with unfores~een difatp-
pointments in hunting, when inundations or
drought threatened their crops with defkruaion,
they called upon their conjurers to begin their in-
cantations, in order to dis~cover the caules of those
calamities, or to foretell what would be their
iflue b. Their confidence in this delusive art gra-
dually increas~ed, and manifelled its~elf in all the oc-
currences oflife. When involved in any difficulty,
or about to enter upon any tranfaaion of moment,
every individual regularly consulted the s~orcerer,
and depended upon his infiruaions to extricate
him from the former, as well as to direa his con-
du8 in the latter. Even among the rudest tribes
in America, superstition appears in this form, and

a Herrera, dec. I. lIb. iii. c. 4. Osborne, Coll. ii. 860.
Dumont, i. 169, &c. Charley. N. Fr. iii. 36I. 364, &cc.
Lawson, N. Carol. 2I4. Ribas, Triumph. p. 17. Biet, 386.
De la Potherie, ii. 35~, &c.

b Charley.N.F.iii. 3. Dumont, i. '73. Fernand. Re-
ac. de los Chiquit* P*140. Lozano, 84. Margrave, 279*

O 3 divination

E 0 0 K divination is an art in high esteem. Long before

IV. r ~man had acquired such knowledge of a deity as in-

spires reverence, and leads to adoration, we observe
him firetchiilg out a pres~umptuous hand to draw
aside that veil ysith which providence kindly con-
ceals its purposes from human k,,owledge; and we
find him labouring, with fruitless anxiety, to pene-
trate into the myfieries of the divine adminiffration.
To ·!ifcern, and to worship a firperintending power,
is an evidence of the enlargement and maturity of
the human undeditandingo ; a vain desire of prying

'into futurity, is the error of its infancy, and a

proof of its weakness.

FRoM this weakinef~s proceeded likewise the

faith of the Americans in dreams, their observation
of omens, their attention to the chirping of birds,
and the cries of animals, all which they suppose to
be indications of future events, and if any one
of these prognoftics is deemed unfavourable, they
instantly abandon the purs~uit of those measures on
which they are most eagerly bent ".

"'fac~ VIII. But if we would form a complete idea of

the uncultivated nations of America, we muff not
pass unobs~erved some singular cuffoms, which,
though univerfral and characleriffic, could not be
reduced, with propriety, to any of the articles

C Charley. N. Fr. iii. 262. 35i3. Stadius, ap. de Bry, iii.

I20. Creuxi) Eff. Canad. 84. Techo, Hist. ofParag
Church..Coll. vi* 37. De la Potherie, iii. 6.

into which I have divided my inquiry concerning B 0~ 0 r
their manners. '

AMONG fagvages, in every part of the globe, the Love of

dancing.

love of dancing is a favourite pafiron. As, during
a great part of their time, they languish in a slate
of inac~ivity and indolence, w-ithout -any oc-
cupation to rous~e or interest them, they delight
universally in a pastime which calls forth the aEtive
powers of their nature into exercise. The Spa-
niards, when they first visited America, were affo-
nifhed at the fondness of the natives for dancing, and
beheld with wonder a people, cold and unanimated
in most of their other pursuits, kindle into life, and
exert thems~elves with ardour, as often as this fa-
vourite amus~ement recurred. Among them, in-
deed, dancing ought not to be denominated an
amusement. It is a s~erious and important occupa-
tion, which mingles in every occurrence of public
or private life. If any intercourse be necessary be-
tween two American tribes, the ambaffaddors of
the one approach in a folemnn dance, and present
the calumet or emblem of peace; the sachems
of the other receive it with the fame ceremony d
If war is denounced against an enemy, it is by
a dance, expressive of the refeatment which they
feel, and of the vengeance which they meditate .
If the wrath of their gods is to be appeased, or

d De la Potherie Hist. ii. I7, &tc. Charley.Nr. Fr.;ii. 2Ir.

297. La Hontan. i. I00. 137. Hennepin, Decou. 146, &rc.

* Charley. N. Fr. iii. 298. Lafitau, i* Sea.

O 4 their

a o 0 o their beneficence to be celebrated; if they rejoice

I -~- 1at the birth of a child, or mourn the death of a

friend =, they have dances appropriated to each of
these situations, and faited to the different f~en·
timents with which they are then animated. If a
person is indisposed, a dance is preferibed as the
moit effeaual means of reffor-ing him to health;
anld if he himself cannot endure the fatigue of such
an exercise, the physician or conjurer performs it
in his name, as if the virtue of his adivity could
be transferred to his patient d.

ALL their dances are imitations of some a~ion;I

and though the music by which they are regulated
is extremely simple and tiresome to the ear by its
dull monotony, some of their dances appear won·
derfully expreifive and animated. The war dance
is, perhaps, the most ficriking. It is the repre-
fentation of a complete American campaign. The
departtire of the warriors from their village, their
march into the enemy's country, the caution with
which they encamp, the address with which they
flation some of their party in ambush, the manner
of surprising the enemy, the noise and ferocity of
the combat, the scalping of those who are slain,
the seizing of prisoners, the triumphant return of
the conquerors, and the torture of the vidims, are
f~ucceively exhibited. The performers enter with

C Jonltel, 343. Gomara, H-ist. Gen. c. 196.
d DenyS Hift.Nat. 189. Brickell, 372. De la Potherie,

ii. 36.

such enthufialtic ardour into their several parts, a 0 0 s o
their geitures, their countenance, their voice, are -J
so wild and so well adapted to their various fitua-
tions, that Europeans can hardly believe it to be
a mimic scene, or view it without emotions of fear
and horror e,

BUT however expreflive some of the American
dances may be, there is one circumitance in them
remarkable, and conneaed with the chara~er of
the race. The songs, the dances, the amusements
of other nations, expre i~ve of the s~entiments which
animate their hearts, are often adapted to display
or excite that s~ensibility which mutually attaches
the lexes. Among some people, such is the ardour
of this patiion, that love is almoff the s~ole objea
of fefivity and joy; and as rude nations are
firangers to delicacy, and unaccuffomed to dif-
guise any emotion of their minds, their dances are
often extremely wanton and in'decent. Such is the
Calenda, of which the natives of Africa are so pas-
fionately fond '; and such the feats of the dancingr
girls, which the Asiatics contemplate with so
much avidity of desire. But, among the Ameri-
cans, more cold and indifferent to their females,
from causes which I have already explained, the
passion of love mingles but little with their fefti-

* De laPotherie, ii. I x . C'harley. N. Fr. i;. 297. La-

fitau, i* 5i23*

* Adanfon, Voy. to Senegral, p. lii. 287. Labat, Voyages,
iv. 463. Sloane, Hist. Nat. of Jam. Introd. p. 48. Fermin.
Defeript. de Surin. i. p. I39- vals

a od~ x vals and pastimes. Their songs and dances are

c-M mostly solemn and martial, they are conneaed

with some of the serious and important affairs of
life ', and having no relation to love or gallantry,
are seldom common to the two fCexes, but exe-
cuted by the men and women apart . If, on
some occaflons, the women are permitted to join
in the feffival, the charader of the entertainment
is still the fanme, and no movement or gelture is
expreflive of attachment, or encourages fami-
liarity ".

amion Tar AN immoderate love of play, especially at games
samu'"' of hazard, which s~eems to be natural to all peopke

unaccuffomed to the occupations of regular indus
try, is likewis~e universal among the Americans.
The fame causes, which so often prompt persons
in civilized life, who are at their ease, to have re·
course to this pastime, render it the delight of the
fadvage. Th'Ee former are independent of labour, the
latter do not feel the necefiltyy of it ; and as both
are unemplo~yed,they run with transport towhatever
is intereffing enough to flir and to agitate their
mlinds. Hence the Americans, who at other times
are s~o indifferent, so phlegmatic, so silent, aml

SDefeript. of N. France. Of'oorne, Coll. ii. 883. Chlarksr

R Wafer's Account, of Isth~mus, &c. 169. L~ery ap. de Bry,

ili. i77. Lozan, Hit. de Parag. i. I49. Hcerrea,dec. 2.
lib. vii. c.8. dec.4. lib. x. c-4. See NOTE LXIII.

" Barrere, f~r. Equin. p. 191.

animated

animated with so few desires, as soon as they engage B Ov K
in play become rapacious, impatient, noisy, and al- L.-v-..
most frantic with eagernes~s. Their furs, their do-
meltic utensils, their clothes, their arms, are flaked
at the gaming-table, and when all is loft, high as
their sense of independence is, in a wild emotion of
delpair or of hope, they will often risk their personal
liberty upon a single cast '. Among s~everal tribes,
such gaming parties frequently recur, and become
their most acceptable entertainment at every great
feltival. Superstition, which is apt to take hold of
those pafiions which are most: vigorous, frequently
lends its aid to confirm and firengthen this fa-
vourite inclination. Their conjurers are accuf-
tomed to prescribe a s~olemn match at play, as one
of the most efficacious methods of appeasing their
gods, or of refforing the sick to health R.

FROM caus~es similar to those which render them and foe
fond of play, the Americans are extremely ad-drnig
diaed to drunkennes~s. It s~eems to have been one
of the firit exertions of human ingenuity to dis~cover
some composition of an intox~icating quality; and
there is hardly any nation so rude, or so destitute
of invention, as not to have succeeded in this fatal
research. The most barbarous of the American
tribes have been so unfortunate as to attain this
art; and even those which are to deficient in

SCharley. NT. Fr. ill. 26r. 3I8. Lafitau, ii. 338, &rc.

Ribas, Triumf* r3. Brickell, 335*·

SCharley. N. Fr. iii. 262.

knowledge,

B o o K knowledge, as to be unacquainted with the method

i '" _ 1of giving an inebriadting firength to liquors by ser.

mentation, can accomplish the fame end by other
means. The people of the islands, of Nordi
America, and of California, used, for this pur.
pose, the fmroke of tobacco, drawn up with a cer.
tain instrument into the noffrils, the fumes of
which ascending to the brain, they felt all the
transports and frenzy of intoxication s. In almolk
every other part of the New World, the natives
poffeffed the art of extraaing an intoxicating
'liquor from maize or the manioc root, the fame
s~ubstances which they convert into bread. The
operation by which they effe& this, nearly re.
fembles the common one of brewing, but with
this difference, that in place of yeft, they use a
nauseous infusion of a certain quantity of maize or
manioc chewed by their women. The saliva ex.
cites a vigorous fermentation, and in a few days
the liquor becomes fit for drinking. It is not
disagreeable to the taste, and when fwrallowed in
large quantities, is of an intoxicating qualityP.
This is the general beverage of the Americans,
which they distinguish by various names, and for
which they feel such a violent and insatiable de·
fire, as it is not easy either to conceive or describe.
Among polilhed nations, where a f~uccellion of va-
rious f~un~ions and amusements keeps the mind in

1 Oviedo, Hist. ap. Ramuf'. ill. Ir3. Venegas, i. 6g.

Naufrag de Cabeca de Vaca, cap. 26. See NOTE LXlf.

P Stadiusap.de~ry, iii. III. Lor;, ibid. 175*

,a continual

continual occupation, the desire for firong drink B O O K
is regulated, in a great meas~ure, by the climate, Y
and increases or diminilhes according to the va-
riations of its temperature. In warm regions, the
delicate and s~ensible frame of the inhabitants does
not require the flimulation of fermented liquors.
In colder countries, the conflitution of the natives,
more robust and more sluggish, flands in need of
generous liquors to quicken and animate it. But
among savages, the desire of something that is of
power to intoxicate, is In every situation the fame.
All the people of America, if we except some
small tribes near the Straits of Magellan, whether
natives of the torrid zone, or inhabitants of its
more temperate regions, or placed by a harder
fate in the severe climates towards its northern or
southern extremity, appear to be equally under
the dominion of this appetite o. Such a similarity
of taste, amnong people in such different situations,
must be akcribed to the influence of some moral
cause, and cannot be considered as the effeQt of
any physical or conflitutional want. W~hile en-
gaged in war or in the chafe, the savage is often.
in the most intereiting fltuations, and all the
powers of his nature are rouzed to the moss vigor-
ous exertions. But those animating feenes are s~ue-
ceeded by long intervals of repose, dttring which

*Gumilla, i. 257. Lazano Delcr;ip, de Gran Cha3co, 56.

to3. Ribas, 8. Ulloa, i. 249* 337. MarchA', iv. 436i.
Ternandez Mlinion. de las Chiquet. 35. Earrere, p. 203*
fElanco Conrerf. de Firitu, 3 I*

a 0~ 0 the wvarrior meets with nothing that he deems of

~ fufficient dignity or importance to merit his atten.

tion. He languishes and mopes in this season of
indolence. The pollure of his body is an emnblem
of the state of his mind. In one climate, cower-
ing over the fire in his cabin; in another,
firetched under the shade of s~ome tree, he doses
away his time in sleep, or in an unthinking joyless
inaaivity, not far removed from it. As firong
liquors awake him from this torpid slate, give
a brisker motion to his spirits, and enliven him
more thoroughly than either dancing or gaming,
his love of them is exceifive. A savage, when
not engaged in aamon, is a pensive melancholy ani-
mal; but as soon as he tastes, or has a profpe8 of
tasting, the intoxicating draught, he becomes gay
and frolickf~ome p. Whatever be the occasion or
pretext on which the Americans assemble, the
meeting always terminates in a debauch. Many of
their feffivals have no other objea, and they wel-
come the return of them with transports of joy.
As they are not accuffomed to restrain any appe-
tite, they set no bounds to this. The riot often
continues without intermiflion several days; and
whatever may be the fatal effeas of their excess,
they never cease from drinking as long as one drop
of liquor remains. The persons of greatest emi-
nence, the most difringuifhed warriors, and the
chiefs most renowned for their wisdom, have no

p Melendez Teforez Verdad. i~ii 369.

greater

greater command of themselves than the most ob- B O Oo K
fcure member of the community. Theireagernefs 0~
for present enjoyment renders them blind to its
fatal cons~equences; :tud thos~e very men, who, in
other situations, s~eem to possess a force of mind
more than human, are in this inflance inferior to
children in foresight, as well as consideration, and
mere slaves of brutal appetite 9. When their pas-
fions, naturally firong, are heightened and in-
flamed by drink, they are guilty of the most enor-
mous outrages, and the feffivity s~eldom concludes
without deeds of violence, or bloodfhed'.

But, amidit this wild debauch, there is one
circumltance remarkable; the women, in most of
the American tribes, are not permitted to partake
of it I. Their province is to prepare the liquor, to
serve it about to the guests, and to take care of
their husbands and friends, when their reason is
overpowered. This exclusion of the women from
an enjoyment so highly valued by savages, may be
juitly considered as a mark of their inferiority, and
as an additional evidence of that contempt with
which they were treated in the New W~orld. The
people of North America, when firlt discovered,
were not acquainted with any intoxicating drink,
but as the Europeans early found it their interest
to supply them with spirituous liquors, dlrunken-

a Ribas, 9. Ulloa, i. 338*
I Lettr. Edif. ii. r78. Torqulemadar Mond. Ind. i. 335*
* See NOTE LXV.

ness

B 0 O K ness soon became as universal among them as

CLM among their countrymen to the south; and their

women having acquired this new taste, indulge
it with as little decency and moderation as the
men'.

Put to death IT Were endless to enumerate all the detached
the aged and
incurabic. cui Oms which have excited the wonder of travel.

lers in America; but I cannot omit one seemingly
as singular as any that has been mentioned. WVhen
their parents and other relations become old, or
labour under any distemper which their slender
knowledge of the healing art cannot remove, the
Americans cut thort their days with a violent hand,
in order to be relieved from the burden of fp.
porting and tending them. This pradice pre.
vailed among the ruder tribes in every part
of the continent, from Hudfon's Bay to the
river De la Plata; and however thocking it
may be to those sentiments of tendernes~s and at·
tachment, which, in civilized life, we are apt to
confider as congenial with our frame, the coa.
dition of man in the savage slate leads and recon·
ciles him to it. The fame hardihips and difficultyq
of procuring fubfiffence, which deter savages, in
some cafes, from rearing their children, prompt
them to destroy the aged and infirm. The de.
clining slate of the one is as htelplefs as the infancy
of the other. The former are no less unable than

SHutchinfon, Hilth of Mafiachut. 469. Lafitau, 11. 'up

Sagar'd, I46.

the latter to perform the funalons that belong to a s ovo a
warrior or hunter, or to endure those various I
diffreffes in which savages are so often involved,
by their own want of foresight and induffry.
Their relations feel this, and, incapable of attend-
ing to the wants or weaknesses of others, their
impatience under an additional burden prompts
them to extinguish that life which they find it
difficult to sustain. This is not regarded as a deed
of cruelty, but as an aeR of mercy. An Ameri-
can, broken with years and infirmities, conscious
that he can no longer depend on the aid of those
around him, places himself contentedly in his
grave; and it is by the hands of his children or
nearest relations that the thongo is pulled, or the
blow infliated, which releas~es him for ever from
the sorrows of life U.

11. AFTER contemplating the rude American ceneralem.

mate of their

tribes in s~uch various lights, after tak~ing a1 view charaser.
of their cuffoms and manners from so many dif-
ferent flations, nothing rernains but to form a ge-
neral effimate of their charac~er, compared with
that of more polished nlations. A human being,
as he comes originally from the hand of natut~e,is
every where the fame. At his first appearance in
the slate ofinfancy, whether it be among the rudest
favlages, or in the most civilized nation, we can

Y Caffani H-illor. de N. Reyno de Gran. P. 300. Pifo,

p. 6. Ellis Voy. 191. Gumilla, i. 333-

dikcern

Vot. II.

a o~ o z discern no quality which marks any diftinalion or

fcL ~ iuperiority. The capacity of improvement seems
to be the fame ; and the talents he may afterwards
acquire, as well as the virtues he may be rendered
capable of exercising, depend, in It great mealure,
upon the Rtate of s~ociety in which he is placed.
To this slate his mind naturally accommodates it-
self, and from it receives discipline and culture.
In proportion to the wants which it accuffoms a
human being to feel, and the funaions in which
these engage him, his intelleaual powers are called
forth. According to the connetions which it
establishes between him and the reft of his [pe-
cles, the affeaions of his heart are exerted. It is
only by attending to this great principle, that we
can discover what is the charader of man in every
different period of his progress.

anenanal IF we apply it to savage life, .and measure the

attainmzents of the human mind in that slate by
this flandard, we shall find, according to an ob·
servation which I have already made, that the in-
telleaual powers of man must be extremely limited
in their operations. They are confined within the
narrow sphere of what he deems necess~ary for sup·
plying his own wants. Whatever has not fame re-
lation to there; neither attraas his attention, nor
is the objeQ of his inquiries. But however nar·
row the bounds may be within which the know·
ledge of a savage is circumscribed, he poffeffes
t-horoughly that small portion which he has at-

tained.

tained. It was not communicated to him by for- B 0 0 x
mal infiruation; he does not attend to~ it as a mat.
ter of mere s~peculation and curiolity; it is the re-
thit of his own observation, the fruit of his own
experience, and accommodated to his condition
and exigencies. While employed in the aaive oc-
cupations of war or of hunting, he often f inds him-
self in difficult and perilous situations, from which
the efforts of his own sagacity muff extricate him.
He is frequently engaged in measures, where every
flep depends upon his oudn ability to decide, where
he muff rely s~olely upon his own penetration to
discern the dangers to which he is expos~ed, and upon
his own wisdom in providing against them. In con-
sequence of this, he feels the knowledge which he
poffeffes, and the efforts which he makes, and either
in deliberation or a~ion rests on himself alone.

As the talents of individuals are exercised and rountcal ta.

improved by such exertions, much political wis- ''nu.
dom is said to be displayed in conduaing the as-
fairs of their small communities. The council of
old men in an American tribe, deliberating upon
its intereits, and determining with refpea to peace
or war, has been compared to the s~enate in more
polished republics. The proceedings of the for-
mer, we are told, are often no less formal and fa-
gacious than those of the latter. Great political
wirldom is exhibited in pondering the various mea-
fures proposed, and in balancing their probable
advantages, against the evils of which they may
be produaive. M~uch address and eloquence are
employed by the leaders, who aspire at acquiring

P 2 such

s oIv o a [uch confidence with their countrymen, as to have

Gz~sSan afcenix~nt in those affemblies'. But, among

savage tribes, the field for displaying political ta.
lents cannot be extensive. WChere the idea ofpri.
vate prope~rty is incomplete, and no criminal ju
rif~di~ion is establishe~d, there is hardly any func.
tion of internal government to exercise. Where
there is no commerce, and fecarcely any intercourse
among separate tribes; where enmity is impla.
cable, and hoffilities are carried on almost without
intenu~idion; there will be few points of public
concern to adjust with their neighbours; and that
department of their affairs which may be denomi.
n~ated foreign, cannot be so intricate as to require
mluch refined policy in conduaing it. Where in-
dlividuals are so thoughtless and improvident as
fecldom to take effeaual precautions for f~elf-pre-
s~ervation, it is vain to exped that public mea·
foires and deliberations will be regulated by the
contemplation of remote events. It is the genius
of savages to aQ from the impulse of prefeat paS-
1100. They have neither foresight nor temper to
form complicated arrangements with refpe8 to
their future condua. The consultations of the
Ahmericans, indeed, are s~o frequent, and their
ne;gaciations are so many Y, and so long protraded,
as to give their proceedings an extraordinary afped
of wifl~om. But this is not owing so much to the
decpth of their s~chemes, as to the coldness and

X Charley. NT. F~r. iii. 269, &c.
r See N OT E LXVI.

phlegll

phlegm of their temper, which renders them flow a 0 0 re
in determining z. If we except the celebrated ~~
league, that united the Five Nations in Canada
into a federal republic, which thall be considered
in its proper place, we can discern few fulch
traces of political wifdlom, among the rude Ame-
rican tribes, as discover any· great degree of fore-
fight or extent of intelleatual abilities. Even
among them, we shall find public measures more
frequently direaed by the impetuous ferocity of
their youth, than regulated by the experience and
wisdom of their old men.

As the condition of man in the savage slate Desree of

is unfavourable to the progress of the understand- aon
ing, it has a tendency liktewif~e, in some ref~peats,
to check the exercise of affeaion, and to render
the heart contraated. The firongeft feeling in the
mind of a favagfe is a s~ense of his own independ-
ence. He has s~acrificed so fmnall a portion of his
natural liberty by becoming a member of society,
that he remains, in a great degree, the sole malter
of his own aaions a. He often takes his refo-
lutions alone, without cons~ulting, or feeling any
conneaion with the persons around him. In many
of his operations, he flands as much detached
hrom the reft of his s~pecies, as if he had formed
no union with them. Conscious how little he de-
pends upon other men, he is apt to view them

* Charley. N. Fr. ili. 2p.·
a Fernandez Mifilon. de los Chlqitc". 33*

P, '2 ith

B O O K with a careless indifference. Even the force of his

S" mind contributes to increase this unconcern, and

as he looks not beyond himself in deliberating
with ref~peQ to the part which he thould act, his
so~licitude about the cons~equences of it seldom ex-
tends farther. He pursues his own career, and
indulges his own fancy, without inquiring or re.
garding whether what he does be agreeable or of-
fenfive to others, whether they may derive bene·
fit, or receive hurt from it. Hence the ungovern-
able caprice of savages, their impatience under
any s~pecies of reffraint, their inability to suppress
or moderate any inclination, the s~corn or negle8
with which they receive advice, their high eftima·
tion of themselves, and their contempt of other
men. Among them, the pride of independence
produces almoit the fame e~ffeas with interested-
ness in a more advanced slate of focietyr, it refers
every thing to a man hims~elf, it leads him to be
indifferent about the manner in which his ac~ions
may affed other men, and renders the gratifica·
tion of his own wishes the measure and enld of con·
dua.

nWlrne~s or To the fame cause may be imputed the hard·
h'"'L ness of heart, and insensibility, remarkrable in all

savage nations. Their minds, rouzed only by
firong emotions, are little s~usceptible of gentle,
delicate, or tender affeaions b. Their union is to
incomplete, that each individual aas as if he re·

b Charley. N. Fr. iii* 309.

tained

tained all his natural rights entire and undimi- B O O K
nifhed. If a favour is conferred upon him, or any C91
beneficial service is performed on his account, he
receives it with much fatisfaeaion, because it con-
tributes to his enjoyment; but this sentiment ex-
tends not beyond himself, it excites no f~edie of
obligation, he neither feels gratitude, nor thinks
of making any return ". Even among persons the
most closely conneaed, the exchange of those good
offices which strengthen attachment, mollify the
hleart, and [weeten the intercours~e of life, is not fre-
quent. The high ideas of independence among the
Americans nouriih a sullen reserve, which keeps
them at a distance from each other. The nearest
relations are mutually afraid to make any demand,
or to solicit any service 6, l6 it iOuld be confi-
dered by the other as imposing a burden, or lay-
ing a restraint upon his will.

I HAVE already remarked the influence of this Irnferbility.

hard unfeeling temper upon domeffic.1ife, with re-
fpeB to the conneaion between husband and wife,
as well as that between parents and children. Its
effeas are no les~s conspicuous, in the performance
of those mutual offices of tenderner~s which the in-
firmities of our nature frequently exaa. Among
some tribes, when any of their number are seized
with any violent disease, they are generally aban-

C Oviedo Hist. lib. xvi. c.2. See NO TE LXVII.
SDe la Potherie, iii. 28.

P 4 doned

B O O K dOned by all around them, who, careelef of their

C·~~ recovery, fly in the utmost consternation from the

supposed danger of infeatione. But even where they
are not thus deserted, the cold indifference with
which they are attended can afford themlittle confo.
lation. No look of sympathy, no s~oothing expref-
fions,no officious s~ervices, contribute to alleviate the
diffrefs of the fufferers, or to make them forget what
they endure f. Their nearest relations will often
refus~e to submit to thP fmallet inconveniency, or to
part with the least trifle, however much it may tend
to their accommodation or relief - So little is the
breast of a savage susceptible of tho~e sentiments
which prompt men to that feeling attention which
mnitigates the calamities of human life, that, in some
provinces of America, the Spaniards have found it
necessary to inforce the common duties of humanity
by politive laws, and to oblige husbands and wives,
parents and children, under severe penalties, to take
care of each other during their ficknefs" Th
fame harfhneifs of temper is flill more conspicuous
in their treatment of the animal creation. Prior to
their intercourse with the people of Europe, the
North Americans had some tame dogs, which ac-
companied them in their hunting excursions, and

*Lettre de P. Cataneo ap. Muratori Christian, i. 309.

Tertre, li* 4I0. Lozano, I00. Herrera, dec. 4. Tib. viii. c. 5*
dec. 5. lib. iv. c, 2. Falkner's Defeript. of Patagonia, 98.

f Gumilla, i. 329. Lozano, 100.
E Garcia Origen, &c. 90. Herrera, dec. 4. lib. viii. c. 5-
SCogulludo Hist. de Yucatham4 P* 300.

served.

ferred them with all the ardour and fidelity pe- B 0 O K
culiar to the Species. But, inficad of that fond fL
attachment w~hich the hunter naturally feels to-
wards those uf'eful companions of his toils, they
requite their services with negleQ, seldom feed,
and never caress them i. In other provinces, the
Americans have become acquainted with the do.
meffic animals of Europe, and avail themselves
of their service; but it is universally observed
that they always treat them harshly k, and never
employ any method either for breaking or ma-
naging them, but force and cruelty. In every
part of the deportment of man in his savage slate,
wnhether towards his equals of the human species,
or towards the animals below him, we recognize
the fame charaater, and trace the operations of a
mind intent on its own gratifications, and regu-
lated by its own caprice, with little attention or
fenibility to the s~entiments and fee~ingrs of the be-
ings around him.

AFTER explaining how unfavourable the savage Taciturnity·
slate is to the cultivation of the understanding, and
to the improvement of the heart, I thould not
have thought it necessary to mention what may b~e
deemed its lesser defec~s, if the chara~ter ofna-
tions, as well as of individuals, were nolt often more
diltinelly marked by circumitances apparently tri-

iCharley. N. Fr. iii. ri9. 337*
k Ulloa Natic. American. 3 -2

71&1,

B O 0 K vial, than by those of greater moment. A fa·

I ~, Ivage, frequently placed in situations of danger and

diffrefs, depending on himself alone, and wrapt
up in his own thoughts and schemes, is a serious
melancholy animal. His attention to others is
small. The range of his own ideas is narrow.,
Hence that taciturnity which is so difguffing to men
accuffomed to the open intercourse of social con-
verfation. When they are not engaged in adion,
the Americans often fit whole days in one posture,
without opening their lips'. When they go forth
to war, or to the chace, they usually march in a line
at some difiance fr-om one another, and without
exchanging a word. The fame profound filenceis
observed when they row together in a canoe". It
is only when they are animated by intoxicating li.
quors, or rouzed by the jollity .of the feffival and
dance, that they become gay and convrerfible.

cmning. To the fame cadies may be imputed the re.

fined cunning with which they form and execute
their s~chemes. Men, who are not habituated to a
liberal communication of their own s~entiments and
wishes, are apt to be so diffruliful, as to place
little confidence in others, and to have recourfeto
an insidious craft in accomplishing their own pur·
poles. In civilized life, thos~e persons, who, by
their situation, have but a few obj~ec'ts of pursuit

SVoyage de BEouguer, 10;.
P Charley. iii. 349*0

on which their minds incess~antly dwell, are most B o o K
remarkable for low artifice in carrying on their c-4c
little projeas. Among savag-es, whose views are
equally confined, and their attention no les~s perse-
vering, those circumfiances muff operate frill more
powerfully, and gradually accuffom them to a dif.-
ingenuous subtlety in all their tranfamions. The
force of this is increased by habits which they ac-
quire in carrying on the two most interesting ope-
rations wherein they are engaged. WJ\ith thern
war is a fyfitem of craft, in which they trust for
success to firatagem more than to open force, and
have their invention continually on the stretch to
circumvent and s~urpris~e their enemies. As hunt-
ers, it is their constant objea to ensnare, in order
that they n~ay deffroy. Accordingly, art and cun-
ning have been universally observed as distinguish-
ing chara~teriftics of all savages. The people of
the rude tribes of America are remarkable for their
artifice and duplicity. Impenetrably s~ecret in form-
ing their measures, they purs~ue them with a patient
undeviating attention, and there is no refinement of
diflimulation which they cannot employ, in order to
insure foccefs. The natives of Peru were engaged
above thirty years, in concerting the plan of that
infurreaion which took place under the vice-royalty
of the marquis de Villa-Garcia; and though it was
communicated to a great number of persons in all
different ranks, no indication of it ever transpired
during that long period; no man betrayed his
truit, or by an unguarded look, or rash~ word,

gave

B OIVO. K gave rife to any f~uipicion of what was intended'.

L~Lv13The difirmulation and craft of individuals is no less

rernarkable than that of nations. WShen set upon
deceiving, they w~rap themselves up so artificially,
that it is impossible to penetrate into their inten·
tions, ok to detea their deig~ns o

viltles. BUTr if there be defeas or vices peculiar to the

savage slate, there are !lkewife virtues which it in·
spires, and good qualities, to the exercise of which

Independent it is friendly. The bonds of society fit so loose
fpiri. upon the members of the more rude American

tribes, that they hardly feel any reffr-aint. Hence
the spirit of independence, which is the pride of a
fatvag~e, and w~hich he considers as the unalienable
prerog~ative of: man. Incapable of controul, and
disdaining to acknowrledge any fixperior, his inind,
though limited in its powers, and erring in inany
of its purs~uits, acquires such elevation by the con·
fciouflefs of its own freedom, that he aas on fame
occasions with afton~ihing force, and perseverance,
and dig~nityr.

rontituzr. As inldependence nouriahes this high spirit

amongf savages, the perpetual wars in which the)
are engagred call it forth into ac'ion., Such lone
intervals oftranquillityr as are frequent~ in polinhed
facieties are unk~nown ini the savage: state. Their

" Voyage <!e Ulle·a, ii- 3'9.

ennut:,,

enmities, as I have observed, are implacable and 3 O O K
immortal. The valour of the young men is never I-
allowed to ruff in inaaion. The hatchet is always
in their hand, either for attack or defence. Even
in their hunting excurflons, they must: be on their
guard againfit sur-prise from the hoffile tribes, by
which they are furroundled. Accuffomed to con-
tinual alarms, they growv familiar with danger;
courage becomes an habitual virtue, resulting na-
turally from their situation, and firengthened by
conflant exertions. The mode of displaying forti-
tude may not be the fame in fmnall and rude comm-
munities,, as in more powerful and civilized slates.
Their fyfitem of war, and standard of valour, may
be formed upon different principles, but in no situ-
ation does the human mind rife more fulperior to
the sense of danger, or the dread of death, than in
its most simple and uncultivated slate.

ANOTHER Virtue remarkable among savages, is Antachment

to their

attachment to the community of which they are commumity,
members. From the nature of their political
union, one might expeca this tie: to be extremely
feeble. But there are circumffances which render
the influence, ever of thepir loos~e mode of affocia-
tion, very powerful. The American tribes are
small; combined against their nleighbours, in pro-
fecution of ancient enmities, or in avenging re-
cent inljuries, their interests and operations are nei-
ther numerous nor complex. There are objeds,
which the uncultivated underflanding of a sa3vage

can

B O O K can comprehend. His heart is capable of form·
*y~ ing connedions, ~which are so little diffufed. He

assents with warmth to public measures, diaated
by passions limilar to those which direa his own
conduat. Hence the ardour with which indi.
viduals undertake the most perilous s~ervice, when
the community deems it necess~ary. Hence their
fierce and~deep-rooted antipathy to the public ene.
mies. Hence their zeal for the honour of their
tribe, and that love of their country, which
prompts them to brave danger that it may triumph,
and to endure the most exquisite torments, without
a groan, that it may not be disgraced.

smatsfaaon THUS, in eVery situation where a human being
ow cni. can be placed, even the most unfavourable, there
tion. are virtues which peculiarly belong to it; there

are affeaions which it calls forth; there is a [pe-
cies of happiness which it yields. Nature, with
most beneficent intention, conciliates and forms
the mind to its condition; the ideas and wishes of
man extend not beyond that slate of society to
which he is habituated. What it presents as ob·
jeas of contemplation or enjoymlent, fills and fa
tisfies his mind, and he can hardly conceive any
other mode of life to be pleasant, or even to·
lerable. The Tartar, accuffomed to roam over
extensive plains, and to fu~ibift on the produa of
his herds, imprecates upon his enemy, as the
greatest of all curses, that he may be condemned
to reside in one place, and to be nourished with

I7 the

the top of a weed. The rude Americans, fond of B O O K
their own pursuits, and fadtisfied with their own 3
lot, are equally unable to con'~prehend the inten-
tion or utility of the various accommodations,
which, in more polished s~ociety, are deemed essen-
tial to the comfort of life. Far from complaining
of their own f ituation, or viewing that of men in
a more improved slate with admiration or envy,
they regard themselves as the flandard of excel-
lence, as beings the best entitled, as well as the
molt perfeAly qtalified, to enjoy real happiners.
Unaccuffomed to any restraint upon their will or
their a8ions, they behold with amazement the in-
equality of rank, and the subordination which
take place in civilized life, and confider the volun-
tary fubmillion of one man to an~other, as a renun-
clation, no less base than unaccountable, of the
first diftinaion of humanity. Void of foresight, as
well as free from care themfetlves, and delighted
with that slate of indolent s~ecurity, they wonder at
the anxious precautions, the uncealing induffry,
and complicated arrangements of Europeans, in
guarding against difiant evils, or providing for fu-
ture wants ; and they often exclaim againlk their
prepofferous folly, in thus multiplying the troubles,
and increasing the labour of life:. This preference
of their own manners is conspicuous on every oc-
cation. Even the names, by which the various
nations with to be difinguifh~ed, are affimed from

* Challey. N. Fr. ill. 308. Lahoutan, it, 97.

O ~. K this idea of their own pre-eminence. The appel.
\-yJlation which the Iroquois give to themselves is,

th~e chief of men Y. Caraibe, the original name of
the fierce inhabitants of the Windward Islands,
signifies the warlike people 9. The Cherokees, from
an idea of their own s~uperiority, call the Euro.
peans Nothings, or the accursed r~ace, and aflfume
to themselves the name of the beloved people'.
The fame principle regulated the notions of the
other Americans concerning the Europeans; for
although, at firit, they were filled with affonifn·
mnent at their arts, and with dread of their power,
they soon came to abate their estimation of men,
whose maxims of life were so different from their
own. Hence they called them the froth of the
sea, men without father or mother. They sup-
posed, that either they had no country of their
own, and therefore invaded that which belonged
to others I ; or that, being deff itute of the necef-
faries of life at home, they were obliged to roam
over the ocean, in or~der to rob such as were more
amply provided.

MEN, thus satisfied with their condition, are far

from any inclination to relinquish their own ha-
bits, or to adopt those of civilized life. The
transition is too violent to be suddenly made.
Even where endeavours have been used to wean a

P Colden, i* 3. 4 Rochefort Hill. des Antilles, 455'
r Adair, Hirt. of Amner. Indians, p. 32.
O Benzon. Hist. Novi Orbis, lib. iii. c. 21.

2 x savage

savage from his own cuffoms, and to rencler the n op o
accommodations of polished s~ociety familiar to cs
him; even where he has been allowed to taste
of those pleasures, and has been honoured with
those diftinaions, which are the chief objeas of
our desire, he droops and languishes under the re-
ftraint of laws and forms, he seizes the firfL oppor-
tunity of breaking loose from them, and returns
with trancoort to the forest or the wild, where
he can enjoy a careless and uncontrouled free-
dom '.

THUs I have finished a laborious delineation of

the charader and mlanners of the uncivilized tribes
kcattered over the vast continent of America. In
this, I aspire not at rivalling the great matters who
have painted and adorned savage life, either in
boldness of design, or in the glow and beauty of
their colouring. I am satisfied with the more
humble merit of having perfiffed with patient in-
dultry, in viewing my f~ubjea in many various
lights, and colleaing from the moss accurate ob-
servers such detached, and often minute features,
as might enable me to exhibit a portrait that re-
fembles the original.

BEFORE I close this part of my work, one ob-- Generalcau-

tion with

s~ervation more is necessary, in order to juffify the rerpeat to
conclusions which I have formed, or to prevent

sCharley. N. Fr. iii. 322*

VToI. II. O the

a o o so the millakes into which s~uch as examine thetamag

ccl, fall.· In contemplating the inhabitants of a coun·

try so widely extended as America, great attention
thould be paid to the diversity of climates under
which they are placed. The influence of this I
have pointed out with refpeac to several important
particulars, which have been the objea of te.
search; but even where it has not been men·
tioned, it ought not to be overlooked. The pro.
vinces of Aimerica are of such dif ferent tempera-
ment, that this alone is fuffcient to conflitute a
diflinaion between their inhabitants. In every
part of the earth where man exists, the power of
climate operates, wvith decisive influence, uponhis
condition and charader. In those countries which
approach near to the extremes of heat or cold, this
influence is so conspicuous as to firike every eye.
WVhether we confider man merely as an animal,
or as being endowed with rational powers which
fit him for sativity and speculation, we shall find
that he has uniformly attained the greatest perfec.
tion of which his nature is capable, in the tempe·
rate regions of the globe. There his conflitution
is aolk vigorous, his organs most acute, and his
form most beautiful. There, too, he poffeffesa
superior extent of capacity, greater fertility of
imagination, more enterprising courage, and a
s~ensibility of heart which gives birth to desires,
nfot only ardent, but persevering. In this favourite
iituation he has displayed the utmost efforts of his
genius, in literature, in policy, in commerce, in

war,

war, and in all the arts which improve or embel. n O, 0 5
lith lifeu ".~c

TmIs powerful operation of climate is felt most
sensibly by rude nations, and produces greater es-
fefts than in societies more improved. The ta-
lents of civilized men a~re continually exerted in ren-
dering their own condition more comfortable ; and
by their ingenuity and inventions, they can, in a
great measure, fulpply the defeas, and guard
against the inconveniences of any climate. But the
improvident savage is affeaed by every circum-
flance peculiar to his situation. H-e takes no pre-
caution either to mitigate or to improve it. Like
a plant, or an animal, he is formed by the climate
under which he is placed, and feels the full force
of its influence.

IN furvreying the rude nations of America, this
natural diftinaion between the inhabitants of the
temperate and torrid zones is very remarkable. They
may, accordingly, be divided into two great class~es.
The one comprehends all the North Americans,
from the river St. Laurence to the Gulf of Mexico,
together with the people of Chili, and a few small
tribes towards the extremity of the southern conti-
nent. To the other belong all the inhabitants of
the islands, an d those f~ettled in the various provinces
which extend from the isthmus of Darien almoff to

SDr. Fergufon's Elfay on the HifU. of Clivil Society, part

B O Op K the southern confines of Brasil, along the east fide of

CMy the Andes. In the former, which comprehends all

the regions of the temperate zone that in America
are inhabited, the human species appears manifeltly
to be more perfed. The natives are more robufr,
more aaive, more intelligent, andmorecourageous.
'They possess, in the most eminent degree, that
force of mind, and love of independence, which l
have pointed out as the chief virtues of man in his
savage state. They have defended their liberty
with persevering fortitude against the Europeans,
who s~ubdued the other rude nations of America
with the greatest ease. The natives of the tempe·
rate zone are the only people in the New World
who are indebted for their freedom to their own
valour. The North Americans, though long en·
compassed by three formidable European powers,
flill retain part of their original poff~eflions, and
continue to exist as independent nations. The
people of Chili, though early invaded, flill mala-
tain a gallant contest with the Spaniards, and have
sett bounds to their encroachments; whereas, in
the warmer regions, men are more feeble in their
frame, less vigorous in the efforts of their mind, of
a gentle but daffardly spirit, more enslaved by plea-
sure, and more funk in indolence. Accordingly,
it is in the torrid zone that the Europeans have
most completely established their dominion over
America; the most fertile and desirable provinces
in it are fubjeaed to their yoke; and if several
tribes there still enjoy independence, it is either
because they have never been attacked by an enemy

already

already satiated with conquest, and poffeffed of B O O K
larger territories than he was able to occupy, or My
because they have been saved from oppression by
their remote and inaccefirble situation.

CONs~rcuous as this diftinalon may Ippear be-

tween the inhabitants of those different regions,
it is not, however, universal. Moral and political
causes, as I have formerly observed, aff~e& the
difpolition and charader of individuals as well as
nations, still more powerfully than the influence
of climate. There are, accordingly, some tribes,
in various parts of the torrid zone, poffeffed of
courage, high spirit, and the love of independnce,
in a degree hardly inferior to the natives of more
temperate climates. W~e are too little acquainted
with the history of those people, to be able to
trace the s~everal circumitances in their progres~s
and condition, to which they are indebted for this
remarkable pre-eminence. The faB, neverthe-
less, is certain. As early as the first voyage
of Columbus, he received information that f~eve-
ral of the islands were inhabited by the CaribbGees,
a fierce race of men, nowise res~embling their
feeble and timid neighbours. In his second ex-
pedition to the New WTorld, he found this in-
formation to be juff , and u r s himself a witness of
their intrepid valour x. The fame charaaer they
have maintained invariably in all subsequent con-

Life of Columb~us, c. 47, 48. See N'OTE LXVIII.

tests

3

B ONO K tests with the people of Europe J ; and, even in our

ccJown times, we have seen them inake a gallant fland

in defence of the last territory which the rapacity of
their invaders had left in their poffeffion Z. Some
nations in Brasil were no less eminent for vig~our of
mind, and bravery in war a. The people of the
isthmus oflDarien boldly met the Spaniards in the
field, and frequently repelled those formidable in·
vaders b. Other inflances might be produced. It
is not attending to any single cause orrprinciple,
how powerful and extensive f~oeverits influence may
appear, that lye can explain the ac~ions, or account
for the charrlter, of men. Even the lawof climate,
more universal, perhaps, in its operation than any
that affeas the human [pecies, cannot be applied,
in judging, of their condua, without many excep·
tions

Y Rochefort H~it. de~s Antilles, 53r.
SSee NOTE LXIX.
SLery ap. de Bry, ifi. 207, &tc.
b Herrera, de~c. i. lib. x. c, I5> &c.; dec. 2. passim.

# BOOK V.

TH E

HISTORY

AMEC~RICA'

B O OK V.

W HEN Grijalva returned to Cuba, he found n o 0 K

the armamlent destined to attempt the con- ,

quest of that rich country which he had disco- sr,8ios.
vered, almost complete. Not only ambition, but o~f Venl:afque
avarice, had urged Velas~quez to hasten his prepa- New Spain.
Tations; and havings such a profped of gratifying
both, he had advanced considerable sums out of
his private fortune towards defraying the ex~pence of
the expedition. At the fame time, he exerted his
influence as governor, in engaging the most diftin-
gblfhed persons in the colony to undertake the ser-
vice i. At a time when the spirit of the Spanish na-
tion was adventurous to exceifs, a number of soldiers,
eager to embark in any daring enterprise, soon ap-
peared. But it was not s~o easy to find a person quali-
fied to take the command in an expedition ofi omuch

a See NOTE LXYX.

4L importance;

B O O K importance; and the charaater of Velasquez, who
<.--- ... had the right of nomination, greatly inlcreafed the

Is'S. difficulty of the choice. Though of most aspiring

ambition, and not destitute of talents for govern-
ment, he poffeffed neither such courage, nor such
vigour and adivity of mind, as to undertake in
person the condua of the armament which he was
preparing. In this emnbarraffing situation, he
formed the chimerical scheme, not only of atchiev-
ing great exploits by a deputy, but of securing to
himself the glory of conquests which were to be
made by another. In the execution of this plan,
he fondly aimed at reconciling contradiaions. He
was solicitous to chuf~e a commander of intrepid
resolution, and of superior abilities, because he
knew there to be requisite in order to enl~ure fuc-
cers; but, at the fame time, from the jealousy
natural to little minds, he wished this person to be
of a spirit so tame and obfeqluious, as to be en-
tirely dependant on his will. But when he came
to apply those ideas in forming an opinion con-
cerning the several offi~cers who occurred to his
thoughts as worthy of being entruffed with the
command, he soon perceived that it was impollible
to find such incompatible qualities united in one
chara~ter. Such as were distinguish~ed for courage
and talents were too high-f~pirited to be pafirve in-
firuments in his hand. Those who appeared more
gentle and tradable, w~ere destitute of capacity,
and unequal to the charge. This augmented his
perplexity and his fears. He deliberated long,

and

and with much solicitude, and was flill wavering B O ~O K
in his choice, when Amador de L~ares, the royal L-h
treafilrer in Cuba, and Andres Duero, his own 'sis,
iecretary, the two persons in whom he chiefly con-
sided, were encouraged by this irresolution to pro-
pole a new candidate, and they supported their
recommendation with such afirduity and addres~s,
that, no less fatally for Velasquez than happily for
their country, it proved fuccefsful b

THE man whom they pointed out to him waS He anpoints

cor es com.

Fernando Cortes. He was born at Medellin, a mander.
small town in Effremadura, in the year one thou-
sand four hundred and eighty-five, and descended
from a family of noble blood, but of very mode-
rate fortune. Being originally destined by his
parents to the fludy oflaw, as the most likely
method of bettering his condition, he was sent
early to the university of Salamanca, where he
imbibed some tinc~ure of learning. But he was
soon difguffed with an academic life, which did
not fait his ardent and restless genius, and retired
to Medellin, where he gave hims~elf up entirely to
aalve sports and rnartial exercises. At this pe-
riod of life, he was s~o impetuous, so overbearing,
and To diflipated, that his father was glad to com-
ply with his inclination, and fend him abroad as
an adventurer in arms. There were in that age
two consp~icuous theatres, on which fach of the

b B. Diaz. c. l9. Gomara Cron. c. 7. Herrera, dec. 2.

lib. iii. c. I J.

Spaniih

B o 0 K Spanish1 youth as courted military glory might dil.

~-cJ play their valour; one in Italy, under the com.
238. nand of the Great Captain; the other in theNew

World. Cortes preferred the former, but was
prevented by indifpolfition from embarking~ with a
reinforcement of troops sent to Naples. Upon
this disappointment h'e turned his views towards
America, whither he was allured by the pro.
s~ped of the advantages which he might derive
from the patronage of Ovando c, the governor of
Hispaniola, who was his kinfinan. When he
landed at St. Domingo in one thoaufand five hun-
dred and four, his reception was such as equalled
his most s~anguine hopes, and he was employed
-by the governor in several honourable and lucra.
tive flations. There, however, did not satisfy his
ambition; and in the year one thoufalnd five hun.
dred and eleven, he obtained permillion to ac.
company Diego Velasquez in his expedition to
Cuba. In this service he dii~inguifh~ed himself 10
much,' that, notwithffanding some violent contells
wvith Velasquez, occafloned by trivial events, un-
wor-thyof remembrance, he was at length taken into
favour, and received an amnple concellion of landsS
and of Indians, the recompence usually beffowed
upon adventurers in the N1Pew W~orld .

TIIonon- Cortes had not hitherto acted in high

command, he had dif'played furch qualities in fe·

C See NOTE LXXI.

Gomara Cron~. c.1 , 2, 3-

veral scenes of difficulty and danger, as ralled uni- a 0~ 0
versal expe~tation, and turned the eyes of his c
countrymen towards him, as one capable of per- unS.S
forming great things. The turbulence of youth,
as soon as he found objeas and occupations
fauited to the ardour of his mind, gradually sub-
sided, and fettled into a habit of regular indefa-
tigable a~ivity. The impetuosity of his temper,
wvhen he came to ac? with his equals, inf~enfbly
abated, by being kept under restraint, and mel-
lowed into a cordial s~oldierly frankness. Ther~e
qualities were accompained with calm prudence in
concerting his schemes, with pers~evering vigour in
executing them, and with what is peculiar to f~u-
perior genius, the art of gaining the confidence
and governing the minds of men. To all which
were added the inferior accomplishments that strike
the vulgar, and command their refpeQ; a grace-
ful person, a winning afp~eQ, extraordinary ad-
drers in martial exercises, and a conflitution of
such vigour as to be capable of enduring any fa-
tlgue.

As soon as Cortes was mentioned to Velasquez

by his two confidents, he flattered himself that he
had at length found what he had hitherto fought
in vain, a man with talents for command, but
not an objea of jealousy. Neither the rank nor
the fortune of Cortes, as he imagined, were foch
that he could aspire at independence. He had
reason to believe, that by his own readiness to

bury

B O ~O K bury ancient animofities in oblivion, as well as his

~cc~ liberality in conferring s~everal recent favours, he
's~p had already gained the good-will of Cortes, and

hoped, by this new and unexpeaed mark of con-
fidence, that he might attach him for ever to his
interest.

soon he. CORTES, receiving his commifiron with the
ICom~es Jham warmest expressions of refpea and gratitude to the
Odtober 23* governor, immediately ereaed his flandard before

his own house, appeared in a military dress, and
assumed all the enligns of his new dignity. His
utmolt influence and aaivity were exerted in per-
fuading many of his friends to engage in the ser-
vice, and in urging forward the preparations for
the voyage. All his own funds, together with
what money he could raise by mortgaging his
lands and Indians, were expended in purchasing
military flores and proviflons, or in s~upplying the
want1s of fuLch of his of~ieers as were unable to
equip themnfelves in a manner suited to their
rank e. Inoffenfive, and even laudable as this con·
duA was, his disappointed competitors were mali-
clous enough to give it a turn to his disadvantage.
They represented him as aiming already, with
little difg~ulfe, at eftablifhingr an independent au.
thority over his troops, anld endeavouring to secure
their refp~eQ or love by his ostentatious and in-
tcrefted liberality. "I hey reminded Velasquez of

C See NOTIE LXXII.

his former diffenflons with the man in whom he B O O K
now reposed so much confidence, and foretold that cM~
Cortes would be more apt to avail himself of the 'Ss
power, which the governor was inconsiderately
putting in his hands, to avenge past injuries,
than to requite recent obligations. There infinua-
tions made such impreifion upon the Cfupicious
mind of Velasquez, that Cortes soon oblerved some
lymptoms of a growing alienation and diffruit in
his behaviour, and was advised by Lares and
Duero, to hallen his departure, before these thouldi
become so confirmed, as to break out with open
violence. Fully f~enfble of this danger, he urged
forward his preparations with such rapidity, that
he set fail from St. Jago de Cuba on the eighteenth
of November, Velasquez accompanying him to
the thore, and taking leave of him with an ap-
pearance of perfed friendsh~ip and confic'ence,
though he had secretly given it in charge to some
of Cortes's officers, to keep a watchful eye upon
every part of their commander's conduat f.

CORTES proceeded to Trinidad, a finall fettle- Endeavours

ment on the fame fide of the island, where he was thiePfoiE:
joined by several adventurers, and received a sup- communlon,
ply of proviflons and military flores, of which his
flock was still very incomplete. He had hardly
left St. Jago, when the jealousy which had been
working in the breast of Velasquez, grew so vio-

* Comara Cron. c. 7. B. Diaz. c. 20.

lent,

B 0~ 0 lent, that it was impoflible to suppress it. The

c ~~armament was no longer under his own eye and

''S. dire~ion; and he felt, that as his power over it

ceased, that of Cortes would become more absolute.
Imagination now aggravated every circumitance,
which had formerly excited suspicion: the rivals
of Cortes induffrioufly threw in refle~ions whids
increas~ed his fears; and with no less art than ina.
lice they called s~uperstition to their aid, employing
the prediaions of an affrologer in order to com.
plete: the alarm. All thes~e, by their united opera-
tion, produced the desired effeat. Velasquez re.
pented bitterly of his own imprudence, in having
committed a truss of so much importance to a per.
son whose fidelity appeared so doubtful, and halfily
dispatched infiruaions to Trinidad, empowering
Verdugo, the chief magiffrate there, to deprive
Cortes of his commi~ffon. But Cortes had already
made s~uch progress in gainling the efleem and con.
fidence of his troops, that, finding officers as well
as soldiers equally zealous to support his authority,
he soothed or intimidated Verdugo, and was per-
mitted to depart from Trinidad without molefta.
tion.

ana to Ir FaoI1 Trinidad Cortes failed for the Havana,
tulm Iunder
arren. in order to raise more s~oldiers, and to complete

the viaualling of his fleet. There several persons
of diftinaion entered into the service, and engaged
to fopply what provilions were still wanting; but
as it was necessary to allow them some time for

21 performing

performing what they had promis~ed, Velasquez, a o, a
sensible that he ought no longer to rely on a man --
of whom he had so openly discovered his dific~ult
availed himself of the interval, which this un-
avoidable delay afforded,, in order to make one
attempt more to wvreft the command out of the
hands of Cortes. H-e loudly complained of V~er-
dugo's condu~t, acculing him either of childilh
facility, or of manifest treachery, in fuffering
Cortes to escape from Trinidad1. Anxiousto guard
against a second disappointment, he sent a person
of confidence to the H-avana, with peremptory in-
jundions to Pedro B~arba, his lieutenant-governor
in that colony, instantly to arrest Cortes, to fend
him prisoner to St. Jago under a firong guard, and
to countermand the failingr of the armament until
he ihould receive farther orders. H~e wrote like-
wife to the principal officers, requiring them to
allift B3arba in executings what he had given him
in charge. But before the arrival of his mcifen-
ger, a Francifean friar of St. Jago had secretly
conveyed an account of this interesting tranfac-
tion to Bartholomew de Olmedo, a monk of the
dame order, who ac~ed as chaplain to the expedi-
tion.

CORTES, forewarned of the danger, had time corres Oe-

to take precautions for his own safety. Hlis REC',wa. n
fiRIdt ep was to find some pretext for remlovingr (' nuewSh
from the H~avana Diego de Ordaz, an ofiice~r of ' `"`
gnreat merit, but in whom, on account of his

KinOH'H

B qOO K known attachment to Velasquez, he could not

Sconfide in this trying and delicate junaure. He
sis.· gave him the command of a vessel, deffined to

take on board some provilions in a fmnall harbour
beyond Cape Antonio, and thus made s~ure of his
absence, without seeming to fulfpe8 his fidelity.
When he was gone, Cortes no longer concealed
the intentions of Velasquez from his troops; and
as oficers and soldiers were equally impatient to
set out on an expedition, in preparing for which
moll of them had expended all their fortunes, they
e~xpressed their affonifhment and indignation at
that illiberal jealousy, to which the governor was
about to fagcrifice, not only the honour of their ge·
neral, but all their sanguine hopes of glory and
wealth. With one voice they intreated that he
would not abandon the important flation to which
he had s~uch a good title. They conjqred him
not to deprive them of a leader whom they fol.
10wed with such well-founded confidentce, and of·
fered to ifhed the last drop of their blood in main·
taining his authority. Cortes was easily induced to
comply with what he hims~elf so ardently desired.
He fwhore that he would never desert soldiers who
had given him s~uch a signal proof of their attach.
ment, and promis~ed instantly to condua them to
that rich country, which had been so long the ob.
jet of their thoughts and wishes. This declaration
was received with transports of military applause,
accompanied with threats and imprecations againlt
all who should presume to call in qlueftion the ju-

rididi~ion

rifdidtion of their general, or to obffruft the execu. a 0 o re
tion of his designs. s...v-..

EvRaY thing was now ready for their departure: The amount
but though this expedition was fitted out by the n oe.
united effort of the Spanish power in Cuba;
though every settlement had contributed its quota
of men and proviflons; though the governor had
laid out considerable sums, and each adventurer
had exhauffed his flock, or firained his credit, the
poverty of the preparations was such as rimuft alto-
nifh the present age, and bore, indeed, no refenr
blance to an armament deffined for the conquent
of a great empire. The fleet consisted of eleven
vessels; the largest of a hundred tons, which was
dignified by the name of Admiral; th~ree of fe-
venty or eighty tons, and the reft fmnall open
barks. On board of ther~e were fix hundred and
seventeen men; of which five hundred and eight
belonged to the land service, and a hundred and
nine were seamen or artificers. The s~oldiers were
divided into eleven companies, according to the
number of the ships; to each of which Cortes ap-
pointed a captain, and committed to him the com-
mand of the vessel while at sea, and of the men
when on shore F. As the use of fire-arms among
the nations of Europe was hitherto confined to a
few battalions of regularly disciplined infantry,
only thirteen soldiers were armed with muikets,

a Se~e N 'O TE LXXIII.

Vot. II. thirty.

B O O K thirty-two were crofs-bow-men, . and the reft had

[c words and spears.. Instead of the usual defensive
armour, which must have been cumbersome in a
hot climate, the s~oldiers wore jackiets quilted
with cotton, which exuperience had taught the Spa.
niards to be a fuff~cient proteation againit the wea.
pons of the Americans. They had only sixteen
horses, ten fmnall field-plleces, and four falconetsb.

F~·~b~' s· Wrra this slender and ill-provided train did

MTuafrom Cortes set fail, to make war upon a monarch

whose dominions were more' extensive than all the
kingdoms fubjeB to the Spanish crown. As reli-
gious enthufiafmn always mingled with the spirit of
adventure in the New W~orld, and, by a combina.
tion Ltill more ithange, united with avarice, in
prompting the Spaniards to all their enterprises, a
large cross was displayed in their standards, with
this infeription, Let us follow the cr-oss, for unr~ie
this jin we fall con92ucr.

So powerfully were Cortes and his followfers

animated with both these paflions, that no lel
eager to plunder the opulent country whither they
were bound, than zealous to propag~ate the Christ-
fan faith among its inhabitants, they s~et out, not
with the solicitude natural to men going upon dan.
gerous services, but with that confidence wihich
arises fron> security of fuecefs, and certainty of the
divine proteation.

·' . Dias. c. I9.

As Cortes had determined to touch at every a op 0 5

place which Grijalva had vilited, he fleered di- j
realy towards the island of Cozumel; there he To lc~etdat
had the good fortune to redeem Jerome de Agui- co uses'
lar, a Spaniard., who had been eight years a pri.
foner among the Indians. This man was perfeely
acquainted with a diale~t of their language, under-
4004o through a large extent of country, and pof-
ifeting besides a considerable share of prudence
and sagacity, proved extremely useful as an inter-
preter. From Cozumel, Cortes proceeded to the unres 4,
river of Tabasco, in hopes of a reception as g;~a Ta-
friendly as Grijalva had met with there, and of
finding gold in the fame abundance; but the dif.
polition of the natives, from some unknown caure,
was totally changed. After repeated endeavours
to conciliate their good will, he was confirained to
have recourse to violence. Though the forces of
the enemy were numerous, and advanced with ex.
traordinary courage, they were routed, with great
slaughter, in fCeveral fuccefiive a~ions. The lots
which they f~ufained, and flill more the afftonifh.
ment and terror excited by the deffrudive effe61
of the fire-arms, and the dreadfcul appearance of
the horses, humbled their fierce spirits, and inc
duced them to sue for peace. They acknowe
ledged the king of Calkile as their forereign, and
granted Cortes a supply of provilions, with a preL
feat of cotton Rgarments, some gold, and twenty
female slaves I,

I See ~N OTE LXXIV.

1 O O K CORTEs continued his course to the wellward,

L~J keeping as near the thore as possible, in order to

Atrr ?s'at observe the country; but could discover no pro-
ifan"" de pCT plaCe fOr landing, until he'arrived at St. Juan
April 2. de U~lua k. As he entered this harbour, a large

canoe, full of people, among whom were twfo
who f~eemned to be pers~ons of diftinaionl, approach.
Sed his thip, with signs of peace and amity. They
came on board without fear or diffruff, and ad.
dressed him in a most refpeaful manner, but in a
language altogether unknown to Aguilar. Cortes
was in the utmost perplexity and diffrefs, at an
event of which he inflantly foresaw all the confe.
quences, and already felt the hesitation and uncer·
tainty with which he thould~ carry on the great
fCchemes which he meditated, if, in his trant-
a~ions with the natives, he muff depend entirely
upon such an imperfedt, ambiguous, and conjec·
tural mode of communication, as the use of signs.
But he did not remain long in this embarrassing
situation: a fortunate accident extricated him,
when his own sagacity could have contributed
little towards his relief. One of the female slaves,
whom he had received from the cazique of Ta-
baf~co, happened to be present at the first inter.
view between Cortes and his new gueits. She per·
ceived his diarefs, as well as the confusion of
Aguilar; and as the perfea~ly underflood the
IMexican language, she explained what they had

k @ D'aZ. c. I-36~. Comara Cron. c. 18-23. Her*

rera, dec. 2. lib. iv. c. rr, &c.

said inthe Yucatan tongue, with which Aguilar was a o~ r
acquainted. This woman, known afterwards by
the name of IDonna Marina, and who makes a con- S9
[picuous figure in the hillory ,0f the New W~orld,
where great revolutions were brought about by
[mall causes and inconsiderable infiruments, was
born in one of the provinces of the Mex-ican em-
pire. Having been fold as a slave in the early part
of her life, after a variety of adventures the fell
into the hands of the Tabafcans, and had refidedi
long enough among them to acquire their lan-
guage, without losing the use of her own. Though
it was both tedious and troublesome to converse
by the intervention of two different interpreters,
Cortes was to highly pleased with having disco-
vered this method of carrying on some inter-
course with the people of a country into which he
was determined to penetrate, that in the transports
of his joy he considered it as a visible interpolition
of Providence in his favour'.

HE now learned, that the two persons whom he Landshis

hald received on board of his thlip were deputieS troops.
from Teutile and Pilpatoe, two officers entrufled
with the government of that province, by a great
monarch, whom they called Montezuma - and that
they were s~ent to inquire what his intentions were
in visiting their coast, and to offer him what al-

I B. Iiaz. c. 37,38, 39. Gomara Cron. c. 5, 26. Her-

rera, dec. 2. lib. v. c. 4-

Rs r ilance

d op o K fftance he might need, in order to continue his

~s;LrJvoyage. Cortes, struck with the appearance of
"'59 thos~e people, as well as the tenor of the message,

stfibred them, ini refpeaful terms, that he approach·
ed their country with most friendly sentiments, and
came to propose matters of great importance to the
ivelfare of their prince and his kingdom, which he
would unfold more fully, in person, to the go.
vernor and the general. Next morning, without
waiting for any answer, he landed his troops, his
horses, , and artillery; and having chosen proper
ground, began to erea huts for his men, and to
fortify his camp. The natives, inficad of oppof.
ing the entrance of thos~e fatal guests into their
country, affiftedd them in all their operations, with
an alacrity of which they had ere long good reafoa
to repent.

HisArain- NEXT day Teutile and Pilpatoe entered the

the Inexi- Spanish camp with a numerous retinue, and Cortes

considering them as the miniffers of a great
snonarch, entitled to a degree of attention very
different from that which the Spaniards were ac-
cuffomed to pay 40 the petty Caziques, with
whom they had intercourse in the isles, received
them with much formal ceremony. He informed
them, that he came as ambassador from Don
Carlos of Auffria, king of Castile, the greatdlt
monarch of the East, and was intruffed with pro-
positions of such moment, -that he could impart
there to none but the emperor Montezuma him· felfi

self, and therefore required them to condua him, a 0 lo sc
without loss of time, into the pres~ence of their LAyr
matter. The Mexican officers could not conceal 15ss
their u~neasiness at a reqlueft, which they knewwould
be disagreeable, and which they foresaw might
prove extremely embarrassing to their sovereign,
whole mind had been filled with many disquieting
apprehenflons, ever since the former appearance of
the Spaniards on his coalts. But before they at-
·tempted to dissuade Cortes from insisting on this
demand, they endeavroured to conciliate his good-
will, by entreating him to accept of certain pre-
Fents, which, as humble slaves of Montezuma,
they laid at his feet. They were introduced with
great parade, and consisted of fine cotton cloth, of
plumes of various colours, and of ornaments of
gold and silver, to a considerable value; the
workimanfhip of which appeared to be as curious
as the materials were rich. The display of these
produced an effeat very different from what the
Mexicans intended. Inficad of satisfying, it in-
creased the avidity of the Spaniards, and rendered
them s~o eager and impatient to bec~ome maiters of
a country which abounded with such precious prol
duaions, that Cortes could hardly listen with pa.
tience to the arguments which Pilpatoe and Teu-
tile employed to difiizade him from visiting the
capital, and in a haughty determined tone he in-
filled on his demand, of being admitted to a per-
fonal audience of their sovereign. During this
interview, some painters, in the train of the Mexi-

R 4 can

a op o K can chiefs, had been diligently employed in deli.

~c~-~neating, upon white cotton cloths, figures of the
sz,. ships, the horses, the artillery, the soldiers, and

whatever else attraded their eyes, as firgular.
W;Then Cortes observed this, and was informed
that these piaures were to be sent to Montezuma,
in order to convey to him a more lively idea of
the firange and wonderful obje~s now presented
to their view, than any words could communicate,
he resolved to render the representation itill more
animated and intereffing, by exhibiting such a
fpe~acle as might give both them and their
anonarch an awful impression of the extraordinary
prowes~s of his followers, and the irresistible force
of their arms. The trumpets, by his order,
founded an alarm; the troops, in a moment,
formed in order of battle, the infantry performed
such martial exercis~es as were best fauited to display
the effe&t of their different weapons; the horse, in
various evolutions, gave a specimen of their agility
and strength; the artillery pointed towards the
thick woods which surrounded the camp, were fired,
and made dreadful havoc among the trees. The
Mexicans looked on with that silent amazement,
which is natural when the mind is firuck with ob·
jeas, which are both awful and above its compre-
henfion. But, at the explosion of the cannon,
many of them fled, fame fell to the ground, and
all were to much confounded at the fight of men
whose power so nearly resembled that of the gods,
that Cortes found ift difficult to compose and re-

afllure

afibre them. The painters had now many new B O O K
objeas on which to exercise their art, and they put ~-
their fancy on the firetch in order to invent figures
and fyimbols to repres~ent the extraordinary things
w~hich they had seen.

MESSENGERS Were immediately dispatched to Negoci s

l\Iontezuma with those pictures, and a full account ong~l
of every thing that had passed since the arrival of ma.
the Spaniards, and by them Cortes s~ent a present
of some European curiosities to Montezuma, which,
though of no great value, he believed would be
acceptable ·on account of their novelty. The
1\lexican monarchs, in order to obtain early in-
formation of every occurrence in all the corners of
their extensive empire, had introduced a refinement
in police, unknown, at that time, in Europe. They
had couriers potted at proper flations along the
principal roads; and as these were trained to agi-
lity by a regular education, and relieved one an-
other at moderate difiances, they conveyea intel-
ligence with surprising rapidity. Though the ca-
pital in which Montezuma resided was above a
hundred and eighty miles from St. Juan de Ulua,
Cortes's pres~ents were carried thither, and an an-
[wer to his demands was received in a few days.
The fame oiffcers who had hitherto treated with
the Spaniards, were employed to deliver this an-
iTwer; but as they knew how repugnant the deter-
mination of their malter was to all the schemes and
wishes of the Spanjfh~ commander, they would not

venture

n o, a re vnture to makre it known until they had pre.

cl~z vioufly endeavoured to soothe and mollify him,

~issi2's. For this purpose, they renewed the negociation,

by Introducing a train o~f a hundred Indians, loaded
wlith prelents sent to him by Montezurna. The
magnificence of these was such as became a great
monarch, and far exceeded any idea which the
Spaniards had hitherto formed of his wealth.
They were placed upon mats s~pread on the ground,
in s~uch order, as thewed them to the greatest ad·
vantage·. Cortes and his officers viewed, with ad.
miration, the various manufaaures of the country,
cotton fluffs to fine, and of such delicate texture,
;Bs to resemble silk; plaures of animals, trees, and
other natural objeAs, formed with feathers ofdif.
ferent colours, diipofed and mingled with such
fikill and elegance, as to rival the works of the
pencil in truth and beauty of imitation. But
what chiefly attraaed their eyes, were two large
plates of a circular form, one of massive gold re-
presenting the fun, the other of silver, an emblem
of the moon m. These were accompanied wRith
bracelets, collars, rings, and other trinkets of
gold; and that nothing might be wanting which
could give the Spaniards a complete idea of what
the country afforded, with some boxes filled with
pearls, precious stones, and grains of gold ca.
wrought, as they had been found in the mines
or rivers. Cortes received all there with an

a See NOTE LXXV.

appearance

appearance of profound veneration for the mo- a 0r a
narch by whom they were beffowed. But when A
the Mexicans, presuming upon this, informed him, Fori~s9or-
that their master, though he desired him to accept t:~oiT
of what he had sent as a token of his regard for the capital.
monarch whom Cortes represented, would not give
his consent that foreign troops should approach
nearer to his capital, or even allow them to continue
longer in his dominions, the Spanish general de.
clared, in a manner more resolute and peremptory
than formerly, that he must insist on his first de-
mand, as he could not, without difnonour, return
to his own country, until he was admitted into the
preience of the prince whom he was appointed to
visit in the name of his sovereign. The Mexicans,
affonifhed at feeing any man dare to oppos~e that
wRill, which they were accustomed to confider as
supreme and irresistible, yet afraid of precipitating
their country into an open rupture with such for-
midable enemies, prevailed with Cortes to promise,
that he would not move from his pres~ent camp,
until the return of a messenger, whom they sent to
bl~ontezuma for farther inftruations. D·

THE firmness with ~which Cortes adhered to his State of the

Mexican

original proposal, thould naturally have brought ~mgy@$~Fht eid,
the negociation between him and Montezuma to a
speedy ilifue, as it seemed to leave the Mexican
monarch no choice, but either to receive him with

a B. Diaz. c. 39. Gomara Cron. c. 27. Herrera, dec. 2,

lib. v. c. 5, 6.

confidence

a o~ Y confidence as a friend, or to oppose him openly

CLMI as an enerny. The latter was what might have
rgs9 been expeaed from a haughty prince in poffellion

of extensive power. The Mexican empire, at this
period, was at a pitch of grandeur to which no so-
ciety ever attained in so thort a period. Though
it had fablifted, according to their own traditions,
only a hundred and thirty years, its dominion ex.
tended from the North to the South Sea, over terri.
tories firetching,with some finall interruption,above
five hundred~ leagues from east to weft, and more
than two hundred from north to fouth,comprehead-
ingprovinces not inferiorin fertility,population,and
spulence,to anyin the torrid zone. The peoplewere
warlikre and enterprising; the authority of therno-
narch unbounded, and his revenues considerable.
If, with the forces which might have been fud.
denly assembled in such an empire, M~ontezpma
had fallen upon the Spaniards while encamped
on a barren unhealthy coast, unsupported by any
ally, without a place of retreat, and destitute of
provilions, it s~eers to be impolible, even with all
the advpantages of their super~ior dis~cipline and arms,
that they could have flood the shock, and they
must either have periihed in such an uneqlual con-
test, or have abandoned the enterprise.

chraser or As the power of Montezuma enabled him to
·drC11. take this spirited part, his own difpolitions wIere

fach as seemed naturally to pjrom2pt him to it.
Of all the princes who had fivay·ed the M~exican
s~ceptre, he was the most haughlty, the moll

violent,

violent, and the molk impatient of controul. His d 0 o rt
fubjeats looked up to him with awe, and his C·C
enemies with terror. The former he governed
with unexampled rigour, but they were impressed
with such an opinion of his capacity, as com-
manded their refpea; and, by many viaories over
the latter, he had spread far the dread of his arms,
and had added several considerable provinces to
his dominions. But though his talents might be
faited to the tranfa8Eions of a slate so imperfeQly
polithed as the Mexican empire, and ifuffcient to
conduat them while in their accuffomed course,
they were altogether inadequate to a conjundture so
extraordinary, and did not qualify him either to
judge with the difcernmlent, or to aQ with the de-
chfion, requisite in s~uch a trying emergence.

FROMI the moment that the Spaniards appeared His perpkr-

ity and tr~-

en his coast, he discovered sy-mptoms of timidity ror upon the

arnival of Ltas

and embarraffmnent. Inficad of taking such refO- Spaniards.
lutions as the confcioufnlefs of his own power, or
the memory of his former exploits, might have in-
spired, he deliberated with an anxiety and hefita-
tion which did not escape the notice of his meanest
courtiers. The perplexity and dtifcompofure of
Montezuma's mind upon this occaflon, as well as
the general dismay of his f~ubje8s, were not owing
wholly to the imprefiron whiich the Spaniardis had
made by the novelty of their appearance and the
terror of their arms. Its orig~in may be traced up
to a more remote source. T'here was an opinion,

n ovo 10 if we may believe the earliest and most authenti

~L'v3 Spanish hifforians, almost: univers~al among the

.j9'Americans, that some dreadful calamity was im-
pending over their heads, from a race of formi.
dable invaders who thnould come from reg-ions to-
wards the rising fun, to overrun and des~olate their
country, Whether this disquieting apprehension
flowed from the memory of some natural calamity
which had aifflic~ed that part of the globe, and im-
pressed the minds of the inhabitants with f~uper~iti
tious fears and forebodings, or whether it wfas an
imagination accidentally fulggefted by the astonish.
Inent which the first light of a newv race of men
occasioned, it is impoflible to determine. But as
the Mexicans were more prone to fuperflition than
any people in the New World, they were more
deeply affeaed with the appearance of the Spa·
niards, whom their credulity inflantly reprefemted
as the infiruments dellined to bring about this fa.
tal revolution which they dreaded. Under thoer
circumstances, it ceases to be incredible that a
handful of adventurers sh~ould alarm the monarch
of a great empire, and all his [nbjeas '.

condnes ao NOTWITHSTANDING the influence of this impreF-
nealews sion, when the messenger arrived from the Spaniih

camp with an account that the leader of the ftrang.
ers, adhering to his original demand, refused to obey

* Cortes Relatione Second'a, ap. Ramus. iii. 234, 23i*

IHerrera, dec. 2. lIb. iii. c. i. lib, v. clrr. )lb.vii.c.6.
G~omara C~ron. c. 66. 92. '44e

the order enjoining him to leave the ~country, a op o s
IMontezuma assumed some degree of resolution, LM~
and, in a transport of rage natural to a fierce prince """9
unaccuffomed to meet with any opposition to his
will, he threatened to f~aerifice those presu~mptuous
men to his gods. But his doubts and fears quickly
returried, and inflead of ifluing orders to carry his
threats into execution, he again called his miniffers
to confer and offer their advice.. Feeble and tem-
porizing mneafures will always be the res~ult when
men assemble to deliberate in a situation where they
ought to as. The Mexican couns~ellors .tookr no
effeaual measure for expelling such troubles~ome in,
truders, and were satisfied with iffiuing a more poi
litive iunju8ion, requiring them to leave the couns
try; but this they prepofferoufly accompanied with
a present of s~uch value, as proved a frafh induce-
inent to remain there,

MEANWHILE, the Spaniards ·were not without Ilnxiety and

apprehen-

solicitude or a variety of sentiments, in delibe- nons of the
rating concerning their own future condua. From pgre
what they had already seen, many of them formed
fach extravagant ideas concerning the opulence
of the country, that, despising . danger or hard-
thips, when the~y had in view treasures which ap.
peared to be inexhauitible, they were eager to at-
tempt the conquest. Others, estimating the power
ps the Mextican empire by its wrea~th, and enu.
Inerating the various proo~fs which had occurred of
its being under a well-regulated adminiffration,

.17 scontended,

B o o0 K 6ontended, that it wvould be an aa of the wilddt

C-~sfrenzy to attack such a slate with a small body of
'5,. men, in wrant of proviflons, unconneted with any

ally, and already enfeebled by the diseases peculiar
to the climate, and the loss of several of their num.
ber . Cortes secretly applauded the advocates
for bold measures, and cherithed their romantic
hopes, as s~uch ideas corresponded with his own,
and favoured the eftecution of the fchemnes which
he had formed. From the time that the fulpicions
of Velas~quez broke out with open violence in the
attempts to deprive him of the command, Cortes

~o3enes or saw the necefirty of d~ifolving a conneaion' which

woidld obitrua and embarralfs all his operations,
and watched for a proper opportunity of coming
to a final rupture with him. Having this in
view, he had laboured by every art to secure the
esteem and affetion of his- soldiers. With his
abilities for command, it was easy to gain their
esteem; and his followers were quickly satisfied
that they might rely, with perfea confidence, on
the condua and courage of their leader. Nor was
it more difficult to acquire their affeaion. Among
adventurers, nearly ~of the fame rank, and serving
at their own expence, the dignity of command did
not elevate a general above mingling with those
who aded under him. Cortes availed hidfelf of
this freedom of intercourse, to insinuate himself
into their favour, and by his affable manners, by

P B. Diaz. c. 40.

tvell-timed aas of liberality to some, by inspiring a ovo ze
all with vast hopes, and by allowing them to trade -l
privately with the natives 9, he attached the greater 19
part of his foldicts so firmly to himself, that they
almoff forgot that the armament had been fitted
out by the authority, and at the expence, of an-
other.

DeRNmo those ;ntrigutes, Teutile arrived with Sis cadrer.

in carrymng

the present from Montezuma, and, together with them on.
it, delivered the ultimate order of that monarch
to depart inflantly out of his dominions; and
when Cortes, inflead of complying, renewed his
requelt of an audience, the Mexican turned from
hint pbruptly, and qluitted the camp with looks
and gestures wihich firongly expressed his surprise
and resentment. Next morning, none of the na-
tives, who used to freqluent the camp in great
numbers, in order to barter with the soldiers, and
to bring in proviflons, appeared. All friendly
correspondence seemed now to be at an end, and
it was expe~ed every moment that hostilities
would commence. This, though an event that
Inight have been foreseen, occasioned a fudders
confiernation among the Spaniards, which em-
boldened the adherents of Velasquez not quly to
Inurmur and cabal against their general, but to
appoint one of their number to remonficate openly
againlt his imprudence in attempting the conquest

a See N OT E LXXVI.

VOL. II. S of

B qOO K Of a mighty empire with fach inadequate force,

c and to urge the necefirty of returning to Cuba, in

9.Order to refit the fleet and augment the army.

Diego de Ordaz, one of his principal officers,
whom the malecontents charged with this com.
miiron, delivered it with a soldierly freedom and
bluntnel~s, assuring Cortes that he spoke the senti·
ments of the whole army. He listened to this re-
monfkrance without any appearance of emotion, and
as he well k~new the temper and wishes of his fol.
diers, and foresaw how they would receive a pro-
polition fatal at once to all the splendid hopes and
schemes which they had been forming with such
complacency, he carried his dissimulation to far as
to seem to relinquilh his own meas~ures in compli-
ance with the request of Ordaz, and issued orders
that the army thould be in readiness next day to
reimbark for Cuba. As soon as this was known,
the dlifappointed adventurers Cxclaimed and threat·
ened; the emissaries of Cortes, mingling with
them, inflamed their rage; the ferment became
general; the whole camp was almost in open mu·
tiny; all demanding with eagerness to fee their
commander. Cortes was not flow in appearing;
when, with one voice, officers and soldiers ex-
pressed their affoniihment and indignation at the
orders which they had received. It was unworthy,
they cried, of the Caffilian courage, to be daunted
at the first afpea of danger, and infamous to fly
before anly enemy appeared. For their parts, they
were determined not to relinquilh an enterprise,

~1 that

that had hitherto been foccefsful, and wrhich a 0~ 0 a
tended to visibly to spread the knowledge of true y
religion, amd to advance the glory and interest of '5'9
their country. Hanppy under his comnland, they
wvould follow him with alacrity through every
dangCer, in queit of those settlements and treasures
wrhich he had so long held out to their view I but
if he chafe rather to return to Cuba, and tamely
give up all his hopes of diftinc~ion and opulence
to an envious rival, they would instantly chufe an·
other general to condua them in that path of
glory, which he had not spirit to enter.

COR'Esr, delighited with their ardour, took tio
offence at the boldness with which it was uttered.
The ~sentiments were what he himself had inspir~ed,
and the warmth ofexpreffion satisfied him that his
followers had imbibed them thorougrhly. He as-
fecled, however, to be surprised at what he heard,
declaring that his orders to prepare for embark;-
ing wvere ifrued from a perfulation that this w~as
agreeable to his troops; that, from defe~rence to
what he had been informed w~as their inclina-
tion, he had s~acrificed his owcn private opinion,
w\hich was firmly bent on eftablithing immedi-
ately a settlement on the sea-coast, and then on
endeavouring to penetrate into the interior part of
the country; that now he was convinced of his
error; and as he perceived that they were ani-
mated with the generous [pirit which breathed in
every true Spaniard, he would resume, with freth

8 2 ardour,

B OVO K ardour, his original plan of operation, and doubted

-,not to condua them, in the career of viaory, to

s,"9 such independent fortunes as their valour rnerited.

Upon this declaration, thouts of applaus~e tellified
the excess of their joy. The measure seemed to be
tak~en with unanimous consent; s~uch as secretly
condemned it being obliged to join in the acclama.
tions, partly to conceal their difaffeaion from their
general, and partly to avoid the imputation of cow.
ardice from their fellow-foldiers '.

Enabhtlhes a ITVITHOUT allowing his men time to cool or to

"ACmmnt refied, Cortes set about carrying his design into

execution. In order to give a beginning to a co-
lonyi, he assembled the principal persons in his
army, and by their f~uffrage ele~ed a council and
magiffrates in whom the government was to be
vested. As men naturally trans~plant the inflitu.
tions and forms of the mother-country into their
new settlements, this was framed upon the model
of a Spanish corporation. The magiffrates were
diftinguifhedd by the fame names and ensigns of
office, and were to exercise a similar jurifdialton.
All the pers~ons chosen were most firmly devoted
to Cortes, and the infirument of their eleaion was
framed in the king's name, without any mention
of their dependance on Velasquez. The two prin-
ciples of avarice and enthuaiafm, which prompted
-the Spaniards to all their enterpris~es in the New

I B3. Diaz. c. 40, 41, 42. Herrera, dec. 2.1lib. v. c. 6, ·.

World,

W~orld, seem to have concurred in fuggeffing the n 0 0 m
name which Cortes beffowed on his infant fettle- --
ment. He called it, The rich town~l ofthe truce Crofs." s s.'

THE firit meeting of the new council was dif- Reasens his
tinguifhed by a tranfaaion of great moment. As omm,
soon as it assembled, Cortes applied for leave tor
enter; and approaching with many marks of pro-
foundrefpeQ, which added dignity to the tribunal,
and set an example of reverence for its authority,
he began a long harangue, in which, with much
art, and in terms extremely flattering to pers~ons
just entering upon their new funalon, he observed,
that as the supreme jurifdiaion over the colony
which they had planted was now velled in this
court, he considered them as clothed with the au-
thority, and repre~senting the pers~on of their fove-
reign; that accordingly he would communicate to
them what he deemed ess~ential to the public
safety, with the fame dutiful fidelity as if he were
addressing his royal master; that the security of a
colony fettled in a great empire, whose sovereign
had already discovered his hoffile intentions, de-
pended upon arms, and the efficacy of these upon
the subordination and discipline preserved among
the troops ; that his right to command was derived
from a commillfion granted by the governor of
Cuba; and as that had been long since revoked, the
lawfulnes~s of his jurifdiation might well be quef~-
tioned; that he might be thought to a~t upon a de-

* Villa rica de la vera Cruz.

S 3 feccive,

B o Co K feaive, or even a dubious title; nor could they

C~-CJ trust an army which might dispute the powers of

sze.' its general, at a junaure when it ought implicitly

to obey his orders; that, moved by these con-
fiderations, he now resig~ned all his authority to
them, that they, havinlg both right to chufe,
and power to confer full jurifdiaion, might ap-
point one, in the king's name, to command the
army in its future operations ; and, as for his own
part, fach was his zeal for the service in which
they were engaged, that he would moit cheerfully
take up a pikie with the fame hand that laid down
the general's truncheon, and convince his fellow-
soldiers, that though accufforrel to command,
he had not forgotten how to obey. Having
finished his discourse, he laid the commillion front
Velasquez upon the table, and, after killing his
truncheon, delivered it to the chief magiffrate,
and withdrew.

*hejriehid~

c:c~ THE deliberations of the council were not long,
:ar~ral. as Cortes had concerted this important mealitre

with his confidents, and had prepared the other
members, with great address, for the part which
he wished them to take. His resignation was
accepted ; and as the uninterrupted tenor of their
prosperity under his condua afforded the moss fa-
tisfying evidence of his abilities for command,
they, by their unanimous f~uffrag-e, elected hill,
chief juffice of the colony, and captain-general of
its army, and appointed his commiion to be made

out in the king's name, with most ample powers, a 0ol g
wvhich were to continue in force until the royal c
pleasure thould be farther known. That this deed s59
might not be deemed the machination of a junto,
the council called together the troops,and acquaint-
ed them with what had been resolved. The fol-
diers, with eager applause, ratified the choice which
the council had made; the air refounded with the
name of Cortes, and all vowed to thed their blood
in support of his authority.

CORTEs having now brought his intrigues to ARrrets his

authority

the desired issue, and thaken off his mortifying with vigour.
dependance on the governor of Cuba, accepted
of the commiflion, which vefied in him s~upreme
jurisdiction, civil as well as military, over the co-
lony, with many profeflions of refpea to the
council, and gratitude to the army. Together
wvith his new command, he assumed greater dig-
nity, and began to exercise more extensive powers.
Formerly he had felt himself to be only the
deputy of a fubjea; now he aaed as the repre-
featative of his sovereign. The adherents ofVe-
lafquez, fully aware of what would be the effea
of this change in the situation of Cortes, could no
longer continue silent and pafilvee fpeaators of his
at~ions. They exclaimed openly againit the pro-
ceedings of the council as illegal, and againfE
those of the army as mutinous. Cortes, inflantly
perceiving the necessity of giving a timely check
to such seditious discourse by so~me vigorous mea-

S 4 sure,

is o 0 K sure, arrested Ordaz, Efcudero, and Vielafquez de

SLeon, the ringleaders of this fa~tion, and sent
'' them pris~oners aboard the fleet, loaded with chains.

Their dependants, aflonifhed and over-awed, re-
mained quiet; and Cortes, more desirous to re-
claim than to punish his prisoners, who were offh.
cers of great merit, courted their friendship with
su-ch ass-iduity and addlref~s, that the reconciliation
was perfealy cordial; and, on the most trying oc.
.cations, neither their connec?ion with the governor
of Cuba, nor the memory of the indignity with
which they had been :reated, tempted them to
Swerve from an inviolable attachment to his in-
terest '. In this, as well as his other negociations
at this critical conljunaure, which decided with re-
fpecB to his future fame and fortune, Cortes owed
much of his ~u~ccefs to the Mexican gold, which he
diffributed with a liberal hand both among his
friends and his opponents '.

dCORTES, having thus rendered the union between
e-himfelf and his army indissoluble, by engaging it to

join him in disclaiming any dependence on the go-
vernor of Cuba, and in repeated alks of disobedience
to his authority, thought he might now venture to
.quit the camp inwhich he had hitherto remained, and
advanceinto thecountry. To thishewas encouraged
by an event no less fortunate than seasonable. Some
Indians having approached his camp inamyiterious

SB. Diaz. c. 42> 43. Gomara Cron. c. 30, 31. Helrreva,

dec. 2. lib. v. c. 7.

SB. Diaz. c.44*

manner,

manner, were introduced into his presence. He B qo o 1
found that they were sent with a proffer of friend- c
Ihip from the cazique of Zempoalla, a considerable rslq:
town at no great distance ; and from their answers
to avariety of questions which he put to them, ac-
cording to his usual pra~ice in every interview with
the people of the country, he gathered, that their
matler, though fubjea to the Mexican empire,
was impatient of the yoke, and filled with such
dread and hatred of Montezuma, that nothing
could be more acceptable to him than any pro-
[ped of deliverance from the opprefiion under
which he groaned. On hearing this, a ray of
light and hope broke in upon the mind of Cortes.
liefaw that the great empire which he intended to
attack was neither perfeatly united, nor its fove-
reign universally beloved. He concluded, that the
causes of difaffe8ion could not be confined to one
province, but that in other corners there must be
malcontents, so weary of fubjeaion, or so desirous
ofchange, as to be ready to follow the flandard of
any proteaor. Full of those ideas, on which he
began to form a s~cheme, that time, and more per-
fed information concerning the slate of the coun-
try, enabled him to mature, he gave a most gra-
clous reception to the Zempoallans, and promised
soon to visit their cazique ".

IN order to perform this promile, it was not ne- unrches to
c ~lkry to vary the route which he had already zem"poaan.

E. Divl. c. 4 . Comara Cron.* c. 28.

fixed

B O O K fixed for his march. Some officers, whom he had

I~~cccccccc~ employed to s~urvey the coast, having discovered a

s59 village named Quiabiflln, about forty miles to

the northward, which, both on account of the
fertility of the foil, and commodious~ness of the
harbour, seemed to be a more proper flation for a
settlement than that where he was encamped,
Cortes determined to remove thither. Zempoalia
lay in his wray, where the cazique received him in
the manner which he had reason to expea; with
gifts and caresses, like a man solicitous to gain his
good-will; with refpeQ approaching almost to ado·
ration, like one who looked up to him as a deli.
verer. From him he learned many particulars
with ref~peat to the charater of Montezuma, and
the circumitanceswhich rendered his dominion odi-
cus. He was a tyrant, as the cazique told him
with tears, haughty, cruel, and rfupicious; who
treated his own f~ubjeas with arrogance, ruined the
conquered provinces by exceirve exaaions, and
often tore their s~ons and daughters from them by
violence ; the former to be offered as viaims to his
gods; the latter, to be reserved as concubines for
himself or favourites. Corres, in reply to him, art-
fully insinuated, that one great obje8 of the Spa-
niards in visiting a country so remote from their own,
was to redress grievances, and to relieve the op·
pressed; and having encouraged him to hope for
this inlterpothiion in due time, he conltinued his
march to Quiabiflan.

THE spot which his officers had recommended as a o o ze
a proper situation, appeared to him to be so well I~
chosen, that he immediately~ marked out ground Bicsla'Toro.
for a town. The hous~es to be ere~ted were only
huts; but there were to be surrounded with forti-
fications, offiufficient firength to resist the assaults
of an Indian army. As the finishing of thos~e for-
tifications was essential to the existence of a colony,
and of no less importance in prosecuting the de-
signs which the leader and his followers meditated,
both in order to secure a place of retreat, and
to preserve their communication with the sea,
every man in the army, officers as well as soldiers,
put his hand to the work, Cortes himself setting
them an example of a~ivity and perseverance in
labour. The Indians of Zempoalla and Qulabillan
lent their aid; and this petty flation, the parent
of so many mighty settlements, was soon in a slate
of defence x,

WHILE engaged in this necessary work, Cortes nei a~
had several interviews with the caziques of Zem- ance with

several ca-

poalla and Quiabiflan; and availing himself of Pinues,
their wonder and affonifhment at 'the new objeas
which they daily beheld, he gradually in~pir-ed
them with such an high opinion of the Spaniards,
as beings of a fiiperior order, and irresistible in
arms, that, relying on their prote~ion, they ven-
tured to infillt the Mexican power, at the v·ery

: B. Diaz. 0- 45, 46. 48. Gamara Cron. c. 32, 33- 37*

Hecrrera, dec. 2. lIb. v. c. 8, 9.

name

a o o o name of which they were accuffomed to tremble.

Cy Some ofMontezuma's officers having appeared to

sys.· levy the usual tribute, and to demand a certain

number of human viaims, as an expiation for
their guilt in pres~uming to hold intercourse w~ith
those firangers whom the emperor had commanded
to leave his dominions, inflead of obeying the or·
der, the caziques made them prisoners, treated
them with great indignity, and, as their fuperfli-
tion was no less barbarous than that of the Mexi-
cans, they prepared to fadcrifice them to their
gods. From this last danger they were delivered
by the interposition of Cortes, who manifefied the
utmost horror at the mention offuch a deed. The
two caziqlues having now been pushed to an aB
of such open rebellion, as left them no hope of
safety but in attaching themselves inviolably to the
Spaniards, they soon completed their union with
them, by fonnally acknowledging themselves to
be vaif~ls of the fame monarch. Their example
was followved by the Totonaques, a fierce people
who inhabited the mountainous part of the coun-
try. They willingly fubjeaed themselves to the
crown of Castile, and off~ered to accompany Cor-
tes, with all their forces, in his march towanrde
M~exico 7.

Ffurmearures CORTES had now been above thr~ee months in
unieve a N\ew Spain; and though thlis period had not been
rion of his
authoiriy by
the king. r D. Diaz. c. 47. Comara Cron- 35> 36. H-errera, dec.2i.

dif inguiflled

dillinguifhed by martial exploits, every moment n ov o
had been employed in operations, which, though L~~7
less [plendid, were more important. By his ad-
dress in conduaing his intrigues with his own
army, as well as his sagacity in carrying on his
negociations with the natives, he had already laid
the foundations of his future su~cces~s. But what-
ever confidence he might place in the plan which
he had formed, he could not but perceive, ·that
as his title to command was derived from a doubt-
ful authority, he held it by a precarious tenure.
The injuries which Velafques had received, were
such as would naturally prompt him to apply for
redress to their common sovereign; and s~uch a
reprefeatation, he foresaw, might be given of his
condua, that he had reason to apprehend, hot
only that he might be degraded from his present
rank, but fubjeaed to punishment.. Before he
began his march, it was necessary to take the
most effeaual precautions against this impending
danger. TWith this view he pers~uaded the magi-
firates of the colony at Vera Cruz to address a let-
ter to the king, the chief objea of which was to
ju~tify their own condua in establishing a colony
independant on the jurifdi~tion of Velasquez. In
order to accomplish this, they endeavoured to de-
trat? from his merit, in fitting out the two former
armaments under Cordova and Grijalva, affirming
that these had been equipped by the adventurers
who engaged in the expeditions, and not by the
governor. They contended that the sole objet of

Velasquez

R o 0 K Velasquez was to trade or barter with the natives,

~ r, not to attempt the conquest of New Spain, or to
"9' f~ettle a colony there. They asserted that Cortes and

the officers who served under him had defrayed the
greater part of the expence in fitting out the arma-
ment. On this account, they humbly requefied
their sovereign to ratify what they had done in his
name, and to confirm Cortes in the supreme com·
mand by his royal commifiron. That Charles might
be induced to grant more readily what they de-
manded, they give him a pompous description of
the country which they had discovered; of its
riches, the number of its inhabitants, their civili.
zat~ion and arts; they relate the progress which
they had already made in annexing some parts of
the country situated on the f~ea-coait to the crown
.ofCaftile; and mention the schemes which they had
formed, as well as the hopes which they entertain.
ed, of reducing the whole to fubjeaion 7. Cortes

Y In this letter it is afTerted, that though a confrderabke

number of Spaniards had been wounded in their various en-
counters with the people of Tabailco, not one of them died,
and all had recovered in a very thort time. This se~ems to
.confirm what I observe in p. 280, concerning the imperfee-
tion of the offenfive weapons used by the Americans. In this
letter, the human sacrifices offered by the Mexicans to their
deities are deferibed minutely, and with great horror;1 some of
the Spaniards, it is said, had been eye-witnesses of those bar·
barous rites. To the letter is fubjoined a catalogue and de-
[cription of the presents sent to the emperor. That publithed
by Gomara, Cron. c. 29. seems to have been copied from it.
Pet. Martyr deferibes many of the articles in his treatise De in-
fulis nuper inventis, P* 354, &rc.

himself

himself wrote in a limilar firain; and as he knew B 0o 0
that the Spanish court, accuffomed to the exagger- ccL
ated representations of every new country by its '59
discoverers, would give little credit to their fplen-
did accounts of New Spain, if thes~e were not ac;-
comnpanied with such a specimen of what it con·
tained, as would excite an high idea of its opu-
lence, he solicited his soldiers to relinqluifh what
they might claim as their part of the treasures which
had hitherto been colleaed, in order that the whole
might be s~ent to the king. Such was the as~cend-
ant which he had acquired over their minds, and
such their own romantic expeaations of future
wealth, that an army of indigent and rapatious ad-
venturers was capable of this generous effort, and
offered to their sovereign the richest present that
had hitherto been tranfmnitted from the New
World ". Portocarrero and Mlontejo, the chief
magiffrates of the colony, were appointed to carry
this present to Castile, with express orders not to
touch at Cuba in their passage thither a.

WHILE a vessel was preparing for their de- A coorpi-

racy against

parture, an unexpeded event occasioned a general corus.
alarm. Some soldiers and sailors, secretly attached
to Velasquez, or intimidated at the profpec? of
the dangers unavoidable in attempting to pene-
trate into the heart of a great empire with fuell

1 See NOTE LXXVII.
O B. Diaz. c. 54. Comara Croni. c. 40.

unequal

BO O K unequal force, formed the design of seizing one of

c~the brigantines, and making their escape to Cuba,

s *9 in order to give the governor such intelligence

as might enable him to intercept the ship which
was to carry the treasure and dispatches to Spain.
This conspiracy, though formed by pers~ons of
10w rank, was conduaed with profound secrecy;
but at the moment when every thing was ready
for execution, they were betrayed by one of their
associates.

nIe denroys ' THoOUG the good fortune of Cortes interposed
his Aee. so s~easonably on this occasion, the deteation of

this conspiracy filled his mind with most disquiet·
ing apprehenflons, and prompted him to execute s
s~cheme which he had long revolved. He per-
ceived that the spirit of difaffeaion still lurked
among his troops; that though hitherto checked
by the uniform success of his s~chemes, or sup.
pressed by the hand of authority, various events
might occur which would encourage and call it
forth. He observed, that many of .his mlen,
weary of the fatigue of f'ervice, longed to revisit
their settlements in Cuba; and that upon any ap.
pearance of extraordinary danger, or-any reverse
of fortune, it would be impoffble to restrain them
from riturning thither. He was sensible that his
forces, already too feeble, could bear no diminu.
tion, and that a very fmnall defe~ion of his fol.
lowers would oblige him to abandon the enter·

a I prise,

prise. After ruminating often, and with much a op 0 s
solicitude, upon thos~e particulars, he saw no hope A4~
of success, but in cutting off all pofirbility of re. = s'o.
treat, and in reducing his men to the neceility of
adopting the fame resolution with which he him-
felfwas animated, either to conquer or to perish.
With this view, he determined to destroy his
fleet; but as he durit not venture to execute s~uch
a bold resolution by his single authority, he la-
boured to bring his soldiers to adopt his ideas
with refped to the propriety of this measure. His
address in accomplithing this was not inferior to
the arduous occasion in which is was employed.
He persuaded some, that the ships had f~uffered so
much by having been long at sea, as to be alto-
gether unfit for service; to others he pointed out
what a s~easonable reinforcement of firength they
would derive from the jundtion of an hundred men,
now unprofitably employed as sa8ilors; and to all,
he reprefeated the necessity of fixing their eyes and
withes upon what was before them, without allow-
ing the idea of a retreat once to enter their
thoughts. With univerfadl consent the thips were
drawn ashore, and after firipping them of their
fails, rigging, iron works, and whatever else might
be of use, they were broke in pieces. Thus, from
an effort of magnanimity, to which there is nothing
parallel in hillory, five hundred men voluntarily'
codfented to be shut up in a hoffile country, filled
with powerful and unknown nations; and having
precluded every means of escape, left themselves

701.. II. T without

B qo o i without any resource but their own valour and

~Jperfeverance b

No'Irmwo now retarded Cortes; the alacrity of

his troops and the disposition of his allies were
equally favourable. All the advantages, how.
ever, derived from the latter, though procured
by much alirduity and address, were well nigh
loft in a moment by an indiscreet ifally of reli.
gious zeal, which, on many occasions, precipi.
tated Cortes into adions inconsistent with the pru.
dence that distinguishes his charaaer. Though
hitherto he had neither time nor opportunity to
explain to the natives the errors of their own fu.
perflition, or to infiruQ them in the principles of
the Christian faith, he commanded his soldiers to
overturn the altars and to destroy the idols in the
chief temple of Zempoalla, and in their place to
ered a crucifix and an image of the Virgin Mary.
The people beheld this with affonilhment and
horror; the prieifs excited them to arms; but
s~uch was the authority of Cortes, and so great
the ascendant which the Spaniards had acquired,
that the commotion was appeased without blood.
shed, and concord perfealy re-efiablifhed'.

Advaces CORTEs began his march from Zempoalia on the

nifi~ sixteenth of Auguff, with five hundred men, sis.

b Relat. di Cortes. Ramus. iii. 225.· B. Diaz. c. 17, IS.

Herrera, dec. 2. lib. v. c. 14*

C B. Diaz. c.41, 42* efrrCra, dec.2. lib. v. c* 3,4

teen

teen horse, and fix field-pieces. The reft of his n 0~ 0 s
troops, con~ifting chiefly of s~uch as from age or cj
infirmity were less fit for aaive service, he left as so19
a garrison in Villa Rica, under the command of
Elcalante, an officer of merit, and warmly at-
tached to his interest. The cazique of Zem-
poalla supplied him with proviiions, and with two
hundred of thos~e Indians called Tamemes, wfhofe
office, in a country where tame animals were un.
known, was to carry burdens, and perform all
servile labour. They were a great relief to the
Spanish s~oldiers, who hitherto had been obliged,
not only to carry their our~ baggage, but to drag
along the artillery by main force. He offered
likewise a considerable body of his troops, but
Cortes was satisfied with four hundred; taking
care, however, to chufe persons of such note as
might prove hoffages for the fidelity of their
master. Nothing memorable happened in his
progress, until he arrived on the confines of Tlaf-
cala. The inhabitants of that province, a warlike
people, were implac,,ble enemies of the Mexicans,
and had been united in an ancient alliance with
the caziques of Zempoalla. Though les~s civi-
lized than the f~ubjeats of Montezuma, they were
advanced in improvement far beyond the rude na-
tions of America, whos~e manners we have de-
kribed. They had made considerable progress in
agriculture ; they dwelt in large towns ; they were
not trangers to some species of commerce; and in

T 2 the

BOOK the imperfea accounts of their inflitutions and

C-u laws, tranfinitted to us by the early Spanish writers,

sys.· we dis~cern traces both of diffributive juffice and of

cr'minal jurifdition, in their interior police. But
still, as the degree of their civilization was incom.
plete, and as they depended for subsistence not on
agriculture alone, but truffed for it, in a great
measure, to hunting, they retained many of the
qualities natural to men in this slate. Like them,
they were fierce and revengeful; like them, too,
they were high-f~ipiited and independent. In con-
fieqluence; of the former, they were involved in per-
petual holtilities, and had but a slender and occa·
fional intercours~e with neighbouring slates. The
latter inspired them with such detellation of fervi·
tude, that they not only refused to floop> to a so-
reign yoke, and mainltained an obstinate and fuc·
cef~sful contest in defence of their liberty against
the superior power of the Mexican empire, but
they guarded with equal solicitude againlt do-
meltic tyranny; and disdaining to acknowledge
any matter, they lived under the mild and limited
jurifdiiion of a council eleaed by their several
tribes.

His wrr CORTES, though he had received information
?.rweahans. concerning the martial charaater of this people,

flattered himself that his profei~ons of delivering
the oppressed from the tyranny of Montezuma,
their inveterate enmity to the Mexicans, and the

example

example of their ancient allies the Zempoallans, a 0~ 0 1
might induce the Tlaf~calans to grant him a friendly cM
reception. In order to dispose them to this, four
Zempoallans of great eminence were sent ambaf~-
fadors, to reqlueft, in his name, and in that of
their cazique, that they would permit the Spa-
niards to pas~s through the territories of the re-
public in their way to Mexico. But instead of the
favourable anfwver which was expe~ted, the Tlaf-
calans seized the ambass~adors, and, without any
regard to their public charaaer, made prepara-
tions for sacrificing them to their gods. At the
fame time, they assembled their troops, in order
to oppose those unknown invaders, if they should
attempt to make their passage good by force of
arms. Various motives concurred in precipitating
the Tlaf~calans into this res~olution. A fierce peo-
ple, that up within its own narrow precinats, and
little accufromed to any intercourse with foreign-
ersfis apt to confider every firanger ase an enemy,
and is easily excited to arms. They concluded,
from Cortes's propos~al of visiting Montezumr in
his capital, that, notwithstanding all his pr~ofef.
fions, he courted the friendfhlip of a monarch
whom they both hated and feared. The impru-
dent zeal of Cortes in violating the temples in
Zempoalla, filled the Tlaficalans with horror; and
as they were no less attached to their f~uperflition
than the other nations of New Spain, they were
impatient to avenge their injured gods, and to ac-

'f 3 quire

B O .O K qluire the merit of offering up to them, as vic·

iraJ tims, those impious men who had dared to

profane their altars; they contemned the small
number of the Spaniards, as they had not yet
measured their own firength with that of there
new enemies, and had no idea of the fupe.
riority which they derived from their arms and
discipline.

suLc iG'it. CORTES, after waiting some days, in vain, for

the return of his ambassadors, advanced into the
Tlafcalan territories. As the resolutions of people
who delight in war are executed with no less
promptitude than they are formed, he found
troops in the field ready to oppose him. They
attacked him with great intrepidity, and, in the
firik encounter, wounded some of the Spaniards,
and ktilled two horses; a loss, in their situation,
of great moment, becaus~e it was irreparable. From
this fpIecimen of their courage, Cortes saw the
necef~ity of proceeding with caution. His army
maiched in close order; he chose the flations,
where he halted, with attention, and fortified
ev~ery camp with extraordinary care. IDuring four-
teen days he was exposed to almost uninterrupted
assaults, the Tlafcalans advancing with numerous
armies, and renewing the attack in various forms,
with a degree of valour and perseverance to which
the Spaniards had seen nothing parallel in the New
WE~orldl. The Spanish hifforians describe those

f~ucceive

successive battles with great pomp, and enter intO B O O K
a minute detail of particulars, mingling many ex- -c
aggerated and incredible circumitances d, with such '5s+
as are real and marvellous. But no power of
words can render the recital of a combat interest-
ing, where there is no equality of danger ; and
when the narrative closes with an account of
thousands slain on the one fide, while not a single
person falls on the other, the most laboured deferip-
tions of the previous disposition of the troops, or
of the various viciflitudes in the engagement, com-
mand no attention.

THERE are some circumfiances, however, in someaingu

lar circum-

this war, which are memorable, and merit notice, Aances in it.
as they throw light upon1 the charader both of the
people of New Spain, and of their conquerors.
Though the Tlafcalans brought into the field such
numerous armies as appear f~ufficient to have over-
whelmed the Spaniards, they were never able to
make any imprefiion upon their fmnall battalion.
Singular as this may feeem, it is not inexplicable.
The Tlalcalans, though addiaed to war, were, likie
all unpolifhed nations, firangers to military order
and discipline, and 10ft in a great ineaf~ure the ad-
vantage which they might have derived from their
numbers, and the impetuosity of their attack, by
their conflant solicitude to carry off the dead and
wounded. This point of honour, founded on a

d See NO TE LXXVIII.

T P. sentiment

B O O0 K sentiment of tenderners natural to the human mind,

Lc~qc3and firengthened by anxiety to preserve the bodies
''.9 of their countrymen from being devoured by their

enemies, was univerfahl among the people of New
Spain. Attention to this pious office occupied
them even during the heat of combat e, broke
their union, and dimninifhed the force of the im-
preflion which they might have made by a joint
effort.

NOT only was their superiority in number of

little avail, but the im~perfeation of their military
weapons rendered their valour in a great meas~ure
inoffenfive. After three battles, and many fkiir.
mifhes and assaults, not one Spaniard was killed
in the field. Arrows -and spears, headed with
flint or the· bones of fish~es, flakes hardened in the
fire, and wooden [words, though deftruc~ive wea-
pons among naked Indians, were easily turned
aside by the Spanish~ bucklers, and could hardly
penetrate the e/caupiles, or quilted jackets, which
the soldiers wore. The Tlarcalans advanced boldly
to the charge, and often fought hand to hand.
Many of the Spaniards were wounded, though all
slightly, which cannot be imputed to any want of
courage or streng~th in their enemies, but to the de·
feB of the arms with wh~ich they assailed them.

NOTWITHSTANDING the fury with which the

Tlafcalans attacked the Spaniard~s, they seem to

* B3. DI)az. c. 6j.

have condu~ted their hostilities with some de ree a 0v 0 1
of barbarous generosity. They gave the Spaniards f
warning of their hoffile intentions, and as they '5'
knew that their invaders wanted proviilons, and
imagined, perhaps, like the other Americans, that
they had left their own country becaus~e it did not
afford therl fubifitence, they ~sent to their camp a
large s~upply of poultry and maize, desiring; them
to ear plentifully, because they s~corned to attack
an enlemy enfeebled by hunger, and it would be
an affront to their G-ods to offer them famnithed
vidtim, as well as dis~agreeable to themselves to
feed on s~uch emaciated prey '.

War x they were taught by the first encounter
with hthir new enemies, that it was not easy to
exec. te this threat; when they perceived, in the
Sub quent' engagements, that notwithfiandingo all
the efforts of their own valour, of which they had
a ve~ry high opinion, not one of the Spaniards was
slain or taken, they began to conceive them to be
a fisperior order of beings, against whom human
power could not avail. In this extremity, they
had recourse to their priests, requiring them to re-
veal the myfierious causes of su2ch extraordin~ary
events, and to declare what new means they thould
employ in order to repulse those formidable in-
vaders. The priests, after many sacrifices and in-

* Herrera, dec. 2. lib. vi. c. 6. Go~mara Cron. c. 47.

cantations,

B 0~ 0 r cantations, delivered this response. That there

frJitrangers were the offspringo of the fun, procreatel

'" ' by his animating energ-y in the regions of the

east; that, by day, while cherished with the la.
fluence of his parental beams, they were invin-
cible; but by night, when his reviving heat was
withdrawn, their vigour declined and faded like
the herbs in the field, and they dwindled dowfn
inro mortal men p. Theories less plaurible have
g~ained credit with more enlightened nations, and
have influenced their conduat. In consequence of
this, the Tlalcalans, with the implicit confidence
of men who fancy themselves to be under the
guidance of Heaven, aaed in contr, !iction to one
of their most eftsablifhed maxims in war, and ven·
tured to attack the enemy, with a fIrong body, in
the night-time, in hopes of destroying the ni hen
enfeebled and surpris~ed. But Cortes had greater
vigilance and discernment than to b- deceived by
the rude firatagems of an Indian army. The cen·
tinels at his out poffs, obs~erving some extraordi·
nary movement among the Tlaf~calans, gave the
alarm. In a moment the troops were under arms,
and s~allying out, dispersed the party with great
slaug~hter, without allowing it to approach the
camp. The Tlafcalans, convinced, by fad expe-
rience, that their priests had deluded them, andi
satisfied that they attempted in vain, either to de·
ceive or to vanqulfhh their enemies, their fierceners

e B. Diaz. c. 66.

abated,

abated, and they began to incline seriously to a oop K

THEY were at a loss, however, in what manner The Tinfea-
to address the fkrangers, wvhat idea to form of their n

a 2fed~pr

character, and whether to confider them as beings
of a gentle or of a malevolent nature. There were
circuditances in their condua which seemed to
favour each opinion. On the one hand, as the
Spaniards conflantly dismissed the prisoners whom
they took, not only without injury, but often
with presents of European toys, and renewed their
offerss of peace after every viaory; this lenity
amazed people, who, according to the ex~terminat-
ing system of war known in America, were accuf-
tomed to sacrifice and devour without mercy all the
captives taken in battle, and dis~pos~ed them to en-
tertain favourable s~entiments of the humanity of their
new enemies. But, on the other hand, as Cortes
had seized fifty of their countrymen who brought
provilions to his camp, and supposing them to be
ipies, had cut off their halds h ; this bloody s~pec-
tacle, added to the terror occasioned by the fire-
arms and horses, filled them with dreadful imn-
pretilonss of the ferocity of their invaders i. This
uncertainty was apparent in the mode of addreffl
ing the Spaniards. " If, said they, you are divini-
tiea of a cruel and savage nature, we present to you
five slav~es, that you may drink their blood, and eat

SCartes Relat. Ramus. ill. 228. C. Comparar Cron. c. 48.
See NOTE L.XXIX.

their

B 0~ 0 t their aslef. If you are mild deities, accept an offer.

M inlg of incense and variegated plumes. If you are
O'59· men, here is meat, and bread and fruit to noutilh

you k." The peace which both parties now desired

Concluded- wVith equal ardour, was s~oon concluded. TheTlaf·

calans yielded themselves as vassals to the crown of
Caltile, and engaged to assist Cortes in all his fu-
ture operations. He took the republic under hir
proteftion, and promnifed to defend their person,
and poff~eifions from injury or violence.

Aryantaes TmIs treaty was concluded at a s~easonable junc.

nilli~e ture for the Spaniards. The fatigue of service

among a fmnall body of men, su~rrounded by such
a multitude of enemies, was incredible. Half the
army was on duty every night, and even they
wvhofe turn it was to reft, slept alw-ays upon their
arms, th-t they migrht be ready to run to their
polls on a momrent's warning. Many of them
wiere wounded, a good number, and among theie
Cortes himself, laboured under the diftempers p:s.
valent in hot climates, and s~everal had died inte
they set out from lVera Cruz. N~otwithflandina
the supplie~s wh~ich they received from the Tlalca·
lans, they w~ere often in wrant of provilions, and
so deltitute of the necessaries most requisite in dan-
gerous se~rvice, that they had no thllve to dress their
wounds, but what wias compos~ed with the £1t of
the Indians whomn they had slain '. W'iorn out nill

k 13. D~iaz. c. 70. Gzlreara Cron1. c. 4-.- Ilcrrr, d

such intolerable toil and hardships, many of the a 0~ 0 t
soldiers began to murmur, and, when they refleaed y4
on the multitude and boldnes~s of their enemies,
more were ready to despair. It reqluired the ut-
most exertion of Cortes's authority and address to
check this spirit of despondency in its progress,
and to reanimnate his followrers writh their wonted
sense of their own s~uperiority over the enemies w~ith
w-hom they had to contend lr'. The fubmillion of
the Tlafcalans, and their owin triumphant entry
into the capital city, w~here they were received
with the reverence paid to beings of a foperior
ord~er, banlihed, at once, from the minds of the
Spaniards, all memory of pafi ifuferings, dispelled
every anxious thougiht writh refp~ec to their future
operations, and fully satisfied them that there was
not now any power in America able to withfland
their arms ".

CORTES remained twenty days in Tlefeala, in coree rot.

order to allow his troops a thort inlterval of repose Pcam th~ei
after fIuch hard service. During that time, he was
employed in tranfadtions and inquiries of great
moment with refped~ to his fu~ture schemes. In
his daily conferences with the Tlalrcalan chiefs, he
received information concerning every particular
relative to the Rtate of the Mexican empire, or to
the qualities of its lovereign, which could be of

D Cortes Relat. Ramuf". iii. 229· B. Diaz. c. 69. Gomrara

Cron. c. pI.

* Cortes Relat. Ramlul' iii. 23o. B. Dlaz. c. 72.

B qOO K u~e in regulating his condua, whether he thould

c~be obliged to aft as a friend or as an enemy. As
s . he found that the antipathy of his new allies to the

Mexican nation was no less implacable than had
been repres~ented, and perceived what benefit he
might derive from the aid of s~uch powerful con·
federates, he employed all his powers of infinua-
tion in order to gain their confidence. Nor was
any extraordinaryr exertion of thes~e necessary.. The
Tlarcalans, with the levity of mind natural to un·
polithed men, were, of their own accord, disposed
to run from the extreme of hatred to that of fond-
nels. Every thing in the appearance and conduct
of their guests, was to them matter of wonder:.
They gazed with admiration at whatever the Spa.
niards did, and fancying them to be of heavenly
origin, were eager not only to comply with their
demands, but to anticipate their wishes. They
offered, accordingly, to accompany Cortes in his
march to Mexico, with all the forces of the re·
public, under the command of their most experi-
enced captains.

Which he BUT, after beffowing so much pains on cement-
had ahnoft.
Jolt by his Ing this union, all the beneficial fruits of it w~ere on

rn a. the point of being 10ft, by a new effufion of that

intemperate religious zeal with which Cortes w~as
animated, no less than the other adventurers of
the ag~e. They all considered themselves as infiru-

* See N O TE LXXX.

ments

ments employed by Heaven to propagate the n op so
Christian faith, and the less they were qualified, LA--
either by their knowledge or morals, for s~uch a 15s+
fun8ion, they were more eager to dis~charge it.
The profound veneration of the Tlaf~calans for the
Spaniards, having encouraged Cortes to explain
to some of their chiefs the do~trines of the Christ-
i~nreligion, and to insist that they sh~ould aban-
don their own fuperflitions, and embrace the faith
of their new friends, they, according to an idea
univ~ersal among barbarous nations,redl ac-
knowledged the truth and excellence of what he
taught; but contended, that the Teules of Tlafcala
wkere divinities no less than the God in whom the
Spaniards believed; and as that Being was intitled
to the homrage of Europeans, so they wer-e bound.
to revere the fame powers which their anceffors
had worshipped. Cortes continued, nevertheles~s,
to urge his demand in a tone of authority, min-
gling threats with his arguments, until the Tlanfca-
lans could bear it no longer, and conjured hinx
never to mention this again, left the gods thould
avenge on their heads the guilt of having listened
to foch a proposition. Cortes, allonifhed and en-
raged at their obitinacy, prepared to execute by
force, what he coul~d not accomplish by perf~uallon,
and was going to overturn their altars, and cast
down their idols with the fame violent hand as at
Zempoalla, if father Bartholemew de Olmedo,
chaplain to the expedition, had not checked his
inconsiderate impetuosity. He reprel~ented the

'7 imprudence

B qOO K imprudence of s~uch an attempt in a large city

c--· newly reconciled, and filled with people no less
'' fuperltitious than warlike; he declared, that the

proceeding at Zempoalla had always appeared to
him precipitate and unjust; that religion was not
to be propagated by the fwiord, or infidels to be
converted by violence; that other weapons were
to be employed in this ministry; patient infiruaion
must enlighten the underflanding, and pious ex.
ample captivate the heart, before men could be
induced to abandon error, and embrace the truth'.
Amidlt scenes, where a narrow-minded bigotry
appears in such close union with oppreflion and
cruelty, s~entiments so liberal and humane soothe
the mind with unexpeated pleasure; and at a time
when the rights of cons~cience were little under·
flood in the Christian world, and the idea of tolera.
tion unknown, one is astonished to find a Spaniih
monk; of the sixteenth century among the first ad·
vocates against persecution, and in behalf of reli-
gious liberty. The remonfirances of an ecclesial·
tic, no less refpeatable for wis~dom than virtue,
had their proper weight with Cortes. He left the
Tlafcalans in the undiflurbed exercise of their own
rites, requiring only that they should desist from
their horrid pradice of offering human vidims in
sacrifice.

Advances COR\TEs, as soon as his troops were fit for
to chlulr. service, resolved to continue his march to.

P B3. Diaz. c. 77* P. 5i4. c. 83. p. 61.

wards

wards Mexico, notwithilanding the earnest difl'ua. a qo o
fives of the Tlafcalans, who represented his de- ~ VI
flrudion as unavoidable, if he put himself in the so'9
power of a prince so faithles~s and cruel as Monte.
zuma. As he was accompanied by fix thousand
Tlafcalans, he had now the command of forces
which resembled a regular army. They direaed oa· .23
their cours~e towards Cholula; Montezuma, who
had at length consented to admit the Spaniards
into his presence, having informed Cortes, that
he had given orders for his friendly reception
there. Cholula was a considerable town, and
though only five leagues distant from Tlalcala,
w~as formerly an independent slate, but had been
lately fubjeaed to the Mex~ican empire. This was
considered by all the people of New Spain as a
holy place, the fanauary and chief feat of their
gods, to which pilgrims resorted from every pro-.
vince, and a greater number of human vidims
were offered in its principal temple than ev·en in
that of Mexico 9. Montezuma seems to have in-
vited the Spaniards thither, either from some
fuperflitious hope that the gods would not s~us-
ser this sacred manflon to be defiled, without
pouring down their wrath upon those impious
firangers, who ventured to insult their power in
the place of its peculiar residence ; or from a be-
lief that he himself might there attempt to cut

(I Torquemada Monar. Ind. 1. 281, 282. ;i. 291. Gomara
Cron. c. 6r. Herrcra, dec. 2. lib. vii. c. 2.

VoL. IF U thent

B op o them off with more certain falccefs, under the int.

Smediate proteaton of his divinities.

rhe reverity CORTES had been warned by the Tlaifcalans, be-

S..fore he fat out on his march, to keep a watchful

eye over the Cholulans. He himself, though re.
ceived into the town with much seeming refpec2
.and cordiality, observed s~everal circumitances in
their conduat which excited ulrpicion. Two of
the Tlafcalans, who were encamped at fame
difiance from the town, as the Cholulans refused
to admic their ancient enemies within its precinc~s,
having found means to enter in dififuie, acquainted
Cortes, that they obs~erved the women and chil·
dren of the principal citizens retiring in great
hurry every night; and that fix children had been
s~acrificed in the chief temple, a rite which indi.
cated the execution of some warlikie enterprise to
be approaching. At the fame time, Marina the
interpreter received information from an Indian
woman of diftinalon, whose confidence she had
gained, that the deftruaion of her friends wfas
concerted ; that a body of Mexican troops lay con·
cealed near the town; that some of' the treets
were barricaded, and in others, pits or deep
trenches were dug, and slightly covered over, as
traps into which the horses might fall; that itones
and~ millive weapons were colleaed on the tops of
the temples, with which to overwhelm the in·
fantry; that the~ fatal hour was now at hand, and
their ruin unavoidable. Cortes, alarmed at this

concurnng

concurring evidence, secretly arrested three of the B O O K
chief priests, and extorted from them a confeifion, j
that confirmed the intelligence which he had re- '5e.
ceived. As not a moment was to be loss, he in-
Itantly res~olved to prevent his enemies, and to in-
fliQ on them such dreadful vengeance as might
fIrike Montezuma and his ~ubjeas with terror.
For this purpose, the Spaniards and Zempoallans
were drawn up in a large court, which had been
allotted for their quarters, near the centre of the
town; the Tlarcalans had orders to advance; the
magiffrates, and s~everal of the chief citizens were
sent for, under various pretexts, and seized. On
a signal given, the troops rush~ed out, and fell
upon the multitude, destitute of leaders, and to
much affonifhed, that the weapons dropping from
their hands, they flood motionless, and incapable
ol defence. W;hile the Spaniards pressed them in
front, the Tlak~alans attacked them in the rear.
The fireets were filled with bloodfhedd and death.
The temples, which afforded a retreat to the:
prieffs and some of the leading men, were set on
fire, and they perished in the flames. This scene
of horror continued two days ; during which, the
wretched inhabitants f~uffered all that the deftruc-
tive rage of the Spaniards, or the implacable
revenge of their' Indian allies, could inflia. At
length the carnage ceas~ed, after the slaughter of
hi thousand Cholulans, without the loss of a
single Spaniard. Cortes then releas~ed the magil·
trates, and reproaching them bitterly for their in-

U 2 tended

B qOO K tended treachery, declared, that as justice was now

L appeas~ed, he forgave the offence, but required

' '9* them to recal the citizens who had fled, and re-

establish order in the town. Such was the ascend.
ant which the Spaniards had acquired over this fu.
perftitious race of men, atnd so deeply were they
impressed with an opinion of their superior, discern-
mnent, as well as power, that, in obedience to this
command, the city was in a few days filled again
with people, who, amidst the ruins of their sacred
buildings, yielded ref~peltful service to men, whole
hands were itained with the blood of their rela·
tions and fellow-citizens '.

on.29. FROM Cholula, Cortes advanced direilly to.
Aldvances.
towards wards Mexico, which was only twenty leagues
Mex'cO, diffant.. In every place through which he passed,

he was received as a pers~on poffeffed of fufficient
power to deliver the empire from the opprellion
under which it groaned; and the caziques or go.
vernors communicated to him all the grievances
which they felt under the tyrannical government of
Montezuma, with that unreserved confidence which
men naturally repose in superior beings. Wfhen
Cortes first observed the feeds of discontent in the
remote provinces of the empire, hope dawned upon
his mind; but when he now dis~covered such ymp·
toms of alienation from their monarch near the

I Cortes Relat. Ramufi. iii. 23.13. .Diaz. c.83. Comara

Cron. c. 64. Herrera, dec. 2. lib. vii. c. I, 2. See NOTE
LXXXI.

feat of government, he concluded that the vital B 0r 0
parts of the constitution were affeaed, and con- cA
ceived the most sanguine expeaations of overturn- asze.
ing a fcate, whose natural firength was thus
divided and impaired. While those refle~ions
encouraged the general to per~ift in his arduous
undertaking, the soldiers were no less animated by
oblervations more obvious to their capacity. In
descending from the mountains of Chalco, across
which the road lay,.~ the vait plain of Mexico
opened gradually to their view. When they first FrRc view
beheld this prof~peQ, one of the most firiking and or a.
beautiful on the face of the earth; when they ob·
served fertile and cultivated fields, firetching far-
ther than the eye could reach; when they saw a
lake resembling the sea in extent, encompalled
with large towns, and discovered the capital city
rising upon an island in the middle, adorned with
its temples and turrets; the scene so far exceeded
their imagination, that some believed the fanciful
deferiptions of romance were realized, and that its
enchanted palaces and gilded domes were pre-
fented to their fight; others could hardly persuade
themselves that this wonderful fpedtacle was any
thing more than a dream '. As they advanced,
their doubts were removed, but their amazement
increased. They were now fully satisfied that the
country was rich beyond any conception which
they had formed of it, and flattered themselves

* See N O TE LXXXII. -

U 3 that

B op it that at length they- thould obtain an ample recom-

Ly pealce for all their services and fulfferings.

tn Mn-Teirrero e- - HITHE R TO they had met with no enemyto oppole
tezuma. their progres~s, though fLeveral circumitances occur·

red which led them to f~ufpea that fame design was
formled to surprise and cut them off. Many mef-
fencgers arrived f~uccellively from Montezuma, per·
m~itting them one day to advance, requiring them
on the next to retire, as his hopes or fears alter-
nately prevailed; and so wonderful was this infa·
tuation, which s~eems to be unaccountable on any
ilippofition but that of a superstitious dread of
thle Spaniatrds, as beings of a superior nature, that
C~ortes was almofl: at the gates of the capital, be.
fore the monarch had determined whether to re.
cceive him as a friend, or to oppos~e him as an enemy.
B~ut as no sign of open hofiliity appeared, the
Spaniards, without regarding the fluanations of
A7·ontezuma's sentiments, continued their march
along the caus~eway which led to Mexico through
the lake, with great circumfpeaion and the firileft
discipline, thiou2gh without s~eeming to fuffed the
prince whom they were about to visit.

H SrR HEN they drew near the city, about a thour
pa.r~s" fanid persons, who appeared to be of diftin8ion,

came forth to meet there, adorned with plumes,
and clad in mantles of fine cotton. Each ofthere,
in his order, passed by Cortes, and saluted him
according to the mode deemed meft refpee~ful and

submissive

fhbmii~ve in their country. They announced the B op
approach of' Montezuma himself, and soon after cMc-
his harbingers came in fight. There appeared firit rs's.
two hundred person~s in an uniform dress, with
barge plumes of feathers, alike in fashion, march-
ing two and two, in deep silence, bare-footed, with
their eyes fixed on the ground. These were fol-
lowed by a company of higher rank, in their most
thowy apparel, in the midst of whom was Monte-
zuma, in a chair or litter richly ornamented with
gold, and feathers of various colours. Four of
his principal favourites carried him on their thoul-
ders, others fblpported a canopy of curious work-
manship over his head. Before him marched
three officers with rods of gold in their hands,
which they lifted up on high at certain intervals,
and at that signal all the people bowed their
heads, and hid their faces, as unworthy to look~
on so great a snonarch. When he drew near,
Cartes dismounted, advancing towards him with
officious halle, and in a refpeaful polture. At
the Fame time Montezuma alighted from his chair,
and leaning on the arms of two of his near rela-
tions, approached with a flow and flately pace, his
attendants covering the fireet with cotton cloths,
that he might not touch the ground. Cortes ac-
costed him with profound reverence, after the Eu-
ropean fashion. He returned the salutation, ac-
cording to the mode of his country, by touching
the earth with his hand, and then killing it. This
ceremony, the customary exprefiion of veneration

U 4 from

na 0 K f'rom inferiors towards those who were above thern

LL in rank, appeared such amazing condefcenflon in

rS e. a proud monarch, who s~carcely deigned to con.

fider the reft of mank~ind as of the fame species
w~ith himself, that all his fubjeas firmly believed
thos~e persons, before whom he humbled himself in
this: manner, to be something more than human.
Accordingly, as they marched through the crowpd,
the Spaniards frequently, and with much fatisfac-
tion, heard themselves denominated Teules, or di·
vinities. Nothing material passed in this firlt in,
terview. M'onteauma conduaed Cortes to the
quarters which he had prepared for his reception,
and immediately took leave of hitn,with a politeness
not unworthy of a court more refined. " You are
now," says he, '( with your brothers in your owrn
house; refresh yourselves after your fatigue, and
be happy until I return '." The place allotted to
the Spaniards for their lodging wa~s a hous~e built
by the father of M/ontezuma. It was surrounded
by a ftonecwall, with towers at proper difiances,
which served for defence as well as for ornament,
and its apartments and courts were so large, as to
accommodate both the Spaniards and their Indian
allies, The first care of Cortes was to take pre.
cautions for his security, by planting the artillery
to as to command the different avenues which
led to it, by appointing a large divilion of his

t Cortes Relat. Ram. fii. 232-235. B. Diaz. C. 83·-488

Gomlars Crop. c. 6L), 64 SIerrera, dec. 7. lib. vii. c. 3, 4, 5*

troops

troops to be always on guard, and by poffing cen- B ovo re
tinels at proper stations, wlth injunaions to observe
the fagme vigilant discipline as if they were within app.·
fight of an enemy's camp.

IN the evening, Montezuma returned to visit his HiS idea of

thle Spa-

guests with the fame pomp as in their first inter. mlards.
view, and brought presents of such value, not
only to Cortes and to his officers, but even to the
pnvate men, as proved the liberality of the mo..
narch to be suitable to the opulence of his king-
dom. A long conference ensued, in which Cortes
learned what was the opinion of Montezuma with
refped to the Spaniards. It. was an eflablifhed
tradition, he told him, among the Mexicans, that
their anceffors came originally from a remote re-
gion, and conquered the provinces now f~ubjea to
his dominion; that after they were f~ettled there,
the great captain who conduaed this colony re-
turned to his own country, promising, that at
fame future period his descendants thouldd visit
them, aflfume the government, and reform their
conflitution and laws; that, from what he had
heard and seen of Cortes and his followers, he
w~as convinced that they were the very persons
wRhofe appearance the Mexican traditions and pro-
phecies taught them to expeQ; that accordingly
he had received them, not as firangers, but as re-
lations of the fame blood and parentage, and de-
fired that they might confider themselves as masters
in his dominions, for both himself and his fubjeas

thould

n o0r 0 retould be ready to comply with their will, and

-I even to prevent their wifhies. Cortes made a reply
s ~9. in his usual flyle, with refpe61 to the dignity and

power of his sovereign, and his intention in fend-
ing him into that country ; artfully endeavouringo
so to frame his discourse, that it might coincide as
much as pofirble with the idea which Montezuma
had formed concerning the origin of the Spaniards.
Next morning, Cortes and s~ome of his principal
attendants were admitted to a public audience of
the emperor. The three subsequent days were
en ployed in viewing the city; the appearance of
w·hich, so far s~uperior in the order of its build-
ings and the number of its inhabitants to any
place the Spaniards had beheld in America, and
y-et so little resembling the firuffure of an European
city, filled them with surprise and admiration.

Mr exico, or Ten~uchtit/arn, as it was anciently

called by the natives, is situated in a large plain,
environed by mountains of such height, that,
though within the torrid zone, the temlperature of
its climate is mild and healthful. All the moiflure
which descends from the high grounds is colle~ed
in several lakes, the two largest of which, of
about ninety miles in circuit, communicate with
each other. The waters of the one are freth, thoer
of the other brackish. On the banks of the latter,
and on some finall islands adjoining to thens, the
capital of Montezuma's empire was built. The
atccefs to the city n as by artificial causeways or

(treets

Aheets formed of itones and earth, about thirty B qOO K
feet in breadth. As t e waters of the lake during cs-
the rainy f~eafonsoverflowfed the flat country, these 'ss,.
caulewvays were of considerable length. That of
Tacuba, on the weft, extended a mile and a half;
that of Tepeaca C, on the north-west, three miles;
that of Cuoyacan, towards the south, fix miles.
On the east there was no causeway, and the city
could be approached only by canoes ". In each
ofthefe cauereways~were openings at proper inter-
vals, through which the waters flow~ed; and over
these beams of timber were laid, which being co-
vered wvith earth, the causeway or street had every-
where an uniform appearance. As the appr-oaches
to the city were singular, its confiruaion was re-
markable. Not only the temples of their gods,
but the houses belonging to the monarch, and to
persons of diftinalon, wrere of such dimenflons,
that, in comparison with ariy other buildings which
hadbeen hitherto discovered i,?America, they might
be termed magnificent. The habitations of the
common people were mean,~ rese-mbling the huts
of other Indians. But they were all placed in a

' I am indebted to M. Clav-igero for correAing an error of
importance in my defer~iption of Mexico. From the east,
where Tezeuco was situated, there was no causeway, as I have
oblerved, and yet by some inattention on my part, or on that
of the printer, in all the former editions one of the causeways
was said to lead to Tezeuco. M. Clavigero's measurement ·
of the length of these causeways differs f~omewfhat from that
which I have adopted from F. Torribio. Clavig. ii. p. 7 2.

9 f?, Torribio MS,

regular

B qOV K regular manner, on the banks of the canals which

Spaff~ed through the city, in some of its diffrias, or

'ss9. on the sides of the fireets which interfeaed it in

other quarters. In s~everal places were large open-
ings or s~quares, one of which, allotted for the
great market, is said to have been so fpacioue, that
forty or fifty thousand persons carried on traffi
there. In this city, the pride of the New World,
and the noblest monument of the indufkr~y and art
of man, while unacquainted with the ·use of iron,
and destitute of aid from any domeltic animal, the
Spaniards, who are most moderate in their compu-
tations, reckon that there were at least sixty thou-
sand inhabitants x

*rseir Sann- uho muhoeethnoetofheob
ETOUS~~ Bvhwmtt&*vrhho ·lyotoe

n. jeas might amuse or affonifh the Spaniards, they

felt the utmost s~olicitude w!ith refpeQ to their owvn
situation. From a courcurrence of circumffances,
no less unexpeAed thtln favourable to their pro-
grefs, they had been, allowed to penetrate into the
heart of a powerful kingdom, and were now
lodged in its capital, without having once met
with open opposition from its monarch. The
Tlarcalans, however, had earnefily diss~uaded thern
from placing such confidence in Montezuma, as to
enter a city of s~uch a peculiar situation as IMexica,
where that prince would have them at mercy, that

SCortes Relat. Jiam. ill. 239. D. Relat. della gran. Citti

de Mexico, par un Gentelhuomo del Cortele. Ram. ibid. 304.
E. Herrera, dec. 2. lib. vii. c. r4, &c.

up as iti were in a snare, from which it was impof- a o a~ re
fible to escape. They assured him that the Mexi- 7
can priests had, in the name of the Gods, counl '5'9.
felled their fobvereign to admit the Spaniards into
the caipital, that he might cut them off there
at one blow with perfeQ security Y. They now
perceived, too plainly, that the apprehensions of
their idlies were not destitute of foundation ; that,
by breaking the bridges placed at certain inter-
vals on the causeways, or by destroying part of the
causeways themnfelves, their retreat would be ren,
deredl impraaicable, and they must remain cooped
up in the centre of a hoffile city, s~urrounded by
multitudes fufficient to overwhelm them, and
writhout a possibility of receiving aid from their
allies. Montezuma had, indeed, received them with
distinguished refpea. But ought they to reckon
upon this as real, or to confider it as feigned ?
Even if it were sincere, could they promis~e on its
continuance ? Their safety depended upon the
wiill of a monarch in whole attachment they had
no reason? to confide; and an order flowing from
his caprice, or a word uttered by him in passion,
might decide irrevocably concerning their fate z,

THESE refleaions, so obvTious as to occur to the Solicitude

meanest ~foldlier, did not escape the vigilant saga. ledxirTr
city of their general. Before he set out from Cho. ons
Jula, Cortes had received advice from VSilla
Rican, that qualpopoca, one of the Miexican

r B. Diaz. c. 85, 86. Z B. Diaz. c. 94.
r Cortes Relat. Ram. iii. 235. C.

generals

B O 9O K generals on the frontiers, having assembled an

C~VIIJarmy in order to attack some of the people
'5s9. whom the Spaniards had encouraged to throw off

the Mexican yoke, Efcalante had marched out
with part of the g~arr~ifn to support his allies; that
an engfagement had ensued, in which, though the
Spaniards were viiaorious, Ef~calante, with seven
of his men, had been mortally wounded, his
horse killed, and one Spaniard had been fur-
rounded by the enemy, and taken alive; that the
head of this unfortunate captivre, after being car-
ried in triumph to different cities, in order to con-
vince the people that their invaders were not im·
mortal, had been sent to Mexico" 6 ots
though alarmed v ith this intelligence, as an indi-
cation of M~ontezuma's hostile intentions, had con-
tinued his march. But as soon as he entered
Mexico, he became sensible, that, from an ex~cess
of confidence in the superior valour and dilcipline
of his troops, as well as from the disadvantage of
having nothing to guide him in an urnknowfn
cfountry, but the defeaive intelligence- which he
had received from people with whom his mode of
communication was very imp~erfea, he had pushed
forward into a situation, where it was difficult to
continue, and from which it was dang~erous to re-
tire. Disgrace, and perhaps ruin, w-as the certain
consequence of attemptingr the latter. The fuc-
cess of his enterprise dependetd upon furppor~ting
the high opinion whichl thie peopic of New Spain

BI. D;3Z. c. 93, 94·IC.Hr~rera dec. 2. lib. Vill. c. I.

had fcrmed with refpea to the irresistible power B qO K
of his arms. Upon the first fympytom of timi- cj
dity on his part, their veneration would cease, and sys.·
Montezuma, whom fear alone reitrained at pre-
feat, would let loose upon him the whole force
of his empire. At the fame time, he knew that
the countenance of his own sovereign was to be
obtained only by a series of viAories, and that no,
thing but the merit of exrtraordinary success could
Screen his condua from the censure of irreg~ul>
rity. From all there considerations, it w-as nece:'.
fary to maintain his station, and to extricate him-
lfelfut of the difficulties in which one bold Rtep
had involved him, by venturing upon another
flill bolder. The situation was trying, but hi:;
mind was eqlual to it; and after revolving the
matter with deep attention, he fixed upon a plalt
no less extraordinary than daring·. He determined nenim cto
to seize Montezuma in his palace, and to carry teauma.
him as a prisoner to the Spanish qu'arters. From
the fuperflitious veneration of the Mexicans for
the person of their monarch, as well as their im-
plicit fubmifIion to his w~ill, he hoped, by having
Montezuma in his power, to acqluire the s~upreme
direation of their affairs; or, at least, with such a
sacred pledge in his hands, he made no doubt of
being secure from anly effort of their violence.

THIS he immediately propofedl to his officers. ru~s mannrr

, of execut5l

The timid flartled at a mealiure so audacious, and uhs.
raised objeaions. T'he more intelligent and refo-
lalte, conscious that it was the only resource in

whic~h

B O O K which there appeared any profped of s~afety,

V.-·warmly approved of it, and brought over their

sz,.· companions so cordially to the fame opinion, that

it was agreed Iintantly to make the attempt. At
his usual hour of visiting Montezuma, Cortes
went to the palace, accompanied by .Alvarado,
Sandoval, Lugo, Velasquez de Leon, and Davila,
five of his principal officers, and as many trafty

folders.Thirty chosen men followed, not mn re.

fgular order, but sauntering at some difiance, as E
t~hey had no objeft but curiosity; fmnall parties
wtere potted at proper intervals, in all the fireets
'leading from the Spanish quarters to the court;
and the remainder of his troops, with the Tlakca.
Jan allies, were under arms, ready to sally out on
the firit alarm. Cortes and his attendants were
admitted without suspicion ; the Mexicans retiring,
;as ufuial, out of refpeft. He addressed the mo.
mnarch in a tone very different from that which he
had employed in former· conferences, reproaching
Shim bitterly as the author of the violent assault
made upon the Spaniards by one of his officers,
and demanded public reparation for the loss which
they had fuffained by the death of some of their
companions, as well as for the ins~ult offered to
the great prince whose s~ervants they were. Mon·
tezuma, confounded at this unexpedted accufa·
tion, and changing colour, either from confciod.·
ness of guilt, or from feeling the indignity with
wnhich he was treated, asserted his own innocence
with great earnefineirs, and, as a proof of it, gave
orders instantly to bring Qualpopoca and his ac.

I7 complices

complices prisoners to Mexico. Cortes replied, a o~l i
with seeming complaisance, that a declaration so A
relpeltable left no doubt remaining in his own "'5'4
mind, but that something more was requisite to
satisfy his followers, who would never be con-
vinced that Montezuma did not harbour hoffile
;ntentions against them, unless, as an evidence 01'
his confidence and attachment, he removed from
his own palace, and took; up his residence in the
Spanish quarters, where he should be served and
honoured as became a great monarch. The firlt
m~ention of so Rtrange a propofat bereaved Mlonte-
zuma of speech, and almost of motion. At length,
indignation gave him utterance, and he haughtily
answered, "C That persons of his rank were not
accuffomed voluntarily to give up themselves as
prisoners; and were he mean enough to do so, his
fubjecls would not permit s~uch an affront to be
offered to their fovereign." Cortes, unwilling to
employ force, endeavoured alternately to soothe
and to intimidate him. T~he altercation became
warm; and having continued above three hours,
Velasquez de Leon, an impetuous and gallant
young man, exclaimed with impatience, " Wihy
waff~e more time in vain Let us either s~eize him
inflantly, or flab him to the heart." The threat-
ening voice and fierce gestures with which there
words were uttered, struck Montezurna. The
Spaniards, he was sensible, had now proceeded so
far, as left him no hope that they would recede.
His own danger was imminent, the necei~ty una-

Vol.. II. I voidable.

a 0~ 0 K voidable. He saw both, and abandoning himself to

L~~~his fate, complied with their request.

I519.

Montezur H!IS officers were called. He communicated to
the Sanih them his resolution. Thuhaonheadaf
4uarter" fliaed, they presumed not to queffion the will of

their matter, but carried him in silent pomp, all
bathed in tears, to the Spanish quarters. When
it was known thac the firangers were conveying
away the emperor, the people broke out into the
wildest transports of grief and rage, threatening
the Spaniards with immediate deffruation, as the
punishment juffly due to their impious audacity.
But as soon as Montezuma appeared with a seem.
ing gaiety of countenance, and waved his hand,
the tumult was hushed, and upon his declaring it
to be of his own choice that he went to reside for
some time among his new friends, the multitude,
taught to revere every intimation of their iove-
reign's pleasure, quietly dispersed ".

THUS WaS a powerful prince s~eized by a few

strangers, in the midst of his capital, at noonday,
and carried offas a prisoner without op~position or
bloodihed. Hiffory contains nothing parallel to
this event, either with refpeQ to the temerity of
the attempt, or the success of the execution; and
were not all the circumstances of this extraordinary
tranfaaion authenticated by the most unquellion.

C B3. Diaz. c. 95. Gamnara Cron. c. 83. Cortes Rdat.

Ra~m. iii. p. 235> 236. Herrera, dec. z. lib. viii. c. 2, 3*

able

a.ble evidence, they would appear so wild and ex- a 0 0 K
travagant, as to go far beyond the bounds of that cM
probability which must be preserved even in fiai* 59
tious narrations.

1\IONTEZUMA Was received in the Spanish quar- Received
ters with all the ceremonious refped which Cortes ret? rielpc.
had promis~ed. He was attended by his own do-
meltics, and served with his us~ual slate. His
principal officers had free acces~s to him, and-he
carried on every funalon of government as if he
had been at perfeQ liberty. The Spaniards, how-
ev~er, watched him with the kcrupulous vigilance
which was natural in guarding such an important
prize d, endeavouring at the fame time to sooth
and reconcile him to his situation, by every exter-
nal demonfiration of regard and attachment. But
from captive princes the hour of humiliation and
fuffering is never far difiant. Qualpopoca, his sajeatea to
lon, and five of the principal officers who served I II.cuelindig-
under him, were brought prisoners to the capital,
in consequence of the orders which Montezuma Dc.4
had ifibed. The emperor gave them up to Cortes,
that he might enqluire into the nature of their
crime, and determine their punishment. They
were formally tried by a Spanish court-martial;
and though they had aaed no other part than what
became loyal f~ubje'as and brave men, in obeying
the orders of their lawful sovereign, and in oppo-
sing the invaders of their country, they were

d See NOTE LXXXIII.

I 2 condemned

B O O K Condemned to be burnt alive. The execution of

fu:iich atrocious deeds is feldorn long suspended. The

'E9 unhappy vidtims were inflantly led forth. The

pile on which they were laid was compos~ed of the
weapons colleaed in the royal magazine for the
public defence. An innumerable multitude of
Mexicans beheld, in silent astonishment, the double
insult offered to the majesty of their empire, an
officer of diftinalon committed to the flames
by the authority of firangers, for having done
wthat he ow-ed in duty to his natural sovereign;
and the arms ps,\ided by the forelight of their an.
ceffors for avenging public wrongs, confilmed be.
fore their ey-es.

Bu'r these were not the most shocking indignities

whIich the Mlexicans had to bear. The Spaniards,
convinced that qualpopoca would not have ven-
tured to attack Efcalante without orders from his
mnafter, were not satisfied with infliaing vengeance
on the infirument employed in committing that
crime, while the author of it escaped with impu-
nity. Juff before Qualpopoca was led out to
fliffer, Cortes entered the apartment of Montezu·
ma, followed by some of his officers, and a soldier
carrying a pair of fetters ; and approaching the
monarch with a fiern countenance, told him, that
as the persons who were now to undergo the pu-
nifh~ment which they merited, had charged him as
the cause of the outrage committed, it was necel-
fary that he likewise thlould make atonement for

that

that guilt; then turning away abruptly, without B qOV K
waiting for a reply, commanded the s~oldier to clap -
the fetters on his legs. The orders were inflantly 'S'
axecuted. The dis~consolate monarch, trained up
with an idea that his person was sacred and invio-
lable, and considering this profanation of it as the
prelude of immediate death, broke out into 10ud
lamentations and complaints. His attendants,
fpeechlels with horror, fell at his feet, bathing
them with their tears; and bearing up the fetters
in their hands, endeavoured with officious tender-
nels to lighten their pressure. Nor did their grief
and delpondency abate, until Cortes returned from
the execution, and with a cheerful countenance
ordered the fetters to be taken off. As Montezu-
ma's spirits had funk with unmanly deje~ion, they
now role into indecent joy ; and with an unbecom-
ing transition, he passed at once from the anlguifh
of despair to trans~ports of gratitude and ex~prefirons
of fondnef's towards his deliverer.

IN those tranf~a~ions, as reprefemted by the Spa- neltons or

Cortes's

niih hifforians, we s~earch in vain for the qualities condua.
which distinguish other parts of Cortes's condua.
To usurp a juridi~iion which could not belong to
afiranger, who assumed no higher char~aacr than.
that of an ambaffdor from a foreign prince, and,
under colour of it, to inflia a capital punifhmentt
on men whose condua intitled them to efreem,
appears an a8t of barbarous cruelty. To put the
monarch of a great kingdom in irons, and, after

X 3 such

B O O K fach ignominious treatment, f~uddently to releare

c~J him, seems to be a dis~play of power no less incon.

'srs* fderate than wanton. According to the common

relation, no account can be given either of the one
a~tion or the other, but that Cortes, intoxicated
with fuccers, and presuming on the ascendant
which he had acquired over the minds of the IMexi-
cans, thought nothing too bold for him to under.
take, or too dangerous to execute. But, in one
view, these proceedings, however repugnant to
juff~ice and humanity, may have flowed from that
artful policy which regulated every part ofCortes's
behaviour towards the Mexicans. They had con-
ceived the Spaniards to be an order of beings fupe.
rior to men. It was of the utmroft consequence to
cherish this illution, and to keep up the veneration
which it insp~ired. Cortes wish~ed that thedding the
blood of a Spaniard should be deerged the moss hei-
nous of all crimes ; and nothing appeared better cal-
culated to establish this opinion, than to condemn
the first Mfexicans who had ventured to commit it
to a crueldcath, and to oblige their monarch him.
self to submit to a mortifying indignityr, as an ex.
piation for being acceffadry to a deed so atrocious'.

ged"pool THE rigour with which Cortes puniihed the un·
tes quird. happy persons who first presumed to lay violent

hands upon his followers, seems accordingly to
have made all the imprefiion that he desired. The

* See NOTE LXXXIV.

[pirit of M~ontezuma was not only overawed, but n oop K
subdued. During fix months that Cortes remained ct-
in Mexico, the monarch continued in the Spanilla 1s 0.
quarters, with an appearance of as entire fatisfac-
tion and tranquillity, as if he had resided there, not
from confiraint, but through choice. -His mini-
fIers and offcers attended him as us~ual. He took
cognizance of all affairs;; every order was ifibet)
in his name. The external alpea of government
appearing the fame, and all its ancient forms being
kcrupuloufly observed, the people were so little
sensible of any change, that they obeyed the man-
dates of their monarch with the fame f~ubmiflive re-
verence as ever. Such was the dread which both
Montezuma and his f~ubjeas had of the Spaniards,
or such the veneration in which they held them,
that no attempt was made to deliver their sovereign
from confinement ; and though Cortes, relying on
this ascendant which he had acquired over their
minds, permitted him not only to visit his temples,
but to make hunting excurflons beyond the lake,
a guard of a few Spaniards carried with it such a
terror as to intimidate the multitude, and s~ecure
the captive monarch f.

THUs, by the fortunate temerity of Cortes in
seizing Montezumna, the Spaniards at once secured
to themselves more extensive authority in the Mexi-
can empire than it was poflible to have acquired
in a long course of time by open force; and they

I Cortes Relat. p. 236. E. B3. Diaz. c. 97, 98, 99*

I 4 exercised

B 0 O0 K exercised more ab~solute s~way in the name of another

1 ~ - ,than they could have done in their own. The arts
'sso. of polished nations, in f~ubjeaing such as are less

improved, have been nearly the fame in every pe-
riod. The fyfitem of screening a foreign uf~urpa-
tion, under the fanation of authority derived from
the natural rulers of a country, the device ofem.
ploying the magiffrates and forms already elta-
blifhed as infiruments to introduce a new dominion
of which we are apt to boast as sublime refinements
in policy peculiar to the present age, were inven-
tions of a more early period,, and had been tried
svith succes~s in the Welt, long before they were
pradit~ed in the East.

rrre which CORTES availed hims~elf to the titmoft of the
h: makes of power which he poff~effed by being able to aQ in the

name of Montezuma. H~e sent some Spaniards,
whom he judged best qualified for fych commillions,
into different parts of the empire, accompanied by
persons ofdiffinaion, whom M~ontezuma appointed
to attend them both as guides and proteaors. They
visited moss of the provinces, viewed their foil and
produalous, surveyed with particular care the dif-
trias which yielded gold or silver, pitched uppa fe.
veral places as proper stations for future colonies,
and endeavoured to prepare the minds of the people
for submitting to the Spanish yoke, WThile they
were thus employed, Cortes, in the name and by
the autliority of Mlontezuma, degraded some of the
principal officers in ;the empire, whole abilities or

independent

independent s~pirit excited his jealousy, and fubiti- a q o ze
tuted in their place persons less capable or more cs
obsequious, asso.

ONE thing still was wanting to complete his fe-
curity. He wished to have such command of the
lake as might ensure a retreat, if, either from le-
vity or disgust, the Mexicans thould take arms
against him, and break down the bridges or cause-
ways. This, too, his own address, and the faci-
lity of Montezuma, enabled him to accomplish.
Having frequently entertained his prisoner with
pompous accounts of the European marine and art
of navigation, he awakened his curiosity to fee
those moving palaces which made their way
through the water without oars. Under pretext
of gratifying this desire, Cortes persuaded Mon-
tezuma to appoint some of his s~ubjects to fetch part
of the naval flores which the Spaniards had deposit-
edat Vera Cruz to Mexico, and to employ others
in cutting down and preparing timber. With their
afilance, the Spanish carpenters soon completed
two brigantines, which afforded a frivolous amule-
ment to the monarch, and were considered by Cortes
as a certain resource, if he should be obliged to
retire.

ENCOURAGED by to many inflances of the mo- rnontezumr
narch's tame s~ubmission to his will, Cortes ventured Irdks hm-

self a vassal

to put it to a proof still more trying. He urged or spain.
Montezuma to acknowledge himself a vassal of the
king of Castile, to hold his crown of him as fupe-

2 I rlOr,

a qo o a rior, and to fubjea his dominions to the payment

c ~~~of an annual tribute. With this requisition, the

asso. last and moss humbling that can be made to one

poffeff~ed of sovereign authority, Montezuma was
so obsequious as to cornply. He called together
the chief men of his~ empire, and in a s~olemn ha-
rangue, reminding thern of the traditions and pro.
phecies which led them to expea the arrival of a
people fprungr from the fame flock with themselves,
in order to take poffeflion of the supreme powfer,
he declared his belief that the Spaniards were this
promised race; that therefore he recognized the
right of their monarch to govern the 1Wexican
empire; that he would lay his crown at his feet,
and obey him as a tributary. While uttering thdel
words, Montezuma dis~covered how deeply he wFas
affeaed in making such a s~acrifice. Tears and
groans frequently interrupted his discourse. Over.
awed and broken as his spirit was, it ftliUretained
such a sense of dignity, as to feel that pang which
pierces the heart of princes when confirained to
resign independent power. The first mention of
such a resolution firuck the afiembly dumb with
a(Lonifhment. This was followed by a sullen mur·
mur of sorrow, mingled with indignation, which
indicated fame violent eruption of rage to be near
at hand. This Cortes foresaw, and seasonably in·
terpofed to prevent it, by declaring that his maftrr
had no intention to deprive Montezuma of the
royal dignity, or to make any innovation upon the
conflitution and laws of the Mexican empire.

I7 This

This ass~urance, added to their dread of the Span~ih a o a o
power, and to the authority of their monarch's ex- <-- --

I25·0

ample, extorted a reluaant consent from the aff~em-
·bly r. The at of f~ubmillionl and homage was exe-
cuted with all the formalities which the Spaniards
were pleased to prescribe h

MONTEZUMA, at the desire of Cortes, accorn. The amount

of the trea-

panied this profeffion of fealty and nomage with a Cure conleB
magnificent present to his new sovereign; and, as- $2~h~ .
ter his example, his f~ubjeas brought in very libe-
ral contributions. The Spaniards now colleaed
all the treas~ure which had been either voluntarily
beffowed upon them at different times by Mlonte-
zuma, or had been extorted from his people under
various pretexts; and having melted the gold and
silver, the value ofthere, without including jewels
and ornaments of various kinds, which were pre-
ferred on account of their curious workmanship,
amounted to fix hundred thousand pesos. The
soldiers were impatient to have it divided, and olvitln of

it, and the

Cortes complied with their desire. A fifth of the dilcontent it

occalioned.

whole was first s~et apart as the tax due to the
king. Another fifth was allotted to Cortes, as
commander in chief. The s~ums advanced by Ve-
lafquez, by Cortes, and by s~ome of the officers,
towards defraying the expence of fitting out the
armament, were then deduaed. The remainder

a See NOTE LXXXV.
* Cortes Relat. 238. D. B. Diaz. c. 01. Gomara Cron.

c. 92. Herrera, dec. 2. lib. x. c. 4.

was

a ov K was divided among the army, including the garri.

Mc fou of Vera Cruz, in proportion to their different
aszo. ranks. After s~o many defalcations, the share of

a private man did not exceed a hundred pesos.
This fum fell so far below their sanguine expe~ta-
tions, that some f'oldiers rejefted it with scorn,
and others murmured to loudly at this cruel dil-
appointment of their hopes, that it required all the
address of Cortes, and no fmnall exertion of his
liberality, to appea~se them. The complaints of
the army were not altogether deffitute of founda-
·tion. As the crown had contributed nothing~ to-
wards the equipment or s~uccess of the, armament,
it was not without regret that the soldiers beheld it
diveep away so great a proportion of the treasure
purchased by their blood and toil. What fell to
the share of the general appeared, according to
the ideas of wealth in the sixteenth century, an
enormous fum. Some of Cortes's favourites had
s~ecretly appropriated to their own use several orna-
ments of gold, which neither paid the royal fifth,
nor were brought into account as part of the comn-
mon flock. It was, however, so manifeltly the
interest of Cortes at this period to make a large
remittance to the king, that it is highly probable
those concealments were not of great consequence.

Rea~aron THE total fum RUmaffed by the Spaniards bears
why gold
was found no proportion to the ideas which might be formed,
in Such
rinyl quan. either by reflec~ing on the descriptions given by
titles. Shifforians of the ancient splendour of Mlexico, or

by considering the produtions of its mines in n qo o i
modern times. But, among the ancient Mlexi- Mc
cans, gold and silver were not the flandards by '"
which the worth of other commodities was efti-
mated; and destitute of the artificial value derived
from this circumflance, were no farther in request
than as they furnished materials for ornaments and
trinkets. These were either consecrated to the
gods in their temples, or were worn as marks of
diftin8ion by their princes and some of their most
eminent chiefs. As the confumnption of the pre-
clous metals was inconsiderable, the demand for
them was not such as to put either the ingenuity
or induffry of the Mexicans on the fkretch, in or-
der to augment their flore. They were altogether
unacquainted with the art of working the rich
mines with which their country abounded. Wihat
gold they had was gathered in the beds of rivers,
native, and ripened into a pure metallic slate i
The utmost effort of their labour in s~earch of it
wvas to wash the earth carried down by torrents
from the mountains, and to pick out the grains of
gold which subsided; and even this simple opera-
tion, according to the report of the persons whom
Cortes appointed to su~rvey the provinces where
there was a profped of finding mines, they per-
formed very unikilfully k. From all those causes,
the whole mass of gold in poffeflion of the Mexi-

SCortes Relat. p. 236. F. B. Diaz. c. rto, log. Go.

mara Cron. c. 90.

SB. Diaz. c. 103*

c; ms

B qOO K cans was not great. As silver is rarely found pure,

c ~~and the Mexican art was too rude to conduat the

as20. process for refining it in a proper manner, the

quantity of this metal was still lefCs confiderable'.
Thus, though the Spaniards had exerted all the
power which they poffeffed in Mexico, and often
with indecent rapacity, in order to gratify their
predominant pafiron, and though Montezuma had
fondly exhauffed his treasures, in hopes of fa·
tiating their thirfk for gold, the produa of both,
which probably included a great part of the bul.
lion in the empire, did not rife in value above
what has been m~entioned m.

Montezuma Bxrr however pliant M~ontezuma might be in
inflexible
with grepeat other matters, with ref~pea to one point he was in-
to reupon. Aexible. Though Corces often urged him, with

the importunate zeal of a millionary, to renounce
his fals~e gods, and to embrace the Chriftianfaith,
he always rejeeaed the propolition with horror.
Superflition, among the Mexicans, was fonned
into s~uch a regular and complete fyltem, that its
inflitutions naturally took Edt hold of the mind;
and while the rude tribes in other parts of Ame-
rica were easily induced to relinquiih a few no-
tions and rites, so loose and arbitrary as hardly
to merit the name of a public religion, the Mexi-
cans adhered tenaciously to their mode of worship,
which, however barbarous, was accompanied with

SHerrors, dec. 2. lib. ix. c. 4*
m See NOTE LXXXVI.

such order and solemnity as to render it an objeQ B O O K
of the highest veneration. Cortes, finding all his .'
attempts ineffeaual to shake the conflancy of 1sso.
Montezuma, was so much enraged at his ob~tinacy,
that in a trans~port of zeal he led out his s~oldiers to
throw down the idols in the great temple by force.
But the priests taking arms in defence of their altars,
and the people crowding with great ardour to s~up-
port them, Cortes's' prudence overruled his zeal,
and induced him to desist from his rash attempt,
after ditlodging the idols from one of the ihrines,
and placing in their flead an image of the Virgin
Miary ".

FRoM that moment the Mexicans, who had schemes or

the Mexi-

permitted the imprisonment of their fovereign,castde Grtoy the
and fuffered the exaaions of strangers without a Spaniards.
flrug~gle, began to meditate how they might expel
or deffroy the Spaniards, and thought themselves
called upon to avenge their insulted deities. The
priests and leading men held frequent cons~ultations
with Montezuma for this purpole. But as it
might prove fatal to the captive monarch to
attempt either the one or the other by violence,
he was willing to try more gentle means. Having
called Cortes into his prerence, he observed, that
now, as all the purposes of his embassy were fully
accomplilhed, the gods had declared their will,
and the people signified their desire that he and
his followfers thould instantly depart out of the

a See NTOTE LXXXVII.

emplep

B O O K empire. With this he required them to domply,

' or unavoidable deftruation would fall suddenly on

asso. their heads. The tenor of this unexpeaed requ~ifi

tion, as well as the determined tone in which
it was uttered, left Cortes rio room to doubt that
it was the result of ~some deep fchem'e concerted
between Montezuma and his f~ubjeas`. He quickly
perceived that he might derive mlore advrantage
from a s~eeming compliance with the monarch's in.
clination, than from an ill-timed attempt to change
or to oppos~e it; and replied, with great compo·
sure, that he had already begun to prepare for re-
turnling to his own country; but as he had de.
firoyed the vessels in which he arrivred, some time
was requisite for building other· hipsi This ap.
peared reafonablel A number of Mexicans woere
s~ent to Vera Cruz to cut down timber, and some
Spaniih carpenter~s were appointed to superintend
the work. Cortes flattered himself, that during
this interval he might either find means to avert
the threatened danger, or receive such reinforce.
ments as would enable him to despis~e it.

^n~xi~etyand ALMost nine months were elapsed since Porto.
corref* carrero and Montejo had failed with his dispatches

to Spain; and he daily exvpeated their return with
a confirmation of his authority from the king.
Without this, his condition was insecure and
precarious, and after all -the great things which
he had done, it might be his doom to bear
the name and f~uffer the punishment of a tral-
tor, Rapid and extensive as his progress had

been,

been, he could not hope to complete the reduc- B O O K-
sion of a great empire with so fmnall a body of men,
w~hich by this time diseases of various kinds had sa,.·
considerably thinned; nor could he apply for re-
cruits to the Spanifhl settlements in the islands un-
til he received the royal approbation of his pro-
ceedings.

WHILE he remained in this cruel situation, he arr~ival

of a new ar-

anxious about what was past, uncertain with re- mamcnt,
spelt to the future, and, by the late declaration
es Montezuma, oppress~ed with a new addition of
cares, a Mlexican courier arrived with an account
of some ihips having appeared on the coast.
Cortes, with fond credulity, imagining that his
messengers were returned from Spain, and that the
completion of all his withes and hopes was at:
hand, irnparted the glad tidings to his compa-
nions, who received them with transports of mu-
tual gratulation. Their joy was not of long
continuance. A courier from Sandoval, whom
Cortes had appointed to succeed Ef~calante in com.
mand at Vera Cruz, brought certain information
that the armament was fitted out by Velafqpuez,
governor of Cuba, and idltead of bringing the aid
which they expeated, threatened them with imme-
diate deftruaion.

THE motives which prompted Velasquez to thls fitted out by
violent measur~e are obvious. From the circum- V''afques,
flances of Cortes's departure, it was impossible not
to ~ulpea his intention of throwing off all depend-

VOL. II. Y ence

BO O K ence upon him. His negleaing to transmit any

- account of his operations to Cuba, firengthened

snzo. this Cfupicion, which was at last confirmed, be.

yond doubt, by the indiferetion of the officers
whom Cortes s~ent to Spain. They, from some
motive which is not clearly explained by the con-
temporary hifforians, touched at the island of
Cuba, contrary to the peremptory orders of their
generalo. By this means Velasquez not only
learned that Cortes and his followers, after for·
mally renouncing all conneaion with him, had
effablifhed an independent colony in New Spain,
and were s~oliciting the king to confirm their pro.
ceedings by his authority; but he obtained parti·
cular information concerning the opulence of the
country, the valuable presents which Cortes had
received, and the inviting profpeas of s~uccess that
opened to his view. Every paflion which can
agitate an ambitious mind; thame, at having been
so grossly overreached; indignation, at being be-
trayed by the man whom he had feleted as the
objea of his favour and confidence; grief, for
having wasted his fortune to aggrandize an ene.
my; and despair of recovering s~o fair an opportu·
nity of establishing his fame and extending his
power, now raged in the bosom of Velasquez. All
there, with united force, excited him to make an
extraordinary effort in order to be avenged on the

* B. Diaz. c. 54, 55.· Herrera, dec. 2. lib. v. c.:4. Go.

mara Cron. c. 96.

author

author of his wrongs, and to wrest from him his B qOO K
usurped authority and conquests. Nor did he want c-
the appearance of a good title to juffify s~uch an asso.
attempt. The agent whom he sent to Spain with
an account of Grijalva's voyage, had met with a
most favourable reception; and from the f~peci-
mens which he produced, such high expeaations
were formed concerning the opulence of New
Spain, that Velasquez was authorised to prosecute
the discovery of the country, and appointed go-
vernor of it during life, with more extensive power
sad privileges than had been granted to any ad-
venturet from the time of Columbus'. Elated by
this distinguishing mark of favour, and warranted
to confider Cortes not only as intruding upon his
jurifdi8ion, but as disobedient to the royal man-
date, he determined to vindicate his own rights
and the honour of his sovereign by force of arms '.
His ardour in carrying on his preparations, were under the
such as might have been expeaed from the vio- Ev'£~",d of
lence of the pafirons with which he was animated ;
and in a short time an armament was completed,
consisting of eighteen ships, which had on board
fourscore hors~emen, eight hundred foot soldiers,
of which eighty were mufkieteers, and a hundred
and twenty cross-bow men, together with a train
of twelve pieces of cannon. As Velafquez's expe.
rience of the fatal cons~equence of committing to

a Herrera, dec. 2. lib. iii. c. I I.
r See N O TE LXXXVIII.

Y 2 another

B O O K another what he ought to have executed himself,

-L had not rendered him more enterprising, he vested

lj3o0 the command of this formidable body, which, in

the infancy of the Spanish power in America, me-
rits the appellation of an army, in Pamphilo de
Narvaez, with infiruaions to seize Cortes and his
principal officers, to fend them pris~oners to him,
and then to complete the discovery and conquest
of the country in his name.

Thlepro- AFTER a prosperous voyage, Narvaez landed
Nave. his men without opposition near St. Juan de Ullua.
Ap'n. Three soldiers, whom Cortes had s~ent to search

for mines in that diffria, immediately joined him.
By this accident, he not only received information
concerning the progres~s and situation ofCortes,
but as these soldiers had made some progress in
the knowledge of the Mexican language, he ac-
quired interpreters, by whose means he was en-
abled to hold s~ome intercours~e with the people of
the country. But, according to the low cunning
of deserters, they framed their intelligence with
more attention to what they thought would be
agreeable, than- to what they knew to be true;
and represented the situation ofCortes to be to
desperate, and the difaffeaion of his followers to
be to general, as increased the natural confidence
and pres~umption of Narvaez. His firit operation,
however, might have taught him not to rely on
their partial accounts. H~aving; sent to summon
thie governor of Vera Cruz to surrender, Guevara,

a priest

a priest whom he employed in that service, made B qo o i
the requilition with s~uch insolence, that Sandoval,
an officer of high spirit, and zealously attached to 'smo.
Cortes, inficad of complying with his demands,
seized him and his attendants, and sent them in
chains to Mexico.

CORTES received them not like enemies, but as cortes deep.

friends, and condemning the severity of Sandov~I yal, fe
set them immediately at liberty. By this well-
timed clemency, s~econded by caresses and pre-
fents, he gained their confidence, and drew from
them s~uch particulars concerning the force and in-
tentions of Narvaez, as gave him a view of the
impending danger in its full extent. He had not
tocontend now with half-naked Indians, no match
for him in war, and still more inferior in the arts
of policy, but to take the field against an army in
courage and martial discipline eqlual to his own, in
number far superior, aaing under the fan~ion of
royal authority, and commanded by an officer of
known bravery. He was informed that Narvaez,
more solicitous to gratify the res~entment of Velaf-
quez, than attentive to the honour or interest of
his country, had begun his intercourse with the
natives, by rep~resenting him and his followers as
fugitives and outlaws, guilty of rebellion against
their own sovereign, and of injuffice in invading
the Mexican empire; and had declared that his
chief objeat in visiting the country was to punish
the Spaniards who had committed these crimes,
and to res~cue the Mexicans from opprefiron. He

Y 3 s~oon

B 01, o soon perceived that the fame unfavourable repre-

f ientations of his charaaer and amions had been con-

Jsso. veyed to Montezuma, and that Narvaez had found

means to aifire him, that as the conduat of those
who kept him under reffraint was highly displeasing
to the king his master, he had it in charge not only
to res~cue an injured monarch from confinement,
but to reinflate him in the poffeffion of his ancient
power and independence. Animated with this
profped of being set free from f~ubjeaion to firan-
gers, the Mexicans in several provinces began open-
ly to revolt from Cortes, and to regard Narvaez as
a deliverer no less able than willing to save them.
Montezuma himself kept up a s~ecret intercourse
with the new commander, and seemed to court
him as a person superior in power and dignity to
those Spaniards whom he had hitherto revered as
the firlt of men i,

gf~~eohbera- SuCH were the various afpeas of danger and
cerning chis difficulty which presented themselves to the view
una. of Cartes. No situation can be conceived more

trying to the capacity and firmnes~s of a general,
or where the choice of the plan which ought to be
adopted was more difficult. If he should wait the
approach of Narvaez in Mex~ico, deffruaion s~eem-
ed to be unavoidable; for while the Spaniards
pressed him from without, the inhabitants, wfhole
turbulent spirit he could hardly refrrain with all his
authority and attention, would eagerly lay hold on
such a favourable opportunity of avenging all their

* See N OT E LXXXIX.

wrongs.

wrongs. If he should abandon the capital, set the n 0v 0 x
captive monarch at liberty, and march out to meet
the enemy ; he must at once forego the fruits of asze.
all his toils and viaories, and relinquish advan-
tages which could not be recovered without ex-
traordinary efforts, and infinite danger. If, in.
flead of employing force, he thould have recours~e
to conciliating measures, and attempt an accom-
modation with Narvaez; the natural haughtiness
of that officer, augmented by conficiouf~nef~s of his
present superiority, forbad him to cherish any fan-
guine hope of fuccef's. After revolving every
kcheme with deep attention, Cortes fixed upon
that which in exrecution was most hazardous, but,
if faccefsful, would prove most beneficial to him-
felfand to his country; and with the decisive in,
trepidity s~uited to des~perate situations, determined
to make one bold effort for viaory under every
disadvantage, rather than sa8crifice his own con-
queits and the Spanish interest in M~exico.

But though he foresaw that the contest must be H;s negacir-
terminated finally by arms, it would have been the conlowers
not only indecent, but criminal, to have marchedotwra.
against his countrymen, without attempting to
adjust matters by an amicable negociation. In this
service he employed Olmedo, his chaplain, to
whole charader the fundtion was well faited, and
who poffeffed, besides, s~uch prudence and address
as qualified him to carry on the secret intrig~ues in
which Cortes placed his chief confidence. Narvaez

Y 4 rejeAed,

B O .O K r~ejeed, with scorn, every scheme of accomma·

c dation that Olmedo proposed, and was with difi.·

'sZo. culty reffrained from laying violent hands on him

and his attendants. He met, however, with a
more favourable reception among the followers of
Narvaez, to many of whom he delivered letters,
either from Cortes or his officers, th ir ancient
friends and companions. Cortes artfully accom-
panied these with presents of rings, chains of gold,
and other trinkets of value, which inspired those
needy adventurers with high ideas of the wealth
that he had acquired, and with envy of their good
fortune who were engaged in his s~ervice. Some,
from hopes of becoming fhlarers in thos~e rich spoils,
declared for an immediate accommodation with
Cortes. Others, from public s~pirit, laboured to
prevent a civil war, which, whatever party thould
prevail, must shake, and perhaps subvert the Spa-
nifh power, in a country where it was so imper-
sealy eflablifhed. Narvaez disr-egarded both, and
by a public proclamation denounced Cortes and his
adherents rebels and enemies to their country.
Cortes, it is probable, was not much surprised at
the untraaable arrogance of Narvaez ; and, after
having given such a proof of his own pacific dil-
polition as might juffify his recourse to other means,
he determined to advance towards an enemy whom
he had laboured in vain to appease.

Marches HE left a hundred and fifty men in the capital,
agamR~l him.

may. under the command of Pedro de Alvarado, an of-

ficer

ficer of distinguished courage, for whom the Mexi- B O O K
cans had conceived a singular degree of refpeQ.
To the cuffody of this slender garrison he commit- asso.
ted a great city, with all the wealth he had amaf--
ed, and, what was still of greater importance, the
person of the imprisoned monarch. His utmost
art was employed in concealing from M1ontezuma
the real cause of his march. He laboured to per-
fuade him, that the firangers who had lately ar.
thred were his friends and fellow-f~ubje~ts; and that,
after a short interview with them, they would de-
part together, and return to their own country.
The captive prince, unable to comprehend the
designs of the Spaniards, or to reconcile what he
now heard with the declarations of Narvaez, and
afraid to discover any fyrmptom of f~uipicion or dif-
truss of Cortes, promised to remain quietly in the
Spanish quarters, and to cultivate the fame friend-
ship with Alvarado which he had uniformly main-
tained with him. Cortes, with s~eeming confidence
in this promise, but relying principally upon the
injuntions which he had given Alvarado to guard
his prisoner with the moRl scrupulous vigilance, set
out from Mexico.

HIs firength, even after it was reinforced by Number of

his troops.

the jundtion of Sandoval and the garrison of Vera
Cruz, did not exceed two hundred and fifty men.
As he hoped for s~uccess chiefly from the rapidity
of his motions, his troops were not incumbered
either with baggage or artillery. But as he dread-

ed.

B O O K ed extremely the imprefion which the enemy

Smight make with their cavalry, he had provided

'5'o. against this danger with the foresight and sag-acity

which distinguish a great commander. Having
observed that the Indians in the province of Chi.
nantla used spears of extraordinary length and force,
he armed his soldiers with thes~e, and accullomed
them to that deep and compaft arrangement which
the us~e of this formidable weapon, the belt perhaps
that ever was invented for defence, enabled them
to assume.

contnuen" Wrra this fmnall but firm battalion, Cortes ad-
to neg~ociate
as he a:,d- vanced towards Zempoalla, of which Narvaez had

taken poffe~ion. During his march, he made re-
peated attempts towards some accommodationwith
his opponent. But Narvaez requiring that Cortes
and his followers should instantly recognize his
title to be governor of New Spain, in virtue of the
powers which he derived from Velasquez; and
Cortes refusing to su~bmit to any authority which
was not founded on a commifflon from the emperor
hims~elf, under whole immediate protection he and
his adherents had placed their infant colony; all
these attempts proved fruitlers. The intercourse,
however, which this occasioned between the two
parties, proved of no fmnall ads antage to Cortes,
as it afforded him an opportunity of gaining some
of Narvaez's officers by liberal presents, of soften-
ing others by a semblance of moderation, and of
dazzling all by the appearance of wealth among his

troops,

troops, nfoft of his s~oldiers having converted their B O O K
Ihare of the Mexican gold into chains, bracelets, LJ
and other ornaments, which they displayed with sso.
military ostentation. Narvaez and a little junto of
his creatures excepted, all the army leaned towards
an accommodation with their countrymen. This
dircovery of their inclinationl irritated his violent
temper almoff to madnes~s. In a trans~port of rage,
he Let a price upon the head of Cortes, and of his
principal officers; and having learned that he was
now advanced within a league of Zempoalla with
his [mall body of men, he considered this as an
insult which merited immediate chastisement, and
marched out with all his troops to offer him battle.

But Cortes was a leader of greater abilities and . Attacks
usperience than, onequal ground, to fight an enemy ~the nishe,
10 far superior in number, and so much better ap-
pointed. Having taken his flation on the oppo-
The bank of the river de Canoas, where he knew
that he could not be attacked, he beheld the ap-
proach of the enemy without concern, and difr-e-
parded this vain bravade. It was then the begin-
ning of the wet s~eason t, and the rain had poured
down, during a great part of the day, with the
violence peculiar to the torrid zone. The follow-
ers of Narvaez, unaccuffomed to the hardships of
military service, murmured so much at being thus
fruitlessly ex~pos~ed, that, from their unfoldier-like
impatience, as well as his own contempt of his

' Hacklayt, vol. iii. 467. De Laet Defecr. Ind. Occid. 22 r .

adversary,

B 0 0 re adversary, their general permitted them to retireto

cc~J Zempoalla. TCe very circumstance whichinduced
'jto. them to qluit the field, encouraged Cortes to form

a feheme, by which he hoped at once to terminate
the war. He obs~erved, that his hardy veterans,
though flanding under the torrents, which conti-
nued to fall, without a single tent or any thelter
whatsoever to cover them, were so far from repin.
ing at hardships which were become familiar to
them, that they were still freth and alert for ser-
vice. He foresaw that the enemy would naturally
give themselves up to repose after their fatigue,
and that, judging of the condua of others by their
own effeminacy, they would deem themselves per·
sealy s~ecure at a season so unfit for acaion. He
res~olved, therefore, to fall upon them in the dead
of night, when the surprise and terror of this un-
expeaed attack might more than compensate the
inferiority of his numbers. His soldiers, sensible
that no resource remained but in some desperate
effort of courage, approved of the measure with
such warmth, that Cortes, in a military oration
which he address~ed to them before they began their
march, was more solicitous to temper than to in-
flame their ardour. He divided them into three
parties. At the head of the first he placed Sando-
val; entruffing this galiant officer with the m ft
ulangerous and important service, that of seizing
the enemy's artillery, which was planted before
the principal tower of the temple, where Narvaez
had fixed his head-qjuarters. Chrifloval de Olid

commanded

commanded the second, with orders to assault the n op so
tower, and lay hold on the general. Cortes him- MJ
self conduaed the third and fmnalleft division, asso.
which was to a~t as a body of reserve, and to s~up-
port the other two as there should be occaflon.
Having passed the river de Canoas, which was
much Swelled with the rains, not without difficul-
ty, the water reaching almoff to their chins, they
advanced in profound silence, without beat of
drum, or found of any warlike infirument; each
man armed with his sword, his dagger, and his
Chinanitlan spear. Narvaez, remis~s in proportion
to his security, had posted only two centinlels to
watch the motions of an enemy whom he had such
good cause to dread. One of these was seized by
the advanced guard of Cortes's troops, the other
made his es~cape, and hurrying to the town with
all the precipitation of fear and zeal, gave such
timely notice of the enemy's approach, that there
was full leisure to have prepared for their recep-
tion. But, through the arrogance and infatuation
ofNarvaez, this important interval was loft. He
imputed this alarm to the cowardice of the centi-
nel, and treated with derision the idea of being at-
tacked by forces so unequal to his ~own. The
thouts of Cortes's soldiers, rushing on to the as-
fault, convinced him at last, that the danger which
he delpifed was real. The rapidity with which
they advanced was such, that only one cannon
could be fired, before Sandovral's party closed with
the enemy, drove them from their guns, and began

17 to

B O TO K to force their way up the fleps ofthe tower. Nar.

L~r vaez, no less brave in aaion than presumptuous
sso. in condua, armed himself in haste, and by his

voice and example animated his men to the com-
bat. Olid advanced to s~ustain his companions;
alld Cortes hims~elf, rushing to the front, conduat-
ed and added new vigour to the attack. The com-
paca order in which this fmnall body pressed on,
and the impenetrable front which they presented
with their long spears, bore down all opposition

~eV-~ before it. They had now reached the gate, and

were firuggling to burst it open, when a f~oldie
h'avingr set fire to the reeds with which the tower
was covered, compelled Narvaez to sally out. In
the first encounter he was wounded in the eye with
a spear, and falling to the ground, was dragged
down the fleps, and in a moment clapt in fetters.
The cry of viatory refounded among the troops of
Cortes. Those who had fagllied out with their
leader now maintained the conflia feebly, and be-
gan to surrender. Among the remainder of his
soldiers, flationed in two fmnaller towers of the
temple, terror and confusion prevailed. The
darknes~s was so great, that they could not diftin-
guifh between their friends and foes. Their own
artillery was pointed against them. Wherever
they turned their eyes, they beheld lights gleaming
through the obscurity of night, which, though
proceeding only from a variety of thining infeas,
that abound in moist and sultry climates, their al-
frighted imaginations represented as numerous

eI bands

bands ofmufkreteersadvancing with kindledmatches a qo o i
to the attack. After a thort refillance, the fol- c
diers compelled their pfficers to capitulate, and be- '5'o.
fore morning all laid down their arms, and s~ub-
mitted quietly to their conquerors.

TmIs complete via~ory proved more acceptable, T'he areas~
as it was gained almof1 without bloodshed, only rory.
two soldiers being killed on the fide of Cortes, and
t'wo officers, with fifteen private men, of the ad-
verse fadion. Cortes treated the vanquifhedd not
like enemies, but as countrymen and friends, and
offered either to fend them back direaly to Cuba,
or to take them into his service, as partners in his
fortune, on equal terms with his own s~oldiers.
This latter proposition, s~econded by a seasonable
diffribution of f'ome presents from Cortes, and li-
beral promises of more, opened profpe~s so ag~ree-
able to the romantic expec~ations which had invited
them to engage in this service, that all, a few par-
tizans of Narvaez excepted, closed with it, and
vied with each other in profeflions of fidelity and
attachment to a general, whose recent success had
given them such a striking proof of his abilities for
command. Thus, by a series of events no les~s
fortunate than uncommon, Cortes not only escaped
from perdition which s~eemed inevitable, but, when
he had least reason to exped it, was placed at the
head of a thoufadnd Spaniards, ready to follow
w~herever he should lead them. WVhoever refleas
upon the facility with which this vic~ory was ob-

tained,

g 0 _0 it tained, or considers with what s~udden and unani.

' mous transition the followers of Narvaez ranged

aszo. themselves under the Rtandard of his rival, aill be

apt to ascribe both events as much to the intrigues
as to the arms of Cortes, and cannot but fuipccd
that the ruin of Narvaez was occasioned, no less
by the treachery of his own followers, than by the
valour of his enemy ·.

,T* "fgi. Brrr, in one point, the prudent condua and
C'sfinaR golod fortune of Cortes were equally conspicuous,
niards. If, by the rapidity of his operations after he began

his march, he had not brought matters to such a
speedy iirue, even this decisive viffory would have
come too late to have saved his companions whom
he left in Mexico. A few days after the dif.
comfiture of Narvaez, a courier arrived with an
account that the Mexicans had taken arms, and
having seized and defiroyed the two brigantines,
which Cortes had built in order to s~ecure the com-
mand of the lake, and attacked the Spaniards in
their quarters, had killed s~everal of them, and
wounded more, had reduced to ash~es their maga-
zine of provisions, and carried on hoffilities with
s~uch fury, that, though .Alvarado and his men de.
fended thems~elves with undaunted resolution, they
mult either be s~oon cut off by famine, or fink
under the multitude of their enemies. This re.

U Cortes Relat. 242. D. B. Diaz. c. I10--123. Herrera,

dec. 2. lib. ix. c. 18, &~c. Gomara CroI, c. 97, ac.

oolt was excited by motives which rendered it still a ot o
more alarming. On the departure of Cortes for cM
Zempoalla, the Mexicans flattered themselves, 'sZO
that the long-expeaed -opportunity of restoring
their lovereign to liberty, and of vindicating their
country from the odioils dominion of Rrangers,
was at length arrived ; that while the forces of their
oppressors were divided, and the arms of one party
turned againf1 the other, they might triumph with
greater facility over both. Consultations were held,
and schemes formed with this intention. The Spa-
niards in Mexico, conscious of their own feeble-
ners, fhfpeaed and dreaded those machinations.
Alvarado, though a gallant officer, poffeffed nei-
ther that extent of capacity, nor dignity of man-
ners, by which Cortes had acquired such an ascend-
ant over the minds of the Mexicans, as never al-
lowed them to form a just effimate of his weakness
or oftheir own firength. Alvarado knew no mode
of supporting his authority but force. Inficad of
employing address to disconcert the plans or to
soothe the spirits of the Mexicans, he waited the re-
turn of one of their solemn feffivals, when the
principal persons in the empire were dancing, ac-
cording to cuffom, in the court of the great tern-
ple; he seized all the avenues which led to it, and,
allured partly by the rich ornaments which they
wore in honour of their -gods, and partly by the
facility of cutting off at once the authors of that
conspiracy which he dreaded, he fell upon them,
unarmed and unfufpicious of any danger, and maf~-

Vot. II. Z sacred

a o o ac sacred a great number, none escaping but such as

c~~r made their way over the battlements of the temple.

'52o. An aaion so cruel and treacherous filled not only

the city, but the whole empire, with indignation
and rage. All called aloud for vengeance; and
regardles~s of the safety of their monarch, whose
life was at the mercy of the Spaniards, or of their
own danger in assaulting an enemy who had been
so long the objeQ of their terror, they committed
all thos~e aas of violence of which Cortes received

an account.

~b~arc~e To him the danger appeared to imminent, as
cqapit. to admit neither of deliberation nor delay. He set

out inflantly with all his forces, and returned from
Zempoalla with no less rapidity than he had ad.
vanced thither. At Tlafcala he was joined by two
thousand chosen warriors. On entering the Mlexi-
can territories he found that difaffetion to the
Spaniards was not confined to the capital. The
principal inhabitants had deserted the towns through
which he pass~ed; no person of note appearing to
meet him with the usual refpea; no provision was
made for the subsistence of his troops; and though
he was permitted to advance without opposition,
the solitude and silence which reigned in every
place, and the horror with which the people avoid.
ed all intercourse with him, discovered a deep-
rooted antipathy, that excited the molt juff alarm.
But, implacable as the enmity of the Mexicans
was, they were to unacquainted with the science

of war, that they knew not how to take the pro. a op I(
per measures, either for their own safety or the de- c
fiuaion of the Spadniards. Uninfiruaed by their '5o.
former error in admittingS a formidable enemy into
their capital, inflead of breaking down the cause-
w·ays and bridges, by which they might have in-
closed Alvarado and his party, and have ef~eau-
ally flopt the career of Cortes, they again fuffered June 24.
him to march into the city without molellation,
and to take quiet poffeflion of his ancient flation.

THE tranfDOWrS O l'ov with which Alvarado arid Impop~e~r
his soldiers receivred their companions cannot be cortes.
expreffecd. Both parties were so much elated~, the
one with their s~easonable deliverance, and the other
w~ith the great exploits which they had atchieved,
that this intoxication of success s~eems to have
reached Cortes h-imfnelf ; and he behaved on this
occasion neither with his usual sagacity nor atten-
tion. He not only negleaed to visit M~ontezuma,
but imbittered the infillt by expreifions full of
contempt for that unfortunate prince and his peo-
ple. The forces of which he had now the com-
mand, appeared to him so irresistible, that he might
afiume an higher tone, and lay aside the mafki of
moderation, under which he had hitherto conceal-
ed his designs. Some Mexicans who underflood
the Spanish language, heard the contemptuous
words which Cortes uttered, and reporting them
to their countrymen, kindled their rage anew.
They were now convinced that the intentions of

Z 2 the

B qOV K the general w~ere equally bloody with those of Alva.

rc-~rado, and that his original purpose in visiting their

Isao. country, had not been, as he pretended, to court

the alliance of their sovereign, but to attempt the

The violent conquest of his dominions. They resumed their
hoffility of
the Mexi- arms with the additional fury which this discovery
Cans. Sinfpired, attacked a considerable body of Spaniards

who were marching towards the great square in
which the public market was held, and compelled
them to retire with some loss. Emboldened by
this success, and delighted to find that their op.
preffors were not invincible, they advanced next
day with extraordinary martial pomp to assault the
Spaniards in their quarters. Their number was
formidable, and their undaunted courage flill more

o.Though the artillery pointed against their nu.

merous battalions, crowded together in narrow
fireets, fwnept off multitudes at every discharge;
though every blow of the Spanish weapons fell
with mortal effeQt upon their naked bodies, the
impetuosity of the assault did not abate. Fresh
men rushed forward to occupy the places of the
slain, and meeting with the fame fate, were sue-
ceeded by others no less intrepid and eager for ven·
geance. The utmoff: effort of Cortes's abilities
and experience, seconded by the d~isciplined valour
of his troops, were hardly fufificient to defend the
fortifications, that s~urrounded the post where the
Spaniards were flationed, into w-hich the enemy
were more than once on the point of forcing their

way. CORTES

CORTEs beheld, with wonder, the implacable n qo o
ferocity of a people, who seemed at firit to sub- cM
Init tamely to the yoke, and had continued so Din'rs~obo
long paflive under it. The soldiers of Narvaez, nirds a
who fondly imagined that they followed Cortes
to share in the spoils of a conquered empire, were
affoniihed to find that they were involved in a dan-
gerous war, with an enemy whole vigour was still
unbroken, and loudly execrated their ownweaknefs,
in giving such easy credit to the delusive promises
of their new leader x. But s~urprise and complaints
were of no avail. Some immediate and extraor-
dinary effort was requisite to extricate themselves
out of their present situation. As soon as the ap-
proach of evening induced the Mexicans to re-
tire, in compliance with their national cuffom
of ceasing from hoffilities with the setting fim,
Cortes began to prepare for a sally, next day, with
such a considerable force, as might either drive the
enemy out of the city, or compel them to listen to
terms of accommodation.

HE conduaed, in person, the troops destined corte. at.

tacks thern

for this important service. Every invention known without sC-,

Cels.

in the European art of war, as well as every pre-
caution, fuggefied by his long acquaintance with
the Indian mode of fighting, were employed to
ensure success. But he found an enemy prepared
and determined to oppos~e him. The force of the

a B. Diaz. c. I26.

Z 2 Mexicans

B OVO K MCXICaES WaS greatly augmented by fresh troops,

cz-J which poured in continually from the country, and

's20. their animosity was in no degree abated. They

were led by their nobles, inflamed by the exhorta·
tions of their priests, and fought in defence of
their temples and families, under the eye of their
gods, and in presence of their wrives and children.
Notwithilanding their numbers, and enthufiaitic
contempt of danger and death, wherever the
Spaniards could close with them, the superiority
of their discipline and arms obliged the nlexi.
cans to give way. But in narrow fireets, and
where many of the bridgres of communication
were broken down, the Spaniardis could s~eldom
come to a fair rencounter with the enemy, and as
they advanced, were exposed to fhiowrers of arrows
and itones from the tops of the houses. Aftar
a day ofinceffant extertion, though valt numbers
of the Mexicans fell, and part of the city wvas
burnit, the Spaniards, weary with the flaubhter,
and harassed by multitudes which fuccefirvely re-
lieved each other, were obligedi at length to retire,
with the mortification of having accomplifhled no-
thing so decisive as to compensate the unusual cala-
paity' of having twelve soldiers killied, and above
sixty wounded. Another fillyr, made with gredter
force, was not m~ore effec~ual, ande in it the g~eneral
himself was M oundedi inl the hand.

Moezumr Corrrs nocw perceived, too late, the fatal cr-

ror inito whlich he had been betra;yed by his owrn

contempt

contempt of the Mexicans, and was satisfied that n o p to
he could neither maintain his present flation in the Ly
centre ofan hoffile city, nor retire from it without '5'o.
the moit imminent danger. One resource still re-
mained, to try what effed the interposition of
Montezuma might have to soothe or overawe his
fubjeas. When the Mexicans approached next
morning to renew the affadult, that unfortunate
prince, at the mercy of the Spaniards, and reduced
to the fad necellity of becoming the instrument of
his own disgrace, and of the slavery of his people y,
advanced to the battlements in his royal robes, and
with all the pomp in which he used to appear on
solemn occasions. At fight of their s~overeign,
whom they had long been accuitomed to honour,
and almost to revere as a god, the weapons dropt
from their hands, every tongue was silent, all
bowed their heads, and many proffrated themselves
on the ground. Montezuma addressed them with
every argument that could mitigate their rage, or
persuade them to cease from hostilities. When he
ended his discours~e, a sullen murmur of difagppro-
bation run through the ranks; to this su~cceeded
reproaches and threats; and the fury of the mu!-
titude rising in a moment above every refkraint of
decency or refpedt, flights of arrows and volleys of
stones poured in so violently upon the ramparts,
that before the Spanish s~oldiers, appointed to co-
ver Montezuma with their bucklers, had time to

r See N OT E XC.

n o ~o so lift them in his defence, two arrows wounded the

tcvllrunhappy monarch, and the blow of a stone on his
asso. temple firack him to the ground. On feeing him

fall, the Mexicans were so much affonifhed, that,
with a traelition not uncommon in popular tu-
mults, they passed in a moment from one extreme
to the other, remorse succeeded to insult, and they
fled with horror, as if the vengeance of Heaven
were pursuing the crime which they had com-
mitted. The Spaniards, without moleitation, car-
ried Montezuma to his apartments, and Cortes
hastened thither to console him under his misfor-
tune. But the unhappy monarch now perceived
how low he was funk, and the haughty spirit
which seemed to have been to long extinat, re-
turning, he scorned to survive this last humiliation,
and to protrad an ignominious life, not only as
the prisoner and tool of his enemies, but as the
objeat of contempt or detestation among his s~ub.
jeas. In a transport of rage he tore the bandages
from his wounds, and refus~ed, with s~uch obfti-
nacy, to take any nouriihment, that he soon ended
his wretched days, rejeaing with disdain all the
folicitations of the Spaniards to embrace the Christ-
ian faith.

New con. Urow the death of Montezuma, Cortes having
"hat loft all hope of bringing the Mexicans to an ac-

commodation, saw no profrpea of safety but in at·
tempting a retreat, and began to prepare for it.
But a s~udden motion of the Mexicans engaged

him

him in new confliats. They took; poffefi~on of a B 0~ 0 t
high tower in the great temple which overlooked
the Spanish quarters, and placing there a garrison Is20.
of their principal warriors, not a Spaniard could
stir without being expos~ed to their miflile weapons.
From this post it was necessary to dislodge them
at any risks; and Juan de Efcobar, with a nume-
rous detachment of chos~en soldiers, was ordered to
inake the attack. But Ef~cobar, though a gallant
offcer, and at the head of troops accilftomed
to conquer, and who now fought under the eyes
of their countrymen, was thrice repuls~ed. Cortes,
sensible that not only the reputation, but the safety
of his army depended on the s~ucces~s of this assault,
ordered a buckler to be tied to his arm, as he
could not manage it with his wounded hand, and
rushed with his drawn fwvord into the thickeff~ of
the combatants. Encouraged by the pres~ence of
their general, the Spaniards returnled to the charge
with such vigour, that they gradually forced their
way up the fleps, and.drove the Mexicans to the
platform at the top of the tower. There a dread-
ful carnage began, when two young Mexicans of `
high rank, observing Cortes as he animated his
soldiers by his voice and example, resolved to fa-
crifice their own lives in order to cut off the au-
thor of all the calamities which desolated their
country. They approached .him in a fulpplicant
posture, .as if they had intended to lay down their
arms, and s~eizing him in a moment, hurried him
towards the battlements, over which they threw

themselves

B 0;TO K themselves headlong, in hopes of dragging hhn

C~c7Jalong to be dashed in pieces by the fame fall. But
'Slo, Cortes, by his fIrength and agility, broke loose

from their grasp, and the gallant youths periihed
in this generous, though unf~uccefsful, attempt to
save their country Y. As soon as the Spaniards be-
came masters of the tower, they s~et fire to it, and,
without farther molestation, continued the prepa-
rations for their retreat.

ree so-THIs became the more necessary, as the Blex-i.

don te ultY. cans wvere so much aftoniihed at the last effort of the

Spanifhh valour, that they began to change their
whole fy-fiem of hoffilityr, and inflead of inceffantt
attacks, endeavoured, by barricading the fireets,
and breaking down the causeway-s, to cut off the
-communication of the Spaniards with the continent,
and thus to flarve an enemy whom they could not
falbdue. The first point to be dletermined by Cor.
tes and hlis followers, was, whether they thould
march out openly in the face of day, when they
could discern every danger, an~d fee how to regu.
late their own motions, as w~ell as how to resist the
assaults of the enemy, or, whetherl they) th~ould en.

y M. Clavigrro has cedrured me w-ith alperity for rch gd

this gallant aE~ion of the twro M1/exican:s, ami for supp~l ,
that therre were battlements r-ound the temp;le· of Mex~iu. I
related the atttmpt to defltroy Cortes oni the auir..atig ofH r.
dec. 2. lib. x. c. 9. and of Torlqucmada, 11b. iv. c. ( . I
followed thera likewvifel in fulppothalg th~e upper~noit pl tio a f
the tenpipl to be encomnpafikd bi· a bat~t~c:; llr or rail.

dease r

deavour to retire secretly in the nlight ? The latter B OvO K
was preferred, partly from hopes that their national

1520.

fuperltition would reffrain the Mexicans from ven-
turing to attack; thera in the night, and partly
from their own fond belief in the prediaions of a
private soldier, who having acquired universal
credit by a smattering of learning-, and his preten-
fions to affrology, boldly aifired his countrymen
of succes~s, if they made their retreat in this man-
ner. They began to move, towards midnight, inl
three divisions. Sandoval led the van; Pedro Al-
varado, and Velas~quez de Leon, had the conduQ
of the rear ; and Cortes commanded in the centre,
where' he placed the prisoners, among whom were
a son and two daughters of Montezuma, together
with several Mexicans of diftinaion, the artillery,
the baggage, and a portable bridge of timber, in-
tended to be laid over the breaches in the causeway.
They marched in profound silence along; the cause-
way which led to Tacuba, because it was shorter
than any of the reft, and lying most remote from
the road towards Tlafcala and the f~ea-coaft,had been
left more entire by the Mexicans. They reached
the first breach in it without molestation, hoping
that their retreat was undiscovered.

BuIT the Mexicans, unperceived, had not only Attacked
watched all their motions with attention, but had beians,.
made proper difp~olitions for a most formidable at-
tacki. While the Spaniards were intent upon pla-
cing their bridge in the breach, and occupied in
conduating their horses and artillery along it, they

were

tt o 0 f were suddenly alarmed with the tremendous found

I -~--- 1of warlike infiruments, and a general thout from
5asso an innumerable multitude of enemies ; the lake was

covered with canoes; flights of arrows, and show.
ers of stones poured in upon them from every
quarter; the Mexicans rushing; forward to the
charge with fearless impetuosity, as if they hoped
in that moment to be avenged for all their wrongs.
Unfortunately the wooden-bridge, by the weight
of the artillery, was wedged to fast into the itones
anad muud, that it was impoffiblee to remove it.
Difmnayed at this accident, the Spaniards advanced
with precipitation towards the second breach.
The Mexicans hemmed them in on every fide, and
though they defended themselves with their usual
courage, yet crouded together as they were on a
narrow causeway, their dis~cipline and military sk~ill
were of little avail, nor did the obs~curity of the
night permit them to derive great advantage from
their fire-arms, or the s~uperiority of their other
weapons. All Mexico was now in arms, and to
eager were the people on the deffrucaion of their
oppressors, that they who were not near enough
to annoy them in person, impatient of the delay,
pressed forward with such ardour, as drove on their
countrymen in the front with irre~iftible violence.
Fresh warriors inflantly filled the place of such as
fell. The Spaniards, weary with slaughter, and
unable to sustain the weight of the torrent that
poured in upon them, began to give way. In a mo-
ment the confusion was univers~al ; hors~e and foot,
.of~cers and soldiers, friends and enemies, were

mingled

aningled together ; and while all fought, and many B o ~o It
fell, they could hardly distinguish from what hand A
the blow came. Isso.

CORTEs, with about a hundred foot soldiers and Their dif-

a~ters,

a few horse, forced his way over the two remain-'
ing breaches in the causeway, the bodies of the
dead serving to fill up the chafmns, and reached the
main land. Having formed them as soon as they
arrived, he returned with such as were yet capa-
ble of service, to afilli his friends in their retreat,
and to encourage them, by his presence and ex-
smple, to persevere in the efforts requisite to effe&t
it. He met with part of his soldiers, who had
broke through the enemy, but found many more
overwhelmed by the multitude of their aggr-essors,
or perithing in the lake; and heard the piteous la-
mentations of others, whom the Mexicans, having
taken alive, were carrying off in triumph to be
sacrificed to the god of war. Before day, all who
had escaped af~emnbled at Tacuba. But when the
morning dawned, and dis~covered to the view of
Cortes his thattered battalion, reduced to less than
half its number, the survivors dejeaed, and mnoft
of them covered with wounds, the thoughts of
what they had fuffered, and the remembr-ance of
so many faithful friends and gallant followers who
had fallen in that night of sorrow 2, pierced his
foul w~ith such anguiih, that while he was form-
ing their ranks, and ith~ing lome necessary orders,

a Noche Tryle is the name by whbich it is flill diftingu~ihed

B qOO K his soldiers observed the tears trickling from his

cc-r eyes, and remarked, with much fatisfadion, that

'320. while attentive to the duties of a general, he was

not ins~ensible to the feelings of a man.

and !ors. IN this fatal retreat many officers of diftinalon

perished a, and among these Velasq~uez de Leon,
who having forsaken the party of his kinsman, the
governor of Cuba, to follow the fortune of..his
companions, was, on that account, as well as for
his superior merit, ref~peaed by them as the second
pers~on in the army. All the artillery, ammuni-
tion, and baggage, were loft; the greater part of
the horses, and above two thousand Tlafcalans,
were killed, and only a very [nuall portion of the
treas~ure which they had amassed was saved. This,
which had been always their chief obje8, proved
a great caus~e of their calamity; for many of the
soldiers having fa overloaded themselves with bars
of gold as rendered them unfit for aaion, and re-
tarded their flight, fell, ignominiously, the vic~ims
of their own inconsiderate avarice. Amidst so
many disasters, it was some consolation to find that
Aguilar and Marina, whose funalion as interpreters
was of fiich essential importance, had made their
escape "

Onecure-THE first care of Cortes was to find some shelter

y & *~l~ for his w~earied troops ; for as the MCexicans infest.

a See N O TE XCI. .
b Cortes Relat. p. 248. B. Diaz. c. I22. Gomara Cron.

c. Ic9. Herrera, dec. 2. lib. x. c. rI, I2.

ed them on evrery fide, and the people of Tacub:a n o0~ 0
began to take arms, he could not continue in his ".
present flation. He direaed his march towards 'j'O
the rising ground, and having fortunately disco-
vered a temple situated on an eminence, took pof-
fetion of it. There he found not only the shelter
for which~ he wished, but, what w~as no less wanted,
some proviflons to refresh his men; and though
the enemy did not intermit their attacks throughl-
out the day, they were with less difficulty prevent-
ed from making any impreflion. During this time
Cortes was engaged in deep consultation with his
officers, concerning the route which they oug-ht to
take in their retreat. They were now on the w~eft
fide of the lake. Tlafcala, the only place where
they could hope for a friendly reception, lay about
fixty-four miles to the east of M~exico c; so that
they were obliged to go round the north end of the
lake before they could fall into the road which
led thither. A Tlafcalan soldier undertook to be
their guide, and conduated them through a cou:1-
try, in some places marihy, in others mountainous,
in all ill-cultivated and thinly peopled. They
marched for fix days w~ith little refpitC, and under
continual alarms, numerous bodies of the M~exi-
cans hovering around them, famnetimes harrafi~ng
them at a difiance with their millile w~eapons, and
sometimes attacking· them cloefey in front, in rear,
in flank, with great boldness, as they now knewv

( Villa Segnor Teatro Amer~icanos, lib. ;i. c. rI.

that

s O O K that they were not invincible. Nor were the fa-

1~ tigue and danger of those incessant conflias the
'sso. workt evils to which they were exposed. As the

barren country through which they passed afforded
hardly any provisions, they were reduced to feed
on berries, roots, and the Rtalks of green maize;
and at the very time that famine was depressing
their spirits and wasting their firength, their fitua-
tion required the moRt vigorous and unremitting
exertions of courage and a~ivity. Amidst those
complicated diffreffes, one circumfcance supported
and animated the Spaniards. Their commander
sustained this fad revers~e of fortune with unshaken
magnanimity. His presence of mind never forsook
him; his sagacity forefadw every event, and. his vi.
gilance provided for it. H~e was foremost in every
danger, and endured every hardship with cheer·
fulnes~s, The difficulties with which he was ilbr-
rounded s~eemed to call forth new talents ; and his
soldiers, though delpairingr themselves, continued
to follow him with encreafing confidence in his
abilities.

trdfbaof ON the sixth day they arrived near to Otumba,

not far from the road between Mexico and Tlaf-
cala. Eairly next morning they began to advance
towards it, flying parties of the enemy flill hang.
ing on their rear; and, amidRt the insults with which
they accompaniedt their hostilities, Marina remark.
ed that they often exclaimed with exrultation, " Go
on, robbers; go to the place where you thall

17 · quickly

quickly meet the vengeance due to your crimes." B O O K
The meaning of this threat the Spaniards did not Lc-V-
comprehend, until they reached the s~ummit of
an eminence before them. There a spacious valley
opened to their view, covered with a vast army,
extending as far as the eye could reach. The
Mexicans, while with one body of their troops
they harassed the Spaniards in their retreat, had
assembled their principal force on the other fide of
the lake; and marching along the road which led
direaly to Tlafcala, potted it in the plain of Otum-
ba, through which they knew Cortes must pass.
At the fight of this incredible multitude, which
they could survey at once from the rising ground,
the Spaniards were affonifhed, and even the boldest
began to des~pair. But Cortes, without allowing
leisure for their fears to acquire strength by reflec-
tion, after warning them briefly that no alternative
now remained but to conquer or to die, led them
initantly to the charge. The Mexicans waited
their approach with unusual fortitude. Such,
however, was the superiority of the Spanish dif`-
cipline and arms, that the impression of this fmnall
body was irresistible; "and whichever way its force
was direted, it penetrated and dis~persed the most:
numerous battalions. But while these gave way
in one quarter, new combatants advanced from
another, and the Spaniards, though f~uccefsful in
every attack, were ready to fink under those re-
peated efforts, without feeing anly end of their toil,
or any hope of viaorl. At that time Cortes ob.

VOL. ZI. Ba k feTV

a 0~ 0( r erved the great flandard of the empire, which was
-~`. carried before the Mexican general, advancing;

asso. and fortunately recolle~ing to have heard, that on

the fate of it depended the event of every battle,
he assembled a few of his bravelt officers, whole
horses were still capable of service, and placing
himself at their head, pushed forward towards the
flandard with an impetuosity which bore down
every thing before it. A chosen body of nobles,
who guarded the Rtandard, made some refillane,
but were soon broken. Cortes, with a firoke of
his lance, wounded the Mexican general, and
threw him to the ground. . One of the Spanish of-
ficers alighting, put an end to his life, and laid
hold of the imperial flandard. The moment that
their leader fell, and the flandard, towards which
all direaed their eyes, disappeared, an universal
panic firuck the Miexicans, and, as if the bond
which held them together had been dissolved,
every enlign was lowered, each soldier threw awray
his weapons, and all fled with precipitation to the
mountains. The Spaniards, unable to purfuethem
far, returned to collea the spoils of the field,
which were so valuable, as tobe some compensation
for the wealth which they had loft in Mexico; for
in the enemy's army were most of their principal
warriors, dressed out in their richest ornaments, as
if they had been marching to afilured viaory. Next

July s. day, to their great joy, they entered the Tlalcalan

territories d.

d Cortes Relat.p. 219. B. Diaz. c. l28. GomaraCron.

:c. Ir0. Herrera, dec. 2. lib. x. c. I2, 13*

BUT,

BUT, amidit their f'atisfamion in having got be- B rO, K
yond the precines of an hostile country, they could
not look forward without solicitude, as they were acc n~
flill uncertain· what reception they might meet ih~~pa
with from allies, to whom they returned in a con- *riarca'a.
dition very different from that: in which they had
lately set out from their dominions. Happily for
them, the enmity of the Tlakcalans to the Mexi-
can name was so inveterate, their desire to avenge
the death of their countrymen so vehement, and
the ascendant which Cortes had acquired over the
chiefs of the republic so complete, that, far from
entertaining a thought of taking any advantage of
the diffreffed situation in which they beheld the
Spaniards, they received them with a tenderners
and cordiality which quickly dissipated all their ful.
picions.

SOME interval of tranquillity and indulgence was Newk deli-
now absolutely necessary; not only that the Spa- cortes.
niards might give attention to the cure of their
wounds, which had been too long negleated, but
in order to recruit their ithength, exhauffed by
such a long faucceflion of fatigue and hardships.
During this, Cortes learned that he and his com-
panions were not the only Spaniards who had felt
the effeAs of the MP~exican enmity. A considerable
detachment, which was marching from Zempo-
alla towards the capital, had been cut off by the
people of Tepeaca. A smaller party, .returning
from Tlafcala to Vera Cruz, with the share of the

A a2 Mv'exican

a 8~ e

o Kexican gold allotted to the g~arrison, had been

f iurprif~ed and destroyed in the mountains. At a

asso. junaure when the life of every Spaniard was of

importance, sauch losses were deeply felt, The
schemes which Cortes was meditating rendered
them peculiarly aff-liaive to him. W~hile his ene.
mies, and even many of his own followers, confi.
dered the disasters wihich had befallen him as fatal
to the progref~is of his arms, and imagined that
nothing now remained but speedily to abandon a
country which he had invaded with unequal force,
his mind, as eminent for perseverance as for en-
Iterprife, was still bent on accomplishing his origi.
nal purpose, of fub~jefing the Mlexican empire to
the crown of Caffile. Severe and unexpeaed as
the check was which he had received, it did not
appear to him a fufficient reason for relinquilhingn
the conquest-s which he had already made, or
against resuming his operations with better hopes
of s~uccess. The colony at Vera Cruz w'aS not
only safe, but had remained unmolefied. The
people of Zempoalla and the adjacent diffrias
had discovered no sy~mptoms of defe~ion. The
Tlafcalans continued faithful to their alliance. On
their martial [pirit, easily rouzed to arms, and in-
flamed with implacable hatred of the Mexicans,
Cortes depended for powerful aid. He had still
·the command of a body of Spaniards, equal in
number to that with which he had opened his way
into the centre of the empire, and had taken pof.
f~efiron of the capital; f0 that with the benefit of

greater

greater experience, as well as more perfea knOW* B qO O K
ledge of the country, he did not despair of quickly cc
recovering all that he had been deprived of by un. asso.
toward events.

FoUL of this idea, he courted the Tlafcalan The mea.

chiefs with such attention, and diffributed among taks.h
them so liberally the rich spoils of Otumba, that he
was secure of obtaining whatever he thould require
of the republic. He drew a small supply of am-
munition, and trio or three field-pieces, from his
flores at Vera Cruz. He dispatched an officer of
confidence with four thips of Narvaez's fleet to
Hispaniola and Jamaica, to engage adventurers,
and to purchase horses, gunpowder, and other
military flores. As he knew that it would be vain
to attempt the reduaion of Mexico, unless he
could secure the command of the lake, he gave
orders to prepare, in the mountains of Tlafcala,
materials for building twelve brig-antines, so as they
might be carried thither in pieces ready to be put
together, and launched when he flood in need of
their service '.

But while, tvith provident attention, he was Mutioous

taking those necessary fleps towards the execution .f~rqhi
of his meas~ures, an obstacle arose in a quarter
wrhere it was least expeaed, but most formidable.
The spirit of discontent and mutiny broke out in

* Cortes Relat. p. 253, E. Gomara Cron. c. I'7.

A a3 his

B O O K his OWn army. Many of Narvaez's followers were

~ planters rather than soldiers, and had accompanied
1'0·o him to New Spain with sanguine hopes of obtain·

ing s~ettlements, but with little inclination to en·
gage in the hardships and dangers of war. As the
fame motives had induced them to enter into their
new engagements with Cortes, they no sooner be-
came acquainted with the nature of the service,
than they bitterly repented of their choice. Such
of them as had the good fortune to survive the
perilous adventures in which their own imprudence
had involved them, happy in having made their
escape, trembled at the thoughts of being exposed
a second time to similar calamities. As soon as
they dis~covered the intention of Cortes, they began
secretly to murmur and cabal, and waxuing gra.
dually more audacious, they, in a body, offered
a remonfirance to their general against the impru-
dence of attacking a powerful empire with his
thattered forces, and formally required him to
lead them back direaly to Cuba. Though Cortes,
long praaifed in the arts of command, employed
arguments, intreaties, and presents to convince
or to soothe them; though his own soldiers, ani-
Inated with the s~pirit of their leader, warmly f~e-
conded his endeavours; he found their fears too
violent and deep-rooted to be removed, and the
utmost he could e~ea was to prevail with them to
defer their departure for some time, on a promis~e
that he would, at a more proper junaure, dismiss
such as should desire it.

T~ar

TArr the malcontents might have no leis~ure tO B O O K

brood over the causes of their dif~affeaion, he re- \cc
solved inflantly to call forth his troops into a~tion. Mea o'
He proposed to chastise the people of Tepeaca for ,enlVeOtR"!io
the outrage which they had committed, and ascofdne
the detachment which they had cut off happened
to be composed mostly of s~oldiers who had s~erved
under Narvaez, their companions, from the
desire of vengence, engaged the more willingly in
this war. He took the command in person, ac- AugUR.
companied by a numerous body of Tlafcalans,
and in the [pace of a few weeks, after various en-
counters, with great slaughter of the Tepeacans,
reduced that province to f~ubjeaion. During f~e-
veral months, while he waited for the supplies of
men and ammunition which he expeaed, and was
carrying on his preparations for conftruAing the
brigantines, he kept his troops constantly employ-
ed in various expeditions against the adjacent pro-
vinces, all of which were conduaed with an uni-
form tenor of succes~s. By these, his men became
again accuffomed to viatory, and resumed their
wonted sense of superiority; the Mexican power
was weakened; the Tlafcalan warriors acquired
the habit of ading in conjunalon with the Spa-
niards; and the chiefs of the republic delighted
to fee their country enriched with the spoils of all
the people around them, and affonifhed every day
with fresh discoveries of the irresistible prowess of
their allies, they declined no e~ffort requisite to
support them.

A a 4 ALL

B 0T 0 K ALL those preparatory arrangements, however,
Gy- though the most prudent and eflicacious which the

15"0·

strengthen- situation of Cortes allowed him to make, would
ed by se~veral
-e nlorce- have been of little avail, without a reinforcement

of Spanish soldiers. Of this he was so deeply fen·
fible, that it was the chief objea of his thoughts
and withes; and yet his only prospecT of obtaining
it from the return of the officer whom he had sent
to the isles to s~olicit aid, was both difiant and un.
certain. But what neither his own sagacity nor
power could have procured, he owed to a series of
fortunate and unfores~een incidents. The governor
of Cuba, to whom the faccefs of Narvaez appear·
ed an event of infallible certainty, having sent twfo
fmnall thips after him with new infiruaions, and a
s~upply of men and military flores, the officer

' . whom Cortes had appointed to command on the

coast, artfully decoyed them into the harbour of
Vera Cruz, seized the vessels, and easily persuaded
the soldiers to follow the flandard of a more able
leader than him whom they were deilined to join '.
Soon after, three ships of more considerable force
came into the harbour separately. T'here belong-
ed to an armament fitted out by Francis~co de Ga-
ray, governor of Jamaica, who, being poffeffed
with the rage of discovery and conquest which
animated every Spaniard fettled in America, had
long aimed at-intruding into some districT of New
Spain, and dividing with Cortes the glory and
gain of annexing that empire to the crown of

'B. Diaz. c. r3r.

Caf ile.

Caltile. They unadvisedly made their attempt on a op o t
the northern provinces, where the country was CLJ
poor, and the people fierce and warlike; and, after
a cruel f~uccefiron of disasters, famine compelled
them to venture into Vera Cruz, and cast them-
selves upon the mercy of their countrymen. Their Odtober 23.
fidelity was not proof against the splendid hopes
and promises which had s~educed other adventurers,
and as if the spirit of revolt had been contagious
in New Spain, they likewise abandoned the master
whom they were bound to s~erve, and inlifted un-
der Cortes g. Nor was it America alone that fur-
nilbed such unexpe~ted aid. A ship arrived from
Spain, freighted by some private merchants with
military flores, in hopes of a profitable market in
a country, the fame of whose opulence begun to
Spread over Europe. Cortes eagerly purchas~ed a
cargo which to him was invaluable, and the crew,
following the general example, joined him at
Tlalcala b.

FRoM those various quarters, the army of Cor-
tes was augmented with an hundred and eighty
men, and twenty horses, a reinforcement too in-
considerable to produce any consequence which
would entitle it to have been mentioned in the
hillory of other parts of the globe. But in that
ofAmerica, where great revolutions were brought
about by causes which seemed to bear no propor-

s Cartes Relat. zl53, F. B. Diaz. c. 133-
a lbid. c. r36. tion

a Oo o i tion to their eff~eas, such fmnall events rife into isn.

ccrportance, because they were fufficient to decide with

**refpeat to the fate of kingdoms. Nor is it the least

remarkable instance of the singular felicity con.
f~picuous in many passages of Cortes's flory, that
the two persons chiefly infirumental in furnishing
him with those s~eas~onable su~pplies, thould be an
avowed enemy who aimed at his deffruaion, and
itn envious rival who wifhedd to supplant him,

Nomber of Tan firit effeQ of the junalon with his newp

hsoce foll0WerS WaS to enable him to diftnifs such of

Narvaez's soldiers as remained with reluaance in
his service, After their departure, he ltill muf.
tered five hundred and fifty infantry, of which
fourscore were armed with musk~ets or crofs-bows,
forty horsemen, and a train of nine field-pieces'.
At the head of these, accompanied by ten thousand
Tlafcalans and other friendly Indians, Cortes ber
gan his march towards 111exico, on the twenty-
eighth ofl~ecember, fix months after his difaffrous
retreat from that city k

Preparations NOR did he advance to attack an enemy unpre.

ianS o si; pared to receive him. Upon the death of Monte·
defence' zulma, the Mexican chiefs, in .whom the right of

eleaing the emperor was vested, had inflantly
raised his brother Quetlavaca to the throne. His

SCortes Relat. 255S, E.
k Relat. 256, A. B. Diaz. c. 137.

avowed

svowed and inveterate enmity to the Spaniards ar qo 0
wcould have been fufficient to gain their fuffrages, A5
although he had been less distinguished for courage mo.0
and capacity. He had an immediate opportunity
of thewing that he. was worthy of their choice, by
conduc~ing, in person, thos~e fierce attacks which
compelled the Spaniards to abandon his capital;
and as soon as their retreat afforded him any re-
[pite from a~tion, he took measures for prevent-
ing their return to Mexico, with prudence equal
to the spirit which he had displayed in driving
them out of it. As from the vicinity of Tlafcala,
he could not be unacquainted with the motions
and intentions of Cortes, he observed the itorm
that was gathering, and began early to provide
againlL it. He repaired what the Spaniards had
ruined in the city, and firengthened it with such
new fortifications as the skill of his f~ubjeats was
capable of ereaing. Beside filling his magazines
with the usual weapons of war, he gave direations
to make long spears headed with the fwvords and
daggers taken from the Spaniards, in order to an-
noy the cavalry. He s~ummoned the people in
every province of the empire to take arms againit
their oppressors, and as an encouragement to ex-
ert themselves with vigour, he promised them ex-
emption from all the taxes which his predecessors
had imposed '. But what he laboured with the
greatest earnefinef~s was, to deprive the Spaniards

* Cortes Relat. p. 25i3, E. 2;4, A. B3. Diaz. c. 14o.

a qo o of the advantages wphich they derived from the

Gc3 friendship of the Tlafcalans, by endeavouring to

s"a' persuade that people to renounce all conne~ion

with men, who were not only avowed enemies of
the gods whom they worshipped, but who would
not fail to s~ubject them at last to the fame yoke,
wvhich they were now inconsiderately lending their
aid to impose upon others. Ther~e representations,
no les~s firiking than well founded, were urged to
forcibly by his ambassadors, that it required all the
address of Cortes to prevent their making a dan.
gerous impreflion ".

BUr while Quetlavaca wras arranging his plan

of defence, with a degree of foresight uncommon
in an American, his days were cut short by the
small-pox. This distemper, which raged at that
time in New Spain with fatal malignity, was un-
known in that quarter of the globe, until it was
introduced by the Europeans, and may be reckon-
ed among the greatest calamities brought upon
them by their invaders. In his flead the Mexicans
raised to the throne Guatimozin, nephew and son·
in-lawt of Mcotezuma, a young man of such high
reputation for abilities and valour, that in this dan-
gerous crisis, his countryrmen, with one voice, call-
ed him to the supreme command ".

I B. Diaz. c. 129. Herrera, dec. 2. lib. x. c. 14* I9*
a B. Diaz. c. '3o.

As soon as Cortes entered the enemy's territories, a op sc
he dis~covered various preparations to obffrua his J
progress. B~ut his troops forced their way with coE .a
little difficultyr, and took poffeffion of Tezeuco, any -ds~x
the second city of the empire, lituated on the Ca.
banks of the lake about twenty miles from IMexi-
mEO. Here he determined to eflablifh his head.
quarters, as the most proper flation for launching
his brigantines, as well as for making his approaches
to the capital. In order to render his relidence
there more secure, he deposed the cazique or chief,
wrho was at the head of that community, under
pretext of some defedt in his title, and s~ubstituted
in his place a person whom a faaion of the nobles
pointed out as the right heir of that dignity. At.
tached to him by this benefit, the new cazique
and his adherents served the Spaniards with invio.
hable fidelity P.

As the preparations for confiruaing the brigan- ~. Cf'nis ~opev

tines advanced slowly under the unfkiilful hands of and cau*
soldiers and Indians, whom Cortes was obliged to o.
employ in assisting three or four carpenters who
happened fortunately to be in his s~ervice, and as
he had not yet received the reinforcement which
he expeaed from His~paniola, he was not in a con-
dition to turn his arms direaly against the capital.

*Villa Senor Theatro Americano, i. 156.
* Cortes Relat. 256, &c. B. Diiaz.c. I37. Gomara Cron.
c. m. Hersera, dec* 3. c. I.

B qOO K To have attacked, at this period, a city so popu.

l2 ous, so well prepared for defence, and in a fitua.

sex. tion of such peculiar firength, must have exposed

his troops to inevitable deffru~tion. Three months
clapfed before the materials for the brigantines
were finished, and before he heard any thing with
refpea to the succes~s of the officer whom he had
s~ent to Hispaniola. This, however, was not a
season of inaaion to Cortes. He attacked fuccef-
fively several of the towns situated around the lake;
and though all the Mexcian power was exerted to
obitrua his operations, he either compelled them
to submit to the Spanish crown, or reduced them
to ruins. The inhabitants of other towns he endea-
voured to conciliate by more gentle means, and
though he could not hold any intercourse with them
but by the intervention of interpreters, yet, under all
the disadvantage of that tedious and imperfea
mode of communication, he had acquired such
thorough knowledge of the slate of the country, as
well as of the dispositions of the people, that he
conduated his negociations and intrigues with
allonifhing dexterity and s~ucces~s. Most of the
cities adjacent to Mexico were originally the capi-
tals of [mnall independent slates ; and some of them
having been but lately annexed to the Mexican
empire, flill retainect the remembrance of their
ancient liberty, and bore with impatience the rigo-
rous yoke of their new masters. Cortes having
early obs~erved symptoms of their difaffeaion,
availed himself of this knowledge to gain their con-

fidence

fidence and friendship. By offering, with confi- a o 0 sc
dence, to deliver them from the odious dominion
of the Mexicans, and by liberal promis~es of more sys.·
indulgent treatment, if they would unite with hinx
agiainlt their oppressors, he prevailed on the people
offeveral considerable diffrias, not only to acknow-
ledge the king of Castile as their sovereign, but to
supply the Spanish camp with provisions, and to
firengthen his army with auxiliary troops. Guati-
mozin, on the first appearance of defeation among
his fubjeas, exerted himself with vigour to pre-
ventor to punish their revolt ; but in spite of his
efforts, the spirit continued to s~pread. The Spa-
niards gradually acquired new allies, and with
deep concern he beheld Cortes arming againfl his
empire those very hands which ought to have been
Paive in its defence; and ready to advance agrainft
the capital at the head of a numerous body of his
own fubjeas s.

WHILE, by those various methods, Cortes was
gradually circumscribing the Mexican power in
such a manner that his profpea of overturning
it seemed neither to be uncertain nor remote, all
his schemes were well nigh defeated, by a con-
[piracy no less unexpec~ed than dangerous. The
soldiers of Narvaez had never udited perfealy with
the original companions of Cortes, nor did they

4 Cartes Relat. 256-260. B3. Diaz. c. 137--140. Comara
Cron. c. 122, 123. Herrera, dye. 3. lib. i. c. r, 2.

enter

B O O K enter into his measures with the fame cordial zeal.

~ , Upon every occasion that required any extraordi.

as"' nary effort of courage or of patience, their [pirits

were apt to fink ; and now, on a near view of what
they had to encounter, in attempting to reduce a
city so inaccefllble as Mexico, and defended by a
numerous army, the resolution even of those among
them who had adhered to Cortes when he was de-
ferted by their associates, began to fail. Their fears
led them to presumptuous and unfoldier-like dif.
cufirons concerning the propriety of their general's
measures, and the improbability of their faucefs.
From there they proceeded to censure and invec-
tives, and at last began to deliberate how they
might provide for their own safety, of which they
deemed their commander to be totally negligent.
Antonio Villefagna, a private foldie'r, but bold,
intriguing, and firongly attatched to Velasquez,
artfully fomented this growing spirit of difaffeaion.
His quarters became the r'endezvous of the mal.
contents, where, after many cons~ultations, they
could dis~cover no method of checking Cortes in
his career, but by affafiinating him and his most
considerable officers, and conferring the command
upon some person who would relinquish his wild
plans, and adopt measures more consistent with
the general f~ecuri-iy. Despair inspired them with
courage. The hour for perpetrating the crime,
the persons whom they destined as vidtims, the
offcers to facceed them in command, were all
named; and the conspirators signed an association,

17 by

by which they bound themselves with mos. solemn B qOO K
oaths to mutual fidelity. But on the evening be- c
fore the appointed day, one of Cortes's ancient assz.
followrers, who had been sed~uced into the confpi-
racy, touched with compunalon at the imminent
danger of a man whom he had long been accuf-
tomed to revere, or itruck with horror at his own
treachery, went privately to his general, and re·
vealed to him all that he ktnew. Cortes, though
deeply alarmed, d~iscerned at once what condua
was proper in a situation so critical. Ife repaired
inflantly to Villefagna's quarters, accompanied by
some of his most trusty officers. The aftonifl-
ment and confuflon of the man at this unexpec~ed
visit anticipated the confefiron of his guilt. OLurtes,
while his attendants s~eized the traitor, snatched
from his bos~om a paper containing the association,
signed by the conspirators. Impatient to know
how far the defeaion extended, he retired to read
it, and found there names which filled him with
surprise and sorrow. But, aware how dangerous
a firic? scrutiny might prove at such a junaure, he
confined his judicial inquiries to Villefagna alone.
As the proofs of his guilt were manifeit, he was
condemned after a thort trial, and next inorning
he was s~een hanging before the door of the hous~e
in which he had lodged. Cortes called his troops
together, and having explained to them the atro-
cious purpose of the conspirators, as well as the
juffice of the punishment infliaed on Villefagna,
he added, with an appearance of fatisfaalion, that

VoL. JI. B b he

B O O K he was entirely ignorant with refpedt to all the cir.

Lr~J cumftances of this dark tranfaaion, as the traitor,

's·I. when arrefied, had suddenly torn and swallowed a

paper, which probably contained an account of it,
and under the severest tortures poffeffed such con·
flancy as to conceal ·the names of his accomplices.
This artful declaration reffored tranquillity to inany
a breast that was throbbing, while he spoke, wvith
cons~ciousness of guilt and dread of deteaion; and
by this prudent moderation, Co-rtes had the ad-
vantage of having discovered, and of being able to
observe such of his followers as were difaffe~ted;
while they, flattering thems~elves that their past
crime was unknown, endeavoured to avert any s~us-
picfLoi of it, by redoubling their aaivity and zeal
in his ~fervice'.

Hir aingular CORTEs did not allow them leisure to ruminate
preparano~ns
for building on what had happened; and as the most effe~tual
brigantines. means of preventing the return of a mutinous fpi-

rit, he determined to call forth his troops imme.
diately to aaion. Fortunately, a proper occasion
for this occurred without his seeming to court it.
H-e received intelligence that the materials for build·
ing the brigantines were at length completely
finished, and waited only for a body of Spaniards
to conduat them to Tezeuco. The command of
this convoy, consisting of two hundred foot fol.

r C'ortes -Relat. -283, C. B. Diaz. c. 146.` Hemrrr,

skc. 3. lib. i. c. r.:.

- 1 diers,

diers, fifteen horsemen, and two field-piecesj he B O rO K
gave to Sandoval, who, by the vigilance, aaivity, ccA
and courage which he nrianifefked on every occa- "'5'
sion, was growing daily mn his confidence, and in
the ellimation of his fellow-f~oldiers. The s~ervice
w~as no less fmngular than important; the beams,
the planks, the masts, the cordage, the fails, the
iron-work, and all the infinite variety of articles
requisite for the confkiruaionofthiftleen brfgantines,
were to be carried sixty miles over land, through a
mountainous country, by people who were unac-
quainted with the mniniffryi ofdomeffic animals, or
the aid of machines to facilitate any Work of la-
bour. The Tlafcalans furniihed eight thousand
Tatmenes, an inferior order of men deffined for s~er·
vile talks, to carry the materials on theit thoul.
ders, and appointed fif'teen thousand warriors to
accompany and defend thent. Sandoval made the
diofpoition for their progress with great propriety,
placing the Tamtenes in the centre, orie body of
wiarriors in the front, another in the reat, with
considerable parties to cover the flanks. To each,
of there he joined some` Spaniards, not only to at-
sift them in danger, but to accuffom them to re.
gularity and ~subordination. A body so numerous,
and so much encumbered, advanced leis~urely, but
in excellent order; and in some places, where it
was confined by the woods or mountains, the line
of march extended above fix miles. Parties of
M~exicans frequently appeared hovering around
them on the high grounds; but perceiving no

S b profppif

B O O K profped of success in attacking an enemy conti-

c- nually on his guard, and prepared to receive them,

s i2. they did not venture to molest him; and Sandoval

had the glory of conduaing safely to Tezeuco, a
convoy on which all the future operations of his
countrymen depended '

aReeeives TmIs was followed by another event of no less
forcement. moment. F~our ships arrived at Vera Cruz from

HifCpaniola, with two hundred soldiers, eighty
hors~es, two batteritig cannon, and a considerable
supply of ammunition and arms '. Elevated with
observing that all his preparatory fchemnes, either
for recruiting his own army, or impairing the force
of the enemy, had now produced their full effec1,
Cortes, impatient to begin the siege in form,~ hal-
tened the launching of the brigantines. To fa·
cilitate this, he had employed a vast number of
Indians for two months in deepening the small ri-
vulet which runs by Tezeuco into the lake, and
in forming it into a canal near two miles in lengthu;
and though the 1Wlexicans, aware of his intentions,
as well as of the danger which threatened them,
endeavoured freqluently to interrupt the labourers,
or to burn the brigantines, the work was at last

The brigan. completed x. On the twenty-eighth of April, all
thnestaunch-
ed. the Spaniih troops, together with the auxiliary In.

dians, were drawn up on the banks of the canal;

* Cortes Relat. 260, C. E. B. Diaz. c. 140.
· Cortes Relat, 25;9, F~. 262, D. Gomara Cran. c. 129.
* See NOTE XCII. · B.D~iaz. c. r40.

and

and with extraordinary military pomp, rendered a op 0 s
inore solemn by the celebration of the most sacred s.----.
rites of religion, the brigantines were launched. '5'
As they fell down the canal in order, Fa-
ther Olmedo blessed them, and g~ave each its
name. Every eye followed them with wonder ~
and hope, until they entered the lake, when they
hoisted their fails, and bore away before the
wind. A g~eneral thout of joy was rais~ed; all ad-
miring that bold inventive genius, which, by
means to extraordinary that their s~uccess almost
exceeded belief, had acquired the command of a
fleet, without the aid of which Mexico would
have continued to set the Spanish power and arms
at defiance r.

CORTEs determined to attack the city from Di otin
three different quarters; from Tepeaca on the
north fide of the lake, from Tacuba on the weft,
and from Cuyrocan towards the south. Those
towns were situated on the prinlcipal causeways
which led to the capital, and intended for their
defence. He appointed Sandoval to command in
the firit, Pedro de Alvarado in the recond, and
Chriftoval de Olid in the third; allotting to each
a numerous body of Indian auxiliaries, together
with an equal divilion of Spaniards, who, by the
jun~tion of the troops from Hispaniola, amounted
now to eighty-fix horsemen, and eight hundred

u Cortes Relat. 266, C. Herrera, dec. 3. lib. i. c. 5*

Gomara Cron. c. r29,

B3 b 3 and

B Op O and eighteen foot soldiers; of whom one hundred

~cJand eighteen were armed with mufkiets or cross-

's"· bows. The train of artillery confii~ed of three bat-

tering cannon, and fifteezi feld-pieces >. He re·
served for hims~elf, as the Rtation of greatest import-
ance and danger, the conduet of the brigantines,
each armed with one of his sm~all cannon, and man-
ned with twenty-five Spaniards,

usy ro. As Alvarado and Olid proceeded towards the

poffs afirgned them, they broke down the aque.
duas which the ingenuity of the Mexicans bad
ereaed for conveying water into the capital, and by
the di~trefs to wihich this reduced the inlhabitants,
gave a beginning to the calamities which they were
deffined to fuffer 2. Alvarado and Olid found the
towns of which they were ordered to take poffefi~on
des~erted by their inhabitants, who had fled for safe·
ty to the capital, where Guatimozin had colleded
the chief force of his empire, as there alone he
could hope to make a f~uccef~sful fland againlt the
formidable enemies who were approaching to al.
fault him.

aexicans Tax first effort of~the I~exicans was to deftroyl
brgaties the fleet of brigantines, the fatal effeas of whole

operations they foresaw and dreaded. Though
the bri antines, after all the labour and merit of

r Cortes R~elat. 266, C.
aCert<;s Relat. 267, B3. B. Dial. c. 150. Herrera, dec* 3-

5Ib. i. c. I3*

C.0rtes

Cortes in forming them, were of inconsiderable B 0 0 K
bulk, rudely conftruaed, and manned chiefly with -J
landmen, hardly poffeifed of skill enough to con- 'SyS.
dua them, they muff have been objeats of terror
to a people unacquainted with any navigation but
that of their lake, and poffeffed of no vreffel larger
than a canoe. NecefiTty, however, urged Guati-
mozin to hazard the attack ; and hoping to supply
by numbers what he wanted in force, he assembled
such a multitude of canoes as covered the face of
the lake. They rowed on boldly to the charge,
wvhile the brigantines, retarded by a dead calm,
could fearcely advance to meet them. But as the Repulsed,
enemy drew near, a breeze s~uddenly [prung up;
in a moment the f~ails were s~pread, the brigantines,
with the utmoit ease, broke through their feeble
opponents, overset many canoes, and dillipated
the whole armament with such slaughter, as con-
vinced the Mexicans, that the progress of the Eu-
ropeans in knowledge and arts rendered their f~upe-
riority greater on this new element, than they had
hitherto found it by land b.

hRoM that time Cortes remained master of the singulrr

lake, and the brigantines not only preserved a 0fa;~ C2.:
communication between the Spaniards in their dif. "'se.
ferent flations, though at considerable difiance
from each othpr, but were employed to cover the

b Cortes Relat. 267, C. B. DiRZ. C. 150. Goinara Cron.

c.'3'. Herrera, dec. 3. lib. i. c. 17*

B b 4 caus~eways

a 0 0 K caus~eways on each fide, and keep off the canoes,

C~~· when they attemnpted to annoy the troops as they

advanced towards the city. Cartes formed the bri-
gantines in three divilions, appointinlg one to cover
each of the flations from which an attack was to be
carried on against the city, with orders to second the
operations of the officer who commanded there,
From all the three flations he pushed on the attack
against the city with equal vigour ; but in a manner
so very different from the conduQ of sieges in regu-
lar war, that he hims~elf seems afraid it would appear
no less improper than singular, to persons unac-
quainted with his situation c. Each morning his
troops assaulted the barricades which the enemy had
ereaed on the caus~eways, forced their way over
the trenches which they had dug, and through the
canals where the bridges were broken down, and
endeavroured to penetrate into the heart of the city,
in hopes of obtaining some decisi;ve advantage,
which might force the enemy to s~urrender, and
terminate the war at once; but when the abitinate
valour of the Mexicans rendered the efforts of the
day ineffeatual,, the (Spaniards retired in the even·
ing to their former quarters. Thus their toil and
danger were, in some meas~ure, continually ren~ew.
ed; the Mexicans repairing in the night what the
Spaniards had deffroyedl through the day, and re-
cov~ering the poffs from which they ·had driven
them. But necellity prescribed this flow and un.

C Cortes Relat. 270, F.

to ward

toward mode of operation. The number of his n o0 o to
troops was so fmnall, that Cortes durst not, with a A
handful of men, attempt to make a lodgment in a 's=*
city where he might be s~urrounded and annoyed
by such a multitude of enemies. The remem-
brance of what he had already fuffered by the ill-
judged confidence with which he had ventured into
such a dangerous situation, was itill fresh in his
mind. The Spaniards, exhausted with fatigue,
were unable to guard the various posts which they
daily gained; and though their camp was filled
with Indian auxiliaries, they durfk not devolve this
charge upon them, because they were so little ac-
cuffomed to discipline, that no confidence could
be placed in their vigilance. Besides this, Cortes
was extremely solicitous to preserve the city as
much as possible from being destroyed, both be-
cadfe he destined it to be the capital ofhis con-
quells, and wished that it might remain as a mo-
nument of his glory. From all these confidera-
tions, he adhered obitinately, for a month after
the siege was opened, to the fyfiem which he had
adopted. The rVlexicans, in their own defence,
displayed valour which was hardly inferior to that
with which the Spaniards attacked them. On land,
on water, by night and by day, one furious cone
fli8 succeeded to another. Several Spaniards were
killed, more wounded, and all were ready to fink
under the toils of unintermitting service, which
were rendered more intolerable by the injuries of

the

a Ov o the season, the periodical rains being now set in

I 1with their usual violence d.

IS2x.

Endeavours ASTONISHED and disconcerted with the length
EntYrm th and difficulties of the siege, Cortes determined to

om.make one great effort to get poff~efiron of the city,

before he relinquiihed 'the plan which he had hi.
therto followed, and had recourse to any other
mode of attack. With this view, he sent infiruc-
tions to Alvarado and Sandoval to advance with
their divisions to a general assault, and took the
command in person of that posted on the causeway

July 3. of Cuyocan. Animated by his presence, and the

expeltation of some decisive event, the Spaniards
pushed forward with irresistible impetuosity. They
broke through one barricade after another, forced
their way over the ditches and canals, and having
entered the city, gained ground incessantly, in
spite of the multitude and ferocity of their oppo-
nents. Cortes, though delighted with the rapidity
of his progres~s, did not forget that he might flill
find it neceffaryr to retreat; and in order to secure
it, appointed Julian de Alderete, a captain of
chief note in the troops which he had received front
H-ispaniola, to fill up the canals and gaps in the
caus~eway as the main body advanced. That oili-
Ier, deeming it inglorious to be thus employed,
while his companions were in the heat of adhon and
the career of vi~tory, neglecaed the important

B. Diaz. c. 151.

charge

charge committed to him, and hurried on, incon· a o ~o K
fiderately, to mingle with the combatants. The c-
M~exicans, whole military attention and skill were 'i"·
daily improving, no sooner observed this, than they
carried an account of it to their monarch.

GUAnuMozIN inflantly discerned the confe- Repulsed
quence of the error which the Spaniards had com-
mitted, and, with admirable presence of mind,
prepared to take advantage of it. He commanded
the troops posted in the front to slacken their es-
forts, in order to allure the Spaniards to push for-
ward, while he dispatched a large body of chos~en
warriors through different fireets, fiome by land,
and others by water, towards the great breach in
the causeway, which had been left open. On a
signal which he gave, the priests in the principal
temple Rtruck the great drum consecrated to the
god of war. No sooner did the Mexicans hear its
doleful solemn found, czlculated to inspire thern
with contempt of death and enthufiaffic ardour,
than they rushed upon the enemy with frantic rage.
The Spaniards, unable to resist men urged on no
less by religious fury than hope of success, began
to retire, at sirs leis~urely, and with a good coun-
tenance; but as the enemy pressed on, and their
own impatience to escape increased, the terror and
confusion became to general, that when they are
rived at the gap in the causeway, Spaniards and
Tlalcalans, horsemen and infantry, ·plunged in
~ramifcuoufly, while ,he Mexicans ruthed upon

them

B op o them fiercely from every fide, their lighit canoes

L ca~rrymg them through thloals which the brigan.
sex.1 tines could not approach. In vain did Cortes at·

tempt to flop and rally his flying troops; fear
rendered, them regardless of his entreaties or com-
. mands. Finding all his endeavours to renew the
combat fr-uitles~s, his next care was to save some of
those who had thrown themfllelves into the water;
but while thus employled, with more attention to
their situation than to his own, fix Mexican cap-
tains suddenly laid hold of him, and were hurry-
ing him off in triumph ; and though two of his of.
ficers refeued him at the expence of their own lh~es,
he received several dangerous wounds before he

wtih con8- could break loos~e. Above sixty Spaniards perished

aeaeo.in the rout; and what rendered the disaster more

afflicing, forty of there fell alive into the hands
of an enemy never known to thew mercy to a cap·
tive e·

Thol who THE approach of night, though it delivered the
sacrificed to dejeaed Spaniards from the attacks of the enemy,
the god of
war. Wfhered in, what was hardly less grievous, the

noise of their barbarous triumph, and of the hor-
rid feffival with which they celebrated their vic.
tory. Every quarter of the city was illuminated;
the great temple shone with such peculiar fplen.
dour, that the Spaniards could plainly fee the

* Cartes Relat. p. 273. B. Diaz. c. 152. Gomara Cron.

c. I38. Herrera, dec. 3. lib. i. c. 20.

people

people in motion, and the priests busy in hallening B O O K
the preparations for the death of the prisoners. c
Throug~h the gloom, they fancied that they dif- 5'j'
cerned their companions by the whiteness of their
Ikins, as they were fiript naked, and compelled to
dance before the image of the god to whom they
were to be offered. They heard the shrieks of
thos~e who w~ere sacrificed, and thought that they
could distinguish each unhappy vidim, by the
well-known found of his voice. Imnagrination added
to what they really saw or heard, and augmented
its horror. The moss unfeeling melted into tears of
compaflion, and the flouteft heart trembled at the
dreadful f~pecacle which they beheld '.

CORTES, who, besides all that he felt in com- Newraremes
maon with his soldiers, was oppressed with the ad- tht·leu
ditional load of anxious reffeaions natural to a ge- cus.'
neral on such an unexpeated calamity, could not,
like them, relieve his mind by giving vent to its
angulfh. He was obliged to assume an air of tran-
quillity, in order to revive the spirit and hopes of
his followers. The junaure, indeed, required an
extraordinary expertion of fortitude. The Mexi-
cans, elated with their viaory, sallied out next
morning to attack him in his quarter~s. But they
did not rely on the efforts of their own arms alone.
They sent the heads of the Spaniards whom they
had sacrificed, to the leading men in the adjrlcent

* See N O TE XCIII.

provmeces,

s o ~O K provinces, and affixred them that the god ofwrar,

1 ' 1appeased by the blood of their invaders, which

'3u. had been shed to plentifully on his altars, had de.

clared with an audible voice, that in eight days
time those hated enemies should -be finally destroy-
ed, and peace and prosperity re-established in the
empire.

Contes as- A PREDICTION uttered with such confidence, and
'"gfhis, -in terms s~o void of ambiguity, gained universal
Indian allks' credit among a people prone to fuperitition. The

zeal of the provinces, which had already declared
against the Spaniards, augmented; and several
which had hitherto remained inaltive, took arms,
with enthufiaffic ardour, to execute the decree of
the gods. The Indian auxiliaries who had joined
Cortes, accustomed to venerate the fame deities
with the Mexicans, and to receive the responses of
their priests with the fame implicit faith, abandon-
ed the Spaniards as a race of men devoted to cer-
tain deftruftion. Even the fidelity of the Tlafca-
lans was shaken, and the Spanifhh troops were left
almost alone in their stations. Cortes, finding that
he attempted in vain to dispel the superstitious fears
of his confederates by argument, took advantage,
from the imprudence of those who had framed the
prophecy, in fixing its accomplifhnxent so near at
hand, to give a firiking demonfiration of its falsity.
He fulpended all military operations during the
period marked out by the oracle. Under cover of
the brigantines, which kept the enemy at a distance,

bis troops lay in safety, and the fatal term expired a 0~ 0 t
without any dis~aster s. J

MANY of his allies, ashamed of their own cre- ne regains
dulity, returned to their flation. Other tribes. oli ind
judging that the gods who had now deceived the
Mlexicans, had decreed finallyl to withdraw their
proteaion from them, joined his flandard; and
Such was the levity of a fimnple people, moved by
every flight imprefiion, that in a short time after
such a general defeftion of his confederates, Cortes
saw himself, if we may believe his own account, at
the head of a hundred and fifty thoufagnd Indians.
Even with such a numerous army, he found it ne- and adoptsa

new ryller

ceffary to adopt a new and more wary fyftent of of atract.
operation. Inficad of renewing his attempts to be-
come maiter of the city at once, by such bold but
dangerous efforts of valour as he had already tried,
he made his advances gradually, and with every
possible precaution againit exposing his men to any
calamity similar to that which they Ltill bewailed.
As the Spaniards pushed forward, the Indians
regularly repaired the causeways behind them.
As soon as they got poffeflion of any part of the
town, the houses were inflantly levelled with the
ground, Day by day, the Mexicans, forced to re-
tire as their enemies gained ground, were hemmed
inwithin more narrow limits. Guatimozin, though
unable to flop the career of the enemy, continued

r 'B. Diaz.e. '53· Gomara Cron. c.138.

B O O K. to defend his capital with obstinate relolution, and

c~-J disputed every inch of ground. The Spaniards

1s"*· not only varied their mode of attack, but, by or·

ders of Cortes, changed the weapons with which
they fought. They were again armed with the
long Chinantlan spears, which they had employed
with such s~uccess against Narvaez ; and, by the firm
array in which this enabled them to range them-
selves, they repelled, with little danger, the loose
assault of the Mexicans: incredible numbers of them
fell in the conflias which they renewed every day b.
While war wasted without, famine began to con-
fume them within, the city. The Spanith brigan-
tines, having the entire command of the lake, ren·
dered it almnoft impossible to convey to the besieged
any supply of provisions by water. The immense
number of his Indian auxiliaries enabled Cortes to
fhuxt up the avenues to the city by land. The
flores which G uatimozin had laid up were exhaull-
ed, by the multitudes which had crowdedinto the
capital, to defend their sovereign and the temples
of their gods. Not only the people, but persons
of the hig~hest rank, felt the utmost diffreffes of fa-
ruine. What they f~uffered, brought on infealious
and mortal diftempers, the last calamity that visits
belieged cities, and which filled up the measure of
their woes i.

* Cortes Relat. p. 27i, C. 276, F. B., Diaz. c. I13*
SCortes Relat. 276, E. 277, F. B. Diaz, 5. Il·Gam.

Cron. c. 14.£.

21 I UT,

BuT, uEnder the pressure of so many and fiueb s omo a

rat~ious evils, the spirit of Guatimozin remained c-I
fina and unfubdued-. He reje~ted, with s~corn, coudate~and
every overture of peace from Cortes; and, dis~dain- COunatimoYZin
ing the idea of f~ubmitting' to the oppressors of his
country, determined not to survive Its ruin. The
Spaniards continued their progres~s. At length all July 27.
the three divilions penetrated into the great s~quare
inthecentre of the city, and made a secure lodge-
Inent there. Three-fourths of the city were now
reduced, and laid in ruins. The remaining quar-
ter was so closely preffd, that it could not long
withfland aiffailants, who attacked it from their new
flatIon with fuEperior advantage, and more assured
expectation of s~uccess. The Mexican nobles, s~oli-
citous to save the life of a monarch whom they
revered, prevailed on Guatimozin to retire from a
place where resistance was now vain, that he might
rouse the more difiant provinces of the empire to
arms, and maintain there a more fuccefsful firuggle
with the public enemy. In order to facilitate the
execution of this measure, they endeavoured to
amuse Cortes with overtures of fubmillion, that,
while his attention was employed in adjuffing the
articles of pacification, Guatimozin might escape
unperceived. But they made this attempt upon a
leader of greater sagacity and dis~cernment than to
be deceived by their arts. Cortes fufpeaing their
intention, and aware of what moment it was to de-
feat it, appointed Sandoval, the officer on w·hol~e

Vol.. II. C c vigilance

g qo o s vigilance he could most perfealy rely, to take the

c- command of the brigantines, with firia injunc.
ss . tions to watch every motion of the enemy. San-

doval, attentive to the charge, obs~erving some
large canoes crowded with people rowing across
the lake with extraordinary rapidity, inflantly gave
the signal to chace. Garcia Holguin, who com-
manded the f~wifteft-f~ailing brigantine, soon over·
·took them, and was preparing to fire on the fore-
most canoe, which seemed to carry some person

as is taken whom all the reft followed and obeyed. At once

en. the rowers dropt their oars, and all on board,

throwing down their arms, conjured him with cries
and tears to forbear, as the emperor was there.
Holguin eagerly s~eized his prize, and Guatimozin,
with a dignified composure, gave hims~elf up into
his hands, requesting only that no ins~ult might be
offered to the empress or his children. When con·
duaed to Cortes, he appeared neither with the
sullen fierceness of a barbarian, nor with the de-
jeaion of a supplicant. "L I have done," said he,
addrefirng himself to the Spanish general, " what
became a monarch. I have defended my people
to the last extremity. Nothing now remains but
to die. Take this dagger," laying his hand on
one which Cortes wore, 'C plant it in my brealt,
and put an end to a life which can no longer be of
us~e '."

t Cortes Relat. 279. B. Diaz. c. 136. Gomara Cron.

e. 414. Herrera, dec* 3. lib. ii. c. ?.

As soon as the fate of their foverei n was n aV o w
known, the ref~itance of the Mexicans ceased; c
and Cortes took poff'eflion of that small part of Aupt,1"3'
the capita' which yet remained undeftroyed. Thus ThC ' 'Y
terrninated the siege of Mexico, the most me-
morable event in the conquest of America. It
continued feventy-five days, 11ardly one of which
passed without some extraordinary effort of one
party in the attack, or of the other in the defence
of a city, on the fate of which both knew that the
fortune of the empire depended. As the firuggle
here was more obitinate, it was likewise more
equal, than any between the inhabitants of the Old
and New Worlds. The great abilities of Guati-
mozin, the number of his troops, the peculiar
lituation of his capital, to far counterbalanced the
superiority of the Spaniards in arms and discipline,
that they must have relinquished the enterprise, if
they had truffed for success to thems~elves alone.
But Mexico was overturned by the jealousy· of
neighbours who dreaded its power, and by the re-
volt of fubjeas impatient to thake off its yoke.
By their effeaual aid, Cortes was enabled to ac-
complifh what, without such support, he would
hardly. have ventulred to attempt. How much
soever this account of the reducaion of Mexico
may detraQ, on the one hand, from the marvel.
lous relations of foaxe Spanish writers, by al~cribing;
that to simple and obvious causes which they at-
tribute to the romantic valour of their country-

C c2 men,

B O O K men, it adds, on the other, to the merit and abi.

C~lities of Cortes, who, under every disadvantage,

'asn. acquired such an ascendant over unknown nations,

as to render them infiruments towards carrying his
iEchemes into execution'.

smanlners of THE exultation of the Spaniards, on accom·
the booty,
and difap-' plifhing this arduous enterprise, was at first ex-
pointmentrof
the spa. cetive. But this was quickly damped by the cruel

mad. disappointment of those sanguine hopes, which

had animated them amidst so many hardships and
dangers. Initead of the inexhauffible wealthwhich
they expeaed from becoming masters of Monte.
zuma's treasures, and the ornaments of so many
temples, their rapacioufnels could colle61 only an
inconsiderable booty amidst ruins and defolationm
Guatimozin, aware of his impending fate, had
ordered what remained of the riches amassed by
his anceffors to be thrown into the lake. The
Indian auxiliaries, while the Spaniards were en-
gaged in conflia with the enemy, had carried off
the most valuable part of the spoil. The fum to
be divided among the conquerors was so [mall,
that many of them dif~dained to accept of the pit-
tance which fe~llto their share, and all murmured

a See NOTE XCIV.
a The gold and silver, according to Cartes, amounted only

to Izo,000 pesos, Relat.- 280, A. a fum much inferior to that
which the Spaniards had formerly dividecd in Mexico.

and exclaimed; some, againfkt Cortes and his con- B OVP K
fidents, whom they ufupeated of having s~ecretly cM·
appropriated to their own use a large portion of 2u
the riches which thould have been brought into
the common flock; others, against Guatimozin,
whom they accus~ed of obstinacy, in refuring to dif-
cover the place where he had hidden his treasure.

ARGUMENTs, intreaties, and promises were em- ,Gortemgin
played in order to 'footh them, but with so little
effea, that Cortes, from solicitude to check this
growing [pirit of discontent, gave way to a deed
which flains the glory of all his great aaians.
WVithout regarding the former dignity of Guati-
mozin, or feeling any reverence for those virtues
which he had displayed, he fubjeaed the unhappy
monarch, together with his chief favourite, to
torture, in order to force from them a discovery
of the royal treasures, which it was supposed they
had concealed. Guatimozin bore whatever the
refined cruelty of his tormentors could inflia, with
the invincib'e fortitude of an American warrior.
His fellow-f~ufferer, overcome by the violence of
the anguish, turned a dejeaed eye towards his
master, which seemed to implore his permiifion to
reveal all that he knew. But the high-fpirited
prince, darting on him a look of authority mingled
w~ith s~corn, checked his weakness by asking, "C Anx
1 now reposing on a bed of flowers ?" Overawed
by the reproach, the favourite persevered in his du-
tiful silence, and expired. Cortes, athamed of a

C c3 scene

a qo o; x cene to horrid, rescued the royal vitim-from the

c-I hands of his torturers, and prolonged a life reserved

Issz. for new indignities and f~ufferings m.

All the pro. THE fate of the capital, as both parties had

emie iu - foreseen, decided that of the empire. The pro-

ann. vinces submitted one after another to the con-

querors. Small detachments of Spaniards march.
ing through them without interruption, penetrated
in different quarters to the great Southern Ocean,
which, according to the ideas of Columbus, they
imagined would open a short as well as easy passage
to the East Indies, and secure to the crown of Ca·
itile all the envied wealth of those fertile regions ";

cortes forms and the ative mind of Cortes began already to
(chemes of
n~ew dilo. form s~chemes for attempting this important dif-

vee, covery ".

c~pi g*r HE did not know, thlat during the progress of
by Magellan. his viaorious arms in M'exico, the very [cheme, of

which he began to form some idea, had been un.
dertaken and accomplifhled. As this is one of the
molt [plendid events in the hillory of the Spanish
discoveries, and has been produaive of effeas pe-
culiarly interesting to those extensive provinces
which Cortes had now f~ubjeaed to the crown of

a B3. Diaz. c. 157. Gotnara Cron. c. 146. Herrera,

dec. 3. lib. ii. c. 8. Torqucm. Mon. Ind. i. 574*

" Cortes Relat. 280, D, &tc. B. Diaz. c. 197.
* Herrera, dec. 3. lib. ii. c. 17. Gomara Cron. c. I49.

Callile,

Caitile, the account of its rife and progress merits a ovo ze
a particular detail.

2522.

FERDINAND MAGALHAENS, Or Magellan, a
Portuguese gentleman of honourable birth, having
served several years in the East Indies, with di-
flinguifhed valour, under the famous Albuquerque,
demanded the recompence which he thought due
to his s~ervices, with the boldness natural to a high-
[pirited soldier. But as his general would not grant
his fait, and he expeaed greater juffice from his
lovereign, whom he knew to be a good judge and
a generous rewarder of merit, he quitted India
abruptly, and returned to Lisbon. In order to
induce Emanuel to listen more favourably to his
claim, he not only slated his pail services, but of-
fered to add to them by conduaing his collntry.
men to the Molucca or Spice Islands, by holding a
welterly course ; which he contended would be both
shorter and less hazardous than that which the Por-
tuguefe now followed by the Cape of Good Hope,
through the immense extent of the Eastern Ocean.
This was t~he original and favourite projeQ of Co-
lumbus, and Maagellan founded his hopes of success
on the ideas of that great navigator, confirmed by
many observations, the result of his own naval ex-
perience, as well as that of his countrymen in their
intercourse with the East. But though the Portu-
gouef~e Mlonarchs had the merit of having firit
awakened and encouraged the spirit of discovery in
that age, it was their deltiny, in the course of a

C c 4 few

B qOO K few years, to rejetl two grand schemes for this

L~*3 purpose, the execution of: which would have been

's"'' attended with a great acceflion of glory to thenx.

selves, and of power to their kingdom. In ·confe-
quence of some ill-founded prejudice against Ma-
gellan, or of some darkr intrigue which contempo-
rary hifforians have not explained, Emanuel would
neither beffow the recompence which he claimed,
nor approve of the s~cheme which he proposed; and
difmniffed him with a disdainful coldness intolerable
to a mnari conscious of what he deserved, and ani-
mated with the sanguine hopes of success peculiar
to those who are capable of forming or of conduat.
ing new and great undertatkings. In a transport of
resentment, Magellan forreally renounced his alle.

as. giance to an ungrateful master, and fled to the

court afCaftile, where he expeated that his talents
would be more justly effimated. He endeavoured
to recommend himself by offering to execute, un-
der the patronage of Spain, that scheme, which he
had laid before the court of Portugal, the ac.
complifhment of which, he knew, would wound
the monarch against whom he was exasperated in
the moss tender part. In order to establish the
jufinef~s of his theory, he produced the fame ar-
guments which he had employed at Lisbon; ac-
knowledging, at the fame time, that the undertaking
was both arduous and expensive, as it could not
be attempted but with a s~quadron of considerable
force, and viaualled for at least two years. For.
tunately, he applied to a miniffer who was not

apt to be deterred, either by the boldness of a de- a ov a t
sign, or the expence of carrying it into execution. M-rs
Cardinal Ximenes, who at that time direted the *5'
affairs of Spain, discerning at once what an in.
crease of wealth and glory would accrue to his
country by the success of Magellan's proposal,
lillened to it with a most favourable ear. Charles V.
on his arrival in his Spanish dominions, entered
into the measure with no less ardour, and orders
were iss~ued for equipping a proper s~quadron at the
public charge, of which the command was given
to Magedlan, whom the king honoured with the
habit of St. Jag~o and the title of Captain-
General P.

ON the tenth of August one thousand five hun- ais voyase.
<lred and nineteen, Magellan failed from Seville
with five ships, which, according to the ideas of
the age, were deemed to be of considerable force,
though the burden of the largest did not exceed
one hundred and twenty tons. The crews of the
whole amounted to two hundred and thirty-four
men, among whom were some of the moss fkiilful
pilots in Spain, and s~everal Portuguese sailors, in
whole experience, as more extensive, Magellan
placed still greater confidence. After touching
at the Canaries, he flood direaly south towards
the equinodial line along the coast of America,

P Herrera, dec. 2. lib. ii. c. 19. lib. iv. c. 9. Gomara
flif. c. 91. Dalrymple's Collect. of Voyages to the South
Pacific Ocean, vol. i, p. I, &c.,

a oV a but was so long retarded by tedious calms, and

c spent so much time in searching every bay and in.
'Y· let for that communication with the Southern

Ocean which he withed to discover, that he did
not reach the river De la Plata till the twelfth of

asso. January. That Spacious opening through which

its vast body of water pours into the Atlantic
allured him to enter; but after failing up it for
some days, he concluded, from the shallowness of
the itheam and the frefhnefs of the water, that the
withed-for firait was not situated there, and con-
tinued his course towards the south. On the
thirty-firft of March he arrived in the port of St.
Julian, about forty- eight degrees south of the
line, where he resolved to winter. In this un-
comfortable flation he loft one of his squadron, and
the Spaniards fuffered to much from the excefllve
rigour of the climate, that the crews of three of
his thips, headed by their officers, role in open
mutiny, and insisted on relinquishing the visionary
projee? of a desperate adventurer, and returning
direaly to Spain. This dangerous infurreaion
Magellan suppressed, by an effort of courage no
less prompt than intrepid, and infliated exemplary
punishment on the ringleaders. With the re-
mainder of his followers, overawed but not recon.
ciled to his scheme, he continued his voyage to-
wards the south, and at length discovered, near
the fifty-third degree of latitude, the mouth of a
strait, into which he entered, notwithflanding the
murmurs and remonfiranices ofC the people under

his command. After failing twenty days in that a qo 0
winding dangerous channel, to which he gave his cc
own name, and where one of his thips deserted Ists-
him, the great Southern Ocean opened to his
view, and with tears of joy he returned thanks to
fleaven for having thus far crowned his endea- ·
vours with success 9.

BU'r he was still at a greater dillance than he

imagined from the objea of his wishes. He failed
during three months and twenty days in an uni-
form diretion towards the north-west, without
discovering land. In this voyage, the longest that
had ever been made in the unbounded ocean, he
fuffered incredible distress. His flock of provi-
fions was almost exhauffed, the water became
putrid, the men were reduced to the thorteft al-
lowance with which it was pofirble to sustain life,
and the s~curvy, the most dreadful of all the mala-
dies with which sea-faring people are affliaed, be-
gan to s~pread among the crew. One circumfkance
alone afforded them some consolation; they en-
joyed an uninterrupted course of fair weather, with
fach favourable winds, that Magellan bestowed on
that ocean the name of Pacifec, which it still retains.
When reduced to such extremity that they must

< Herrera, dec. 2. lib. iv. c. 10. lib. ix. c. ro, &ce. Go-

mara Hist. c. 92. Pigafetta Viaggio ap. Itamuf. ii. P* 352,
&c.

have

a qo o have funk under their fufferings, they fell in with

~ c-c3 a dluffer of fmnall but fertile islands, which afford.

h1a5'~ ed them refresh~ments in such abundance, that their

health was soon re-eftabliihed. Fromn there illes,
which he called De los Ladrones, he proceeded on
his voyage, and soon made a more important dif.
covery of the islands now known by the name of
the Philippines. In one of there he got into an
unfortunate quarrel with the natives, who at-
tacked him with a numerous body of troops well
armed; and while he fought at the head of his

^pril s. men with his usual valour, he fell by the hands of

those barbarians, together with several of his prin-
cipal offcers.

THE expeditionl was, prosecuted umder other

commanders. .After viliting many of the finaller
illes Ecattered in the ·eastern part of the Indian
ocean, they touched at the great island ofEorneo,

Ncv. s. and at length landed in Tidore, one of the Mo.

luccas, to the affonifhment of the Portuguese,
who could not comprehend how the Spaniards, by
holding a wkefferly course, had arived at that fe-
queffered feat of their most valuable commerce,
which they themselves had discovered by failing
in an opposite direation. There, and in the ad-
jacent illes, the Spaniards found a people ac-
quainted with the benefits of extensive trade, and
willing to open an intercourse with a new nation.

They

They took in a cargo of the precious spices, which a so o x
are the diftinguilhed produation of those islands; c
and with that,: as well as with fpecimnens of the 'szz.
rich commodities yielded by the other countries
which they had visited, the Vidobry, which, of the Jan. 1s==.
two ships that remained of the squadron, was most
fit for a long voyagfe, set fail for Europe, under
the command of Juan Sebastian del Cano. He
followed the course 'of the Pfortuguefe, by the
Cape of Good Hope, and, after many disasters
and f~ufferings, he. arrived at St. Lucar on the
seventh of September one thousand five hundred
and twenty-two, having failed round the globe
in the space of three years and twenty-eight
days (I.

THouGH an untimely fate deprived Magellan
of the fatisfaltion of accompiihing this great un-
dertaking, his contemporaries, just to his memory
and talents, alcribed to him not only the honour
of having formed the plan, but of having fur-
mounted almaft every obitacle to the completion
of it; and in the present age his name is still
ranked among the highest in the roll of eminent
and fuccefsful navigators. The naval glory of
Spain now eclipsed that of every other nation;
and by a singular felicity the had the merit, in

9 Herrera, dec- 3. lib. i. c. ;. 9. lIb. iv. c. i. Gomara

Cron. c. 9, &c. Pigafetta a~. Ramut ii. p. 361, &rc.

B qOO K the cours~e of a few years, of discovering a new

I~ continent almost as large as that part of the earth

a"'2 - which was formerly known, and of ascertaining by

experience the form and extent of the whole terra-
queous globe.

THE Spaniards were not satisfied with the glory

of having first encompassed the earth; they ex-
peaed to derive great commercial advantages from
this new and boldest effort of their maritime fkrill.
The men of science among them contended, that
the spice islands, and several of the richest coun-
tries in the East, were s~o situated as to belong of
right to the crown of Castile, in consequence of
the partition made by Alexander VI. The mer-
chants, without attending to this dikcuflion,; en-
gaged eagerly in that lucrative and alluring com-
merce, which was now opened to them. The
Portuguese, alarmed at the intruflon of such for.
midable rivals, remonfirated and negociated in
Europe, while in Asia they obffruated the trade of
the Spaniards by force of arms. Charles V. not
fufficiently infiruaed with ref~ped to the import-
ance of this valuable branch of commerce, or
diffraded by the multiplicity of his schemes and
opera~;ons, did not afford his f~ubjeats proper pro-
teaion. At last, the low slate of his finances, ex-
hauffed by the efforts of his arms in every part of
Europe, together with the dread of adding a new
war with Portugal to those in which he was already

2r engaged,

engaged, induced him to make over his claim of a o a K
the Moluccas to the Portugues~e for three hundred
and fifty thous~and ducats. He reserved, however, '5".
to the crown of Castile the right of reviving its
pretensions on repayment of that fum; but other
objeas engrossed his attention and that of his f~uc-
ceffors; and Spain was finally excluded from a
branch of commerce in which it was engaging with
sanguine expe~ations of profit '.

THOUGH the trade with the Moluccas was relin-
quifhed, the voyage of Magellan was followed by
commercial effeats of great moment to Spain.
Philip II. in the year one thousand five hundred
and fixty-four, reduced those islands which he diT-
covered in the Eastern Ocean to f~ubjeaion, and
eliablifhed settlements there; between which and
the kingdom of New Spain, a regular intercourse,
the nature of which thall be explained in its proper
place, is Rtill carried on. I return now to the tradr-
a~tions in New Spain.

AT the time that Cortes was acquiring such ex. Ani order as

supersede

tensive territories for his native country, and pre. corues,
paring the way sori future conquests, it was his fin-
gular fate not only to be destitute of any commis-
sion or authority from the sovereign whom he was
serving with such fuccefsful zeal, but to be regarded

SHerrera, dec- 3. lib. vi. c. 5, &c. dec. 4. lib. v. c. 7,

a ov K as an undatiful and s~editious fubjea. By the in·

~~ fluence of Fonseca, bilhop of Bu-rgos, his conduQ
>s - in affiuming the government of New Spain was

declared to be an irregular usurpation, in contempt
of the royal authority; and Chriftoval de Tapia
received a commillion, impowering him to s~uper.
fede Cortes, to seize his person, to confiscate his
effeas, to make a stria~ scrutiny into his proceed-
ings, and to transmit the res~ult of all the enquiries
carried on in New Spain to the council of the In-
dies, of which the bishop of Burgos was president.
.A few weeks after the reduAlon of Mexico, Tapiao
landed at Vera Cruz with the royal mandate to
fkrip its conqueror of his power, and to treat him
as a criminal. But Fons~eca had chosen a very
improper infirument to wreak his vengeance on
Cortes. Tapia had neither the reputation nor the
talents that fauited the high command to which he

wahic he was appointed. Cortes, while he publicly ex;-
eludes' pressed the most refpeaful veneration for the em-

peror's authority, secretly took mfeafures to defeat
the effea of his commiiron; and having involved
Tapia and his followers in a multiplicity of nego-
ciations and conferences, in which he s~ometimes
had recourse to threats, but more frequently em-
ployed bribes and promises, he at length prevailed
on~that weak man to abandon a province which he
was unworthy of governing'.

SHerrera, dec. 3. lib. iii, c. I6. dec. iv. c. I. Cort. Re.

lat. 281, E. B. Diaz. c. z3j8.

SUTr notwithfkanding the fortulnate dexter~ity B o p sc

aith which he hrid eluded this danger, Cortes cMi
twas to s~ensible of the precarious tenure by which Apli'es
he held his power, that he dispatched deputies to Pc~:,o rt,
Spain, with a pompous accoun~t of the success of MaY 1s.
his arms, with farther specimens of the produc-
tions of the counitry, and with rich preiknts to the
emperor, as the earnest of future contributions
from his new conaquelt ) requeffing, in recom-
pence for all his services, the approbation of his
proceedings, and that he might be entruffed with
the government of those dominions, which his con-
duel, and the valour of his follotvers, had added
to the crown of Castile. The junaure in which
his deputies reached the court was favourable.
The internal edmmotions in Spain, ivhich had dif
quieted the beginning of Charles's reigh, were jult
appeased ". The miniffers had leisure to turn their
attention towards foreign affairsi The account of'
Cortes's viaories filled his countrymen with ad-
miration. The extent and vtalue of his conque~ts
became the objeQ of vast and intereffing hopes.
W~hatever slain he inight have contra~ed, by the
irregularity of the fleps which he took in order to
attain power, was so fully effaced by the splendor
and merit of the great aalons which this had
enabled him to perform, that every heart revolted
at the thought of infliaing any cens~ure on a inan,·
whole services entitled him to the higheit marks

P Hist. of Charles V. vol ii. b. ill.

VoL. II. I)d

BOO K of diftinAlon. The public voice declared warmly

~ Lrin favour of his pretenflons, and Charles arriving

'5zz. in Spain about this time, adopted the sentiments

aontd is eap- of his f~ubje~s with a youthful ardour. Notwith-
~canPrain- flandiwr the claims of Velasquez, and the partial

,ceqor I representations of the bishop of Burgors, the em·

peror appointed Cortes captain-general and go-
vernor of New Spain, judging that no person was
so capable of maintaining the royal authority, or of
establishing good order both among his Spanish and
Indian fubjeas, as the viaorious leader whom the
former had long been accuffomed to obey, and the
latter had been taught to fear and to refped=,

ais resemes EVEN before his jurif~di~ion received this legal
an rn~:angt·. fan~ion, Cortes ventured to exercise all the

powers of a governor, and, by various arrange.
ments, endeavoured to render his conquest a f~e.
cure and beneficial acquisition to his country. He
determined to establish the feat of government in
its ancient flation, and to rais~e Mexico again*
from its ruins; and having conceived high ideas
concerning the future grandeur of the slate of
which he was laying the foundation, he began to
rebuild its capital on a plan which hath gradually
formed the most magnificent city in the New
World. At the fame time, he employed fkrilful
persons to search for mines in different parts of

SHerrera, dec* 3. lIb. 17. c. 3. Gomara Cron. c. 164r

J65. B. Dial;. 167, 168

the country, and opened fonie which were found B O O K
to be richer than any ivhich the Spaniards had hi- c*~

I Sts.

therto discovered in America. He detached his
principal office~rs into the remote provinces, and
encouraged them to fettle there, not only by be-
flowing upon them large traas of laird, but by
granting them the fame dominiori over the Indians,
and the fame right to their service, which the Spa-
niards had afiumed in the islands.

IT was not, however, without difficulty that the onur ae inex
1Yexican entpire could be entirely reduced into ::nitya dthe
the form of a Spanish colony. Enraged and ren- Spaniards,
dered des~perate by opprefiron, the natives often
forgot the superiority of their enemies, and ran to
arms in defence of their liberties. In every conl
telt, however, the European valour and dis~cipline!
prevailed. But, fatally for the honour of their
coun~try, the Spaniards sullied the glory redound-
ing from these repeated viaories by their mode of
treating thle variquifhed people. - After taking
Guatimozin, and becoming masters of his capital,
they suppos~ed that the king of Castile entered on
poffeffion of all the rights of the captive monarch,
and affeaed to con~der every effort of the Mexicans
to assert their own independence, as the rebellion
ofraffals against their s~overeign, or the mutiny of
slaves against their master. Under the fidnaion of
those ill-founded maxims, they violated every
right that thould be held sacred between holtile
nations. After each infurreaion, they reduced the

D d common

B qOO K Common people in the provinces which they s~ub-

~ ccJ dued, to the most humiliating of all conditions,
sz'that of pers~onal s~ervitude. Their chiefs, supposed

to be more criminal, were punished with greater
s~everity, and put to death in the moit ignominious
or the most excruciating mode, that the info-
lence or the cruelty of their conquerors could de.
vif'e. In almof1 every diffria of the Mexican
empire, the progress of the Spanish arms is marked
with blood, and with deeds so atrocious, as dif-
grace the enterprising valour that conduaed them
to success. In the country of Panuco, sixty ca·
ziques, or leaders, and four hundred nobles, were
burnt at one time. Nor was this thocking barba-
rity perpetrated in any sudden sally of rage, or by
a commander of inferior note, It was the at of
Sandoval, an officer whole name is entitled to
the second rank in the annals of New Spain, and
executed after a solemn cons~ultation with Cortes;
and to complete the horror of the feene, the chil-
dren and relations of the wretched vidims were
assembled, and compelled to be f~pedators of their
dying agonies 7. It seems hardly possible to ex-
ceed in horror this dreadful example of severity;
but it was followed by another, which affeaed
the Mexicans still more sensibly, as it gave them
a most feeling proof of their own degradation,
and of the small regard which their haughty
Inafters retained for the ancient dignity and Cplea.

x Cortes Relat. 291, C. GOmara Croa. c. 155*

dour

dour of their slate. On a flight suspicion, con. B 0~ 0 s
firmed by very imperfea evidence, that Guatimo- ~
zin had formed a scheme to shake off the yoke, 'szz.
and to excite his former f~ubjeas to take arms,
Cortes, without the formality of a trial, ordered
the unhappy monarch, together with the caziques
ofTezeuco andl Tacuba, the two persons of greatest:
eminence in the empire, to be hanged; and the
Mexicans, with affonifhment and horror, beheld
this dis~graceful punishment infliaed upon persons,
to whom they were accuffomed to look up with
reverence, hardly inferior to that which they paid
to the gods themselves z. The example of Cortes
and his principal on-cers encouraged and juitified
persons of s~ubordinate rank to venture upon com-
mitting greater excess~es. Nuno de Guzman, in
particular, Rtained an illuffrious name by deeds of
peculiar enormity and rigour, in various expedi-
tions which he conduaed "

ONE circumstance, however, saved the Mexi- Firaohet

of induffry

cans from farther consumption, perhaps from one amone, are
as complete, as that which had depopulated the conquerors.
islands. The firit conquerors did not attempt to
s~earch for the precious metals in the bowels of the
earth. They were neither fufficiently wealthy to
carry on the expensive works, which are requisite
for opening those deep recess~es where Nature has

ZGomara Cron. c. I70. B. Diaz. c. Ij7. Herrera, dec. 3*

lib. vii. c. . See N O TE XCV.

* Herrers, decr4 and 5 passim.

D d 3 con.

a o o K concealed the veins of gold and silver, not fuffi.

~jclently fkiilful to perform the ingenious operations

azzz. by which those precious metals are s~eparated from

their refpeaive ores. They were satisfied with the
more simple methodl pra~ised by the Indians, of
wYafhing the earth carried down rivers and torrents
frorn the mountains, and polleding the grains of
'native metal deposited there. The rich mines of
New Spain, which have poured forth their trea-
fures with fixch pro~fdia on every quarter of the

assz, ac. globe, were not discovered far s~everal years after

the conquelt ". By that time, a more orderly go.
vernment and police were introduced into the co.
lony; experience, derived from former errors, had
fuggefied many useful and humane regulations for
the proteaign and preservation of the Indians;
and though it then becarne necessary to increaff
the number of those employed in the mines, and
they were engagred in a s~pecie~s of labour more per-
nicious to the human conflitution, they fuffered
les~s hardship or diminution than from the ill-
judged, but less Rxtenfive, schemes of the first
conquerors.

Their po. t7CHILE it was the lot of the Indians to f~uffer,
VemY. their new masters seem not to have derived any

considerable weaheh fron> their ill-conduc~ed re-
searches. Accordjng to the usual fate of first set-
tlers in new colonies, it was their lot to encounter

SHerrerp, dec. 8, lib. x. c. 21.

danger,

danger, and to firuggle with difficulties; the fruits a op a r
of their viaories and toils were reserved for times
of tranquillity, and reaped by s~uccessors of greater 's'z.
inddktry, but of inferior merit. · The early hiffo-
rians of America abound with accounts of the
fufferings and of the poverty of its conquerors c.
In New Spain, their condition was rendered more
grievous by a peculiar arrangement. W~hen Charles
V. advanced Cortes to the government of that
country, he at the fame time appointed certain
commifironers to receive kand administer the royal
revenue there, with independent jurifdialion d
These men, chosen from inferior flations in various
departments of public business at Madrid, were so
much elavated with their promotion, that they
thought they were called to aB a part of the firit
cons~equence. But being accuffomed to the mi-
nute formalities of off~ce, and having contrasted
the narrow ideas suited to the sphere in which
they had hitherto moved, they were affonifhed, on
arriving in Mexico, at the high authority which as 4.
Cortes exercised, and could not conceive that the
mode of adminiffration, in a country recently s~ub-
dued and fettled, must be different f-rom what
took place in one where tranquillity and regular
government had been long establish~ed. In their
letters, they represented Cortes as an ambitious
tyrant, who having usurped a jurifdiaion superior

c ~Cortes Relat. 283, F. B. Diaz. c. zo9.
SHerreyta dec. 3. lib.iv. c. 3.

D d4 to

B O 0 K so law, aspired at independence, and by his ex-

-- orbitant wealth and extensive influence, might ac.
5l24-' complifh those disloyal schemes which he appa-

yently meditated 4. These insinuations made s~uch
deep impreflion upon the Spanish miniffers, molt
of whom had been formed to business under the
jealgus and rigid adminiftwatipn ofFerdinand, that,
unmindful of all Cortes's past services, and re-
gardlef~s of what he was then fuffering in condu8-
ing that extraordinary expedition, in which he
advanced from the lake of Mexico to the wellent
extremities of Hopdurasf, they infused the fame
fixfpicions into the hind of their master, and pre-
vailed on himn to order a solemn inquest to be
made into his condu60, with powens to the licen-

ttSI tiate Ponce de Leon, entruffed with that commis-

sion, to seize his person, if he thpuld find that
expedient, and fend lum pnfloner to Spain p.

conere. THE sudden death of ponce de Leon, a few dayS

jun
o after his arrival in New Spain, prevented the exe-

cution ps this cpmmiflion. But as the objet of
his appointment was k~nown, the mind of Cortes
was deeply wounded with this unexpelled return
for services, which far exceeded whatever any sub.
jedt of Spain had rendered to his [pvereign. He
endeavoured, however, to maintain his flation,
jlad to recpyer the confidence of the court. But

* Herre~ra, dec* 3. lIb. v. c. 74.
r See NO~TE XCVI.
a Flerrera, dec. 3. Jib. vil. c. 14, x y.

* every

Fvery person in ofirce, who had arrived from Spain a qo o
since the conquest, was a spy upon his conduc?, cA
and with mahicious ingenuity gave an unfavourable 5S
representation of all his amions. The apprehen-
fions of Charles and his miniffers increas~ed. A rses.
new commiiron of enquiry was ifiued, with more
extensive powers, and various precautions were
taken in order to prevent or to punish him, if he
ihould be so presumptuous as to attempt what was
inconfiffent with the fidelity of a fubjeQ h. Cortes
beheld the approaching crisis of his fortunle with
all the violent emotions natural to a haughty mind,
conscious of high desert, and receiving unworthy
treatment. But though some of his des~perate fol-
lowers urged him to assert his own rights against
his ungrateful country, and with a bold hand to
seize that power which the courtiers meanly accuf-
ed him of coveting ', he retained su~ch felf-com-
mand, or was aauated with s~uch sentiments of
loyalty, as to rejea their dangerous counsels, and
to chuf~e the only course in which he could secure
his own dignity, without departing -from his duty.
He refolyed not to expose himself to the ignominy
of a trial, in that country which had been the scene
of his triumphs; but without waiting for the ar-
rival of his judges, to repair direaly to Caffile,
and commit himself and his cause to the juffice and
generosity of his forereign ".

bHerrera, dec. 3.116. vili. c. 15. dee. 4. lib. 11. c. I. lib.

v. c. 9, 0. B. Diaz. c. 17j2. 196. Gomara Cron. c. 166.

i B. Diaz. c. 194*
'Herrera, dec. 3. lib. iv. c. 8.

21 CORTES

a o o K CORTBs appeared in his pative country with the

L~v~ splendour that s~uited the conqueror of a mighty

His: .b kingdom. He brought with him a great part of
tion there, flis wealth, many jewels and ornaments of great

value, s~everal curious produacions of the country',
and was attended by some Mexicans of the first
rank, as well as by the most considerable of his
own officers. His arrival in Spain removed at once
every suspicion and fear that had been entertained
with refpea to his intentions. The emperor, hav-
ing now nothing to apprehend from the designs of
Cortes, received him like a pers~on whom confci.
oufnefs of his own innocence had brought into the
presence of his master, and who was entitled, by
the eminence of his services, to the highest marks
of diitinaion and refpeQ. The order of St. Jago,
the title of Marquis~ del Valle de Guaxaca, the
grant of an ample territory in New Spain,w~ere fr.c
cei~ively beffowed upon him; and as his manners
.wvere correQ and elegant, although he had passed
the greater part of his life among rough adven.
turers, the emperor admitted him to the fame fa-
miliar intercourf~ie with himself, that was enjoyed by
noblemen of the firift rank m.

Setdmen BUT, amidst those external proofs of regard,
g""g"'t fnymptoms of remaining diffruit appeared. Though

Cortes earnestly soli cited to be reinflated in the go.

i See NOTE XCVII.
m Herrera, dec. 3. lib. iv. c. I. lib. vi. c. 4. B. IDiaz.

c. r96. Gom.Cron. c. r82.

vernment

rernment of New Spain, Charles, too sagacious B 90 o
to commit such an important charge to a man Cy5
wNhom he had once f~ulpeaed, peremptgrily refused as 3.
to inveit him again with powers which he might
find it impossible to controul. Cortes, though as e.
dignified with new titles, returned to Mexico with
diminished authority. The military department,
with powers to attempt newl discoveries, was left
in his hands; but the s~upreme direaion of civil
affairs was placed in a board, called The Audience
of NVew Spain. At a s~ubsequent period, when,
upon the increase of the colony, the exertion of
au.hority more unit~ed and extensive became necef-
fary, Antonio de Mendoza, a nobleman of high
rank, was sent thither as Viceroy, to take the go.
vernment into his hands.

THIs diviflon of power in New Spain, proved, as New

was unavoidable, the source of perpetual diffen. or carr q.
tion, which embittered the life of Cottes, and a
thwarted all his s~chemes. As he had now no op-
portunity to drp~lay his aaive talents but in'at-
tempting new discoveries, he formed various
schemes for that purpose, all of which bear impref-
fions of a genius that delighted in what was bold
and splendid. He early entertained an idea, that,
eithei- by fleering througoh the gulf of Florida
along the eeaf coast of North America, some firait
would be found that communicated with the weft-
ern ocean; or that, by examining the isthmus of
Darien, some passage would be difcovrered betweep

the

B O O0 K the North and South Seas". But having been dif.
I --- --.. appointed in his expedtations wnith refpe to both,

'sso. he now confined his views to such voyages of dif-

covery as he could make from the ports of New
Spain in the South Sea. There he litted out fuc.
cefirvely s~everal small squadrons, which either pe.
rifhed in the attempt, or returned without making
any discovery of moment. Cortes, weary of entruit·

rsj6. ing the conduat of his operations to others, took

the command of a newv armament in person, and,
after enduring incredible hardfhlips, and encoun·
tering dangers of every [~pecies, he discovered the
large penins~ula of California, and s~urveyed the
greater part of the gulf which separates it from
New Spain. The discovery of a country of such
extent would have refleaed credit on a common
adventurer; but it could add little new honour to
the name of Cortes, and was ~far from satisfying
the sanguine expeaations which he had formed*.

1 Difguffed with ill success, to which he had not

been accuitomed, and weary of cont~effing with
adversaries to whom he considered it as a disgrace

rs40. to be opposed, he once more fought: for redres~s in

his native country.

His death. BU'r his reception there was ·very different from

that which gratitude, and even decency, ought to
have s~ecured for him. The mer~it of his ancient

II Cortes Relat. Ramn. ill. 294, B*
* Herrera, dec. 5. lib. vili. c. 9, 10. dec. 8. lib, vi. c. I4*

Venegas Hiit. of Californ. i. I25. Lorenzana Hist. p. 3a2, &c.

exploits

exploits was already, in a great measure, forgot- s ov a
ten, or eclipsed by the fame of recent and more c
valuable conqueits in another quarter of America. 's40.
No service of moment was now expeaed from a
man of declining years, and who began to be un-
fortunate. The emperor behaved to him with
cold civility; his miniiters treated him, sometimes
with neglea, sometimes with insolence. Ilis
grievances received no redress; his claims were
urged without effea ; and after several years sp~ent
in fruitless application to miniffers and judges, an
occupation the most irksome and mortifying to a
man of high s~pirit, who had moved in a sphere
where he was more accuitomed to command than
to solicit, Cortes ended his days on the second of
December one thousand five hundred and forty-
seven, in the fixty-f~econd year of his age. H~is
fate was the fame with that of all the persons who
distinguished themselves in the discovery or con-
queit of the New World. Envied by his contem-
poraries, and ill requited by the court whbich he
served, he has been admired and celebrated by
succeeding ages. Which has formed the moflt juit
estimate of his charaaer, an impartial consideration
of his aations must determine.

# NOTES AND ILLUSTRATIONS.

NOTES

AND

IL LUtST RA T I ONS.

N O TES

ANTD

ILLUSTRATION S.

N O TE I. p. 4*

T HE height of the most elevated point in th7e Pyrenees

is, according to M. Caflini,, fix thousand fix bun-

dred and forty-fix feet. The height of the mountain
Gemmi, in the canton of Berne, is ten thodrand one hun-
dred and ten feet. The height of the Pe k; of Teneriffe,
according to the meas~urement of P. Ftudll6, is thirteen
thouland one hundred and feventy-eight feet. The height
of Chimborazzo, the most elevated point of the Andes, is
twenty thousand two hundred and eighty feet; no less than
seven thodrand one hundred and two feet above the highelt
mountain in the ancient continent. Voyage de D. Juan
~Ulloa, Observations Aitron. et Phyfiq. tom. ii. p. I14·
The line of congelation on Chlimborazzo, or thlat part of
the mountain which is covered perpetually with snow, is
no less than two thodrand four hundred feet from its fum-
mit. Prevot. Hill. Gener. des Voyages, vol. xiii. p. 636.

NOTE II. p. 4.

AS a particular description makes a fIronger impretlion

than general assertions, I thall give one of Rio de la

Plata by an eye-witness, P. Cattaneo, a M~odenefe Jesuit,
who landled at Buenos Ayres in 1749, and thus represents
what he felt when such new obje~ts were first preieated to
his view. " While I resided in Europe, and read in books

Vol.. II. E e of

NOTE S AND ILLUST RATIONS.

of hiflory or geography that the mouth of the river De la
Plata was an hundred and fifty miles in breadth, I con-
fidered it as an exaggeration, becaule in this hemisphere
we have no example of fach vast rivers. When I ap-
proached its mouth, I had the moss vehement desire to
ascertain the truth with my own eyes; and I have found
the matter to be exaatly as it was represented. This I
deduce particularly from one circumitance : When we
took our departure from Mvonte-Video, a fort situated
Inore than a hundred miles from the mouth of the river,
and where its breadth is considerably diminished, we failed
a complete day before we discovered the land on the op-
polite bank of the river ; and when we were in the middle
of the channel, we could not discern land on either fide,
and saw` nothing but the sky and water, as if we had been
in some great ocean. Indeed, we thould have taken it
to be sea, if the frelh water of the river, which was turbid
like the Po, had not satisfied us that it was a river.
Moreover, at Buenos Ay·res, another hundred miles up
the river, and where it is flill much narrower, it is not
only impollible to discern the opposite coast, which is in-
deed very low and flat; but one cannot perceive the
hodfes or the tops of the fleeples in the Portuguese Fettle-
ment at Colonia on the other fide of the river." Lettera
prima, published by Muratori, 11 Chriftianefimo Felict,
&c. i. p. 257*

NOTE III. p. 8.

NEWFOUNDLAND, part of ,Nova Scotia and

Canada, are the countries which lie in thle fame pa-

rallel of latitude with the kingdorn of France; and in
every part of there the water of the rivers is frozen during
winter to the thicknels of several feet; the earth is cover-

NOTES AND ILLUSTRATIONS.

ed with [now as deep; almoR all the birds fly, during
that season, from a climate where they could not live.
The country of the Elkimaux, part of Labrador, and the
countries on the sout~h of Hudfon's Bay, are in the Fame
parallel with Great Britain ; and yet in all thes~e the cold
is to intense, that even the indu~try of Europeans has not
attempted cultivation.

NOTE IV. p. II.

ACOSTA is the sirs philosopher, as far as I know, who

endeavoured to account for the different degrees of

heat inl the old and new continents, by the agency of
the winds which blow in each. Hill. Moral. &tc. lib. ii.
and iii. M. de Buffon adopts this theory, and has not
only improved it by new oblervations, but has employed
his amazing powers of deferiptive eloquence in embellith-
ing and placing it in the most firiking lighlt. Some re-
Inarks may be added, which tend to illuitrate more fully
a do61rine of much importance in every inquiry concern-
ing the temperature of various climates.

WTHEN a cold wind blows over land, it mull in its pas~-
sage rob the surface of some of its heat. By means of
this, the coldnels of the wind is abated. But if it con-
tinue to blow in the fame direaion, it will come, by de-
grees, to pass over a surface already cooled, and will thlf-
ser no longer any abatement of its own k~eenners. Thus
as it advances over a large traat of land, it brings on all
the leverity of intense froll.

LET the fame wind blow over an extensive and deep

sea; the superficial water must be immediately cooled to
a certain degree, and the wind proportionally warmed.
But the superficial and colder water becoming [pecifically

E e heavier

Leavier than the warmer water below it, descends; .what
is warmer hipsplies its place, which, as it comes to be
cooled in its turn, continues to warm the air which
passes over it, or to diminith its cold. This change of
the superficial water, and faccellivz ascent of that which is
avarmer, and the consequent faccefi~ve abatement of cold.
ness in the air, is aided by the agitation cauled in the sea
by the mechanical adlion of the wind, and also by the
motion of the tides. This willgo on, and the rigour of
the wind will continue to diminilh until the whole water
is so far cooled, that the water on the lurface is no longer
removed from the a~lion -of the wind, fast enough to hin-
der it from being arrefled by froff. Whenever the surface
freezes, the wind is no longer warmed by the water from
below, and it goes on with undiminished cold.

FRoM those principles may be explained the leverity of

winter froffs in extensive continents & their mildnels in
finall islands; and the superior rigour of winter in thole
parts of North America with which we are best ac-
quainted. In the north-well parts of Europe, the severity
ofC winter is mitigated by the weft winds, which uiually
blow in the months of November, December, and part of
January.

OhT the: other hand, when a warm wind blows over

land, it heats the surface, which muff therefore ceale to
abate the fervour of the wind. But the fame wind blow-
ing over water, agitates it, brings up the colder water
from below, and thus is continually loring somewhat of
its own beat.

BUT the great power of the sea to mitigate the heat of

the wind or air patiingd over it, proceeds from thle follow-
ing2 circumlnance, that on account of the transparency of

the

the sea, its thrface cannot be heated to a great degree by
the Fun's rays; whereas the ground, fubjefied to their
influence, very soon acquires great heat. When, there-
fore, the wind blows over a torrid continent, it is soon
railed to a heat almost intolerable; but during its passage ·.
over an extensive ocean, it is gradually cooled; so that
on its arrival at the farthest Ihore, it is again fit for re-
iiration.

THOSE principles will account for the sultry heats of

large continents in the torrid zone ; for the mildl climate
of illands in the fame latitude; and for the superior warmth
in summer which large continents, lituated in the tem-
perate or colder zones of the earth, enjoy, whlen com-
pared with that of islands. The heat of a climate depends
not only upon the immediate effea of the fun's rays, but
on their continued operation, on the effeRt which they
have formerly produced, anld which remains for some
time in the ground. This is the reason why the day is
warmest about two in the afternoon, the s~ummer warmest
about the middle of July, and the winter coldelt about
the middle of January.

THE forests which cover America, and hinder the fun-
beams from heating the ground, are a great caule of the
temperate climate in the equatorial paarts. The ground,
not being heated, cannot heat the air; and the leaves,
which receive the rays intercepted from the grounld, have
not a mals of matter fufficient to abrorb heat enough for
this purpole. Besides, it is a known faRt, that the vege-
tative power of a plant occallons a perspiration faom the
leaves in proportion to the heat to which they are ex-
poled; and, from the nature of evaporation, this perfpi-
ration produces a cold in the leaf proportional to the per-
fpiration. Thus the effeRt of the leaf in heating the air

N OT E S AND L L US TRATI O N .

in contaat with it, is prodigiously diminilhed. For thoer
oblervations, which throw much additional light on this
curious fubjeat, I am indebted to my ingenious friend,
Mr. Robifon, profeffor of natural philolophy in the uni-
verfity of Edinburgh.

NOTE V. p. 12.

THE climate of Brasil has been deferibed by two emi-

nent naturalifts, Pilo and Margrave, who oblerved

it with a philosophical accuracy·, for which we search in
vain in thie accounts of many other provinces in America.
Both reprelent it as temperate and mild, when compared
with the climate of Africa. They: ascribe this chiefly to
the refreshing wind which blows contintually from the sea.
The air is not only cool, but chilly through the night, in
to much, that the natives kindle fires every evening in
their huts. Pifo de Medicina Brafilienli, lib. i. p. I, &(c.
M~argravius Hiffor. Rerum N~atural. Brasilia, lib. vili.
c. 3. p. 264. Nieuhoff, who resided long in Brasil,
confirms their defeription. Churchill's Colle~tion, vol. ii.
p. 26. Gumilla, who was a millionary many years
among the Indians, upon the river Oronoco, gives a
similar description of the temperature of the climate there.
Hist. de l'Orenioque, tom. i. p. 26. P. Acugna felt a
very considerable degree of cold in the countries on the
banks ~f the river Amazons. Relat. vol. ii. P. 56. M.
Biet, who lived a considerable time in Cayenne, gives a
similar account of the temperature of that climate, and
alcribes it to thle fame cause. Voy·age de la France,
Equinox~, p. 330. Nothing can be more different from
these defecriptions than that of the burning heat of the
African coast giv·en by M. Adanfon. V'oyage to Senegal,
passim..

NOTE

NOTE VI. p. 13*

TWO French frigates wrere sent upon a voyage of

discovery in the year I739. In latitude 44. south,

they began to feel a considerable degree of cold. In lati-
tude 480, they met with islands of floating ice. Hilloire
des N~avigations aux Terres Auffrales, tom. ii. 2-56, &rc.
Dr. Halley fell in with ice in latitude 590. Id. tom. i.
P* 47. Commodore Byron, when on the coast of Pata-
gonia, latitude 50o 33' south, on the fifteenth of Decem-
ber, which is midsummer in that part of the globe, the
twenty-firft of December being the longest day there,
compares the climate to that of England in the middle
of winter. Voyages by Hawfkefworth, i. 25. Mr. Banks
having landed on Terra del Fuego, in the Bay of Good
Success, latitude 550, on the sixteenth of January, which
corresponds to the month of July in our hemisphere, two
of his attendants died in one night of extreme cold, and
all the party were in the moll imminent danger of periih-
ing. Id. ii* 51> 52. By the fourteenth of Mlarch, cor-
responding to September in our hemisphere, winter was
set in with rigour, and the mountains were covered with
[now. Ebid. 72. Captain Cook, in his voyage towards
the South pole, furnishes new and firiking inflances of
the extraordinary predominance of cold in this region of
the globe. " Who would have thought (say·s he) that
an island, of no greater extent than seventy leagues in
circuit, situated between the latitude of 540~ and 55.r
fhiould in the very beight of summer be, in a manner,
wholly covered, many fathoms deep, with frozen [now;
but more especially the S. W. coast ? The very fummits
of the lofty mountains were cased with snow and ice ; but
the quantity that lay in the valleys is incredible; and at

E e the

the bottom of the bays, the coait was terminated by a wall
of ice of considerable height." Vol. ii. p. 2zy.

IN some places of the ancient continent, an extraordi-

nary degree of cold prevails in very low latitudes. Mr.
Bogle, in his embassy to the court of the Delai Lama,
passed the winter of the year 1774 at Chamnanning, in
latitude 3r 39' N. He often found the thermometer in
his room twenty·-nine degrees under the freezing point by
Fahrenheit's feale, and in thle middle of April the fland-
ing waters were all frozen, and heavy showers of snow
frequently fell. The exrtraordinary elevation of the coun-
try seems to be the caus~e of this exceive cold. In tra-
velling from Indollan to Th~ibet, the ascent to the fum-
rnit of the Boutan Mlountains is very great, but th~e
del~cent on the other fide is not inl equal proportion. The
kingdom of Thibet is an elevated region, extremely bare
and des~olate. Account of Thib~et, by Mr. Stewart, read
in the Royal Society, p. 7. Thle extraordinary cold in
low latitudes in America cannot be accounted for by thle
fame cause. Thos~e regiols are not remark~able for eleva-
tion. Some of them are countries depresse~d and level,

THE moll obvious and probable caule of the superior

degree of cold, towards thle southern extremity of Ame.
xica, seems to be the form of the continent there. Its
breadth gradually decreases as it flretches from St. Anto-
nio southwards, and firom the bay of St. Julian to the
Straits of MS/agellan its dimensions are much contrae~ed.
On the east and well sides, it is washed by the Atlantic
and Pacific Oceans. Fr.omT its southern point it is pro-
bable that a great extenlt of sea, without any considerable
traB of land, reaches to the Antaraic pole. In whichever
of these direaions the winld blows, it is cooled before it
approaches the Magellanic regions, by passing over a vast

body

body of water, nor is the land there of luch extent that it
can recover any considerable degree of heat in its progress
over it. There circumitances concur in rendering the
temperature of the air in this diffriAl of America, more
limilar to that of an insular, than to that of a continental
climate, and hinder it from acquiring the Fame degree of
summer heat with places in Europe and Asia, in a corre-
[ponding northern latitude. The north wind is the only
one that reaches this part of America, after blowing over
a great continent. But from an attentive Survey of its
polition, this will be found to have a tendency, rather to
diminish than augment the degree of heat. The southern
extremity· of America is properly the termination of the
immense ridge of the Andes, which Atretches nearly in a
direch line from north to south, through the whole exten~t
of the continent. The moll sultry regions in South Ame-
rica, Guiana, Brasil, Paraguay, and Tucuman, lie many
degrees to the east of the 1 agellanic regions. The level
coulntry of Peru, which enjoys the tropical heats, is situ-
ated considerably to the weft ofthem. The north wind
then, though it blows over land, does not bring to the
foutherit extremity of America, an increase of heat col-
ledled in its passage over torrid regions; but before it ar-
rives there, it mufl have swept along the fulmmits of the
Andes, and comes impregnated with the cold of that frozen
region.

TaoucH it be now demonficated that there is no futrh-
emn continent in that regaion of the globe which it was
supposed to occupy, it appears to be certain from Captain
Cook's discoveries, that there is a large traEt of land near
the South pole, which is the source of most of the ice
spread over the vail southern ocean. Vol. ii. p. 230, 239.,
8.e. Whether the influence of this remote frozen cl·a-

tinent

tinent may reach the southern extremity of America,
and affea its climate, is an inquiry not unworthy of atten-
tion.

NOTE VII. p. 16.

aC O ND AM IN E is one of the latest and most

Saccurate oblervers of the interior slate of South.

America. (( After descending from the Andes (says he),
one beholds a vast and uniform profpea of water and ver-
dure, and nothing more. One treads upon the earth, but
does not fee it; as it is so entirely covered with luxuriant
plants, weeds, and thrubs, that it would require a confi-
derable degree of labour to clear it, for the space of a foot."
Relation abreg6 d'un Voy·age, &tc. p. 48. One of the
singularities in the forefls is a fort of ofiers, or withs, called
bejucos by the Spaniards, lianes by the French, and nibbees
by the Indians, which are usually employed as ropes in
America. This is one of the parasitical plants, which
twists about the trees it meets with, and rising above their
highest branches, its tendrils descend perpendicularly·, firike
into the ground, tak~e root, rife up around another tree,
and thus mount and descend alternately. Other tendrils
are carried obliquely by the wind, or some accident, and
form a confusion of interwoven cordage, which resembles
the rigging of a thip. Bancroft, Nat. Hist. of Guiana,
99. There withs are often as thick as the arm of a man.
Ib. p. 75.· M. Bouguer's account of the forefls inl Peru
perfealy refemnbles this defecription. Voyage au Pern,
p. 16. Oviedfo gives a similar description of the forelts in
other parts of America. Hist. lib. ix. p. I44. D. The
country of the Moxros is to much overflowed, that they
are obliged to reside on the fummnit of some rising ground
during Some part of the year, and hlave no communication

with

with their countrymen at any difiance. Lettres Edifiantes,
tom. x. p. 187. Garcia gives a full and just defeription
of the rivers, lakes, woods, and marshes in those countries
of America which lie between the tropics. Origen de los
Indios, lib. ii. c. 5. ( 4, 5. The incredible hardships to
which Goncalez Pizarro was exposed in attempting to
march into the country to the east of the Andes, convey a
very firiking idea of that part of America in its 0.riginal
uncultivated slate. Garcil. de la Vega, Royal. Comment.
of Peru, part ii. book iii. c. 2--5*

NOTE VIII. p. 19*

THE animals of America seem not to have been al-

wayls of a size inferior to those in other quarters of

the globe. From antlers of the moofe-deer which have
been found in America, it appears to have been an animal
or great size. N~ear the banks of the Ohio, a considerable
number of bones of an immense magnitude have been
found. The place where this discovery has been made
lies about one hundred and ninety miles t, sow the junblion
of the river Scioto with the Ohio. It is about four miles
difiant from the banks of the latter, on the fide of the
marlh called the Salt Lick. The bones lie in valk quanti-
ties about five or fix feet under ground, and the firatum is
visible in the bank on the edge of the Lick. 'fournal of
Colonel George Crogian, MlS. penes me. This ipot s~eems to
be accurately laid down by Evans in his map. There
bones mult have belonged to animals of enormous bulk; but
naturalifts being acquainted with no living creature of such
size, were at first inclined to think that they were mineral,
fubitances. Upon receiving a greater number of fpeci-
mens, and after infpeating them more narrowly, they are
now allowed to be the bones of an animal. As the ele-

phant

phant is the largest known quadruped, and the tufkts which
were found nearly res~embled, both in form and quality,
the tufkrs of an elephant, it was concluded that the car-
cafes depolited on the Ohio were of that species. ButDr.
Hunter, one of the persons of our age belt qualified to de-
cide with refpe61 to this point, having accurately examined
several parcels of tufkrs, and grinders, and jaw-bones, sent
from the Ohio to London, gives it as his opinion, that
they did not belong to an elephant, but to some huge car-
nivorous animal of an unknown species. Phil. TranfaR.
vol. Iviii. p. 34. Bones of the fame kind, and as remark,
able for their size, have been found near the mouths of
the great rivers Oby, Jenifeia, and Lena, in Siberia.
Stralb~renberg, De~cript. of north and eafl Parts of Europe
and A/ia, p. 402, &c. The elephant seems to be confined
in his range to the torrid zone, and never multiplies be-
yond it. In suc~h cold regions as those bordering on the
frozen sea, he could not live. The exiffence of such large
animals in America might open a wide field for conje61ure.
The more we contemplate the face of nature, and confider
the variety of her produations, the more we muit be fatil-
fied that affonifbing changes have been made in the
terraqueous globe by convulsions and revolutions, of which
no account is preserved in hillory.

NOTE IX. p. 20.

THIS degeneracy of the domeltic European animals

in America may be imputed to some of there caules.

In the Spanish settlements, which are situated either
within the torrid zone, or in countries bordering upon
it, the increase of heat, and diversity of food, prevent
sheep and horned cattle from attaining the fame size as
in Europe. They seldom become to fat, and their fleth is

not

not 10 juicy, or of such delicate flavour. In North Ame-
rica, where the climate is more favourable, and similar to
that of Europe, the quality of the grass~es which spring up
naturally in their paflure-grounds is not good. Mitchell,
p. IZ·z Agriculture is Hill to much in its infancy, that
artificial food for cattle is not railed in any quantity. Du-
ring a winter, long in many provinces, and rigorous in all,
no proper care is taken of their cattle. The general treat-
ment of their horses and horned cattle is injudicious and
harth in all the English colonies. There circumitances
contribute more, perhaps, than any thing peculiar in the
quality of the climate, to the degeneracy of breed in the
horses, cows, and sheep, of many of the North American
provmeces.

NOTE X. p. 21.

SN the year 1518, the island of Hispaniola was affli8ed

with a dreadful vilitation of those deftruaive infe~s,

the particulars of which Herrera describes, and mentions a
singular inflance of the fuperflition of the Spanish planters.
After trying various methods of exterminating the ants,
thefr resolved to implore proteaion of the Faints; but as
the calamity was new, they were at a loss to finld out the
faint who could give them the moll effe8uall aid. They
cast lots in order to dilcover the patron whom they should
invoke. The lots decided in favour of St. Saturninus.
They celebrated his feffival with great solemnity, and im-
mediately, adds the historian, the calamity began to abate.
Herrera, dec. 2. lib.iii. c. 15* P. 107.

NOTE

NOTE XI. p. 24.

SH E author of Recherches Philofophiques fur les Ame.

ricains fuppoles this difference in heat to be equal to

twelve degrees, and that a place thirty degrees from the
equator in the old continent, is as warm as one situated
eighteen degrees from it in America, tom. i. p. Ir. Dr.
Mitchell, after oblervations carried on during thirty years,
contends that the difference is equal to fourteen or fifteen
dlegrees of latitude. Present State, &c. p. 257.

NOTE XII. p. 24.

JANUARY 3d, 1765, Mr. Bertram, near the head

of St. John's river in Fast Florida, observed a froll so

intense, that in one night the ground was frozen an inch
thick upon the banks of the'river. The limes, citrons,
and banana trees, at St. Auguffin, were defiroy·ed. Ber-
tram's Journal, p. 20. Other inflances of the extraordi-
nary operations of cold in the southern provinces of North
America are colleated by Dr. M/itchell. Prelent State,
p. 206, &c. February 7th, '177, the frost at Charles-
town was 10 intense, that a perfoa having carried two
quart bottles of hot water to bed, in the morning they
were split to pieces, and the water converted into solid
lumps of ice. In a kitchen, where there was a fire, the
water in a jar, in which there was a large live cel, was
frozen to the bottom. Almost all the orange and olive
trees were deitroyed. Delcription of South-Carolina, 8vo.
Lond. IT6I.

NOTE

NOTE XIII. p. 25.

SREMARKABLE inflatce of this occurs in Dutch

Guiana, a country every where level, and to low,

that during the rainy seasons it is usually covered with
water near two feet in height. This renlders the foil so
rich, that on the surface, for twelve inches in depth, it is
a firatum of perfeat manure, and as such has been tranf-
ported to Barbadoes. On the banks of the Eff~equebo,
thirty crops of ratan canes have been railed successively,
whereas in the Weft Indian islands not more than two is
ever expeEted from the richest land. The expedients by
which the planters endeavour to diminilh this excellive
fertility of foil are- various. Bancroft, Nat. Hill. of
Guiana, p. I0, &tc.

NOTE XIV. p. 39-

SULLER seems to have believed, without ifulicient

evidence, that the Cape had been doubled, tom. i.

p. II, &c.; and the Imperial Academy of St. Peteri-
burgh give some countenance to it, by the manner in
which T/chukot/ki-\nofs is laid down in their charts. But
I am aifured, from undoubted authority, that no Ruflian
vessel has ever failed round that cape, and as the country
of T/chutki is not f~ubje61 to th~e RufTian empire, it is very
imperfe~tly known.

NOTE XV. p. 43-

VVERE this the place for entering into a long and in-

tricate geographical disquisition, many curious ob-

fervations might arise from comparing the accounts of the

'7 two

two Ruffian voyages, and the charts of their refpetive
navigations. One remark is applicable to both. W~e can-
not rely with ablolute certainty on the polition which they
assign to several of the places which they visited. The
weather was to extremely foggy, that they seldom saw the
fun or flars, and the polition of the islands and supposed
continents was commonly determined by reckoning, not
by oblervation. Behring and Tfchirikow proceeded much
farther towards the east than Krenitzin. The land dilco-
vered by Behring, which he imagined to be part of the
American continent, is in the 236th degree of longitude
from the first meridian in the isle of Ferro, and in 5go
28" of latitude. Tlc~hirikow came upon the fame coast in
longit. 241o, lat. 560. Muller, i. 248, 249.· The former
muff have advanced 60 degrees from the Port of Petro-
pawlowfvki, from which he took his departure, and the
latter 65 degrees. But from the chart of Krenitzin's voy-
age, it appears that he did not fail farther towards the cast
than the zo8th degree, and only 32 degrees from Petro-
pawlowPki. In '74', Behring and Tfchirikow, both in
going and returning, held a course which was mofily to
thle South of that chain of islands, which they dilcovered;
and observing the mountainous and rugged aipeA of the
head-lands which they deferied towards the north, they
supposed them to be promontories belonging to some part
of the American continent, which, as they fancied,
itretched as far south as the latitude 56. In this manner
they are laid down in the chart published by Muller, and
likewise in a manulcript chart drawn by a mate of Beh-
ring's (hip, communicated to me by Mr. Profeffor Ito-
bison. But in 1969, Krenitzin, after wintering in the
island Alaxa, flood to far towards the north in his return,
that his course lay through the middle of what Bebring
and Tfchirikow had supposed to be a continent, which he
found to be an open sea, and that they had millaken rocky

2·2 illes

NOTES AND ILL~USTRATIONS.

illes for the head-lands of a ccatinent. It is probable, that
the countries discovered in r'741, towards the east, do not
belong to the American continent, but are onlly a conti-
nuation of the chain of islands. The number of volcanos
in this region of the globe is remarkable. There are feve-
ral in Kamnchatka, and not one of the islands, great or
Small, as far as the RufiTan nlavigation extends, is without-
them. Many are a8ually burning, and the mountains
in all bear marks of having been once in a slate of erup-
tion. Were I disposed to admit Auch conje~tures as have
found place in other enquiries concerning the peoplinlg of
America, I might fuppole that this part of the earth, h~av-
ing manifellly fuffered violent convulfilons from earthquakes
and volcanos, an ifthlmus, which may have formerly
united Asia to AmTerica, has been broken, and formed into
a cluffer of islands by the ihock.

IT is fingaular, that at the very time the Ruffian naviga-
tors were attempting to make dilcoveries in the north-west
of America, the Spaniards were prosecuting the fame de-
sign from another quarter. In 1969, two imall veffeis
failed from Loretto in California to explore the coasts of
the country to the nlorth of that peninsula. Th~ey advanced
no farther than the port of M/onte-Rey in latitude 36. But,
in leveral faccellive expeditions fitted out from the port of
St. Blas in New Galicia, the Spaniards have advanced as
far as the latitude 58. Gazeta de lifadrid, March 19, and
Mlay I4, 1776. B~ut as the journals of those voy:ages
have not yet been publiihed, I cannot compare their pro-.
greits with that of the Ruflians, or thew how near the na-
vigators of the two nations have approached tb each other.
It is to be hoped, that the enligh~tened miniffer, who has
qow the dire~ion of American affairs in Spain, w·ill not
withhold this information from the public.

N TO T

V OL . II.

N OT E XVI. p. 45*

OUR know-ledge of the vicinity of the two continents of

Alia and America, which was very imperfea when I

published the hillory of America in the y·ear ;777, iS now
complete. Mr. Coxe's Account of the Ruffian Difcove-
ries between Asia and America, printed in the year 1980o,
contains many curious and important fa~ts with refpea to
the various attempts of the Ruffans to open a communica.
·tion with the New Wilorld. The hiffory of the great Voy.
age of difcoveryr, begun by Captain Cook in '776, and
completed by Captains Clerk and Gore, published in the
year 1780-, communicates all the information that the curios
futy of mankind could desire with regard to this f~ubjea.

AT my request, my friend MIr. Play:fair, Profeffor of

Mathemnaticks in the Univerlity of Edinburgh, has com-
pared thle narrative and charts of those illuffrious naviga-
tors, with the more imperfea relations and maps of the
Ruffians. The result of this comparison I comnmunicate
i~n his own words, with much greater confidence in his
scientific accuracy than I could have ventured to place in
any oblervations which I myself might have made upon the
fubje61.

" TH E discoveries of Captain Cook in his last voyage

have confirmed the conclusions which Dr. Robertson had
dr-awn, and have conneaed together the fa~s from which
they were deduced. They have now rendered it certain
that Behring and Tf~chirikow touched on the coast of Arne-
rica in 17Qr. The former discovered land in lat. 58" 231',
and about, 236. eall from F~erro. He has given such a de-
s~cription of the bay in which he anchored, and the high
mountain to the w-elward of it, w~hich he calls St, Elies,
that though the account of his veyage is much abridged in
the Englith tranilation, Captain Cook recognized the place

Ps he failed along the wellern coast of America in the year
1778. The ille of St. Hermogenes, near the mouth of
Cook's river, Schumagins Isles on the coast of Alafhka, and
Foggy Ille, retain in Captain Cook's chart the names which
they bad received from the Rulian navigator. Cook's
Voy. vol, ii. p. 347*

" TSCH IRIKow came upon the fame coaff about 20 30'

farther south than Behring, near the M~ount Edrgecumbe of
Captain Cook.

" WrraI regard to K~renitzin, w·e learn from Coxe'n

Account of the Rul~ian Dikcoveries, that he failed from
the mouth of thle Kamtfchatka river with two thips in the,
y·ear 1968. Wlith his own ship he reached the illand
Oonolafhka, in which there had been a RufiTan settlement
lince the y·ear 1762, where he wintered, probably in the
fame harbour or bay w~here Captain Cook afterwards an-
chored. The other sh~ip wintered at Alalhk~a, which was
supposed to be an island, though it be in faat a part of the
American continent. Krenitzin, accordingly, returned
without knowving that either of his ihips had been on the
coal of America ; and this is the more furprizing, becaule
Captain Cook has informedt us that Alafhkla is underflood
to be a great continent both by the R~ullans and the na-
tives at Oonolaihka.

** ACCORDiNG to Krenitzin, the ihip which had win-
tered at Alafhka had hardly failed 320 to the eastward of
thle harbour of St. Peter and St. Paul in Kamtchlatka;
but, according to the more accurrate charts of Caftain
Cook, it had failed no leis than 370o s'7 to the eaftwvard of
that harbour. There is nearly the fame m~ifake of 50 in
the longitude w~hich Krenitzin aflgns to Oonolafhk~a. It
is remarkable enougih, that in the chart of those seas, put
into the hands of Captain Cook by the Ruifians on that

F f2 iiland,

island, there was an error of the fame kind, and very
nearly of the fame extent.

"' BUT what is of most consequence to be remarked on

this libbje£1 is, th~at the ditcoveries of Captain Cook have
fully verified Dr. Robertfon's conje~ture, " that it is pro-
bable that future navigators in thos~e seas, by fleering far-
ther to the north than Behring and Tfchirikow or Kre-
nitzin had done, may find that the continent of America
approaches flill nearer to that of Afia." Vol. ii. p. 44. It
hlas accordingly been found that these two continents, which
in the parallel of 550, or that of the southern extremity
of Alafhlka, are about four hundred leagues asunder, ap-
proach continually to one another as they firetch together
tow~ard the north, until, within less than a degree from
th:e polar circle, they are terminated by two capes, only
th~irteen leagues difiant. The eait cape of Asia is in lati-
tulde 66o 6', and in longitude 190o 22' east from Green-
wich; the wellern extremity of America, or Prince of
W'lales Cape, is inl latitude 650 46', and in longitude 19l0
45'. Nearly in the middle of the narrow firait (Behrinlg's
Strait) which separates these capes, are the two islands of
St. Diomede, from which both continents may be Ceen.
Captain King informs us, that as he was failing through
this firait July 5, 1779, the fog having cleared away, he
enjoyed the pleafulre of feeing from the ship the continents
of Asia and America at the fame moment, together with
the islands of St. Diomede ly-ing between them. Cook's
V'oy. vol. iii. p. 244*

" E Y O ND this point the firait opens towards the

Air~ic Sea, and the coasts of Asia and America diverge
so fall from one another, that in the parallel of 690 they
are more than one hundred leagues alunder. Ib. p. 277.
To the south of the firait there are a number of islands,
Clerke's, King's, Anderfon's, &rc. which, as well as

those

thos~e of St. Diomede, may have facilitated the migrations
of the natives from the one continent to the other. Cap-
tain Cook, however, on the authority of the Ruffians at
Oonolafhka, and for other good reasons, has diminilhed the
number of islands which had been inserted in former
charts of the northern Archipelago. He has also placed
Alalhka, or the promontory which firetches from the con-
tinent of America S. W. towards Kamtchatka, at the dif-
tance of five degrees of longitude farther from the coast of
Asia than it was reckoned by the Ruifian navig~ators.

"L Ta xE geography of the Old and the New W~orld is
therefore equally indebted to the discoveries made in this
memorable voylage ; and as rinany errors have been correL~ed,
and many deficiencies supplied by means of there dilcoveries,
10 the accuracy of some former observations has been efta-
blithed. The balis of the map of the Ruffian Empire, as far
as regarded Kamtfchatka, and the country of the Tlchutzkti,
was the polition of four places, Yak~utfh, Ochotz, Bolchle-
rdk<, and Petropawlowfkri, which had been determined by
the affronomer Krallilnicow in the year r'744. Nov. Co-
ment. Petrop. vol. iii. p. 465> &ce. But the accuracy of his
oblervations was contefied by M. Engel, and M. Robert
de Vaugondy; Coxe Append. I. No. 2. p. 267, 272 i
and the former of these geographers ventured to take away
no less than 28) degrees from the longitude, whlich, on thle
faith of K~rafflinicow's oblervations, was alligned to the
eastern boundary of the Ruflian empire. Wlith how little
reason this was done, will appear from considering that
our British navigators, having determined the polit~ion of
Petropawlofki by a great number of very accurate obferva-
tions, found the longitude of that por~t 158o 43/ E. from
Greenwich, and its latitude 530 I', agreeinga, the firfl to
less than leven minutes, and the lecond to les~s than half a mi-
note,wRit tllrhe calculations of the R uffian afironomer : a coin-
cidence which, in the situation of 10 remote a place, does not
leave an uncertainty of more than four Englilh miles, and

F f3 which,

which, for the credit of science, deserves to be particularly
remarked. The chief error in the Ruffian maps has been
inl not extending the boundaries of that emnpire fufficiently
towards the east. For as there was nothling to conneat
the land of the Tlchutzki and the north-eait poinlt of
Asia withl those places whereof the polition had been care-
fully alcertained, ex~cept the imlperfenl accounts of Beb.
ring's and Synd's voyages, considerable errors could not
fdil to be int-roduced, and that point was laid down as
not more than 230 2' east of the meridian of Petropaw-
lofk~i. Coxe App. i. N~o. 2. By the observations of
Captain King, thle difference of longitude between Petro-
pawlofki and the East Cape is 31o 9'; that is 8' 7' greater
than it was fuppofedi to be by the Ruflian geographers."
It appears from Cook's and King's Voy. iii. p. 272. that
thle continents of Asia and Aimerica are plually joined to-
gether by ice during winter: Mir. Samwell confirms this
account ofhis fisperior officer. " At this place, viz. near the
latitude of 660 N. the two coasts are only thirteen leagues
asunder·, and about midway between themn lie two itands,
the difiance from which to either nhore, is thort of twenty
miles. At this place, the natives of Asia could find no
diffculty in paffng over to the oppofu:e coast, which is in
fighlt of their own. That inl a course of years such an
event would happen, either through design or accident,
cannot admilt of a doubt. The canoes which we law
among the Tfchutzfki wer~e capable of performing a much
longe~r voy-age; and, hlowever rudle thley may have been at
som~e distant period, we can [carcely fuppole them unequal
to a paffge of fix: or seven leagues. People mighlt h~ave
been carried over by accident on floating pieces of ice.
They mighlt as~ so hve travelled across onl fledges or on
foot; for we halve reason to believe that the firait is en-
tirely frozen over in the winter; 10 that during that sea-
son, th~e continents, with refpec? to the communication
between them, maly be considered as one land." Letter
from M~r. Sdmwfell, Scots Malgazine for xyi88, p. 604.

It is probable that this intereffing portion of geographical
knowledge will, in the cours~e of a few years, receive far-
ther improvement. Soon after the publication of Captain
Cook's last voya e, the great and enlightened Sovereign
of Ruf~ia,, attentive to every thing that may contribute to
extend the bounds of science, or to render it more accu-
rate, formed the plan of a new voyage of discovery, in
order to explore those parts of the ocean lying between
Alla and America, which Captain Cook did not v~isit, to
examine more accurately the islands which firetch from one
continent almoff to the other, to survey the north-east
coast of the Ruffian empire, from the mouth of the K~o-
vyma, or Kolyma, to the North Cape, and to fettle, by
allronomical oblervations, the polition of each place worth
notice. The conduB of this important enterprize is com-
mitted to Captain Billings, an English officer in the Ruf-
fian s~ervice, of whole abilities for thlat flation it will be
deemed the best evidence, that he accompanied Captain
Cook in his last voyage. To render the expedition uxore
extensively useful, an eminent naturalist is appointed to
attend Captain Billinlgs. Six years will be requisite for
accomplimhing the purpoles of the voyage. Coxe Supple-
mnent to RufIian Discoveries, p. 27, &c.

N O TE XVII. p. 61.

FEW travellers have had such opportunity of ob-

s~erving the natives of America, in its various dil-

triAs, as Donl Antonio Ulloa. In a work lately pub-
lilbed by him, he thus describes the chara~teriffical sea-
tures of the race : " a very small forehead, covered with
hair towards its extremities, as far as the middle of the
ceye-brows; little eyes; a thin nos~e, small and bending
towards the upper lip; the countenance broad; the ears
large; the hair very black, lank, and coarie; the limbs
well turned, the feet small, thle body of just proportion ;

Ss 4 and

and altogether smooth and free from hair, until old age,
when they acquire some beard, but never on the cheeks."
Noticias American~as, &;c. p. 307. M. le Chevalier de
Pinto, who resided leveral years in a part of America which
Ulloa never visited, gives a flketch of the general alpeR
of the Indians there. '' They are all of copper colour,
with some diverlity of thade, not in proportion to their
distance from the equator, but according to the degree of
elevation of the territor-y which they inhabit. Thole who
live in a high country are fairer than thof, in the marshy
low lands on the coast. Thieir face is round, farther re-
!noved, perhaps, than that of anly people from an oval fhlape.
Their forehead is fmnall, the extremity·of their ears far from
the face, their lips thick, their nose flat, their eyres black,
or of a chlefiut colour, small, but capable of dilcerning ob-
jeats at a great difiance. Their hair is always thick and
sleek, andi without anly tenldency to curl. They have
no hair on any· part of their body· but the hlead. At the
firit afpedt, a fouthlern American appears to be mild and
innocent, but on a more attentive view, one dilcovers inl
his countenance fomethling wild, difruitful, and fallen."
MlS. penes me. The tw·o portraits drawn by hands very
different from those of common travellers, have a near re-
semblance.

N OT E XVIII. p. 62.

Ah1A 'IN G accounts are given of the peirevering

[peed of the Amnericans. Adair relates the adventures

of a Chik~kafah w~arrior, who ru1n throug~h w~oods and over
mounltains, th~ree hundred computed miles, in a day and a
half and two nights. Hill. of Amer. Ind. 396.

N O TE XIX. p. 68.

h GoDIN L.E JEUNE, W110 Teiided flfteen TearS

Samonlg the Indians of Peru and Quito, anld twenty

y·ears

years in the French colony of Cayenne, in which there is
a conflant intercourse with the Galibis and other tribes on
the Orinoco, oblerves, that the vigour of conflitution
among the Americans is exaEtly in proportion to their ha-
bits of labour. The Indians, in warm climates, such as
those on the coasts of the South Sea, on the river of Ama-
zons, and the river Orinoco, are not to be compared for
firength with those in cold countries; and yet, says he,
boats daily set out from Para, a PortuguesE settlement on
the river of Amazons, to ascend that river againit the ra-
pidity of the fiream, and with the fame crew they proceed
to San Pablo, which is eight hundred leagues difiant. No
crew of white people, or even of negroes, would be found
equal to a tafki of fitch perlevering: fatigue, as the Portu-
guefe have experienced, and yet the Indians, being accul-
tomed to this labour from their infancy, perform it. M/S.
penes me.

NOTE XX. p. 7.

D ON ANromIo ULLOA, wuho visited a great part of

Peru and Chili, the kingdom of New Granada, and

several of the provinces bordering on the Mexican gulf,
while employed in the fame service with the French ma-
thematicians during the space of ten years, and who after-
wards had an opportunity of viewing the North-Ame-
ricans, asserts, " that if we have seen one American, we
may be said to have seen them all, their colour and make
are to nearly the fame." Notic. Americanas, p. 308.
A more early observer, Pedro de Ciega de Leon, one of
the conquerors of Peru, who had likewise traver ed many
provinces of America, affirms, that the people, men and
wome~n, although there is such a multitude of tribes or
nations as to be almoff innumerable, and luch div~erlity of
climates, appear nevertheless lik~e the children of one fa-
ther and mother. Chronica del' Pern, parte i. c. 19*
There is, no doubt, a certain combination of' featurcs, and

peculiarity

peculiarity of afpec9, which forms what may be called a
European or Asiatic countenance. There mull likewise
be one that may be denominated 'American, co~nuon to
the whole race. This may be supposed to firike the tra.
veller at first fight, while not only the various thades,
which diflinguifh people of different regions, but the pe-
culiar features which discriminate individuals, escape the
notice of a transient observer. But when persons who had
resided 10 long among the Americans concur in bearing tef-
timony to the limilarity of their appearance in every cli-
anate, we may conclude that it is more remarkable than that
of any other race. See likewise Garcia Origen de los In-
dies, P* 54- 242. TorquemadaMonarch. Indiana, ii. 571.

N OT E XXI. p. 79.

R/.LE CHEVALIER DE PIwro oblerves, that in the

*interior parts of Brafit, he had been informed that

some perfoms resembling the white people of Darien have
been found ; but that the breed did not continue, and their
children became like other Americans. This race, how-
ev·er, isvery imperfealy known. MVS. penes mec.

N OT E XXII. p. 83.

THE teffimonie's~ of different travellers, concerning the

Patagonians, have been colle~ted and slated with a

con ilderable degree of accuracy by the author of Recherches
Philolophiques, &c. tom. i. 281, &c. iii. 18I, &tc.
Since the publication of his work, several navigators have
vilited the Magellanic regions, and, like their predecessors,
differ very widiely in their accounts of itsinhabitants. By
Commodore Byron and his crew, who failed through the
Straits inl 1;64, thle common size of the Patagonians was
eflirnated to be eight feet, and many of them Isuch taller.

Phil.

Phil. TranfaR. vol. Iv~i. p. i8. By Captains Wallis and
Carteret, who aaually measured them in 1766, they were
found to be from fix feet to fix feet five and seven
inches in height. Phil. Tranf.' vol. lx. p. 22. There,
however, seem to have been thle very people whole size
had been rated 10 high in the year 1764,i for Ceveral of
them had beads and red baize of the fame k~ind with what
had been put aboard Captain W~allis's thip, and he natural-
ly concluded that they hlad got these from Mr. Byron.
Hawkefw. i. In 1767 they were again measured by M.
Bougainville, whole account differs little from that of
Captain W~allis. Voy. 129. To there I thall add a tef-
timony of great weight. In thle year 1762, Don Ber-
nardo Ibagnez de Echavarri accompanied the Marquis de
Valdelirios to. Buenos Ayres, and resided there several
years. He is a very intelligent author, and his reputation
for veracity unimpeached among his countrymen. In
rpeaking of the country towards the southern extremity of
America, (( By what Indians," says he, '' ip it poffeffed ?
Not certainly by the fabulous Patagonians, who are sup-
posed to occupy this diffriEL. I have from many eye-wit-
neffes, who have lived among those Indians, and traded much
with them, a true and accurate defeription of their perrons.
They are of the fame flature with Spaniards. I never favr
one who role in height two v~aras and two or three inches,"
i. e. about 80 or 8r.332 inches English, if Echavarri
makies his computation according to the vtara of Madrid.
This agrees nearly with the measurement of Captain Wal-
lis. Reyno Jefuitico, 238, Mr. Falkner, who resided
as a millionary forty years in the foutliern parts of Ame-
rica, says, that " the Patagonians, or Puelches, are a large-
bodied people , but I never heard of that gigantic race which
others have mentioned, though I have seen persons of all the
dllforent tribes of southern Indians." Introd. p. 26. MZ.
Debrrizhoffer! aJefuit, who resided eighteen years inParagouay,

and who had seen great numbers of the various tribes
which inhabit the countries situated upon the Straits of
Mlagellan, confirms, in every point, the teffimony of his
brother millionary F~alkner. Dobrizhoffer enters into some
detail with refpeA to the opinions of several authors corr-
cerning the stature of the Patagonians. Having mention-
ed the reports of some early travellers with regard to the
extraordinary size of some bones found on that coast,
which were fixppofed to be human; and having endeavour-
ed to thew that there bones belonged to some large marine
or land animal, he concludes, ''de hifce offibus crede
quicquid libuerit, dummnodo, me fuafore, Patagones pro gi-
gantibus definas habere." Hilloria de Abilfonibus, vol, ii,
p. 19, &c.

N OT E XXIII. p. 87*

AwrnloNIO sANCHIEZ RIBEIRO, a learned anld ingeni-

ous physician, published a dissertation in thle year

1965, in which he endeavours to prove, that this disease
was not introduced from America, but took its rife in Eu-
Jope, and was brought on by an epidemical and malignant
disorder. Did I chufe to enter into a disquisition onl this
fubjeat, which I th~ould not have mentioned, if it had niot
beenl inltimately connebled with this part of my inquiries,
it would not be difficult to point out some millakes with
refpe61 to the fa £1s upon which he founds, as well as some
errors in the consequences which he draws from them. The
rapid communication of this disease from Spain over Eu-
rope, seems however to resemble the progrels of an epide-
mic, rather than that of a disease tranfinitted by infeEtion.
The frirt mention of it is in the year 1493, and before the
year 1497 it had made its appearance in most countries of
Eulrope, with such alarming lymptoms as rendered it ne-

ceffry

ceffary for the civil magiffrate to interpole, in order to
check its career.--Since the publication of this work, a fe-
cond edition of Dr. Sanchez's Dfifertation has been comm-
municatedd to me. It contains several additional fasts in
confirmation of his opinion, which is supported with such
plausible arguments, as render it a fuubjeal of inquiry well
deserving the attention of learned physicians.

N O TE XXIV. p. 92.

THE people of Otahelte have no denomination for any

number above two hundred, which~ is fufficient for

their tranfaftions. Voyages, by Hawkelworth, ii. 228.

N OT E XXV. p. 100.

AS the view which I hlave given of rude nations is

extremely different from that exhibited by very re-

fpeEtable authors, it may be proper to produce some of the
many authorities on which I found my defeription. The
manners of the savage tribes in America have never beca
viewed by persons more capable of observing them with
dilcernment, than the philosophers employed by France and
Spain, in the year 1735, to determine the figure of the
earth. M. Bouguer, D. Antonio d'Ulloa, and D. Jorge
Juan, resided long among the natives of the least civilized
provinces in Peru. M. de la Condamine had not only the
fame advantages with them for observation, but, in his
voyage down the Maragnon,~ he had an opportunity of
infpe~ing the slate of the various nations seated on its
banks, in its vast course acros~s the continent of South
America. There is a wonderful resemblance in their re-
presentation of the chara~ter of the Americans. C* They
are all extremely indolent," fayrs M. Bouguer, a they

XTOTES AND ILLUfSTRiATIONS.J

are flopid, they pass whole days fitting in the fame place,
without moving, or speaking a single word. It is not
easy to deferibe the degree of their indifference for wealth,
and all its advantages. One does not well know what
rnotive to propole to them, when one would persuade
them to perform any service. It is vain to offer thern
money; they anfwver, that they are not hungry." Voy·age
au Perou, p. I02. " If one considers them as men, the
narrowners of their underitanding seems to be incompa-
tible with the excellence of the foul. Their imbecilityr
is to vilib':, that one can hardly form an idea of them
different from what one has of the brutes. Nothing dif-
turbs the tranquillity of their Fouls, equally infeasible
to disasters and to prosperity. Though half-naked, they
are as contented as a monarch in his most iplendid array·.
Riches do not attraRt them in the Smallest degree, andi
the authority or dimrities to which they may alpire are To
little the objeats of their ambition, that an Indian will
receive with the fame indifference the office of a judge
(Alcalde) or that of a hangman, if deprived of the former
and appointed to thelatter. Nothing can move or change
them. Interest has no power over them, and they often
refuse to perform a small service, though certain of a
great recompence. Fear makes no imprellion upon them,
and refpeR as little. Their difpolition is to singular, that
there is no method of influencing them, no means of rous-
ing them from that indifference, which is proof against
all the endeavours of the wifeit persons; no expedient
which can induce them to abandon that gross ignorance,
or lay aside that carelers negligence, which dilconcert the
prudence anld difppoint the care of such as are attentive
to their welfare." Voyage d'Ulloa, tom. i* 335> 356.
Of those singular qualities he produces many extraordi-
nary inflances, p. 336--347. " Infenfibility," says M. de
la Condamine, " is the basis of the American charaEler.

I leave

NOTES AND ILLUSTRATIONS.

I leave others to determine, whether this should be dig-
nified with the name of apathy, or disgraced with that
of flupidity. It arises, without doubt, from the small
number of their ideas, which do not extend beyond their
wants. Gluttons even to voracity, when they have where-
withal to satisfy their appetite. Temperate, when ne-
cellity obliges them, to such a degree, that they can en-
dure want without seeming to desire any thing. Pulilla.
nimous and cowardly to excess, unless when they are ren-
dered desperate by drunkenners. Averse to labour, indil-
ferent to every motive of glory·, honour, or gratitude;
eccupied entirely by the 0 jeR that is prelent, and alway·s
determined by it alone, without any solicitude about futu-
rity; incapable of foresight or of refle~tion 4 abandoning
themselves, when under no restraint, to a puerile joy,
which they express by frifkinlg about, and immoderate fits
of laughter; without objPEt or design, they pass their life
without thinking, and grow old without advancing be-
yond childhood, of which they retain all the defeas. If
this description were applicable onlly to the Indians in fomne
provinces of Pern, who are slaves in every refpeAl but the
name, one might believe, that this~degree of degeneracy
was occalloned by the servile dependence to which they
are reduced ; the example of the modern Greeks being
proof how far servitude may degrade the human ipecies.
But the Indians in the: mifllonss of the Jesuits, and the Fa-
vages who flill enjoy unimpaired liberty, being as limited
in their faculties, not to fady as flopid as the other, one
sannot oblerve, without humiliation, that man, whers
abandozned to timple nature, and deprived of the advan-
tages resulting from education and s~ociety, differs but little
from the brute creation." Voyage de la Riv. de Amaz.
52, 53. M. de Chanvalon, an intelligent and philolo-
phical oblerver, who visited Martinico in x75r, and re-
lied there f;?x years, gives the following dekcription of the

Caraibs:

NOTES AND ILLUSTRATIONTS.

Caraibs: (' It is not the red colour of their complexion, it
is not the singularity of their features, which conflitutes
the chief difference between them and us. It is their ex.
cefllvee fmplicity; it is the limited degree of their faculties.
Their reas~on is not more enlightened or more provident
than the initina of brutes. The reason of the most gross
peasants, that of the negroes brought up in the parts of
Africa most remote from intercourse with Europeans, is
such that we discover appearances of intelligence, which,
though imperfedt, is capable of increase. But of this the
undeditanding of Caraibs seems to be hardly ifuceptible. 'If
found philolophy and religion did not afford us their light,
if we were to decide according to the firff impreflion which
the view of that people makes upon the mind, we should
be disposed to believe that they do not belong to the fame
species with us. Their flupid eyes are the true mirrour of
their fouls; it appears to be without fun~ions. Their in-
dolence is extreme ; they have never the least solicitude
about the moment which is to succeed that which is pre-
fent." Voyage B la Martinique, p. 44, 45- 5'. M.
de la Borde, Tertre, and Rochefort, confirm this deferip-
tion. << The charaderiftics of the Californians," says P.
Venegas, " as well as of all other Indians, are flupidity
and insensibility; want of knowledge and refleaion; in.
conflancy, impetuosity, and blindness of appetite; an ex-
cellive sloth, and abhorrence of all labour and fatigue ; an
excellive love of pleasure and amusement of eviery kind,
however triflinlg or brutal; pusillanimity, and, in fine, a
most wretched want of every thing which conflitutes the
real man, and renders him rational, inventive, tra8able,
and useful to himself and society. It is not easy for Euro-
peans, who never were out of their own country, to con-
ceive an adequate idea of those people : for, even in the
least frequented corners of the globe, there is not a na-
tion 10 flupid, of such contraaed ideas, and to weak both

in body and mind, as the unhappy Californians. Their
underflanding comprehends little more than what they
fee; abitra8 ideas, and much less a chain of reasoning,
being far beyond their power; so that they fearce ever
improve their first ideas, and ther~e are in general falle, or
at least inadequate. It is in vain to reprelent to them
any future advantages which will refuilt to them fromn doing
or abitaining from this or that particular immediately
present; the relation of means and ends being beyond
the firetch of their faculties. N\or have they the least
notion of pursuing such intentions as will procure them-
selves some future good, or guard themn against fulture
evils. T'heir will is proportional to thleir faculties, and
all their palfions move in a very nlarrowf sphere. Amnbi-
tion they have none, and are mor-e delirous of beinlg ac-
counted firong than valiant. The obje~rs of ambition
with us, honour, fame, reputation, titles, poffs, and diC-
tinEtions of superiority, are unknown among them; 10
that this powerful spring of aEtion, the caule of so much
seeming good and real evil in the world, hras no power
here. This difpolition of mrind, as it gives them up to
an amazing languor andi lafficude, their lives fleeting away
in a perpetual inaaivityl and detelltation of la'cour, so it
likewise induces them to be attra~ted by the firfl obJedt
which their own fancy, or thle perfua(10n of another,
places before them; and at the fame time renders themn as
prone to alter their resolutions wvith the fame facility-.
They look with indifference upon any kindners done
them; nor is ev·en the bare remembrance of it to be ex-
peaed fromn them. In a word, the unhappy· mortals mayr
be compared to children, in whom the de-velopement of
reason is not completed. They may indeed be called a
nation who never arr-ive at manhood." Hl.o ai
sorn. Engl. T'ranfl. i.-64. 67. Mr. Ellis gives a Glimilar
account of the want of for-esight and inconsiderate difpo-

Vot. II. G.g fition

fition of the people adjacent to Hudfon's Bay. Voyage,
p. '94, 195-

TaxE incapacity of the Americans is to remarkable,

that negroes from all thle different provinces of Africa are
oblerved to be more capable of improving by innrue~ion.
They acquire the knowledge of s~everal particulars which
the Americans cannot comprehend. Hence the negroes,
though slaves, value themselves as a superior order of be-
ings, and look down upon the Americans with contempt,
as void of capacity and of rational discernment. Ulloa
Notic. Americ. 3122 323*

N OTE XXVI. p. 107.

O4BRIZHOF'FER, the last traveller, I know, who has
resided among any tribe of the ruder Americans, has

explained to fully the various reasons which have induced
their women to suck~le their children long, and never to
undertakie rearing such as were feeble or diitorted, and even
to deflroy a considerable number of their offspring, as to
thirow great light on the observations I have made, p. 72,
73. His1. de Abiffonibus, vol. ii. p. 107. 22x. So deeply
were there ideas imprinted in the minds of the Ame-
ricans, that the Peruvians, a civilized people, when com-
pared with the barbarous tribes, whole manners I am de-
scribing, retained th~em; and even their intercourse with
thle Span~iards has not been able to root them out. When
twins are born in any family, it is nill considered as an
ominous event, and the parents have recourse to rigorous
acls of mortification, in order to avert the calamities with
which th7ey are threatened. Wh'en a child is born with
any deformnity, they will not, if they can possibly avoid it,
bring it to be baptized, and it is with difficulty they can

ar be

be brought to rear it. Arriaga Extirpac. de la Idolat. del
Peru, p. 32, 33.

NOTE XXVII. p. rI3.

HE number of the sith in the rivers of South America
is to extraordinary, as to merit particular notice.

" In the Maragnon (says P. Acugna) filh are 10 plentiful,
that, without anly art, they may take them with the hands."
p. 138. << In the Orinoco (says P. Gumilla), besides an
infinite variety of other filh, tortoise or turtle abound in
Fuchhumbers, that I cannot find words to express it. I
doubt not but that fach as read my account will ac-
cuie me of exaggeration: but I can afmrm, that it is
as difficult to count them, as to count the sands on
the banks of that river. One may judge of their num-
ber by the am~azing conlfumption of them; for all thle nla-
tions contiguous to th~e river, and even many whlo are
at a difiance, flock thither at the season of breeding, and
not only find fulfenance during ~that time, but carry off
great numbers both of the turtles and of their eggs, &~c."
Hill. de P'Orenoque, ii. c. 22. p. 59. M. de la Conda-
mine confirms their accounlts, p. I59.

N OT E XXVIII. p. Ir3-

PISO deferibes two of there plants, the Cururuafe, and

the Guajana-Timbs. It is remarkable, that though

they have this fatal effe~t upon fithes, they are 10 far from
being noxious to the human species, that they are used inl
medicine with succes~s. Pifo, lIb. iv. c. 88. Ban~croft
mentions another, the Hiarise, a fmnall quantity of which
is fufficient to inebriate all the filh to a conlfidierable diflane,
so that in a fe v minutes they float motionless on the fur-

G g face

face of the water, and are takien with ease. Nat. Hi-ll. of
Guiana, p. 106.

N OT E XXIX. p. rI7.

REMARKABLE inflances occur of the calamities which

rude nations fuffer by famine. Alvar Nugnez Ca-

beca de Vaca, one of the most gallant and virtuous of the
Spanilh adventurers, relided almost nine years among the
savages of Florida. They were unacquainted with every
Cpecies of agriculture. Their fubfliffence was poor and
prescarious. '' They live chiefly (says he) upon roots of
different plants, which they procure with great difficulty,
wandering from place to place in search of them. Some-
times they kill game, sometimes they catch sith, but in
such iimall quantities, that their hunger is 10 extreme as
compels them to eat [piders, the eggs of ants, worms,
lizards, serpents, a kind of un~luous earth, and I am per-
fuaded, that if in this country there were any stones, they
would [wallow these. They preserve the bones of filhes
and serpents, which they grind into powder, and eat.
The only season when they do not fuffer much from fa-
mine, is when a certain fruit, which he calls Tunars, is
ripe. This is the fame with the Opuntia, or prickly pear,
of a reddish and yellow colour, with a [wveet insipid tafle.
They are sometimes obliged to travel far from their uiual
place of residence, in order to find them." Naufragias,
c. xviii. p. 20, 21, 22. In another place, he oblerves that
thiey are frequently reduced to pals two or three days with-
out food, c. xxiv. p. 27.

NOTE,

N O TE XXX. p. x x9*

FERMlIN has gwven an accurate defeription of the
*two species of manioc, with an account of its cul-

ture, to which he has added some experiments, in order
to al~certain the poisonous qualities of the juice extradled
from that species which he calls the bitter cassava. Among
the Spaniards it is known by the name of Yuar brava.
Defcr. de Surin. tom. i. p. 66.

NO TE XXXI. p. xx9-

TH E plantain is found in Asia and Africa, as well as

in Amer-ica. Oviedo contends, that it is not an in-

digenous plant of the New World, but was introduced
into the -island of Hispaniola, in the year 1516, by
father Thomas de Berlanga, and that he transplanted it
from the Canary Islands, whither the original flips had
been brought from the East Indies. Oviedo, lib. viii.
c. r. But thle opinion of Acolla and other naturalifts,
who reckon it an American plant, seems to be better
founded. Acolla Hist. Nat. lib. iv. 21. It was culti-
vated by rude tribes in America, who had little intercourse
with the Spaniards, and who were deflitute of that inge-
nuity which difpoles men to borrow what is useful from
foreign nations. Gumil. iii. 186. Wafer's Voyage,
p. 87.

N O TE XXXII. p. 12z.

1T is remarkcable, that Acofta, one of the most acco.

rate and beft-informed writers concerning the Weft

Indies, allirms, that maize, though cultivated in the con-

G g3 tinlent,

tinent, was not known in the islands, the inhabitants of
which had none but caffada '7read. Hist. Nat. lib. iv.
c. r6. But P. Martyr, in the first book of his first De-
cad, -which was written in the year '49)3, upon th'e re-
turn of Columbus from his firit voyage, exprefaly men-
tions maize as a plant which the, islanders cultivated,
and of which they made bread, p. 7. Gomnara likewise
ailerts, that they were acquainted with the culture of
mnaize. Hiffor. Gener. cap. 28. Oviedo dlefcribes
maize without any intimation of its being a planlt that
was not natural to Hispaniola. Lib. vii. c. r,

N O TE XXXIII. p. 129-

4 E~ W O L LA ND, a country which formerly was

only known, has lately been visited by intelligent

observers. It lies in a region of the globe where it
must enjoy a very favourable climate, as it firethes from
the Ioth to the 38th degree of northern latitude. It is of
great extent, and from its square form muff be much
more than equal to all Europe. The people who inha.
bit the various parts of it appear to be OE one race.
They are evidently ruder than moll of the Americans,
and have made flll less progress in improvement and the
arts of life. Thlere is n~ot the least appearance of culti-
vation in any part of this vaff region. The inhabitants
are extremely few·, so that the country appearsa almnoft
desolate. Their tribes are f ill more inconfrderable than
those of America. They depend for fabfiffence, almolk
entrirely, on fishing. They do, not lettle in one place,
but roam about in qucil of focld. Both sexes go flark-
naked. Thleir hajbitationls, uttenfils, &(c. are more simple
and rude than those of the Americans. Voyages, by
Hawkeifwortht, iii. 622, &c. T'his, perhaps, is the coun-
try where man has been diicovered in the earliest flage of

his

his progrels, and it exhibits a miserable specimen of his
condition and powers in that uncultivated slate. If this
country (hall be more fully explored by future navigators,
the comparison of the manners of its inhabitants with
those of the Americans will prove an infiru6'ive article
in the hillory of the human species.

N OT E XXXIV. p. 130.

PGABRIEL MAREST, who travelled from his flation
Samong the Illinois to Machillimakinac, thus deferibes

the face of the country: L' We have marched twelve day·s
without meeting a single human creature. Sometimnes we
found ourselves in vast meadows, of which we could not
fee the boundaries, through which there flowed many
brooks and rivers, but without any path1 to conduEt us.
Somerimnes we were obliged to open a paSsage acrofrs thick
forests, through bushes, and underwood filled with briars
and thorns. Sometimes we had to pass through deep
marlhes, in which we funk up to the middle. After being
fatigued through the day, we had the earth for our bed, or
a few leaves, exposed to the wind, the rain, and all the
injuries of the air. Lettr. Edifianltes, ii. 360. Dr.
Brickell, in an excursion from North Carolina towards
the mountains, A. D. 1730, travelled fifteen days without
meeting with a human creature. Nat. Hist. of North Ca-
rolina, 389. Diego de Ordas, in attemlpting to make
a lettlement in South America, A. D. r532, marched fifty
days through a country without one inhabitant. Herrera,
dec. 5. lib. i. c. It.

NTOTE

Gg 4

N OT E XXXV. p. r3'-

SSTRONGLY fulPCe thast a community of goods, anel

an undivided flore, are known only among the rudest

tribes of hunters; and that as soon as any [pecies of agri-
culture or regular induffry is known, the idea of an ex-
clufive right of property to the fr·uits of them is intro-
duced. I am confirmed in this opinion by accounts which
I have received concerningo the slate of property among
the Indians in very difrerent regions of America. " The
idea of the natives of Bralil concerning property ic, that
if any person cultivate a field, he alone ought to en-
joy· the produce of it, and no other has a title to pretend
to it. If an individual or Family go a hurnring or filh-
ing, what is caught belongs to thle individual or to the
fdmily, and they commun~icate no part of it to any but to
their cazique, or to such of thleir kin~dred as hlappen to be
inldifpofed. If any, pedim~ in thle village corne to their
blut, he may fit down freely~, and eat without asking
liberty. But this is the consequence of their general
principle of hospitality; for I never observed any parti-
tion of the increase of their fields, or thle produce of
the chace, which I co~uld confidler as the result of any
idea concerning a comnmunity of goods. On the contrary,
th~ey are so much attachied to wh~at they deem to be their
property-, that it woulld be extremely danlgerous to en-
croach~ upon it. As far as I have seen, or can learn,
thlere is not one tribe of Indians in South Amterica, among
whom that comrmunity of goods which has been to highly
extolled is knownl. The circumstance in the govern-
rnent of thle Jesuits, mail irksome to the Indians of Pa-
raguay, was the commun~ity of goods which those f'athers
inltroduced. Thiis w\as repag~ndlt to the origrinal idleas

of the Indians. They were acquainted with the rights
of private exclusive property, and they submitted with
impatience to regullations which destroyed them." M.
le Chleval. de Pinto, MS. penes me. (( A~tual posses~-
sion (says a miironary who resided several years among
the Indians of the Five Nations) gives a right to the foil,
but whenever a poffeffor fees fit to quit it, another has as
good right to take it as he who left it. This law, or
cuffom, refpeas not only the particular [pot on which he
cre~ls his houle, but also his planting-ground. If a man
has prepared a particular s~pot of ground, on which he
designs in future to build or plant, no man has a right
to incommode him, much less to the fruit of his labours,
until it appears that he voluntarily gives up his views.
But I never heard of any formal conveyance from one In-
dian to another in their natural slate. The limits of
every canton is circumscribed; that is, they are allowed to
hunt as far as iuch a river on this hand, and such a
mountain on the other. This area is occupied and im.
proved by individuals and their families. Individuals,
not the community, have the use and profit of their own
labours, or success in hunting." MS. of M/r. Gideon
Hawley, penes me.

NOTE XXXVI. p.132*

THIS difference of temper between the Americans and

negroes is to remnarkable, that it iS a proverbial fay-

ing in' the French islands, '( Regarder un fauvage de
travers, c'eft le battre; le battre, c'eft le tuer; battre
un negre, c'eft le nourrir." Tertre, ii. 490.

NOTE

TO T E XXXVII. p. 133*

rH E description of the political slate of the people of

Cinaloa perfeltly resembles th~at of the inhabitants

of North America. " They have neither laws nor kings
(says a mifflonary who resided long among them) to pu-
nifh anyr crime. Nor is there zlmon~g them any species
of authority, or political government, to restrain them
in any part of their conduRt. It is true, that *they ac-
knowledge certaini Caziques, who are heads of their fa-
Inilies or villages, but their aulthority appears chiefly in
war, and the exrpeditions against their, enemies. This
authority the Caziques obtain not by hereditary right, but
by their valour in war, or by the power and number of
their families and relations. Sometimes they owe their
pre-eminence to their eloquence in displaying their own
exploits." Ribas Hiftor. de las Triumph. &c. p. rI.
T'he slate of the Chiquitos in South America is nearly the
fame. " They have no regular form of government, or
civil life, but in matters of public concern they liflen
to the advice of their old men, and ulually follow it.
The dignity of Cazique is not hereditary, but conferred
according to merit, as the reward of valour in war. The
union among them is imperfeat. Their society resembles
a republic without any head, in which every man is
master of hmimelf, and, upon the least difguff, separates
from those with whom he seemed to be conneAed." Re-
lacion Hillorical de las Alifliones de los Chiquitos, por P.
Juan Patr. Fernandez, p. 32, 33. Thus, un~der very dif-
ferent climates, whenl nations are in a fimnilar slate of
faciety, thleir inititutions anld ci~il gov~ernlment alffime
the fame form.

NOTE

NOTE XXXVIII. p. I48*

** H -AVE known the Indians (says a person well ac-

quainted with their mode of life) to go a thous~and

miles for the purpole of revenge, in pathless woods,
over hills and mountains, through huge cane fwvamps, ex-
posed to the extremities of heat an~d cold, the viciifitude
of seasons, to hunger and thirit. Such is their over-
boiling revengeful temper, that they utterly contemn all
those things as imaginary trifles, if they are to happy as
to get the fealp of the murderer, or enemy, to satisfy the
craving ghoffs of their decealed relations." Adair's Hist.
of Amer. Indians, p. I50.

NO TE XXXIX. p. I48.

IN the account of the great war between the Algon.

qumns and Iroquois, the atchievements of Pifkaret, a

famous chief of the Algonquins, performed mostly by him-
self alone, or with one or two companions, make a capital
figure. De la Potherie, i. 297, &c. Colden's Hist. of
F~ive N tions, 125, &rc.

N O TE XL. p. 151.

THE life of an unfortunate leader is often in danger,

and he is always degraded from the rank which he

had acquired by his former exploits. Adair, p. 388-

N OTE

NOTE XLI. p. Igr.

AS th'e ideas of the North Americans with relpeit to

the mode of carrying on war, are generally known;

I have founded my observations chiefly upon the teimony
of the authors who describe them. But the fame maxims
took place among other nations in the New World. A
judicious missionary has given a view of the military ope.
rations of the people in Gran Chaco, in South America,
~perfeAly similar to those of the Iroquois. (( They are
much addidted to war (says he), which they carry on fre-
quently among thems~elves, but perpetually aganint the Spa-
niards. But they may rather be called thieves than 101,
diers, for they never make head againit the Spaniards,
unless when they can assault them by flealth, or have
guarded against any milchance by spies, who may be called
indefatigable; they will watch the settlements of the Spa-
niards for one, two, or three years, oblerving by night
every thing that passes with the utmnoft s~olicitude, whe-
ther they may expeRt refillance or not, and until they are
perfealy secure of the event, they will not venture upon
an attack; so that w~hen they do give thle assault, they are
certain of success, and free from all danger. These [pies,
in ordler that they may not be oblerved, will creep on
all-four like cats in the night; but if they are difcovecred,
make their escape with much dexterity·. But, although
they never chufe to face the Spaniards, if they be fur-
rounded in any place, whencle they cannot efeape·, they
will fight with delperate valoulr, and fe1 ll thir lives very
dear." Lozano Defecrip. del Gran Chiaco, p. 78.

N OT E

N OT E X;LII. p. 153*

LE RY, whbo was an eye-witness of the proceedings

of the Toupinambos, a Brafilian tribe, in a war against

a powerful nation of their enemies, describes their courage
. and ferocity in very firiking terms. Ego cum Gallo al-

tero, paulo curiofius, magno nofiro periculo (si enim ab
hoftibus capti aut lefi fuiffemus, devorationi faiffemus de-
voti), barbaros noffros in militiam euntes comitari volui.
Hi, numero 4000 capita, cum hoffibus ad littus decer-
tarunt, tanta ferocitate, ut vel rabidos et furiolos quofque
fuperarent. Chm primum hoftes confpexere, in magnos
atque editos ululatus perruperunt. Haec gens adeo sera
eft &( truculenta, ut tantifper dum virium vel tantillum
reftat, continuo dimicent, fugamque nunquam capeffant.
Quod a natura illis inditum effe reor. Teffor interea me,
qui non femnel, tum peditum tum equitum copias ingen-
tes, in aciem infiru~las hic confpexi, tanta nunquam vo-
luptate videndis peditum legionibus armis fulgentibus,
quanta tum pugnantibus iftis percuff~um suisse. Lery Hill.
Navigat. in Brasil. ap. de Bry, iii. 207, 208, 209.

N OT E XLIII. p. 154-

1T was originally the praffice of the Americans, as

well as of other fadvage nations, to cut off the heads

of the enemies whom they flew, and to carry them away
as trophies. But, as they found these cumbersome in their
retreat, which they always make very rapidly·, and often
through a vast extent of country, they became satisfied with
tearing off their fecalps. This cullom, though most preva-
lent in North America, was not unknown among the
Southern tribes. Lozano, P. 79. NOTE

N OT E XLIV. p. 159*

H E terms of the war-fong seem to be ditat~ed by the
fame fierce ipirit of revenge. cc I go to war to re-

venge the death of my brothers; I (hall kill ; I shall ex-
terminate; I thall burn my enemies; I thall bring away
slaves; I shall devour their heart, dry their flesh, drink
their blood; I thall tear off their scalps, and make cups
of their fkulls." B~olfu's Travels through Louisiana,
vol. i. p. I02. I am informed, by persons on whole
testimony I can rely, that as the numnber of people in the
Indian tribes has decreased so much, almoit none of their
prisoners are now put to death. It is considered as bet-
ter policy to spare and to adopt them. Those dreadful
scenes which I have described occur now 10 rarely, that
millionaries and traders who have resided long among the
Indians, never were witnesses to them.

N OT E XLV. p. 159-

ALL the travellers who have visited the most unci-

vilized of the American tribes, agree in this. It

is confirmed by two remarkable circumfltances, whicn oc-
curred in the conquest of different provinces. In the ex-
pedition of Narvaez into Florida in the year I528, the
Spaniards were reduced to such extreme diffrers by fa-
mine, that, in order to preserve their own lives, they eat
such of their companions as happened to die. This ap-
peared 10 thocking to the natives, who were accuffomed
to devour none but prisoners, that it £11led them with hor-
ror and indignation against the Spaniards. Torquemada
Monarch. Ind. ii. p. 584. Naufragios de Aly. Nugnes
Cabeca de Vaca, c. xiiv. p. 15. During the siege of

Mexico,

Mexico, though the Mexicans devoured with greediness the
Spaniards and Tlal~calans, whom they took prisoners, the
utmost rigour of the famine which they fuffered could not
induce them to touch the dead bodies of their own coun-
trymen. Bern. Diaz. del Castillo Conquilt. de la N. Es-
pagna, p. I56.

N O TE XYLVI. p. 16r.

ANY singular circumstances concerning the treat-
ment of pril~oners among the.people of Brasil, are

contained in the narrative of Stadius, a German officer
in thle service of the Portuguese, published in the year
1556. He was taken prisoner by the Toupinam~bos, and
remained in captivity nine years. He was often prefren
at those horrid feflivals whlich he describes, and was def~-
tined himself to the fame cruel fate with other prisoners.
But he saved his life by extraordinary efforts of courage
and address. De Bryl, iii. p. 3+,~ &c. M. De Lery,
who accompanied M. De Villegagnon in his expedition to
Brasil, in the year 1556, and who resided some time in
that country, agrees with Stadius in every circumflance of
importance. He was frequently an ey·e-witners of the
manner in which the Brafilians treated their prisoners. De
Bry, iii, 2r0. Several firiking particulars omitted by
them, are mentioned by a Portuguese author. Purch.
Pilgr. iv. I294, &rc.

N OT E XLVII. p. 164.

H O 0G H I have followed that opinion concerning
the apathy of the Americans, which appeared to me

most rational, and supported by the authority of the most
refpe6able authors, other thleories hav·e been formed with

regard

regard to it, by writers of great eminence. D. Ant.
Ulloa, in a late work, contends, that the texture of the
fikin and bodily habit of the Americans is such, that they
are less sensible of pain than the reft of mankind. He
produces s~everal proofs of this, from the manner in which
they endure the most cruel chirurgical operations, &c.
Noticias Americanas, p. 3r3, 3I4. The fame obferva-
tion has been made by s~urgeons in Brasil. An Indian,
they fay, never complains under pain, and will bear the
amputation of a leg or arm without uttering a single
groan. MS. penes me.

N OT E XLVIII. p. x67.

THIS is an idea natural to all rude nations. Among

the Romans, in the early periods of their common-

wealth, it was a maxim that a prisoner, " tum deceif~fe
videtur cum captus eft." Digest. lib. xlix. tit. 15. c. r8.
And afterwards, when the progress of refinement rendered
them more indulgent with refpe61 to this article, they
were obliged to employ two fiEtions of law to secure the
property, and permit the return of a captive, the one
by the Lex Cornelia, and the other by the Jus Poftliminii,
Heinec. Elem. Jur. Civ. iec. Ord. Pand. ii. p. 294*
Among the negroes the fame ideas prevail. No ransom
was ever accepted for a prisoner. As soon1 as one is taken
in war, he is reputed to be dead, and he is to in effe61 to
his country and his family. Voy. du Cheval. des Mar-
chais, i. P* 369.

NO TE

NOTE XLIX. p. 168.

SH E people of Chili, the' most gallant and high-fpi-

rited of all the Americans, are the only exception

to this oblervation. They attack; their enemics in the open
field; their troops are ranged in regular order; their bat-
talions advance to the charge not only with courage, but
with discipline. The North Americans, though many of
them have fubilituted the European fire-arms in place of
their own bows and arrows, still adhere to their ancient
maxims of war, and carry it on accordingb to their own
peculiar fyltem. But the Chilefe nearly resemble the
warlike nations of Europe and Asia in their military ope-
rations. Ovalle's Relation of Chill. Church. Coll. iii.
p. 7'. Lozano's Hill. Pa-·ag. i. r44, I145*

N OT E L. p. xy1.

E RR E RA gives a remarktable proof of this. In

Y'ucatan, the men are so s~olicitous about their dres~s,

that they carry about with them mirrors, probably made
of stone, like th~ose of the Mlexicans, Dec. iv. lib. iii.
c. 8. in whlich they delight to view themfeives; but the
women never use them. Dec. iv. lib. x. c. 3. He takes
notice, that among thle fierce tribe of the Panches, in the
new kingdom of Granada, none but diflinguilhed warriors
were permitted either to pierce their lips and to wear
green flones in them, or to adorn their heads with plumes
of feathers. Dec. vii. lib. ix. c. 4. In some provinces of
Peru, though that empire had made considerable progress
in civilization, the slate of women was little improved.
All the toil of cul~tivation and domeflic work; was de-

Vo L. II. Ifh volved

volved upon them, and they were not permitted to wear
bracelets, or other ornaments, with which the men were
fond of decking themselves. Zarate Hill. de Peru, i.
p. 15, 16.

N OT E LL. p. 192.

H WA VE ventured to call this mode of anointing and
painting their bodies, the dre/s of the Americans.

This is agreeable to their own idiom. As they never flic
abroad if they are not completely anointed; they excule
themselves when in this situation, by s~aying, that they
cannot appear becadle they are naked. Gumilla Hist. de
P'Orenoque, i. 19s.

NOTE LII. p. 173*

S OME tribes in the province of Cinaloa, on the gulf of

California, feemn to be among the rudefl people of Ame-

rica united in the social Ifate. They neither cultivate
not sow; they have no houses in which they relide.
Thol~e in the inland country fuubift by hunting; ,those on
the sea-coast chiefly by filhing. Both depend upon the
spontaneous produ£1ions of the earth, fruits, plants, and
roots of various kinds. In the rainy season, as they have
no habitations to afford them thelter, they gather bundles
of reeds, or firong grals, and binding themn together at one
end, they open them at the other, and fitting them to
their heads, they are covered as with a large cap, which
like a pent-house throws off the rain, and will keep them
dry for several hours. During the warnt season, they
form a thed with the branches of trees, which prote61s
them from the sultry rays of the fun. When exposed to

cold

cold they make large fires, round which they sleep in the
open air. Hilloria de los Triumphos de Nuefira Santa Ft
entre Gentes las mas barbaras, &tc. por P. And. Perez de
Ribas, p. 7, &c.

NOTE LIII. p. I74-

TIESE houles resemble barns. '' We have measured

some which were a hundred and fifty paces long, and

twenty paces broad. Above a hundred persons reside in
fbme of them." Wfilfon's Account of Guiana. Purch.
Pilgr. vol. iv. p. 1263. Ibid. I291. (( The Indian
houfes," says Mr. Barrere, <' have a most wretched ap-
pearance, and are a striking image of the rudeness of early
times. Their huts are commonly built on some rising
ground, or on the banks of a river, huddled sometimes to-
gether, sometimes Araggling, and alway·s without anly or-
der. Their alpell is melancholy and disagreeable. One
fees nothing but what is hideous and savage. The uncul-
tivated fields have no gaiety. The silence which reigns
there, unless when interrupted by the disagreeable notes of
birds, or cries of wild beasts, is extremely difmal." Re-
hat. de la France Equin. p. 146.

NOTE LIV. p.176.

S OME tribes in South America can fend their arrows to

a great difiance, and with considerable force, without

the aid of the bow. They make use of a hollow reed,
about nine feet long, and an inch thick, which is called a
Sarbacane. In it they lodge a small arrow, with some un-
fptm cotton wound about its great end; this confines the
air, so that they can bolow it with aftonihing rapidity, and
a sure aim, to the dillance of above a hundred paces.

H h2 These

There Imall arrows are alwars poisoned. Fermin. Defer,
de Surin, i. 55. Bancroft's Hist. of Guiana, p. 28I, &c.
The Sarbacane is much used in some parts of the Eaff lndies.

NQTE LV. p. 177.

MIGIHT produce many inflances of this, but thall
satisfy myself with one, taken from the Efkrimaux.

" Their greatest ingenuity (says Mr. Ellis) is thewn in the
firduare of their bows, made commonly of three pieces of
wood, each making part of the fame arch, very nicely and
exiadly joined together. They are commonly of fir or
larch; and as this wants firength and elasticity, they s~up-
ply both by bracinrg the back of the bow, with a kind of
thread, or line, made of the sinews of their deer, and the
bow-firing of the fame materials. To make them draw
more fiff~ly, they dip them into water, which causes both
the back of the bow and the firing to contraa, and con-
feqluently gives it tile greater force; and as they pra~ise
from their youth, they shoot with very great dexterity."
Vo> age to H~udfon's Bay·, p. I38.

NOTE LVI. p. 1i77

SE C ES SIT Y is the great prompter and guide of

mankind in their inventions. There is, however,

fh~ch inequality in fomne parts of their progress, and some
nations get so far the flart of others in circumstances nearly
similar, that we muff alcribe this to some events in their
flory, or to fomne peculiarity in, their situation with which
we ale unacqua.nted. Thle people in the island of Ota-
heLite, lately dil~covered in the South Sea, far excel moll of
thle Amnericans in the k~nowledge and praElice of the arts of
i..genuit·, and yet they had not invented any method of

boiling

boiling water; and having no vessel that would bear the
fire, they had no more idea that water could be made hot,
than that it could be made solid. Voyages by H-awkef-
worth, i. 466. 484*

NO T'E LVII. p. 178.

O NE of these boats, which could carry nine men, weigh-

ed only sixty pounds. Gofnol. Relat. des Voy. a

la Virgin. Rec. de Voy. au N~ord, tom. v. p. 403*

NOTE LVIII. p. 180.

A REMARKABLE proof of this is produced by Ulloa. Tu~

weaving hammocks, coverlets, and the other coarse

cloths, which they are accullomed to manufadture, their
induffry has discovered no more expeditious method, than
to take up thread after thread, and after counting and fort-
ing them each time, to pass the woof 'between them, to
that in finilhing a imall piece of those floffs, they frequent-
ly s~pend more than two years. Voyage, i. 336. Ban-
croft gives the fatne defeription of the Indians of Guiana,
p. 255. According to Adair, the ingenu2ity and dispatch
of the North American Indians are not greater, p. 422.
From one of the engravings of the M~exican paintingrs in
Purchas, vol. iii. p. x106. I think it pro~bable that the
people of Mexico were unacquainted with any better or
more exp'editious mode of weaving. A loom was an in-
vention beyond the ingenuity of the most improved Ame-
ricans. In all their work~s they advance 10 slowly·, that one
of their artists is two months at a tobacco-pipe wyithn his
knife before he finilhes it. Adair, p. 423*

II h 3 NOTE

NO TE LIX. p. r82.

THE article of religion in P. Lafitau's Mvoeurs des

Sauvag~es, extends to 347 tedious pages in quarto.

NOTE LX. p. 185.

SH AV E referred the reader to leveeral of the authors

who describe the most uncivilized nations in America.-

Their teffimony is uniform. That of P. Ribas concerning
th~e people of Cinaloa, coincides with the refl. '( I was
extremely attentive (says he), during the years I resided
among them, to alcertain whether they were to be confi-
dered as idolaters; and it may be affirmed with the most
perse61 exa61ners, that though among some of them there
Inay be traces of idolat~ry, yet others have not the least
knowledge of God, or even of any false deity, nor pay
any formal adoration to the Supreme Being, who exerciles
dominion over the world; nor have they any conception
of the providence of a creator or governor, from whom
they expe61 in the next life the reward of their good, or
the punishment of their evil deeds. Neither do they pub-
licly join in anly ait of divine worthip." Ribas Triumphos,
&c. p. r6.

NOTE LXI. p. 186.

SHE people of Brasil were 10 much affrighted by thun-

der, which is frequent and awful in their country, as

well as in other parts of the torrid zone, that it was not
only the obje61 of religious reverence; but the most ex-
prefilvee name in their language for dhe Deity, was Toupan,

the

the fame by which they diftinguilhed thunder. Pifo de
Medec. Brasil, p. 8. Nieuhoff. Church. Coll. ii. p. 132*

NOTE LXII. p. 194.

SY the account which M. Dumont, an eye-witnels, gives

of thle funeral of the great chief of the Natchez, it ap-

pears, that the feelings of the persons who fuffered on that
occallon were very different. Some solicited the honour
with eagerneirs; others laboured to avoid their doom, and
several saved their lives by flying to the woods. As the
Indian Braplins give an intoxicating draught to thle wo-
men, who ar~e to be burnt together with the bodies of their
husbands, which renders themn insensible of their approach-
ing fate, the N~atchez obliged their viaims to iwallow
several large pills of tobacco, which produce a similar es-
feat. Mem, de Louis. i, 227*

N OT E LXIII. p. 202.

O N some occallons, particularly in dances inflituted for

the recovery of perlons who are indisposed, they are

extremely licentious and indecent. De la Potherie Hist.
&rc. ii. p. 42. Charley. N. Fr. iii. p. 3r9. But the
nature of their dances is commonly foch as Z bave de-
[cribed.

NOTE LXIV, p. 204t

SH E Othomacoas, a tribe seated on the banks of the

Orinoco, employ for the fame purpole a composition,

which they call Yupa. It is formed of the feeds of an on-
known plant, reduced to powder, and certain thells burne:

H h and

and pulverized. The effeas of this when drawn up into
the noffrils are to violent, that they resemble madnels ra-
ther than intoxication. Gumilla, i. 286.

NOTE LXV. p. 207,

H OU GH this oblervation holds true among the
greater part of the southern tribes, there are some in

which the intemperance of the women is as excellive as
that of the men. Bancroft's Nat. Hist. of Guiana,
P* 275-

NOTE LXVI. p. 212.

E VEN in the moss intelligent writers concerning the

manners of the Americans, one meets with inconfift-

ent and inexplicable circumltances. The Jesuit Charlevoix,
who, in consequence of the controverly between his order
and that of the Francircans, with refped to the talents and
abilities of the North Americans, is disposed to reprelent their
intelleatual as well as moral qualities in the moil favourable
light, aff~ects, that they are engaged in continual negocia-
tions with thieir neighlbours, and condua there with the
moif refined address. At the fame time he adds, " that it
behoves their envoys or plenipotentiaries to exuert their abi-
lities and eloquence, for if th~e terms which they offer are
niot accepted of, they had need to fland on their guard. It
frequently happens, that a blow with a hatchet is the only
return given to their propositions. The envoy is not out
of danger even if he is so fortunate as to avoid the firoke,
he may expeRt to be pursued, and if taken, to be burnt."
Hlif. N. Fr. iii. 25'. What occurs vol. ii. p. 277. con-
cerning the manner in which the Tlalcalans treated the am.
baffadorS from Zempoalla, corresp~onds w' h thie sac? re-

lated

lated by Charlevoix. Men capable of such ac~s of vio-
lence, seem to be unacquainted with the first principles
upon which the intercourse between nations is founded;
and inficad of the perpetual negociations which Charlevoix
mentions, it seems almost impollible that there thould be
any correspondence whatever among them.

NOTE LXVII. p. 2I5*

IT is a remark of Tacitus concerning the Germans,

tr Gaudent muneribus, fed nec data imputant, nec ac-

ceptis obligantur." C. 21. An author who had agood
opportunity of observing the principle which leads savages
neither to express gratitude for favours whlich they had re-
ceived, nor to expea any return for such as they bellowved,
thus explains their ideas: " If, iay theyr, you give me
this, it is because you have no need of it yourself ; and as
for me, I never part with that which I think necessary to
me." Memoir fur le Galibis; Hist. des Plantes de la
Guiane Francoise par M. Aublet, tom. ii. p. Ir0.

NOTE LXIV111. p. 229.

AN". BFERNALDES, the contemporary and friend of

Columbus, has preserved some circumilances concern-

inlg the bravery of the Caribbees, which are not mentioned
by Don Ferdinand Columbus, or the other hifl.0rians of
that period, whole works have been publilhed. A Carib-
bean canoe with four men, two women, and a boy, fell
in unexpe~ledly with the fleet of Columbus in his second
voyage, asit was fleering through their ifands. At first
they were firuck; almost flupid with alloniihm~ent at fach a
flrange [pe~tacle, and hardly moved from the spot for above
an hour. A Sparifh bark, with twenty-five men, ad-

vnced

vanced towards them, and the fleet gradually surrounded
them, so as to cut off their communication with the shore.
"' When they law that it was impoflible to escape (says
the hifforian), they seized their arms with undaunted re-
solution, and began the attack. I use the exupreilon, with~
undaunted refl~ution, for they were few, and beheld a vast
number ready to afflult them. They wounded several of
the Spaniards, although they had targets, as well as other
defensive armour; and even after their canoe was overset,
it was with no little difficulty and danger that part of them
were takten, as they continued to defend themselves, and
to use their bows with great dexterity while [wimming in
the fea." Hill, de D. Fern. y Yfab. MlSS. c. I19.

NOTE LXIX. p. 230.

APROB ABLE conje~ure may be formed with refpea

to the caule of the diftinaion in charaner between

the Caribbees and the i nhabitants of the larger islands. The
former appear manifeilly to be a separate race. Their lan-
guage is totally diffe~rent from that of their neighbours in
the large islands. They themselves have a tradition, that
their anceffors came originally from faome part of the con-
tinent, and having conquered anld exterminated the an-
clent inhab~itants, took poffeflion of their lands, and of
their women. Rochelort, 384. Tertre, 360. Hence
they call themselv·es Barnrceu, which signifies a man come
from beyond sea. Labat. vi. 13r. Accordingly·, the
Caribbees flill use two diftinat languages, one peculiar to
the men, and the other to the womnen. Tertre, 36r. The
language of the men has nothing comlmon with that [poken
in the large islands. The diale&t of the women confider-
ably resembles it. Labat. r29. T'his firongly confirms
the tradition which I have mentioned. The Caribbees

theomfelves

themfrelves imagine, that they were a colony from the Ga-
libis, a powverful nation of Guiana, in South Almerica.
Tertre, 36I. Rochefort, 348. But as their fierce manl-
ners approach nearer to those of the people in the northern
continent, than to those of the natives of South America;
and as their language has likewis~e some affinity to that
ipoken in Florida, their origin thould be deduced rathler
from the former than from the latter. Labat. 128, &ic.
Herrera, dec. i. lib. ix. c. 4. In their wars, theyI flill
oblerve their ancient pradice of defiroying all thle males,
and preserving, the women either for servitude or for breed,
ing.

NOTE LXXi. p. 23r,

O U R Iknowledge of the events which happened in the

conquest of New Spain, is derived from sources of

information more original and authentic than that of any
tranfaaion in the hilory of America. The etters of Cor-
tes to the Emperor Charles V. are an hiflorical monument,
not only firit in order of time, but of the greatest authen-
ticity and value. As Cortes early assumed a command in-
dependant of Valafquez, it became necelfary to convey
fach an account of his operations to Madrid, as might pro-
cure him the approbation of his sovereign.

THIE firfl of his dispatches has never been made public.

It was sent from Vera-Cruz, July 16th, Ijr9. As I
imagined that it might not reach the Emperor, until be
arrived in Germany, for which he set out early in the year
I520, in order to receive the Imperial crown; I made
diligent search for a copy of this dilpatch, both in Spain
and in Germany, but without fuccers. This, however, is
of less consequence, as it could not contain any thing very
spaterial, being wttitten to soon after Cortes arrived in New

Spain.

Spain. But, in searching for the letter from Cortes, a
copy of one from the colony of Vera-Cruz to the Emperor
has been discovered in the Imperial library at Vienna. Of
this I have fubjoined some account at the close of the Notes
to the third volume. The second dispatch, dated Odtober
30th, 1520, was published at Seville, A. D. 1522, and
the third and fourth soon after they were received. A La-
tin translation of them appeared in Germany, A. D. 1532*
RamuTio soon after made them more generally known, by
inserting them in his valuable colleaion. They contain a
regular and minute hillory of the expedition, with many
curious particulars concerning the policy and manners of
the Mexicans. The work does honour to Cortes; the
flyle is limple and perspicuous; but as it was manifestly
his interest to reprelent his own aations in the fairest
light, his viatories are probably exaggerated, his losses
diminished, and his aats of rigour and violence soft-
ened.

THE next in order is the Cronica de la Nueva Efpagna,

by Francisco Lopez de Gomara, published A. D. 1554.
Gomara's hillorical merit is considerable. His mode of
marration is clear, flowing, always agreeable, and some-
times elegant. But he is frequently inaccurate and credu-
lous; and as he was the domeltic chaplain of Cortes after
his return from New Spain, and probably composed his
work at his desire, it is manifelt that he labours to magnify
the merit of his hero, and to conceal or extenuate such
tranfa~tions as were unfavourable to his chlara8er. Of
this Herrera accuses him in one inflance, Dec. ii. lib. iii.
c. 2. and it is not once only that this is conrpicuous. He
writes, however, with 10 much freedom concerning several
measures of the Spanish court, that the copies both of his
Hifloria de las Indias, and of his Cronica, were called in
by a decree of the council of the Indies, and they were

long

long considered as prohibited books in Spain; it is only of
late that licence to print them has been granted. Pinelo
Biblioth*. 589*

THE Chronicle of Gomara induced Bernal Diaz del

Castillo to compose his Hilloria Verdadera de la Conquifia
de la Nueva Efpagna. He had been an adventurer in each
of the expeditions to New Spain, and was the companion
of Cortes in all his battles and perils. When he found
that neither he himself, nor many of his fellow-foldiers, were
once mentioned by Gomara, but that the fame of all their
exploits was al~cribed to Cortes, the gallant veteran laid
hold of his pen with indignation, and composed his true
hillory. It contains aprolix, minute, confused narrative
of all Cortes's operations, in such a rude vulgar flyle as
might be expe~ted from an illiterate soldier. But as he
relates tranfaations of which he was witnels, and in which
he performed a considerable part, his account bears all the
marks of authenticity, and is accompanied with such a plea-
sant naiveti, with such intereffing details, with such amui-
ing vanity, and yet so pardonable in an old soldier who had
been (as he boasts) in a hundred and nineteen battles, as
renders his book one of the moit singular that is to be found
in any language.

PET. Martyr ab Angleria, in a treatise de Infulis nuper

inventis, added to his Decades de Rebus Oceanicis &( Novo
Orbe, gives some account of Cortes's expedition. But he
proceeds no farther than to relate what happened after his
first lanlding. This work, which is brief and flight, seems
to contain the information transmitted by Cortes in his
firit dispatches, embellish~ed with several particulars com-
municated to the author by the officers who brought the
letters from Cortes.

But

BurT the book to which the greater· part of modern his-

torians have had recourse for information concerning the
conquest of New Spain, is Hilloria de la Conquilla de
Mexico, por D. Antonio de Solis, firfl publilhed A. D.
1684. I know no author in any language wlhofe literary
fame has risen so far beyond his real merit. De Solis is
reckoned by his countrymen one of the purest writers in
the Cafrilian tongue; anld if a foreigner may venture to
give his opinion concerning a matter of which Spaniards
alone are qualified to judge, he is intitled to that praiie.
But, though his language be correa, his talle in composition
is far from being juff. His periods are to much laboured as
to be often fliff, and sometimes tumid 4 the figures which
he employs by way of ornament, are frequently trite or im-
proper, and his observations superficial. There blemithes,
however, might easily be overlooked, if he were not defec-
tive with refpeat to all the great qualities of an hillorian.
Deffitute of that patient induffry in research, which con-
duas to the knowledge of truth ; a firanger to that impar-
tiality which weighs evidence with cool attention; and
ever eager to eflablifh his favourite iyfiem of exalting the
charader of Cortes into that of a perfea hero, exempt
from error, and adorned with every virtue; he is less so-
licitous to discover what was true, than to relate what
Inight appear [plendid. When he attempts any critical
dilcuf~on, his reasonings are fallacious, and founded upon an
imperfed view of faAs. Though he sometimes quotes the
dirpatches of Cortes, he seems not to have consulted them;
and though he sets out with some cedfure on Gomara, he
frequently prefers his authority, the most doubtful of any,
to that of the other contemporary historians.

But of all the Spanish writers, Herrera furnishes the

fullest and most accurate information concerning the con-

2r qucitt

quell of Mexico, as well as every other tranfadEtion of
America. The induffry and attention wirlh which he con-
fulted not only the books, but the original papers and pub-
lic records, which tended to throw any light upon the sub-
jeRt of his enquiries, were 10 great, and he ufuadlly judges
of the evidence before him with 10 much impartiaity and
candour, that his decads may be ranked among the molt
judicious and uleful historical colleaions. If, by attempt-
ing to relate the various occurrences in the New World
in a firia chronological order, thle arrangement of events
in his wiork had not been rendered to perplexued, dilconneat-
ed, and obscure, that it is an unpleasant taflk to colled from
different parts of his book, and piece togrether thle detached
threds of a flory, he might juffly have been ranked amonlg
the most eminent hillorians of hris country. Hre gives aln
account of the materials from which he compored hI~s
work, Dec. vi. lib. iii. c. 19*

NO TE LXXI. p. 234.

CO RTE S purpoled to have gone in the train of Ovan-

do when he let out for his governmnent in th~e year

1502, but was detainled by an accident. As he was at-
tempting in a dark night to scramble up to the w~indow of
a lady's bed-chamber, with whom he carried on an in-
trigue, an old wall, on the top of which he had mounted,
gave way, and he was to much bruiled by the fanll as to be
unfit for the voyage. Gomara, Cronica de la Nueva
Efpagna, cap. r.

NTOTE

NOTE LXXII. p. 236.

SO R TES had two thloufand pesos in the hands of An-

drew Duero, and he borrowed four thousand. There

sums are about equal in value to fifteen hundred pounds
fierling; but as the price of every thing was extremely
high in America, they made but a scanty flock when ap·
plied towards the equipment of a military expedition. Her-
rera, dec. ii. lib. iii. c. 2. B. Diaz. c. 20.

NOTE LXXIII. p. 24t.

THE names of those gallant officers which will often

occur mn the subsequent flory, were Juan Velafiguez

de Leon, Alonfo Hernandez Portocarrero, Francisco de
Montejo, Chriftoval de Olid, Juan de Efcalante, Fran-
cilco de Morla, Pedro de Alvarado, Francisco de Salceda,
Juan de Eflcobar, Gines de Nortes. Cortes himself com-
manded the Capitana, or Admiral. Francilco de Orozco,
an officer formed in the wars of Italy, had the command
of the artillery. The experienced Alaminos a~led as chief
pilot.

NOTE LXXIV. p. 243*

IN those different conflias, the Spaniards 1011 only two

men, but had a considerable number wounded. Though

there be no occaflon for recourse to any supernatural cause
to account either for the greatnels of their viatories, or the
finallnef~s of their loss; the Spanish hifforians fail not to
alcribe both to thle patronagoe of St. Jago, the tutelar
Saint of their country·, who, as they relate, fought at the
hwcl of thieir countr·men~, and by h~is prowfels gave a turn

22 to

to the fate of the battle. Comara is the first who men-
tions this apparition of St. James. It is amnufing to observe
the embarra~iment of B. Diaz de Caffillo, occasioned by
the firuggle between his fuperflition and his veracity. The
former disposed him to believe this miracle, the latter re-
Itrained him from attelling it. " I acknowledge, Tays he,
that all our exploits and vi~tories are owing to our Lord
Jesus Christ, and that in this battle there was foch a num-
ber of Indians to every one of us, that if each had thrown
a handful of earth they might have buried us, if by the
great mercy of God we had not been proteated. It may
be that the person whom Gomara mentions as having ap-
peared on a mottled grey horse, was the glorious apoitle
Signor San Jago or Signor San Pedro; and that I, as
being a finner, was not worthy to fee him. This I know,
that I saw Francirca de Morla on such a hors~e, but as an
unworthy transgressor, did not deserve to fee any of the
holy apoitles. It may have been the will of God, that it
was to as Gomara relates, but until I read his Chronicle I
never heard among any of the conquerors that such a thing
had happened." Cap. 34-

N OT E LXXV. p. 2go.

SEVERAL Spanish hifforians relate this occurrence in

such terms, as if they withed it thould be believed, that

the Indians, loac'd with the presents, had carried them
from the capital in the fame ihort [pace of time that the
couriers performed that journey. This is incredible, and
Gomnara mentions a circumflance which thews, that no-
thing extraordinary happened on this occasion. This rich
prefeat had been prepared for Grijalva, when he touched
at the Fame place some months before, and was now ready

Vox.. II. I i to

to be delivered, as soon as Montezuma sent orders for that
purpose. Gomara Cron. c. xxvil. p. 28.

ACCORDING to B~. Diaz del Castillo, the value of the

silver plate reprefentirig the moon, was alone above tiventy
thousand pesos, about five thousand pounds fierling.

~N OTE LXXVL, p.257-

rMIS private traffic was direc91y contrary to thle in-

firuaions of Velasquez, who enjoined, that whatever

was acquired by trade thould be thrown into the common
Ilock. But it appears, that the soldiers had each a private
assortment of toys, and other goods proper for the Indian
trade, and Cortes gained their favodr by encouraging this
ulnder-hand barter. B. Diaz, c. 4i.

N OT E LXXVII. p. 271.

(-OMrARA hlas pubilihed a catalogue of the various ar-

ticles of which this present codified. Cron. c. 49*

P. MadrtyIr ab Angleria, who saw them after they were
brought to Spain, and who seems to have examined them
with great attention, gives a defeription of each, which is
curious, as it conveys some idea of the progrels which the
Mexicans had made inl leveral arts of elegance. De Inlulis
nuper inventis Liber, p. 354, &(c.

N OT E LXXVIII. p. 279-

HB~ERE is no circumitance in the hillory of the con.
qlueft of America, which is more queffionable than

th~e account of the numerous armies brought into the field

agaainft

ingain~t the Spaniards. As the war with the republic of
Tlafcala, though of thort duration, was one of the most con-
liderable which the Spaniards waged in America, the account
given of the Tlafcalan armies merits some attention.· The
only authentic information conc~erning this is derived from
thr~ee authors. Cortes, in his second dispatch to the em-
peror, dated at Segura de la Firontera, O~ober 30, 1520,
thus eflimates the number of their troops ; in the sirs battle
6000 ; in the second battle too,0co; in the third battle
£50,000. Relat. ap. Ramus. iii. 228. Bernal Diaz del
Castillo, who was an eye-witners, and engaged in all the
aElions of this war, thus reckons their numbers; in the
first battle 3000, p. 43 ; in the second battle 6000~, ibid.
in the third battle 50,000, p. 45. Comara, who was
Cortes's chaplain after his return to Spain, and published
his Curonria in 15j2, follows the computation of Cortes,
except in the second battle, where he reckons the Tlalca-
lans at 80,000, p. 49. It was manifefily the interest of
Cortes to magnify his owvn dangers and exploits. For it
was only by the merit of extraordinary services, that he
could hope to atone for his irregular conduc't, in affhming
an independent command. 13ern. Diaz, though abundant-
ly disposed to place his own proweis, and that of his fellow-
conquerors, in the most advantageous point of light, had not
the fame temptation to exaggerate; and, it is probable, that
his account of the mimbers approaches nearer to the truth.
The ass~embling of an army of I50,000 men requires many
previous arrangements, and such provision for their fubflt-
ence as seems to be beyond the foresight of Americansl
The degree of cultivation in Tlarcala does nrot seem to
have been to great, as to have furnished foch a vast army
wilth provisions. Though this province was so much bet·-
ter cultivated than other regions of New Spain, that it was
called the country of bread; yet the Spaniards in their march
furffered such want, that they were obliged to fubfill upon

I i2 Tunar,

Tunas, a species of fruit which' grows wild in the fields,
Herrera, Dec, ii. lib. vi. c. 5* P* r82.

N OT E LXXIX.' p. 283-

THESE unhappy vi~ims are [aid to be persons of <lifa

tin~lion. It seems improbable that so great a num-

ber as fifty should be employ~ed as spies. So many prison-
ers had been taken and dismissed, and the Tlalcalans had
lent so many messages to the Spanish quarters, that there
appears to be no reason for hazarding· the lives of 10 many
considerable people, in order to procure information about
the polition and slate of their camp. The barbarous man-
nier in which Cortes treated a people unacquainted with
the laws of war established among poliined nations, appears
so ihocking to the later Spatnifh writers, that they diminilh
the number of those whom he puniihed so cruelly. Her-
rera says, that he cut off the hands of seven, and thumbs
of some more. Dec. ii. lib. ii. c. 8. De Solis relates,
that the hands of fourteen or fifteen were cut off, and the
thumbs of all the reft. Lib. ii. c. 20. But Cortes him-
self, Relat. p. 228, b. and aft'er him Gomara, c. q8, al.
firm, that the hands of all the fifty were cut off.

NOTE LXXX.,p. 286.

-HE horses wrere objeas of the greatest allonifhment to

all the people of New Spain. At firfl they imagined

the horse and his rider, like the Centaurs of the ancients,
to be some monfirous animal of a terrible form; and sup-
posing that their food was the fame as that of men,
~brought fleth and bread to nourish them. Even after they
discovered their millake, they believed the hors~es devoured
Inen in battle, and when they neighed, thought that they
wzaere demanding their prey, It was not the interest ofthe

Spaniards

Spaniards to undeceive them. Herrera, dec. ii. lib. vi.

N OT E LXXXI. p. 292.

ACCORDING to Bart. de las Cafas, there was no rea-

son for this massacre, and it was an aB of wanton

cruelty, perpetrated merely to firik~e terror into the people
of New Spain. Relhc. de la Deficuyc. p. r7, &c. Bult
the zeal of Las Cafas often leads him to exaggerate. In
opposition to him Bern. Diaz, c. 83, asserts, that the first
miionaries sent into New Spain by the emperor, made a
jildicial enquiry into this tranfa~tion; and having examin-
ed the priefls and elders of Cholula, found that there
·was a real conspiracy to cut off the Spaniards, and that the
Pccount given by Cortes was exa81ly true. A's it was the
objeat of Cortes at that time, and manifellly his interest,
to gain the good-will of Montezuma, it is improbable, that
'he thould have takien a flep which tended 10 visibly to alie-
nate him from the Spaniards, if he had not believed it to
be necessary for his own preservation. At the fame time,
the Spaniards who fTerved in America had fach contempt
for the natives, and thought them So little entitled to the
common rights of men, that Cortes might hlold the Cho-
lulans to be guilty upon flight and imperfeak evidence.
The severity of the punishment was certainly excellive and
atrocious.

N OT E LXXXII. p. 293-

'SHIS defeription is taken almost literally from, Bernal

Diaz del Callillo, who was so unacquainted with the

art of composition, as to be incapable of embellithing his

I i3 narrative.

narrative. He relates in a simple and rude flyle what pas-
fed in his own mind, and that of his fellow-foldiers, on
that occasion ; " And let it not be thought flrange, rays
,he, that I should cirrite in this manner of what then hap-
pened, for it ought to be considered, that it is one thing
to relate, another to have beheld things that were never
before seen, or heard, or spoken of among men.!' Cap. 86.
p* 64, b.

NOTE LXXXIII. P* 3 7-

BDiaz del Castillo gives us Tome idea of the fatiguq

*and hardships they underwent in performing this, and

other parts of duty. During the nine months that they
remained in Mexico, every man, without any dillindio4
between officers and soldiers, slept on his arms in his
quilted jacktet and gorget. They lay on roats, or firaw
spread on the floor, and each was obliged to hold himlelf
as alert as if he had been on guard. "( This, adds he, be-
came To habitual to me, that even, now in my advanced
age, I always sleep, in my clothes, and never in any bed.
When I visit my Encomienda, I reckon it faitable to my
rank, to have a bed carried along with my other baggage,
but I never go into it; but, according to cullom, I lie in
Iny clothes, and walk frequently during the night into the
open air, to view the flars as I was wont when in fervipp.",
Cap. r08.

NO TI1 LXXXIV. P* 3ro,

CORTES himself, in his second dispatch to, the emperor,

does not esplain the motives whicly indiuced him eil

ther tq condemn Qualpopoca to the flames, or to put

MontezUma

Montezuma in irons. Ramus. iii. 236. B. Diaz is silent
with refpeA to his reasons for the former; and the only
cause he aifigns for the latter was, that he might meet
with no interruption in executing the s~entence pronounced
againfl Qualpopoca, c. xcy. p. 75. But as Montezuma
was his prisoner, and ablolutely in his power, he had no
reason to dread him, and the insult offered to that monarch
could have no effeA but to irritate him unnecessarily. Go-
mara supposes, that Cortes had no other objedt than to oc-
cupy Montezuma with his own dillrers and fufferings, that
he might give less attention to what befel Qualpopoca.
Cron. c. 89. Herrera adopts the fame opinion. Dec. ii.
lib: viii. c. 9. But it seems an odd expedient, in order to
make a person bear one injury, to load him with another
that is greater. De Solis imagines, that Cortes had no-
thing es fe in view than to intimidate Montezuma, so that
he might make no attempt to rescue the vidtims from their
fate i but the spirit of that monarch was 10 fubmillive, and
b-e had 10 tamely given up the priloners to the disposal of
Cortes, that he had no caule to apprehend any opposition
frpm him. If the explanation which I have attempted to
give of Cortes's proceedings on this occasion be not admit-
ted, it appears to me, that they muff be reckoned among
the wanton and barbarous a~s of oppression which occur
too often in the hiflory of the conqueff of America.

NOTE LXXXV. p.3'5*

D4E Solis asserts, lib. iv. c. 3. that the proposition of

doing homage to the King of Spain, came from

Montezuma himself, and was made in order to induce the
Spaniards to depart out of his dominions. He describes
his condua on this occasion, as if it had been founded upon
a scheme of profound policy, and executed with such re-

I i 4fined

Eined address, as to deceive Cortes himself. But th~ere is no
hint or circumflance in the contemporary historians, Cor-
tes, Diaz, or Gomara, to juffify this theory. Montezu-
ma, on other occasions, discovered no such extent of art
and abilities. The anguith which he felt in performing
this humbling ceremony is natural, if we suppose it to
have been involuntary. But, according to the theory of
De Solis, which fuppoles that Montezuma was executing
what he himself .had proposed, to have assu~med an appear-
ance of sorrow, would hlave been prepollerous and incon-
fiftent with his own design of deceiving the Spaniards.

N O TE LXXXVI. p. 318.

1N s~everal of the provirnces, the Spaniards, with all their

induffry and inlfluence, could colledt no gold. Inr

others, they procured only a few trinkets of small value.
M~ontezulma aflibred Corces, s that thle prefeat whnich he of-
fered to the King of Castile, after doing homage, confilled
of all the treasure amassed by hris father, and told him,
that he had already dificibuted the reft of his gold and
jewels among the Spaniards. B3. Diaz, c. 104. Gomara
relates, that all the silver colleated amounted to 500 marks.
Cron. c. 93. This agrees with the account given by
Cortes, that the royal fifth of silver was 100 marks. Re-
lat. 239, B. So that the fum total of silver was only
4000 ounces, at the rate of eight ounces a mark, which
dprmonfirates the proportion of silver to gold to have been
exceedingly small.

NOTE

N O T E LXXXVII. p. 3I9*

D E Solis, lib. iv. c. z. calls in queion the truth of

this tranfa~lion, from no better reason than that it

was incodillent with that prudence which ditinguilhes the
charaater of Cortes. But he oulght to have recolle~led
the impetuosity of his zeal at Tlalcala, which was no less
imprudent. He asserts, that the evidence for it rests upon
the teffimony of B. Diaz del Castillo, of Gomara, and of
Herrera. They all concur indeed, in mentioning this in-
considerate flep which Cortes took; and they had good
reafonl to do so, for Cortes himself relates this er-ploit in
his second dispatch to the Emperor, and seems to glory in
it. Cort. Relat. RamuT. iii. 140, D. This is one in-
flance, among many, of De Solis's having consulted with
little attention the letters of Cortes to Charles V. from
which the most authentic information with relpe~t to
his operations mult be derived.

N OT E LXXXVIII. p. 323.

H E R R ER and De Solis fuppole, that Velasquez

was encouraged to equip this armament against Cor-

tes, by the accounts which he received from Spain con-
cerning the reception of the a~gents sent by the colony of
Vera Cruz, and the warmth with which Fonseca bishop of
B~urgos had efpouled his interest, and condemned the pro-
ceedings of Cortes. Herrera, dec. ii. lib. ix. c. 18. De
Solis, lib. iv. c. 5. But the chronological order of events
refutes this supposition. Portocarrero and M/ontejo failed
from Vera Cruz, July 26, I5I9. Herrera, dec. ii. lib. v.
c. 4. They landed at St. Lucar in 080ber, according to

Herrera,

Herrera, ibid. But P. Martyr, who attended the court
at that time, and communicated every occurrence of mo-
anent to his correspondents day by day, mentions the arri-
val of these agents, for thle firit time, in December, and
speaks of it as a recent event. Epit. 650. All the his-
torians agree, that the agents of Cortes had their firfl au-
dience of the Emperor at Tordefillas, when he went to
that town to visit his mother in his way to St. Jago de
Compefella. Herrera, dec. ii. lib. v. c. 4. De Solis,
lib. iv. c. 5. But the emperor set out from Valladolid,
for Tordefillas, on thle a th of Mlarch r520; and P. Mar-
tyr' mentions his having seen at that time the presents made
to Chadecs, Epill. I665. The armament under N~arvaez
failed fromt Cuba in ,April 1520. It is manifelt then, that
Velasquez could not receive any account of what passed in
thils interview at Tordefillas, previous to. his hoffile pre.
parations againfl Cortes. His real motives seem to be
tlhofe which I have mentioned. The patent appointing
him Adellnantao of New Spain, with such extensive powers,
bears date November I3, I5r9. Hierrera, dec. ii. lib. iii.
c. Ir. He~ might receive it about the beginning of Janu-
ary. Gomara tak~es notice, that as soon as this patent was
delivered to him, he began to equip a fleet and levy forces.
Cron. c. 96.

N OTE LYXXXIX. p. 326.

D)E Solis contends, that as Narvaez had no interpreterS,

he could hold no intercourse with the people of the

provinces, nor converse with them in any way but by signs,
and that it was equally impossible for him to carry on any
communication with Montezuma. Lib. iv. c. 7. But it
is upon the authority of Cortes himself that I relate all the
particulars of Narvaez's correlpondence both with Mon-

tezumq

tezuma and with his fubjeAs in the maritime provinces.
Relat. Ramus. iii. 244, A. C. Cortes affirms, that there
was a mode of intercourse between Narvaez and the Mexi-
cans, but does not explain how it was carried on. Bernal
Diaz supplies this defe61, and informs us, that the three
deserters who joined Narvaez aated as interpreters, having
acquired a competent knowledge of the language, c. I10.
With his usual minuteneis, he mentions their names and
chara~ers, and relates, in chapter I22, how they were
puniihed for their perfidy. The Spaniards had now re~de4
above a y;ear among the Mexicans ; and it is not surprising,
that several among them thould have made some proficiency
in Speaking their language. This seems to have been the
cafe. Herrera, dec, ii. lib. x. c. 1. Bot'hB. Diaz, who
was present, and Herrera, the most accurate and belt inform-
ed of all the Spanish writers, agree with Cortes in his account
of the secret correspondence carried on with Montezuma.
Dec. ii. lib. ix. c. 18, I9. De Solis seems to confider it
as a discredit to Cortes, his hero, that Montezuma thould
have been ready to engage in a correspondence with Nar.
vaez. He supposes that monarch to have contra~ted such
a wonderful affe~tion for the Spaniards, that he was not
solicitous to be delivered from them. After the indignity
with which he had been treated, such an affe~tion is incre-
dible; and even De Solis is obliged to acknowledge, that
it muff be looked upon as one of the miracles which God
had wrought to facilitate the conquest, lib. iv. c. 7. The
truth is, Montezuma, however much overawed by his
dread of the Spaniards, was extremely impatient to recover

i;s liberty.

NpOTE,

N OT E XC. p. 343-

rlHESE words I have borrowed from the anonymous

Account of the European Settlements in America,

pu~blithed by Dodfley, in two volumes, 8vo. a work of so
much merit, that I thould think there is hardly any writer
in the age who ought to be ashamed of acknowledging
hims~elf to be the author of it.

N OT E XLI. p. 350.

H ES contemporary hifforians differ considerably wi;th
refpe61 to the loss of ,the Spaniards on this occasion.

Cortes, in his second dispatch to thle emperor, makes the
number only r50. R~elat. ap. Ramul. lit. p. 249, A.
But it w·as manifeitly his interest, at that junflure, to
conceal from the court of Spain the fulll extent of the loss
whbich he had fitained. De: Soi1S, always fludious to
diminish every misforturie that befel his countrymen,
rates their loss at about two hundred men. Lib. iv. c. 19.
B. Diaz affirms, that they loft 8T0 men, and that only
440 escaped fro.n Mexjico, c. 128. p. 108, B. Palafox,
blihop of Los Angeles, who seems to have enquired into
thie early tranfac~ions of his countrymen in New Spain,
with great attention, confirms the account of B. Diazz
with refpe61to the extent of their loss. Virtudes del In-
dio, p. 22. Gomara slates their loss -t 450 men. Cron.
c. Io9. Some months afterwards, when Cortes had re-
ceived several reinforcements, he muffered his troops,
and found them to be only 590. Relat. ap. Ramus. iii.
p. 255, E. Now, as Narvaez brought 880 men into
New Spain, and about 400 of Cortes's soldiers were

15 then

then alive, it is evident, that his 10fs, in the retreat from
Mexico, muff have been much more considerable than
what he mnentions. B. Diaz, solicitous to magnify the
dangers and fidfferinrgs to which he and his fellow-con-
querors were exposed, may have exaggerated their 10fs;
but, in my opinion, it cannot well be ellimated at less
than 600 men.

NO TE XCII. p. 372*

SOMIE remains of this great work are fitll visible, and

the rpot where the brigantin'es were built and launched,

lis flill pointed out to firangers. Torquemada viewed them.
Monarq. Indiana, vol. i. p. 53r.

NO'TE XCIII. p.38r.

SH E flation of Alvarado on the causeway of Tacuba

was one nearest to the city. Cortes oblerves, that

there they could diftinEtly observe what passed when their
countrymen were fIacrificed. Relat. ap. Ramul. iii. p. 273,
E. B. Diaz, who belonged to Alvarado's divilion,
relates what he beheld with his own eyles. C. I52*
p. I48, b. 149, a. L~ike a man whole courage was to
clear as to be above ufupicion, he describes with his usual
simplicity the impreflion which this [pe~tacle made upon
him. " Before, says he, I saw the breasts of my com-
panions opened, th~eir hearts, yet fluttering, offered to an
accursed idol, and their flesh devoured by their exulting
~enemies; I was accuffomed to enter a battle not only
without fear, but with hligh ipirit. But from that time I
never advanced to Eight the Mexicans without a secret
horror and anxiety ; my heart trembled at the thoughts of
thle death which I had seen them fulfer." He takes care

to add, that as soon as the combat began, his terror went
off; and, indeed, his adventurous bravery on every oc-
cation is full evidence of this. B. Diazl c: 156. p.
257, a.

SO T E X CIV. p. 3 *.

ONE circumitance in this siege merits particular ndi-

tice. The account which the Spanilh writers give

bs the numerous at~mies employed in the attack or defence
of Mexico, seems to be incredible. According to Cortes
hirilllf, he had at orie time 150,d00 auxiliary indians in
his s~ervice. Relat. Ramus. iii. 275, E. G~omarai al-
fArtS, that they were above 200,000. Cron. c. 196.
Hferrera, an author of higher authority, says, they ivere
about 200,000. Dec. iii. lib. i. c. 19. None of the
contemporary writers ascertain explicitly the number of
persons in Mexico during the flege. But Cortes on fe-
Areral a~ccafions menltions the number of Mexicates who
wiere slain, or who perithed for tvant of food; and, if
we may rely on those circumilances, it is probable, that
above two hundred thoufatnd mTuff bare been that up in
the town. But the quantity of provisions neceffaryr for-
the fu~bfifience of such vast mrultitudes assembled in ont
place during three months, is 10 great, and it requires so6
Inuch foresight and arrangement to colleat there, and lay
them up in magazines, so as to be certain of a regular
supply, that one can hlardly believe that this could be aci
compilihed in a country where agriculture was to im-
perfeat as in the Mex~ican empire, where there were no
tame animals, and by a people naturally to improvidenti
and 10 incapable of executing a complicated plan as the
most improved Americans. The Spaniards, with·'all
their care and attention, fared very! poorly, and were

oftca

e~ten reducedl to extreme diltrefs for want of provisions.
B. Diaz, p. 142. Cortes Relat. 27 x, D. Cortes on
one occasion mentions slightly the fab~Iffnce of hris army i
and after acknowledging that thtey were often in great
want, addis, that they received Ap~plies fromn the people
of the country, of filh, and of s~ome frulit, which he calls
the cherries of the country·. Ibid. B. Diaz Lays, that
they had cakes of maize, and cerafas <e la tierra; and
when the season of thlefe walS over, another fruit, which
he calls Tzmas; but their molk comfortable fulbliffence
was a root which the Indians use as food, to wh~ich heo
gives the name of quilites, p. 142. The Indian auxi-
liaries had one means of fubl;iffence more than the Spa.
niardls. They fed upon the bodies of the Mexicans whlout
they killed in battle.. Cort. Relat. 196, C. B. Diat
confirms his relation, and adds, that when the Indians
returned from Mexico to their own countryr, they car-
ried with them large qluantities of the fleih of the Mecxi-
cans salted or dried, as a molk acceptable prelent to thleir
friends, that theyt mighlt have thle pleathlrc of feeding
upon the bodies of their enemies in their fetivals. P. I57*
De Solis, who seems to~ confider it as an imnputation of
diferedit to his countrymen, that they thould aR in con-
cert with auxiliaries who fed upon human flelh, is soli-
;citous to prove, that the Spaniards endeavoured to pre-
vent their associates from eating the bodies of the Mexi-
cans, liJ. v. c. 24. But he has no authority for this
fronrt the original hifforians. Neither Cortes himrelf, nor
B. Diaz, feemn to have had any such scruple; and, oli
many occasions, mention the Indian repalls, which were
become familiar to them, without any mark of abhorrence.
Even with this additional flock of food for the Indians, it
was hardly pol'lible to procure fub~iftence for armies amount-
ing to such numbers as we find in the Spanilh writers.
Perhaps the bell solution of the difficulty is, to adopt the

opimion

Opinion of B. Diaz del Castillo, the moss artless of all thle
HIflriadores primritivs. " When Gomara (says he), on
some occasions, relates, that there were to many thousand
Indians our auxiliaries, and on others, that there were io
many thousand houles in this or that town, no regard is to be
paid to his enumleration, as he has no authority for it, the
numbers not being in reality the fifth of what he relates.
If we add~together the different numbers which he men-
tions, that country would contain more millions than there
are inl Caffile." C. 129. But though some considerable
dedudlion thould certainly be made from the Spanith ac-
counts of the Mlexican forces, they must have been very
numerous; for nothing but an immense fuperiorityr in
number could have enabled them to withiland a body of
nine hundred Spaniards, conduitred by a leader of fach abi-
lities as Cortes.

N OT E XCVr. p. 405-

1N relating the opprefllye and cruel proceedings of the

conquerors of New Spain, I have not followed B. de

]as Calas asmy guide. H~is account of them, Relat. de
la Deltroyc. p. I8, &c. is manifestly exaggerated. It is
from the teffimonyr of Cortes himlfelf anld of Gomara,
who wrote under his eye, that I have taken my account
of the punishment of the Panucans, andi they relate it
without any disapprobation. B. Diaz, contrary to his
ulhal cuffom, mentions it only in general termcs, c. 162.
Flerrera, solicitous to extenuate this barbarous a~ion of
hlis countrymen, though he mentions 63 caziques, and
400 men of note, as being condemned to the flames,
affects, that thirty only were burnt, and the reft par-
doned. Dec. iii. lib. v. c. 7. But this is contiary to

thec

the testimony of the, original hillorians, particularly of
Gomara, whom it appears he had consulted, as he adopts
several of his expreflions in this passage. The punishment
of Guatimozin is related by the most authentic of the
Spanilh writers. Torquemada has extraaed from a
hiflory of~ezeuco, compos~ed in the Mexican tongue, an
account of this tranleaion, more favourable to Guati-
mozin than that of the Spaniih authors. Mon. Indiana, i.
575. According to the Mexican account, Cortes had
fearcely a shadow of evidence to juffify such a wanton
a61 of cruelty. B. Diaz affirms, that Guatimozin and
his fellow-ifuferers afterted their innocence with their laif
breath, and that many of the Spanith Soldiers condemned
this a~ion of Cortes as equally unnecessary and unjust,
p. 200, b. Mor, a.

NOTE XCVI. p.408.

THE motive for undertaking this expedition was, to

punilh Chriftoval de Olid, one of his officers, who

had revolted against him, and aimed at eliablithing
an independent jurildiation. Cortes regarded this in-
furreaion as of such dangerous example, and dreaded
io much the abilities and popularity of its author, that
in person he led the body of troops deflined to suppress
it. He marched, according to Gomara, three thou-
sand miles, through a country abounding with thick
forests, rugged mountains, deep rivers, thinly inhabited,
and cultivated only in a few places. What he fuffered
from famine, from the hoffility of the natives, from the
climate, and from hardships of every [pecies, has nothing
in hillory parallel to it, but what occurs is the adventures

VTo1. II. K k of

ofthe other discoverers and conquerors of the New World.
Cortes was employed in this dreadful service above two
years, and though it was not diflinguifhed by any splendid
event, he exhibited, during the course of it, greater per-
fonal courage, more fortitude of mind, more perseverance
and patience, than in any other period or scene in his
life. H·errera, dec. iii. lib. vi, vii. viii. ix. Gomara
Cron. c. 163--177. B. Diaz, 174-190o. Cortes,
MS. penes me. Were one to write a life of Cortes, the
account of this expedition thould occupy a [plendid place
in it. In a general hifkory of America, as the expedition
was produaive of no great event, the mention of it is
fufficient.

NOTE XCVTII. p. 4to.

AcCORDING to Herrera, the treasure which

Cortes brought with him, consisted of fifteen hun-

dred marks of wrought plate, two hundred thouland pesos
of fine gold, and ten thousand of inferior flandard, many
rich jewels, one in particular worth forty thousand pesos,
and several trinkets and ornaments of value. Dec. iv.
lib. iii. c. 8. lib. iv. c. I. He afterwards engaged to give
a portion with his daughter of a hundred thousand
pesos. Gomara Cron. c. 237. The fortune which he
left his sons was very considerable. But, as we have be-
fore related, the fum divided among the conquerors on
the first redu~tion of Mexico was very fmnall. There
appears then to be some reason for fulTpe~ing that the
accusations of Cortes's enemies were not altogether
destitute of foundation. They charged him with hav-
ing applied to his own use a disproportionate ihare of
the M;exican spoils 4 with having concealed the Toyal

treafuscg

treatures of Mlontezuma and Guatimozin; with defraud-
ing the king of his fifth; and robbing his followers
of what was due to them. Herrera, dec. iii. lib. viii.
c. 15. dec. iv. lib. iii. c. 8. Some of the conquerors
thems~elves entertained fuipicions of the fame kind, with
refpeRt to this part of his conduat. B. Diaz, c. 157*

EWD OF THE SECOND VOLVNE.
