THE

HISTORY

O F

SCOT LAND

DURING THEREIGNS OF

Qpe"en MA RY and of King J A M ES VI.

TILL

His AcCESSION to the Crown of ENG;LAND.

W ITIH A

Pevisw of the ScorTasH HasToaR previous to that Periodi

And an APPENDIzL containing ORIGINAL PArEAS.

IN TW OVOLUME S.

By W IL L I AM R OBEI:RT S ON, D. D.

VOLUME II.

THE FIFTH EDITIO N.

DUIJB L IN:

PRINTEDFORJAMESWILL IAMS IN SKINNER RO w

rIDCCLX V I.

IaF~

# BOOK VI.

THE

HIS TORY

O F

SCOTLAN D.

BOOK VI.

T HE unexpeated blow, by which the Regent BOOK VI.

was cut off, struck th~e King's party with --

the utmost co~nflernaltion. Elizabeth bewaileJ. h~is Difo a
death as the most fatal disaster, which could have occarioned
befallen her kingdom , and was inconsolable to a by the Re-
degree that little falited her dignity. Mary's adhe- gent's
rents exulted, as if, now, her refforation were not death.
Only certain, but near at hand. Th~e infamy of
the crime naturally fell on those, who expressed
luch indecent joy at the commiflion of it. And as
thec aff~aflin made his ercape on a horse, which be-
longed to Lord Claud Hamilton, and fled diredly
to Hamilton, where he was received in triulmph,
it was concluded thiat the Regent had fallen a fa-
crifice to the relentment of the Qgeen's party, ra-
ther than to the revenge of a private man. On
the day after the murder, Scott of Bucclerugh, and
K~er of Ferniherit, both zealous abettors of th~e
Qgeen's cause, entered England in an hoffile man-
ner, and plundered and burnt the country, th~e
inhabitants of which expelled no faich outrage. If
the Regent had been alive, they would fearce have
ventured on such an irregular incurfron, nor cou~ld
it well have happened so toon after hiis death, uni-
less they had been privy to thle crime.

Az THrs

Y anarchy that followred the Regent's death gave oc-

a 970. callon. During such general confusion, men hoped

for universal imnpunity, and broke out ipto eyceffe~s
of every kind. As it was impoflible to restrain
there, w~ithout a fettled form of government, a
Con ven tion of the nobles was held, in order to de-

Steps taken
towards liberate concerning the eleCftion of a Regent. The
cleaing a- Queen's adherents refused to be prefeat at the
notherRe- meeting, and protefied against its proceedings.

gee-b rz2 Thle King's own party was irresolute, and divided

In opinion. Maitland, whom Kirkaldy had set at
liberty, and who obtained fromn the nobles then al-
fembled a declaration acqluitting him of the crime
which had been laid to his charge, endeavoured to
bring about a coalition of the two parties, by pro-
posing to admit the Queen to the joint adminiftra-
tion of government with her lon. Elizabeth ad-
hering to her ancient lyftem with regard to Scot-
ti02 affairs, laboured, notwithflanding the follici-

* See Ap- tations of Mary's friends *, to multiply, and to
pend.No.I. perpetuate the fa~ions, which tore in pieces the

kingdom. Randolph, whom hbe dilpatched into
Scotland on the fir(1 news of the Regent's death,
and who was her luual agent for ~isch services,
found all partiep 10 exasperated by mutual injuries,
anid 10 filli of irreconcilable raneoilr, that it cost
himn little trouble to inflame their animosity. The
Conivention broke up without coming to any agree-
ment , and a new meeting, to which the nobles of
all partics were invited, was appointed on the Birit

Crawr. of May t-.
Iem·'3s. MEANTIldE, Maitland and Kirkaldy, who itill
laiderw. continued to acknowledge the King's authority,
coalition, were at the utmost pains to reffore fame degree of
:parnies harmony among their countrymen. They procured
emnpted for this purpole, sh amicable conference among the

n.leaders of the two fadtions.Buwhlteoede

mianded the rcllocation of thle Qgeen, as the only

thing

thling· which could re-establish the public tranquil- Boor VI·
lity; while the other esteemed the King'sauthority ~
to be so sacred, that it was, on no account, to be a 570.
called in question or impaired ; and neither of them
would recede in the least point from their opinions,
they separated without any profped of concord.
Both were rendered more averse from reconcile-
ment, by the hope of foreign aid. An envoy ar-
rived from Franice with promises of powerful fuc-
cour to the Qgeen's adherents,; and as the civil
wars in that kingdom seemed to be on the point of
terminating in peace, it was expedted that Charles
would loon be at liberty to fulfil wthat he promised.
On the other hand, the Earl of Sussex was affemb-
ling a powerful army on the borders, and its opera-
tions could not fail of adding Cpirit and firength to
t Kn' atTuovoH the atempt towasrds a coaition of the Mem. 134· rif.
fa~tions proved ineffedtual, it contributed some- Qcueen'sat a
what to moderate, or fulpend their rage; but they p ,1;~
soon began to aA with their ulual violence. Morton, of Edin-`
the most vigilant and able leader on the King's fidei burgh.
follicited Elizabeth to interpole, without delay, for
the safety of a party, 10 devoted to her interest,
and which flood to much in' need of her ali~tance.
The Chiefs of the Qgeen's faction, assembling at
Linlithgow, marched thence to Edinburgh a and April so.
K~irkaldy, who was both Governor of the cattle,
and Provost of the town, prevailed on the citizens,
though with some difficulty, to admit them within
the gates. Together with Kirkaldy, the Earl of
Athole, and Maitland, acceded almost openly to
their party, and the Duke and Lord Herreis, hav-
ing recovered their liberty by Kirkaldy's favour,
resumed the places, which they had formerly held
in their councils. Encouraged byl thle acquifi ion
of persons, so illuff rious by their birth, or so emi-
nent for their abilities, they publilhed a proclama-
tion, declaring their intention to firpport the Qgecn's

A 3 authority,

13OOK .r authOrity, and seemed resolved not to leave the

Lc~city before the meeting ofthe approaching Conven-

asgo. tion, in which, by their numbers and influence,

they did not doubt of securing a majority of voices
on~ their lide: *

Endteavour AT the fame time, they had formed a design of
toinvolve kindling war between the two kingdoms. And if
:Ihe naao they cou~ld engage them in hoffilities, and revive
wIi ng

a hi Warn mlainadaniahthyhp

land. not only to dissolve a confederacy of great advan-

tage to the King's cause, but to reconcile their
countrymen to the Qu~een, Elizabeth's natural and
most dangerous rival. With this view, they had,
imnmediately after the m~urder of the Regent,
prompted Scott and Ker to commence hollilities,
and had since instigated them to continue and ex-
tend their depredations. As Elizabeth forelaw,
on the one hand, the dangerous consequences of
rendering this a national quarrel, and res~olved, on
the other, n~ot to ruffer foch an infillt on her govern-
mlent to pas~s with impunity; , he issued a procla-
mation, declaring that the imputed the outrages
which had been committed, not to the Scottish na-
tion, but to a few derperate and ill-defigning per-
fans; that, with the former, the was resolved to
maintain an inviolable friendthip, whereas thedu-
ty, which the owed to her own fubjedis, obliged
her to chaftile the licentiodniels of th~e latter -t.
Suft-ex and Scroop, accordingly, entered Scotland,
the one on the east, the othier on the weft borders,
and laid waste the adjacent countries with fire and
sword $. Fame magnified the number and pro-

bala' grels of` their armies, and Mary's adherents, not

thinking themfelvess safe in Edinburgh, the inhabi-
tants whereof were ill-affed~ed to thecir cause, retired

\prit 28. to Linlithgow. There by a public proclamation

they aflerted the Queen's authority, and forbad

*Crawf. Manr I37. Cld1erw. s. 176. -t Cald. 2. 181.

giving

giving obedience to any, but the Duke, or the Boor VI.
Earls of Argyll and Huntly, whom the had confli- ep
tuted her Lieutenants in the kingdom. = 570.

THE nobles who continued faithful to the King, King'spar-

though considerably weakened by the defe~tion of ty enter E-
so many of their friends, assembled at Edinburgh dinburgh.
on the day appointed. They issued a counter-pro- May '.
clamation, declaring those who appeared for the
Queen, enemies offeir country ; and charging
them with the murder of the late King, and of the
Regent. They could not, however, presume so
much on their own firength as to venture either to
eleft a Regent, or to take the field against the
Queen's party , but the aidifiance, which they re-
ceived from Elizabeth, enabled them to do both.
By her order, Sir William Drury marched into
Scotland, with a thousand foot, and three hundred
horse , the King's adherents joined him with a
considerable body of troops, and advancing towards
Glasgow, where the adverl~e party had already be·
gun hostilities by attacking the castle, they forced
them to retire, plundered the neighbouring country,
which belonged to the Hamiltons, and, after feiz-
ing some of their caffles, and razing others, return-
ed to Edinburgh.

UNDER Drury's prote~ion, the Earl of Lenox IMotiventf

returned into Scotland. It was natural to commit Elizabeth's
the government of the kinlgdom to him, during conduft~
the minority of hisgrandfon. Hlis illuffrious birthi, gdtro
and alliance with the royal family of England, as them.
well as of Scotland, rendered him worthy of that
honour; and his relentment against Mary being
implacable, and his estate lying in England, and
his family residing there, Elizabeth considered him
as a man, who, bothi from inclination, and from
interest, would sat in concert with her, and ardent-
ly withed that he migh~t Aucceed Murray in the office
of Regent. But, on maniy accounts, the did not
think it prudent to discover her own lentiments, or

A4r 4 to

loor VI. to favour his pretensions too openly. The civil

- wars in France, which had been excited by a pre-

a 370. tended zeal for religion, and carried on with a fierce-

neis that did it real dithonour, appeared now to be
onl the point of coming to an ifrue ; and after thed-
ding the best blood, and wasting the richest pro-
vinces in the kingdom, both parties defared peace
with an ardour, that facilitated the neg~ociations,
which were carrying on for that purpore. Charles
IX. was known to be a pallionate admirer of'
Mary's beauty. Nor could he, in honour, f~uffer
a Qu~een of France, and the most ancient ally of
his crown, to laniguith in her prelent cruel ficuation,
without attempting to procure her relief. He had,
hiith~erto, been obliged to latisfy himself with re-
monfirating, by his ambassa~dors, against the indig-
nity, with which the had been treated. But if he
were once at full liberty to pursue his inclinations,
Elizabeth would have every thing to dread from
the impetuosity of his temper, and the power of
his arms. It therefo~re became necellary for her to
sa with some reserve, and not to appear, avowed-
ly, to countenance the choice of a Regent, in con-
tempt of Mary's authority. The jealoury and pre-
judices of the Scots required nio less management.
Had the openly supported Lenox's claim ; bad the
recommended hiim to thle Convention, as the can-
didate, whom the approved , this might have rouz-
ed the independent rpirit of the nobles, and by too
plain a discovery of her intention, The might have
defeated its success. For there reasons, Ihe befitated
long, and returned ambiguous answers to all the
rnefages, which the received from the King's party.
A more explicit declaration of her sentiments was
at lafl obtained, and an event of an extraordinary
nature seems to have been the occasion of it. Pope
Pius V. having ifu~ed a bull, whereby he excom-
municated Elizabeth, deprived her of her kingdom,
and ablolved her lubjeds from their oath of allegi-

ance,

ance, Felton, an Engliihman, had the boldness to Beoo Vr.
fix it on the gates of the Bilhop of London's pa- ~
lace. In former ages, a Pope, moved by his own ' go.
ambition, or pride, or bigotry, denounced this
fatal featence againRt the moit powerfill monarchs ;
but as the authority of the court of Rome was
now less regarded, its proceedings were more cau-
tious, and, it was only when they were rouzed by
some powerful Prince, that the thunders of the
church were ever heard. Elizabeth, therefore, im-
puted this Rtep, which the Pope had taken, to a
combination of the Roman Catholic Princes against
her, anid fulpedted that some plot was on foot in
favour of the Scottilh Qgeen. In that event, the
knew that the safety of her own kingdom depend-
ed on preserving her influence in Scotland, and
in order to itrengthen this, the renewed her pro-
mile~s of proteding the King's adherents, encou-
raged them to proceed to the cleation of a Regent,
and even ventured to point out the Earl of Lenox,
as the person who had the belt title. That h~onour
was accordingly conferred upon him, in a Conven-
tion of the whole party, hehd on the r 2th of July*.

THE Regent's Gr~t care: was to prevent the meet- Lenox e-

ing of the ParliamntPn, which the Qu!een's party leatd Re
had ~ilmmoned to convene at Linlithgow. Having gent.
effeded that, he marched againRt the Earl of Hunt-
ly, Mary's lieutenant in the North, and forced the
garrison, which he had placed in Brechin, to fur-
render at dilcretion. Soon after, he made himfetlf
malter of some other caffles. Emboldened by this
A~ccefsful beginning of his adminiitration, as well
as by the appearance of a considerable army, with
which the Earl of Sulffx hovered on the borders,
he deprived Maitland of his office of secretary,
and proclaimed him, the Duke, Huntly, an~d other

* Spotlw. 24o. Cald. a. tS6. See Append. No. II.

leade~rs

BOOK VI. leaders of the Qu~een's party, traitors and enemies

· of their country *.
.0,y! IN this delperate fltuation of their affairs, the

adherents Qgeen's adherents had recourse to thle King of
negociate Spaint-, with whom Mar-y hiad hield a close corre-
wi'hSpain. fpondence ever frace her confinement in England.

Th~ey prevailed on thle Duke of Alva, to fend two
of his officers to take a view of the country, and
to examine its coasts, and harbours, and obtained
from him a Tmall supply of m~oney and arms, which
were se~nt to the Earl of H~untly 1. But this aid,
i0 dirproportionate to their exigencies, would have

Elizabeth availed them little. They were indebted for their
,qpoc fa afey to. a treay, whichi Elizabeth was carrying on,
accomimo- under colour of refloring th~e captive Queen to her
dation be- throne. The fir(1 fleps in this negotiation had been
'weenMa- taken inl the month of M~ay , but hitherto little

n her progress was made in it. Thie peace concluded

between the Roman Catholics and Hugonots in
France, and her apprehenflons that Charles would
interpose with vigour in behalf of his rfdler-in-law,
quickrened Elizabeth's motions. She affeded to
treat her prisoner with more indulgence, the liflten-
ed more graciously to the folicitatoionsof foreign
ambassadors in her favour, and seemed fully de-
termined to replace her on the thirone of her anceC-
tors. As a proof of her sincerity, The laboured to
procure a cessation of arms between the two con-
tending faftions in Scotland. Lienox, elated with
the good fortune, which had hithierto attended his
adminiitration, and flattering himself with an eary
triualphi over enemies, whole eflates were wasted,
and their forces dilpirited, refused, for some time,
to come into this measure. It was not rase for himn,
however, to dis~pute the will of his protea5rels. A
cllixtion of hiollilities duringg two months, to com-

*Crows. Memn. '59. Caki. 2. 198. t See Append. NollL.
:t A~nders 3. s z3. Crawf Miem., 153-

mence

mence on the third of September, was agreed up- Boor VI.
on; and being renewed from time to time, it con- r***A***
tinued till the Blrit of April next year *.

Soon after, Elizabeth dilpatched Cecil and Sir 243~

Walter Mildmay to the Qgeen of Scots. The dig-
nity of these ambassadors, the former her prime Mi-
niffer, the latter Chancellor of the Exchequer, and
one of her ablest counsellors, convinced all parties,
that the negociation was serious, and that the hour
of Mary's hiberty was now approaching. The pro-
politions, which they made to her, were advan-
tageous to Elizabeth, but fitch as a Prince in
Mary's situation, had reason to expedt. The rati-
fication of the treaty of Edinburgh , the renouncing
any pretenflons to the Englilh Crown, during Eli-
zabeth's own life, or that of her poileritys; the ad-
hering to the alliance between the two kingdoms a
the pardoning her fiubjeCas, who had taken arms
against her , and her promising to hold no corre-
fpondence, and to countenance no enterprize, that
might diflurb Elizabeth's government, were
among the chief articles. By way of security
for the accomplilhment of there, they demand-
ed that some persons of rank thould be given
as hostages, that the Prince her son thould re-
fide in England, and that a few caffles on the
border (hould be put into Elizabeth's hands.
To fame of thele propolitions Mary codetnted -
some the endeavoured to mlitigate , and others
the attemnpted to evade. In the mnean time, the
tranfmnitted copies of them to the Pope, to the
Kings of France and Spain, and to the D3uke of
Alva. She insinuated, that without some time-
ly and vigorous interpolition in her behalf, the
would be obliged to accept of these hard condi-
tions, and to purchase: liberty at any price. But
the Pope was a dillant and feeble ally, anid by his
efforts against the Turks, his treasury was en-

tirely

800.< VI. tirely exhauffed. Charles had already begun to me-

5 ditate that coul~piracy againit the Hugonots, which

a 970. marks his reign with such infamy ; and it required

much leirure, and perfedt tranquillity, to bring that
execrable plan to maturity. Philip was employed
in fitting out that fleet, which acquired so great re-
nown to the Christian arms, by the vidrtory over the
infidels at Lepanto ; the Moors in Spain threatened
an infurredtion , and his fubjeats in the N~etherlands,
provoked by much oppreflion, and many indigni-
ties, were breaking ouit into open rebellion. All of
them, for thelt diff~erent reasons, advised Mary,
without depeniding on their aid, to conclude the
treaty on the belt terms The could procure*.

ariiEs lizabeth's MARv, accordingly, codiented to many of Eli-
tiracesi zabeth's demands, and dis~cov~ered a facility of dil-
duaiof it. polition, wh~ich promniled flill further conceions.

But no concellion the could have made, would have
satisfied Elizabeth, who, in spite of her repeated
profeflions of sincerity to foreign ambassadors, and
notwithflanding the rolemnity with which the car-
ried on the treaty, had no other objeGt in it, than
to amule Mary's allies, and to gain time t. After
having To long treated a Qgueln, who fled to her for
refuge, in to ungenerous a manner, the could not
now dilmifs her wi th safety. Under all the dilad-
vantages of a rigorous confinement, Mary had found
means to excite commotions in England, wKhich
were extremely formidable. What delperate effeAs
of herj jus relen cmen t might be expeded, if the were
set at liberty, and recovered her former power ?
What engagements could bind her, not to revenge
the wrongs the had fuffered,, nor to take advantage
of- the favourable conjudi'ures, that might prelent
themselves ? Was it poflible for her to give fulch fe-
curity for her b~ehaviour, in times to come, as might

* Ander1. Vol. III. r09, I zo. -t-Digges, Comnp. Amb. 78.

IemoVC

remove all furpicions and fears ? And was there not BoOK VI.
good cause to conclude, that no future benefits could ~
ever obliterate the memory of past injuries ?It was ' yo.0
thus Elizabeth reasoned , though the continued to
na as if her views h~ad been entirely different.
She appointed leven of: her privy counsellors to be
commiironers for lettling the articles of the treaty ,
and as Mary had already named the Bilbops of
Ross, and Galloway, and Lord Levingiton, for he~r
ambassadors, the required the Regent to impower
proper persons to appear in behalf of the King.
The Earl of Morton, Pitcairn abbot of Dunferm-
ling, and Sir James Macgill were the persons cho- I57r-
fen by the Regent. They prepared for their jouir-
ney as flowly-a Elizabeth herfe~lfcould have withed.
At length they arrived at London, and met tbe
commillioners of the two QLueens. Mary's ambal. Feb. rg.
fadors dilcovered the firongeft inclination to comply
witht every thing, that would remove the obstacles,
wrich ~tood in the way of their miftrefs's liberty.
But whieti Mortail taid· his associates were called
upon to vindicate their conduat, and to explain
the f'entiments of their party, they began, in jufti-
fication of their treatment of the Qgeen, to advance
luch maxims concerning the limited powersof Pri n-
ces, and the natural right of fubjeAs to refif and
to controul them, as were extremely thocking to~
Elizabeth, whole notions of regal prerogative were
very exalted. With regard to the authority which
the King now pofreffed, they declared that they
neither had, nor could poirbly receive infirudtious,
to codrent to any treaty, that tended to subvert,
or even to impair it, in the least degree'. No- *Caki. 2.
thing could be more trifling and ridiculous, than 23.4·
ich a reply from the commifiloners of the King of ~g'fff '
Scots, to the Queen of England. His party de- 523, g'24
pended ablolutely On her protedtian, her hand hiad
seated him on the th rone, and to hier pow~er he owecd
the continuan~ce of his reign. With the utmott ease,

th~e

Boon VL. the could have brought themn to talk in a very diF-

fL-3 rerent mfalnner., and whatever conditions the might

'57'· have, thought fut to preferibe, they would have had

no othier ch~oice but to fubmnit. This declaration,
however, the affea~ed to confider as an insuperable

It proves difficulty. And finding that there was no reason to
fruidlers. dread any danger fr-om th~e French King, who had

no0t dilcovered that eagerner~s in support of Mary,
which was exped~ed i the reply made by Morton
furnithed hier withi a pretence for putting a flop to
the nega~ciation, till the Regent thould fend ambal-

1Mach 24. fadors with more ample powers. Thus after being

amuled for ten months with the hopes of liberty,
the unhappy Q~een of Scots remained under itriLaer
custody than ever, and without any profpedt of
ereaping from it , while those fubjedcs, who flill ad-
hered to h~er, were exposed, without ally or protec-
tor, to the rage of enemies, whom their fiuccels in
this negociation rendered flill more infolent'.

O)n the day after the expiration of rthe truce,

which had been observed with little exac~nels on
either fide, Captain Crawfurd of Jordan hill, a gal-
Jant and entrerpriling officer, performedt a service
of great importance to the Regent, by fulrprifing

Dunbar. the catltle of Dunbarton. This was the only for-
tan cale tified place in the kingdom, of which the ~Queen
rurprized had k~ept poffeffion, ever fiance the commencement
by theRe- of thle civil wars. Its lituation on the top of an
gent. high and almost ina~ccessible rock, which rifb·s in the

middle of a plain, rendered it extremely firong,
and in the opinioni of: that age imrnirgnable i as it
commanded the river Clyde, it was of great con-
sequence·, and efleemed the most pro~per place in
the kingdom for landing any foreign tro~ops, that
mighit come to MaryM's aid. The firength of the

* And. 3. 91, &c.

place

place rendered Lord Fleming, the governor, more soot VI.
secure than he ought to have been, considering its C"
importance. A soldier, who had served in the gar- 7'
rifon, and had been dilguited by some ill-ufage, pro-
poled the rcheme to the Regent, endeavoured to de-
monftrate that it was prafticable, and offered him-
lelf to go the foremost man on the enterprize. It
was thought prudent to rifque any danger, for to
great a prize. Scaling-ladders, and whatever else
was necefiary, were prepared with the utmost fe-
crecy and dilpatch. All the avenues to the cattle
were seized, that no intelligence of the design might
reach the governor, Towards evening, Crawfurd
marched from Glasgow, with a small but deter-
mined band. By midnight, they arrived at the
bottom of the rock. The moon was set, and the
sky, which hitherto had been extremely clear, was
covered with a thick fog. It was where the rock
was highest, that the ass~ailants made their attempt,
becaule, in that place there were few sentinels, and
they hoped to find them Ileat alert. The first lad-
der was fearce f ixed, when the weight and eagerners
of those who mounted, brought it to the ground.
None of the assa~ilants were hurt by the fall, and
none of the garrison alarmed by the noise. Their
guide and Crawfurd rcrambled up the rock, and
faitened the ladder to the roots of a tree, which
grew in a cleft. This place they all reached with
th~e utmost difficulty, but were flill at a great dil-
tance from the foot of the wall. Their ladders
were made fast a recond time ; but in the middle
of the alcent, they met with an unforeseen~ difficulty.
One of their companions was seized with some fisd-
den fit, and clung, seemingly without life, to the
ladder. All were at a fland. it was impoffble to
pass him. To tumble him headlong was cruel -, and
might occalion a dis~covery. But Craw~ fuird's prefnce

Boor VI. of mind did not for fake him. He ordered the soldier

'-II to be bound fast to the ladder that he might not fall
'sp.· when the f2t was over: and turning the other fide

of the ladder, they mounted, with ease, over his belly,
Day now began to break, and there still remained
a high wall to feale ; but after surmounting to many
greater difficulties, this was soon accomplilhed. A
sentry oblerved the first man, who appeared on the
parapet, and had just time to give the alarm, be-
fore he was knocked on the head. cThe officers and
soldiers of the garrison ran out naked, unarmed,
and ~more solicitous about their own safety, than
capable of making re~filance. The assailants ruthed
for~wards, with repeating thours, and with the ut-
most fury; took poffeflion of the magazine; f~eiz-
ed the cannon; and turned them against their ene-
mies. Lord F~leming got into a Cmall boat, and fled
all alone, into Argyllibire. Crawfurd, in reward of
his valour and good conduR, remained matter of
the cattle; and as he did not lose a single man in
the enterprize, he enjoyed his luccefs with unmix-
ed pleasure. Lady Fileming, Verac the French
Envoy, and Hamnilton archbishop of St. Andrew's,
were the prisoners of greatest diftin~tion ".

Archbi- yER AC S charader proteAed him from the u-
sP o~f sage which he merited by his attivity in flirring
drews put up enemies against the King. The Regent treated
to death the lady with great politeners, and humanity. Bjut
by himn avery different fate awaited the archbilbop; he

was carried under a firong guard to Stirling; and
as he had formerly been attainted by sat of Par-
liament, he was without any formal trial, con-
demned to be hang'd 4 and on the fourth day as-
ter he was taken, the lentence was executed. An
attempt was made to conviat him of being accef-
fary to the murther of both the King and Re-
gent, but ther~e accusations were fiipported by no

* Buch. 394* proof.

Proof. Our historians oblerve that he was the first soor VI.
bilhop in Scotland who died by the hands of the *j
executioner. The high offices he had enjoyed, a s7t.
both ·in church and slate, ought to have exempted
him from a punilhment, inflided only on the low-
eft criminals. But his zeal for the Qgden, his abili-
ties, and his profef~ion, rendered him odious and
formidable to the King's adherents. Lenox hated
him as the person, by whole counsels the reputation
and power of the house of H-amilton were support-
ed. And party rage, and personal enmity, didta-
ted that indecent sentence, for which some colour
was ibgt~~fought, by imputing to him such odious * Sport-

THE loft of Dunbarton, and the severe treat- Kirkaldy

menit of. the Archbithop, perplelred aind enraged defends
the Qu!een's party; and hollilities were renewed thecafle
with all the fierceness, which dilappointment and o dnbrghi
indignation cai! inspire. K~irkald~y, who, during the
the tru~ce, had taken care to increate the number of queen's
his garrison, and to provide every thing necessary nam"e.
for his defence, itfued a proclamation declaring
Lenox's autthority to be untawful, and usurped;
commanded a'll who favohred his cause to leave the
town within ifit hlours 4feited the arms, belonging
to the citizens ; planted a battery on the fleeple
of St. G les, repaired the walls, and fortified the
gates of the city ; and, though the affeAions of
the inhabitants leaned a different way, held out the
metropolis against the Regent. The Duke, Huntly,
H~ome, Herreis, a~nd other chiefs of that fa~tion,
repaired to Edinburgh with their followers - and
having received a Tmall Fum of money, and some
ammunition from France, formed no contemptible
army within the walls. On the other s~ic, Morton
seized Leith, and forti~fied it , The Regent joined
him with~ a confaderable body of men. While the
Armies lay 10 near each other, daily Fkirm~ithes

Voa. 11. E happened,

Boor VL· happened, an~d with~ various luccefs~. The Qceens:

'` p~arty wcas not througen~ough to take thle field againfit
'j7' the Reg·ent, nor was his firperiority io great as to

under take the siege of thie caff le, or of the town '.

Both par- SoME time before EdinbLurgh fell into the hands
ties hold o~f his enemics, the Regent had f~ummoined a par-
parliia liamnent to meet in that pilace. In ordier to prevent
mMan "4 an~y obljeaionl against the laiwfulnels of the meeting~,

the members obeyed the proclamation as exadtly
as pomlble, and aflemnbled in· a houite at the head of
the Canongate, whichi, though without the walls,
lies within the liberties o~f the city. K~irkaldy ex-
erted himlelt~f to the utmoff to interrupt their meet-
i-ng, but they were 10 firongly guarded, that all
his efforts were vain. Tlhey passed an na~ attaint-
jhg Malitland, and a few others, and then adjourn-
ed to the 28th of Auguf t .

THE other party, in order that their proceed-

ings might be countenanced by the fame thew of
legal authority, held a meeting of parliament soon
after. There was produced in this assembly, a de-
claration by the Queen, of the invalidity of that
deed, whereby the had resigned the crown, and
codecnted to the coronation of her loni. Confor-
mable to this de~claration, an ac2 was past, pro-
nouncing the resignation to have been extorted by
scar , to be null in it~tle, and in all its consequences,
and en;joiningg all good fabjeAs to acknowledge the
Queen alon;e to be thecir lawful lovereign, and to
iblpport those wiho all~ed in her name. T`he present
citablilhment of the protellant religion was con-
firmend by anoth~er flatute, andi, in imitation of
th~e advelle p~arty, a new meetling was appointed
onl the 26th o~f Augufi 1.

Alife~rable I'v1E NwH u.e, all the milk~ries of civil war d,·fo-
condition lated the k~ingdo~m. Ftellow citizens, friends, bro-
of the thlers, tooke diffTerent l-ces, and ranged thecmlclves
kringdom.l t1:nder the fl;:nd~ardl s ot' tile contend\in; faladians. In

* Caldl. 2. =33, &~c ( oE e> v I lid. 177

every

every county, and almoit in every town and vil- Boai VI.
Jage, Kin~g's mnen and Queen s-men were names of`L`
diftindion. Political hatred dissolved all natural 'C7'
ties, and extinguilhed the reciprocal good will and
confidence, which hold mankind together in locie-
ty. Religious zeal mingled itlelf with there civil
diflindtions, and contributed not a little to heighten,
and to inflame them.

THe fatilODS which divided the kingdom were, State of

in appearance, only two. But in both these, there, fmu
were persons, with views, and principles, 10
different from each other, that they ought to be
diftinguithed. With some, considerations of reli-
gion were predominant, and they either adhered
to the Qgeen, becaule they hoped, by her means,
to re-establish Popery, or they defended the King's
authority, as the best support of the Protestant faith.
Among there the opposition was violent and irre-
concileable. Others were influenced by political
motives only, or allured by views of interest ; the
Regent aimed at uniting there, and did not derpair
of gaining, by gentle arts, many of Mary's adhe-
rents to acknowledge the King's au'thority. Mait-
land and Kirkaldy had formed the fame design ofa
coalition, buit on such terms, that the Queen might
be reflored to some share in the government, and'
the kingdom thake off its dependance on England.
Morton, the ablest, the most ambitious, and the
moit powerful of the King's party, held a particu-
lar course ; and moving only as he was prompted
by thle court of England, thwarted every measure,
that tended towards a reconcilement of th~e lation~s;
andc as he served Elizabcth~ with much fidelity, he
derived both power and credit from her avowed
protemton .

TrHE time zppointed by both· parties, for the

meeting of their parliaments, now approached.
Only three peers and two bilhoprs appearred in that,
which \\as hecld in theu Qyecn's lname at Edinb~urp h.

B 2 But

}lOO-K V. E~lt COnte~mptible as th~eir numbers were, th~ey pac.

C Lel d anl a~t for attailtinlg upwards of 200 of the ad-
'7 verie fatctioni. The meetinlg at Stirling was nume-

rou:s anid pleltndid~. The Regent h~ad prevaik~d on
thec Earls of Argyll, E:glinton, Callils, anid Lord
Boyd, to acknowkagcte the King's authority. The
thlree E'arls were amon~g thle most powerful ru ble-
meni ini the Kingdlom, and had h~itherrto been zea-
10us in thie Qgen'ss caule. Lord B~oyd had been
one of M~ar) 's co~mmilionlers at Y-os k an~d W'eftmin-
iter, anid, linice that time, had been admitted into
all herr most recret co~unclls. But, during that tur-
bulenit pttriod the c~ondu~t of individuals, as well
as the principles of fadian~s, varie~d so often, that
the fede of honour, the chief prekirvative of con-
iiflen~ce in ciaraflter, was entirely 1011 -, an~d withi-
out any regaird to decorumn, men suddenly aban-
doned on~e party, and adopted all the violent pas-
fions oftrhe other. The defeftion, however, of
so many perfonls of diftinaion, not only weakened
the Queenl'ss party, but added reputation to her
ad vecr far iss.

The AS ER thle excamplet of thse parliament at Edin-
Ring'Spar-burlgh, that at Stirling began withl Framing aftns a-

g:~P~aiinf the opposite faction~. But in the mnidt of

I~ng, all the l~cuirty, which confiden:ce in thieir own

numbers, or diflance fromi~ danger could inspire,
they wer~te aw~akened, early onel mornmirg, by the

Sept. 3- thouts of ehe eniemy in the heart of the town la

a momewi,r the houle~s of every per(;bn of diflinc-
tion we~re surrounded, and·c before the ~y knew~ what
to thinik of (L, firanget anl evelt,, the Regentl thle
Elarls of Argyll, Mourton, G;]lecairo, Calills, Eg-
liniton, Mon~itratle, Buchanil, thle L~ords 'emipil, Cath~-
c;;rt, ! 'gtivie, \rctre all madice p~rilonecrs, andIC mount11-
ced bechind troo~pers, who were ready toe carry thiem
to, Edinburghl. Kukaldnt y wa's th~e author o~f this
tfurin~g entelrprizi- , arnd i'` he hiad nct been~i inidu ed,
by) thle illai:uedc ul~l~ilCitud of hiS friend.S aboult hijS

thrfe·ty,

sa~fety, not to hazard hiis own person in conduiting soor 'VI.
it, that day might have terminated the contest be- ~T`
tween the two fadtions, and have refloredi peace to '57 -
his country. By his direftion,, four hundre~d men,
under the command of Huntly, Lord Llaud Ha-
milton, and Scott of Buccleugh, let out from Edin-
burgh, and the better to conceal their detign,
marched towards the south. But they so~on wheeled
to the right, and horses having been provided for
the infantry, rode Itheight to Stirling. By four in
the morning, they arrived th~ere , not one featry
was potted on the walls, not a single man was a-
wake about the place. Th~ey met w~ith no refiCt-
ance from any person they hand leized, except Mlor-
ton. He defending his h~oule with obiinate valour,
they were obliged to set it on fire, and he did not
surrender till forced out of it by the flames. In
performing this, Iome time was confulmed , and.
the private men, unaccustomed to regular dilcip-
line, left their colours, and began to rifle theh~oules
and thops of the citizens. T~he noise and uproar
in the town reached the caitle. The Earl of Mar
sallied out with thirty soldiers; fired briskly upon
the enemy, of whom almost none but the officers
kept together in a body. The townsmen too~k arms
to allift th~eir governor; a sudden panic I'ruck the
afailants; some fled, some surrendered themselves
to their own prisoners , and had not the borderers,
who followed Scott, prevented a pursuit, by car-
rying off all the horses within the place, not a man
would have elcaped. If the Regent had not un-
fortunately been killed, the Ilos on the king's fide
wrould have been as inconsiderable, as the alarm
w~as great. fbink onl the Archblbrjop of St· Andrew's,
wa~s thle word among the Queen's soldiers; and
L.enox fell a farcrifice to his memory. 1 he officer
to whom he surrendered, endeavouring to prote~t The RI.
hlina, loft his own life in his defence. He was slain, gent killed.

B 4 according

IIOOK VI· according to the general opinion, by command of

C~Lord Claud Hamilton. Kirkaldy had the glory of
~l~.concerting this plan with great secrecy, and prU-

dence; but Morton's fortunate obstinacy, and the
watnt of discipline among his own troops, deprived

* Mely. hlim of f uccers, the only thing wanting to render
226. this equal to the most applauded military enter-
os awf. prizes of the kinld '.

md .h~l As 10 manly of the nobles were af~embled, they

fen R~e- proceeded, withiout delay, to th~e eledtion of a Re-
gent. gent. Argyll, Morton, anid Mar, were candidates
Sept. 6. Tor the office. Mlar was chosen b~y a majority of

voices. Amni~ft all th~e fierce diffentions, which
had prevailed so long in Scotland, he had diftin-
guilb~ed himself` by' his moderation, his h~umanity,
a;od his difinterefletdners. Andlc as hris powe~r wias
far inferior to A1 gyll's, and hiis abilities not th, great

as ~ ~ ~ ~ 1I IICL orton's,5

heL

wafo heerefns es or

dable to the other nobles. Hi~s merit, too, inl
having so lately refeued the L~eaders of the party
from imminent dleilrudion, contributed not a lit·
tie to his prefermlent.

Proceed- MrHILE there things were carrying on in Scot-
mfgs io land, th~e tranfaL'ions in England were no less in-
~Engad tere~ilig to Malry, and fiill miore fatal to herr c aure.

Mr The parliamen~t of that kingdom, which met in

April, paired an adt, by which, it was decl!ared to
be nig~h treafoni, to, claim any righ't to> th~e Crown.I
during th~e life of thle Qicen; to aflirmi that the
title of any; other perfhn w·as be~tter than hers , or
to maintain thar th~e parliament h~ad not pow~er to let-
tie, and to limit th~e ordier of ti~ccel'lionl. Thi1s re-
mark~able fltarte was intended not on~ly fo~r thle fe-

4 Cama. curity of their own~i sovereign, but to curb the
Mariage reflkIS and intriguinga ipirit of the Scottithl ( acn,
negociated and her adherents -t.
bc ween ATr thlis time, a treaty of manrriage between E-
Elizabeth lizabeth and the Du1ke of Anjou, the F~renchi
atuk o Kinig's brother, was w~ell advanced. Both courts
Anjou. seemed

se~emed to desire it with equal ardor, and gave out, goor[ vt
with thle utmaoil COnfidentce, that it could not fail I'T`
of taking plae. Neithier of them, however, wilbed 50-'
its fuccels; and they encourage~d it for no other end,
but becaule it served to cover or to promote their
particular designs. The wh~ole policy of Catherine
of Medicis whas bent towards the accomplithmnent
of her detestable p:rojle6 for the deflruttion of the
Hurgonot chiie~s ; and by carrying on a negociation
for the marriage of her 100l with a Princels, w~ho was
juffly efleemied the protearers of that party, by

iellding some th~ings in pont,: ors religion, and by
dircovering an indfifference w~ithi regard to otrhers,
the hoped to amule all thle Protellanlts in Euirope,
and to lull asleep th~e jealouly even of` the Hu~gonots
themselves. Elizabeth flattered! herrflf writh reap-
ing advantages of anothier kind. D~uring thle de-
pendance of the negcicationl the ·Frnch courld notr
ivith decency give anly open allittance to thse Scot-
tilh Qg~een, if they conceived any hopes of thiccefs
-rn the treaty of marriage, they would, of course,
;ntereft themselves but co>ldly in her con~cernts
Mary herself mutlt be dejetted at -l0fing an ally,
whom the had h~itherto reckoned hier mnio powver-
ful proteetor ; and by interruptinig her corretiton-
dence w·ith France, one f~urce,, at least, of' the
cabals and intrigues whichi dit~urbed the kingdom~,
would be flopt. Both Q~ueens fiucceeded in their
Ochemes. Catherinle's artifices impos~ed on Elizal-
becth, an~d blinded the H-ugonots. 1I he French
dilcovered the utmott indrfference about the inter·est
of the Scottith Qgeen ; and M~ary, considering thiat
court ats alrea(!v united w~ith hecr rival, turned her.
self. for protection, towa~rds the KingS of Spain*.C Norrolk's
P~hilip, wrhole: dark a d thloughtful mind, detlighted ~:cnfpirac
In1 the mytlery of intrigue, had held a lecret cor- of M/ary.

* Digges, a 44. I48. Camnd. 434-

8 4. refpondence

190?c VI. rerpondence with Mary, for some time, by meang

LL3of the Bithop of Ross, and had A-pplied both her-

!5'1 self, and her adherents in Scotland, with fmail

fumns of money. Ridolphi, a F~lorentine gentle-
man, who resided at London under the charadter
of a banker, and who arfed privately as an agent for
the Pope, was the perlon whoum the Bilhop intruffe4
with th~is negociation. Mary thought it necessary,
likewile, to ccmmun~icate the secret to the Duke
of Norfolk, whiom Elizabeth had lately reffored to
liberty, upon his s~olemn promise to have no fuirther
intercourse with the Qgeen of Scots , which, how-
ever, h~e regarded so litile, that the took no flep in
any matter of momen~t, without his advice. Shie
complained in a lon~g letter, which the wrote to
himi in cyphers, of the bak~nels, with w:hich the
French court had abandoned her interest ; the de-
clar-ed her intention of imploring the affillance of
the Spanith M~onarch, w·hich was now her only re-
source; and recommended Ridolphi to his conf'i-
dence, as a perron, capable both of ex-plaining and
advancing the scheme. Th~e Duke commnanded
Hickford, his recretary, to decypher, and th~en to
burn this letter ; but whether he had been already
gained by the court, or resolved at that time to be-
tray his matter, he disobeyed thle latter part of the
order, and hid thie letter, together with other trea-
fonable papers, under thle D~uke's own bed.

RIDOLPHI, 10 a COnfCTCOCC with Norfolk, omit-

ted none ofC thlofe arguments, andc rpared n;one of
those promises, which are the u~iual incentives to
re bell ion . The Pope, he told him, had a great
fulm in readiners to bestow in so good a caule. The
Duke of Alva had undertaken to land ten thouland
men, not far from London. The Catholics to a
man would rife in arms. Many of the nobles were
ripe for a revolt, and wanted on ly a leader. Half the
nation had turned their eyes towards h~im, and called

on him to revenge the unmerited injuries, which he Boo· VI~,
himself had f~uffered , and to res~cue an unfortunate ~L
Queen, who offered him her perlon, and her crownl, 5'
as the: reward of his iuccels. Norfolk approved of
the design, and though he refused to give Ridolphi
pay letter of credit, allowed him to use his name,
in negociating with the Pope, and Alva*. Tlhe
Ilithop of Rclfs, who, from the violence of his tem- * nderf.
per, and impaticalce to procure relief for his mif-
tress, was apt to run mnto rath and desperate de-
signs, advised the Duke to atfemble secretly a few
of his followers, and at once to lb~ize blizabeth's
pedim~. But this the Duke rejeCtted as a icheme
equally wild and hazardous. Mean while, the Dircove-
Englilh court had re-ceived some imperfecd in for- red by F.11-
snation of the plot, by intercepting one of Ridol- zabeth.
phi's agents , andr~ an accident happened, which AugUit.
brought to light all the circumffances of it. The
Duke had employed Hickford to transmit to Lord
H~erreis, fame money, which was to be diffributed
among Mary's friends in Scotland. A person not
in the lecret was intrufted w~ith conveying it to the
borders; and he, fulpedting it from the weight to
be gold, whereas he had been told that it was ~Il-
ver, carried it direAly to the privy council. The
Duke, his dometics, and all who were privy, or
could be fLrpedted of being privy to the design,
were taken ingt cuitody. Never did the accom- Sp.7
plices in a conipiracy diihover lelCs firmnels , or ser-
vants betray an indulgent maller, withl greater
bareness. Every one confeffed the whole of what
he knew. Hickford gave direc~ions how to find
the papers, which he had h~idden. The Duke him-
self, relying at firit on the fidelity of his associates,
and believing all dangerous papers to have been de-
firoyed, confidently asserted his own innocence; but
when their depositions, and the papers themselves
pyere produced, altonilhed at their treachery, he

acknowledged

Boom VI. acknowledged his guilt, and implored the Qrgeen'si

Lr mercy. His offtence was too heinous, and too often

's7'- repeated, to obtain pardon ; and Elizabeth thought

it necessa~ry to deter her lubjeas, by his puni~hment,
from holding correlpondence with thle Queen of
Scots, or her emiifaries. Being tried by his Peers,
he was found guilty of high treason, and after f~e-

-·Andere. veral delays, fuffered death for the crime*.
3· I49· THE dilcovery of this conspiracy produced many
zs, .8.tate ""i effeas, extremely detrimental to Mary's interest.

s'The Bithop of Ross, who appeared by the confel`-
fron of all concerned, to be the prime mover in
every cabal against Elizabeth, was taken into cul-
tody, his papers searched, himself committed tothe
tow~er, treated with the utmost rigour, threatened
wtith~ capital punithment, and afte~r a long confine-
mlent, le~t at liberty, on condition that he thouldl
leave the kingdom. Mary was not only deprived
of a se~rvant, equally eminent for his zeal, and his
abilities, but was denied, fromn that timne, the privi-
lege of having an ambailador at the Eng~lish court.
The Spanith ambassador, whom, the power and
dignity of the prince he reprefecnted, exempted
from iluch infbilts as Ross had fulffered, was com-

-t Digges, manded to leave England'. Mary he~rself was kiept
r63. under a firider guard than formerly, the number

of her domeftics abridged, anid no pedron permitted

S Strype, to lee her, but inl presence of her keepers t.
An z.50. Ar the lame time, Elizabeth, foreseeing the ito·rm
Elizabeth
declares which was gathering, on th!e continent, agaiinft her
openly a- kingdom, began to with that tranquilli~ty were re-
gainl\ the flored in Scotland,; anid irritated by Mary's late at-

Qenstemp~t against hier governmnent, the determined to

paLy. ;In, withou t difguiile or ambhiguity, in favour of the

K~ing's party. This refl;>ution the intimated to thle

OR· 23. IcRCICEs Of both fadtions. Mary, lthe told thiem,

had hield luch a crimilnal corresponden~ce with·1 her
avowved enemies, and ha~d excited luch dangerous
conspiracies both against her crown and life, th~at

the

the would h~enceforth confider her as unworthy ofsooK Vt.
proteaiion, and would never cod~ent to reflore h~er V
to liberty, far less to replace her on her throne. '57L.
She exhorted them, therefore, to unite in ackn)ow-
ledging the King's authority. She pro~miled to
pro~cure by h~er mlediation eqluitable terms for those~,
who had hitherto oppared it But if thiey flill con-
tinued refr-adory, lbe threatened to employ her ut-
most power to compel themi to flabmit*. Thboug~ * Stee
this declaration didi not produce an immediate es- Append.
fedt; though hoffilities continued in th~e neigh_ No. IV.
bou ihood o~f ; dinburgh,; though Huntly's bro~ther,
Sir Adam Gordon, by his bravery, and good con-
duat, had routed the King's adherents in the North,
in many encounters; yet liich~ an explicit discovery
of~ Eizabeth'~s tentiments contributed not a little to
a~inimte one party, and to dep·ress~ the sp~irit and
hopes of the orther -t. +t Cald. s.

As Morton, who commanded the Regent's fo>r- as,, 294-

ces, lay- at Leith, and Kirkaldy flill hleld out the Strype, 2.
town and cafile of Edinburgh, fearce a day passe-d 7 -

witou aikimih.And whille both avo~ided any Ho aiiie

deciliv·e adtion, they hiarafkd~c each other by attack- carried on
ing fmnall p~arties, beating up quarters, and inter. between
ceptnrg convoy)s. There operations, thiough little themL.
m7-emorable ini themselves, kept the pafions of both~
fadions in perpetual exercise and agitation, and
wrought them up, at last·, to a degree of- fury, which
rendered thiemlelves regairdlels not onlfy of thes la w~s
of war, but of the principtlis of humanity. N'or
was it in the fieldl alone, andl during the heat of
comibat, thiat this implacable ralge app~earedl; both
parties hanged thle prisoners thecy to~ok, of whlatever
ranke or qiuality, w/ithiout mercy, and without tril11.
Great numnbers filife~cred in this thockinig mann~er ;
the unhappy vid'ims were led, by fifties at a time,
to execution , an~d it was not till both7 11dets had
imarted severely, thant they discontinued thiis barba-

TOiUS

Boor VI rous pra~ice, so reproachful to the charafter of the

-' nation *. Mean while, those in the town and cattle,

. ad z.,~ though they had received a lupply of money from
Memn. the Duke of Alva +-, began to liuffer for want of
=L I s, 220. provilions. As Morton had destroyed all the mills
-t Cald. 2. in the neighbourhood of the city, and had planted

I4· mall garrisons in all th~e boufes of firength around
it, fearcity daily encreafed. At las~t all the miseries
of famine were felt, and they muff have been~ soon
reduced to such extremities, as would· have forced
them to capitulate, if the Engilih and French am-
baffadors had not procured a fulpenfion of holbili-

1 Id. 346. ties, between the two parties ·t.
League THOUGH the negaciation for a marriage, between

bte Elizabeth and the Duike of Anijou, hiad been fruite

an France. ler~s, both Charles and the were desirous of conclud-

ing6 a defensive alliance between the two crowns.
He considered such a treaty, not only as the bellt
device for blinding the Protestants, againlt whom
the conspiracy was now almost ripe for execution ;
but as a good precaution, likewise, against the dan-
gerous confeqluences, to which that atrocious mea-
sure might expole him. Elizabeth, who had hi-
therto reigned without a single ally, now saw her
kingdom so threatned with intestine commotions,
or exposed to invasions from abroad, that the was
extremely solicitous to secure the alliftance of so
powerful a neighbour. The difficulties arifmng from
the situation of the Scottith Queen, were the ch~ief
occasions of any delay. Charles demanded som~e
terms of advantage for Mary and her party. Eli-
zabeth rerufed to liflen to any proposition of that
kind. Her obfitinacy overcame the faint efforts of
thie French Monarch. Mary's name was not so
much as mentionedl ini the treaty, and with regard
to Scottith aff~airs, a thoirt article was inferred, in
general and ambiguous terms, to this purpole,

April r r. *~ That the parties cont ra ': ing thall make no inno-

varions in Scotland; nor fuffe~r any firanger to en-

ter,

ter, and to foment the fadions there, but it thall Boor VI.
be lawicful for the Qg~een of England to chastise, by ~
force of arms, thos~e Scots who thall continue to 197>.
harbour the English rebels now in Scotland *."
In codiequence of this treaty, France and England
atf-eaed to adt in concert with regard to Scotland,
anid Du\ Croc, and Sir William Drury, appeared
there, in name of their refpedtIve lovereigns. By
their mediation, a truce, for two months, was a-
greed upon, and during that time, conferences
were to be held between the leaders of the oppolite
faftions, in order to accommodate their differen-
ces, and reflore peace to the kingdom. This truce
afforded a ieafonable interval of tranquillity to the
QLueen's adherents in the South, but in the North,
it proved f~atal to her interest. Sir Adam Gordon
had fill maintained his reputation and superiority
there. Several parties, under different oflicers,
were sent againf1 him. Some of them h~e attack-
ed in the filid; againfl others he employed firata-
gem; and as his courage and conduat were equal,
none of his enterprizes failed of fuccels. He made
war, too, with the humanity, which became so gal-
lant a man, and gained ground by that, no le~s than
by the terror of his arms. If he had not been ob-
liged, by the truce, to filifpend his operation~s, he
would, in all probability, have brought that part
of thle kinigdom to thbmit entirdly to the Qgeen's
authority-t.

NOTWITHSTANDING Gordoni's bravery and fuc- Proceed-

cels, Mary's interest was on the de~clinie, not on~ly ings in
in her own kingdom, bu~t among rthe Englith. No,- England

. . againlt

thiing could be more offenlive to tha~t Ination, jeta- IMiary
lo~us of foreigners, and terrified at thle profped~ of
thle Spanith yoke, tha~n her necgociation,~ s wvith thle
Duke of A2lva. T'he parliamenit, whlich me~t in
Mayv, proceecdedl against her as the mail1 dange~ro~us
enecmy of the kiingdom,l and after a fujlcmn confle-

* iggres, spo, '91. Condlc. j444 *( Crawf. Memu.

ren~ce

L houles agreed in bringinlgin a bill to declare her guil-

s sys. ty of high treason, and to deprive her of all right

of ficcetiion to the crown. This great caufre, as
it was then called, occupied them during the whole
fefliun, and was carried on with much unanimity.
Elizabeth, though the applauded their zeal, and
approved greatly of the cours~e they were taking,
wvas fatisfitd withi thewing Mary what the mightt
expedt from the relentment of the nation, but as
the did not yet think it time to proceed to the
most violent extremity againiit her, the prorogued
the parliament *.

The T`HEsE CeVere proceedings of the English par-
French liament were not more mortifying to M~ary, than
neglefther the coldness anld negled of her allies the F'rench.
meecrett The Dukie of Montmorency, indeed, wh~o came

over to ratify the league with Elizabeth, made a
th~ew of interesting himfell in favour of the Scot-
tilh Qyeen, but inflead of soliciting for her liber-
ty, or her refforation to her throne, all th-at he de-
mainded was a flight mitigation of the rigour of
her imprilonment. And even this small request,
he urged with so little warmth or importunity, that
no regard was paid to it 1-.

The mar- TvHi ;llliance w~ith France afforded Elizabeth~
sacre of muchI tltisfadtion, a~nd (h~e expeded from it a great

Pai.increafe of Iecurity. Sh~e now turned her wholei at-

tet~lion tow\ards Scotland, where thle animnofities of
the twvo fadl~ianls wKere flill so bigh, and so many in-
terfe~i:rin i:,terefts to be adjofted, tha3t a gene~ral pai-
cifica;' i!,n !teemed to be at a great distance. But
whi~i~le th labouuredi to bring thiem to famne agree-
mient, anl eventc h:alppened which filled a great part
of` Europe w~ith afoitclihment, andc withi horror.
Th~iis was thec mnfibere at Paris, anl attempt, to
which there is no parLlel1C in the hlilla~ ~~nry lmanind,
eirther for the diiian;~ilaion w~hich~ led to it, or for
theC cruelty and( lbarbarityv w~ith wh~ich it wa3s putl

* D'Ewes Journ. 2 6, Ac. 4-t !c·b. 2. p z.

;n execution. By the moit solemn promiles of safety oons Vt.
and of favour, the leaders of the Protdltants were ~
drawn to court, and though doomed to deftruc_ = 57f-
tion, they were received with caresses, loaded with
honours, and treated, for Ceven months, with every
poflible mark of familiarity, and of confidence. In Aug. 24.
the midit of their security, the warrant for their de-
firudtion was iffixed by their Sovereign, on whole
word they had relied; and, in obedience toit, their
countrymen, their fellow citizens, and companions,
imbr ued their hands in their blood. Ten thous~and
Protellants, without diftin~ion of age, or sex, or
condition, were murdered in Paris alone. The
fame barbarous orders were sent to other parts of
the kingdom, and a like carnage ensued. This
deed, which no Popilh writer, in the prelent age,
mentions without detestation, was, at that time,
applauded in Spain , and at Rome, solemn thanks-
givings were offered to God for its fuccers. But a-
mong the Protestants it excited incredible horror;
a firiking pidure of which is drawn by the French
ambassador at the court of England, in his account
of his fullt audience after the massacre. " A gloomy
sorrow, l~ays he, fat onl every face, silence, as in
the dead of night, reigned through all the cham-
bers of the royal apartment, th~e ladies and cour-
tiers were ranged on each fide, all clad in deep
mourning, and as I passed throungh them, not one
beffowed on me a civil look, or made the least re-
turn to my falures *."

BU-r horror was not the only paflion, w~ith whi~ch Devrimen-

this event inspired the Proteflants, It fille~d th~en tl tlo Ma-
with fear. Thtey confideredl It as th~e preludle to mtS "e-
fame greater blow, and believed, niot without mu:ch ei
probablity', that all the Popith Frinees hadc confpl-ir-
edc the deltho'iann of their Let. ~This opinion did
nio fmalll dillervice to. Mal~ry's a~fthics inl Scotland.
Malnry o~f' her adhlertents were P-rotethll nts, and,
thouugh they·; wvindcc her rdor

c lation, wecre alt uw d-

Bdoor VI. ling, on that account, to sacrifice the faith which

they-'tcl profeffed. They dreaded her attachment to a

15 1 religion, which allowed its votaries to violate the

most iolemn engagements, and prompted them to
perpetrate the most barbarous crimes. A general
confederacy of the Protestants seemed to them, the
only thing that could uphold the Reformation a-
gainlt the league, which was formed to overturn it.
N~or could the prelent eftablilhment of religion be
long maintained in Britain, but by a firid union with
Elizabeth, and by the concurrence of both nations,
in efpodi~ng the defence of it, as a common caule'.

The RC. TH E Rieent took hold of this favourable con-
gent en- jun~ture for negociating a general peace. And as
deavours he labour~ed for this purpole, with the utmof1 zeal,
to unn'e and the adverse fadtion placed entire conifidence in
both par- his integrity, his endeavours could fearce have fail-

ed of being fuccefsful. Maitland and Kirkaldy
came so near to an agreement with him, that fearce
any thing remained, except the formality of signing
the treaty. But Morton had not forgotten the dil-
appointment he met with in his pretenflons to the
Regency; his abilities, hiis wealth, and the patron-·
age of the court of England, gave him greater Iway
with the party, than even the Regent himself , and
he took pleafore in thwarting every measure pur-
filed by him. He was afraid that if Mlaitland and
his aillociates recovered any thare in the adminiffra-
tion, hiis own influence would be considerably di-
minallthd, anid the Regent, by· their means, would
rtegain tha;t aicendant, w1hich belonged to his fla-
tionl. Wi'thl him, conicurred all those, who were in·
po'lliflion of the lands, w~hich belonged to any of
thle Qleen's paTlly. Anid hlis ambition, and their
avarice, fruffratedl the Regent's pious intentio~ns,
and retardedl a bleflng so necellary to the kring-
dom, as the ellabrlihm-ent of` peace I-.

* Digges, 244, 267. -0 Melv. z33. Crawf. Mem. 237~

SUCH.

SOCH a dilcovery of 'the felfilhnels and ambition, sooK Vt.

which reigned among his party, made a deep im-'er
prem~on on the Regent, who loved his country, and Hi t~ah.
withed for peace with much ardor. This inward
grief broke his Cpirit, and by degrees, brought on
a lettled melancholy, that ended in a distemper,
of which he died on the 29th of OCdober. He was,
perhaps, the only ped~on in the kingdom, who
could have enjoyed the office of Regent, without
envy, and have left it without loss of reputation.
Notwithflanding their mutual aniimofiies, both
fa~ions acknowledged hiis views to be honourable,
and his integrity to be un~corrupted *. * Crawr.

No competitor now appeared against Morton. "::b~~

The Queen of England powerfully lupported his chobt
clatim, and notwithstanding the fears of the people, Regent.
and the jeralouly of the nobles, he was eledted Re. Nov. 24.
gent; the fourth, who in the Cpace of five years,
had held that dangerous office.

As the truce had been prolonged to the first of

January, this gave him an opportunity of continu-
ing the negociations with theoppofite party, which
had been set on foot by his predecessor. They
produced no ~effeAs, however, till the beginning
of the next year.

BE FORE we proceed to there, some events, hither-

to untouched, deserve our notice.

Tus Earl of Northumberland, who had been kept

prisoner in Lochleven, ever since h~is flight into
Scotland in the year I 569, was given upto Lord
Hunfdon Governor of Berwick ; and being carried
to York, fliffered there the punithment of his rebel-
lion. The king's party were so fenrible of their de-
pendence on Elizabeth's proterfion, that it was
fearce pollible for them to refuse putting into her
hands a person who had taken up arms against her.
But as a fum of money was paid, on that account;
and (hared between Morton and Douglas of Loch-

VoL. II. C leven,

Boor VI. leven, the former of whom, during his exile inl

E7~-ngland, had been much indebted to N2orthumnber-

lj7z. Jandc's friendship, the abandoning this unhappy

nobleman, in CAch a m~anner, to certain deflruc-
tion, was deemed an ungrateful and mercenary
adtion *.

A ffairs TH Is year was remarkable for a conflderab:le i n -
o~f the novanion inl the governmient of the Churchi. Soon

cuc.after th~e Reformation, the Popith Bilbops had been

coinirmned by law in polieflion of part of their be-
nefices ; but the fpiritualjuril~dimton, \w bich~ belong-
ed to th~eir oi de~r, wras exercied by fulper~intendants,
thocugh withl mo!re modelrate authority. On
th~e death o~f thle Archbilhop of St. An~drew's,
Morton obtainedl from; the Crown a grant of th~e
temiposaitciies of` that fee. At as it was thlought
indecent for a layman to hold a benefice, to whichl
thec cure of fo\uls was anniexed, h~e procured D~oug·-
laS, redtor of the un~iversity ofSt. Andrew's, to be
choten archlbilhop, and allotting him a imall pen-
sion ouit of the revenues of th~e fee, retained the
remainder in his own hands. The nobles, wh~o
saw the advantages they migh~t resp from s~uch a
prad'ice, fuipported him in the execution of hris plan.
It gave greait offence, how'ever, to the Clergy, who,
initead of pe~rpetuating an order, whole name an~d
powver was odious to them,, ivifhted that the reve-
nues which had belongedi to it, migaht be employed
io fuppiniig f~lichparithes, as werre fili un provided
with Aettled paflors. B~ut on the one band, it would
have been rath in the Clergy to have irritated, tcoo
much, noblemen, on whom thle very existence of
the Protestant Church in Scotland depend~d , and
Mlorton, on the other, co~nduAerd his fchleme w~ith
fisch clexrterity, and man~aged them with so muich
art, that it wzas, at lasS, agreed, in a Convention
composed of the leading men amiong the Clergy,
together w~ith a committee olf privy council, "L Ihat
the name and cOfic~e of` ar-chbdlhop, andt bilhop,

* Crawf. M1em~. 55o 222. Camd. 445-

; ithouldt

thouldl be continued during thle King's minority·, soox yr.
an~d there dignities be conferred upon the best qua- ~;-
lified among thle Protcitant Min~iffers 4 but thiat -
with regard to their spiritual jurifidiations, they~
thould be fubjeCd to the general afkembly of thle
·Ch urch." The rules to be oblerved ini thetir eledtion;
and the~ persons who were to supply the place, and
enj~oy the privileges, which belonged to thle 1)ean
anid Chapter in times of Popery, were likewise
particularly· rpecified *. And thle whiole bceing laid
before the General Assembly, after Ccome exceptions
to the name of~rchblfop, Dean, .Chlpter, &rc. and
a protdltation that it thould be considered onliy aS
a temporary conflitution, tI one more perfedt could
be introduced, it obtained thle app~roblation of` thiat
court -t. Even Knox, who1 was prevented from
a1t tending th e Assembly by thle ill slate of his hetalth,
though he declaimed loudly againi~t the Simoniacal
padtion, to, wh~ich Douglas ow~ed his preferment,
and blamed the nomination of a person, worn out
with age and infirmities, to an office, which re-
qluired unimpaired vigour both of body and mind,
seems not to have condemned the proceedings of
thle Convention , and in a letter to~the Assembly,
approved of some of their regu-lations with refpeCa
to else ele~tion of Bilbops, as worthy of being care-
fully obler ved $. In consequence of the affembly's
.codent to the plan agreed upon in the Convention,
Douglas was iflllalled in his o~tice, and at the
fame time, an archbihop of Glasg~ow, and a biifhop
of Dun keld were chose~n from among t he Protellant
Clergy. TIhey were all admitted to the place in
parliament, which belonged to the ecclefiallical
order. Cut in imitation of the example set by
Moirton, fiuch bargains were made with them by
different noblemen, as gave them poflfelion only
of a very Im~all part of the revenues, belongin-g to I Spotrw.
their fees $. 20:~.

*Cald. 2. 305 p. IJ. 3 54. f See Appendix No. V.

C 2 Soonv

Boose VI. Soon after the dissolution of this assembly, Knox,

~3the prime infirument of fpreadlng and eflablithing

No',t the Reformed religion in Scotland, ended his life,
Death and I:1 the 6'7th year of his age. Zeal, intrepidity, dif-
charPAer interefiednefs, were virtues which he poffelfed, inl
of Knor. an eminent degree. He was acquainted, too, with

the learning, cultivated in that age - and excelled
in that rpecies of eloquence, which is calculated to
rouze, and to inflame. His maxims, however,
were often too severe, and the impetudi~ty of his
tem per exceflive. Rigid and uncomplying himself,
he thewed no indulgence to the infirmities of others.
Regardlels of the diftin~tions of rank and charac-
ter, h~e uttered his admonitions with an acrimony
and vehiemence, more apt to irritate, than to re-
claim. 'This often betrayed him into indecent and
undatiful expr'eions, with refpea to the Q~een's
person and condua. Those very qualities, how-
ever, which now render his charar~ter less amiable,
fitted him to be the infictument o~f Providence for
advancing the Reformation among a fierce people,
and enabledl him to face dangers, and to surmount
oppolv~ion. from which, a person of a more gentle
[pirit would have been apt to thrink back. By an
unwearied application to fludy, and to bufinel~s,
as well as by the frequency and fervor of his public
discourses, he had worn out a cons litution, natural-
ly firong During a lingering illness, he discover -
ed the utmof1 fortitude, and met the approaches
of death, with a magnanimity inseparable fromn his
charadter. He was conitantly employed in aLas of
devotion, and comforted himlelf with those prof-
peats of immcortality, which notonly preserve good
rnen from delponding, but fill them with exulta-
tion in their !aft moments. The Earl of Morton,
wh~o was prelent at his funeral, pronounced his
culogium in a few words, the more honourable~
for Knox, as they came from one whom he had

often

often cenlured with peculiar ieverity. "L There lire aaourf
He, who never feared the face of man'."

THO GH Morton did notdefire peace from fach* c.6~1

generous motives as the former Regent, he laboure; L66-
however, in good earneit, to eflablilh it. The rI'- Cald. 2.
lic confutions and calamities, to whlich he owed his "73-
power and importance when he was only the (econd ThI?3Re-'
person in the nation, were extremely detrimetal to gent tre**
him, now that he was raised to be the firit.1Vhile was the
so many of the nobles continued in arm against Queen's
hiim, his authority, as Regent, was partia, feeble, palrry.
and precarious. Elizabeth was no leslsefirous of
extinguithing the flame, which the had landled, and Dies
kept so long alive in Scotland t. SY had disco- 299.get
vered the alliance with France, from thich the had
expefted luch advantages, to be ur foundation of
security. And though appearano~s of friendship
ft ill fubilited between her andthat~-aurt, and Charles
-daily renewed his protestations If inviolable adhe-
rence to the treaty, the was cravinced, by a fatal
example, how little the oueit to rely on the pro-
miles or oaths of that perfusous Monarch. Her
ambassador warned her the the French held a secret
correfpondenee with Ma~y's adherents in Scotland,
and encouraged them in their obitinacy $. The $ Id. 296.
D>uke of Alva carried on his intrigues in that king- 3'2.
dom, with less disguise. She was perluaded that
they would embrace the irft serene interval, which
the commotions in France and in the Netherlands
would allow them, and openly attempt to land in
Scotland She resolved therefore,' to prevent their
getting anly footing in the island, and to cut off all
their hopes of finding any affiitance there, by unit-
ing the two parties.

THE r1tuatlOD Of Mary's adherents enabled the His over-

Regent to carry on his negociations with them to tufresr-
great advantage. They were now divided into tWO jc~ed by
faIon1s. At the head of the onie, were Chatelhe-d

C 3 ra ult, klaw.

- sra~ult, andi Huntly. Makland and Kirkaldy wrere
c the leaiders of the other Their high rank, their

57. rtenlive property, and th e numbers of their fol-

Ivers, rendered the form~er considerable. The lat-
Catekcre~ indebted for their importance, to their per-

focal vices, anld to the ithength of the cattle of

Edi;:bigh, wh~ich was in their poffellion. The
Regentiad no intention to comprehend both ini the
famlc tretJy , but as he dreaded that the Queen as
party, if tremined;c~ entie, would be able to thwarIt
and emibabals his adminiltration, he relolved to di-
v·ide an~d wa·iken it, by a Ieparate negaciatiorn. He
mlade the filp overture to Kirkaldy, and his ath;-
ciates, and sdeavoured to renew thle negociatlon
with them, w;ch, during the life of his predecel-
for, hlad been buklen off by his own artifices. B3ut
Kirkaldiy knew 40~rton's view~s, and fyfiem of go,-
vernme~nt, to bevrery dif~ferent from thole of the
former Re~genlt. liaitiand considered hlim, as a
perfional and< implacgble enemy. They received
repeated affo~rances of protettion from France.
And though the siege of Rochelle employed the
FVrench arms at that time, the fame hopes, which
ha~d so ,ofte~n deceived the party, t~ill amul~ed them,
and thety expedted that tlie abit~inacy of the Ha-
gon~ots would soon be furbdued, and that Charles
wo~uld~ then be at liberty to ad~ withl vigour in Scot-
Jand. Mean whiile, a rtpply of money was sent,
anld if the caffle could be held out till W'hirtunday,

* Digges, effedusl ;:id was promiledp. Maiitland's genius
3'+- delighted in forming schemes, that were dange-

rous; and Kirkaldy poffeffed the intrepidity, necel`-
lary for putting them- m~ execution. The cattle,
they knew, was i;, fituactd that it might defy alt:
thle Regent's power. Elizabeth7, they hoped, would
not violate thle treaty with France, by sending for-
ces to his allittanue; and if the French thould be
able to lalnd any confidierable body of men, it might
be pombleSL to de!iverr the Qnueen from captivity, or

at least to ballance the influence of France and Eng. Boon VI.
Janld io inch a man~ner·, as to rescue Scotland from ~
the dilhonourable dependance on the latter, under 5J
which it had fallen. ~This s~plendid, but chimerical
projeA, th~ey preferred to the friendlhip of Morton.
TPhey en~couraged the negociation, however, becaule:
it se~rved to gain time ; they propoled, for the fame
purpole, that the whole of the Queen's party thould
be comprehended in it, and that Kirkaldy thould
retain the command of the cattle, fix months after
the treaty was signed. His interett prompted the
Regentc to rejeat the former; his penetration dilco-
vered the danger of complying with the latter ; and
all hopes of accommodation vanilbed'. 231r be

As soon as the truce expired, Kirkaldy began to

fire on the city of Edinburgh, which, by th~e re-
turn of thle inhabitants whom he had expelled, was
devoted as zealously as ever, to the King's cad~e.
But as ther Re~gent hiad now set on foot a treaty
with Chatelherault and Huntly, the cessation of
arms flill continued with them.

THEY were less ferupulous than thle other party, Accepted

and liflened eagerly to his overtures. The Duke by Chatel*
was naturally uniiteady, and the approach of old an ut-;hral
age increased his irresolution, and averflon to aatonl.
T~he mise~ries of civil dilcord had affidted Scotland,
almost five years, a length of time far beyond the
duration of any former contest. The war, inflead
of doing lervice, had been detrimental to the Queen,;
and more ruinous than any foreign invasion, to the
kiingdom. In prosecuting it, neither party had
gained much honour; both had fuffered great losses,;
and had exhaulted their own estates, in wasting
those of their adversaries. The commons were in
the utmolt milcry, and longed arden~tly for a peace,
which might terminate this fruitless, but dellruc-
tive quarrel.

AGCRE AT nep WAS taken towards this delicable Annices of

event, by the treaty corncluded at IPrthl, brrteenl'eeb.~

C 4 thle

Boog VI. the Reg nt on one hand, and Chatelherault and

·' Hilntly oni the other, under the mediation of Kil-

Se Jplegrew, Elizabeth's ambassador*. The chief arti-

pend. No. cles in it were there; that all the parties compre-
Vi. hendcd in thle treaty (hould declare their approbation

of the Reformed religion, now eflabhtlhed in the
kingdom that they thould fabmit to the King's
government, and own· M~orton's authority as Re-
gent , that they thould acknowledge every thing
done in oppolitio~n to the King, finice his coronation
to be illegal; that on both sides, the prisoners who
had been taken rthould be let at liberty, and the
lands restored to their proper owners ; that th~e acT
of~ attainde~r patked againit the Queen's adh~erents
thould be repraled, and indemnity gran-ted for all
the crimes, of whiich~ they had been guilty floce the
I5th OF June '567 , and that the treaty thould be
ratified, by the common consent of both parties, in

+ Crawf. parliamen~t t.
M/em 29S.· Kl ? KA LDY, though abandoned by his associates,
siege of wh~o n~either dilcovered follicitude nor madeproviflon
of Edith cae for his s~afety, did not lose courage, nor entertain
burgh. any thoughts of accommodation 1. And though

all Scotlanid had now filbmitted to the King. he Itill
resolved to defend the caflik, in the Qgeen's name,

f Melvil, whole brother Sir Robert was one of those who

joined with Kirkaldy in the defence of the ca~lie, and who was
himferlf ltrongly attached to their party, aiffrts that Ki;rkaldy of-
fe~red to accept of any reasonable termsu of' composition, but that
all his offers were rejeded by the Regent. Mely. 240. But as Eli-
zabeth was, at that timle. extremlely ddfivous of rettoring peace in
Scotland. and her anabathu~or Killegrew, as well as the Earl of
Rothes, Used their utmnol endeavours to persuade Kirkladyy roacc-
cede to the treaty at Perth, it feenes mlore credible to impute the
continuance of hottilities to Kirkaldy's obitinacy, his dittruft of
Morton, or hiJ hope of foreign aid, than to any other cadre.

T'hat this was really the cafe, is evident from~ the politive rte-

timrony of Spotdw. 2 '9. '70. Camid. 448. Johnit. Hidt. 3, 4-
D~igges, g34. Crawford's account agrees, ia the main, with
theirs, Mem,. 263.

aind

and to wait the arrival of the promised luccours. ljook VI.
The Regent was in want of every thing necessar-y C
for carrying on a siege. But Elizabeth, who de- SD-3
termined, at any rate, to bring the diffentions in
Scotland to a period, before the French could Eind
leifore to take part in the quarrel, soon afforded him
fiifficient supplies. Sir William Drury marched into
Scotland, with I5oo foot, and a considerable train
of artillery. The Regent joined him, with all his April 29.
forces , and trenches were opened and approaches
regularly carried on, againit the castle. Kirkaldy,
though dilcouraged by the loss of a great fum of
money, remitted to him from France, and which
fell in to the Regent's hands, th~rough the treachery
of Sir James Balfour, thle most corrupt man of that
age, defended himself with bravery, augmented by
det'pair. T'hree and thirty days he resifted all the
efforts of the Scots and English, who puthed on
their attacks with courage, and w'ith emulation.
Nor did he demand a parly, till the fortifications
were battered down, and one of the wells in the
castle dried up, and the other choaked with rubbish.
Even then, his spirit was unfubdued, and he deter-
mined rather to fall gloriously behind the last in-
trenchment, than to yield to his inveterate enemies.
But his garrison was not animated with the fame he-
roic or del~perate resolution, and rifmng in a mutiny,
forced him to capitulate. He fizrrendered himself May 29.
to D~rury·, who promised, in· the name of his mif-
tress, that he thould be favourably treated. Toge-
ther with him, James Kirkaldy his brother, Lord
Home, Maitland, Sir Robert Melvil, a fetw citizens
of Edinburgh, and about 160 soldiers were made
prisoners. * Cald. 2.

SEVER AL of the officers, who had been kept in M,.240.,

pay during the war, prevailed on their men to ac- Crawf.
company them into the: Low countrie~s, and enter- Mem.265.
ing intor the service of the States, adlded, by thieir
g~ilanit behaio~cur 1, to:I: repuita;tion for military

Booir VI. virtue, wh~ich has always been the charaf~terjific of

C1~r3 the, Scottilh Nationi.

Re inY oftS3 Tou br i y the treaty withh Chatelherault and Hunt-
the cha. ily, anid the fuirrender of the caltle, the civil wars in
rocter of` Scotland were brought to a period. Wlhen we re-
both par- vieiw the slate of` the nation, and com~pare the

ne.trength of thle two factions, Mary's partizans

am~ong the nobkes app~ear, maniftltly, to have been
superior, both in numbers, and in pow~er. But there
aIdvanltages were more: than counterballanedl by
oth~ers, wh~ich therir antangonifts enjoyed. Political
abilities, military skill, and all the talents, which
times of action form, or call forth, appeared chiefly
oni the Kiing's Iide. No~r couldl their eniemies boast
of any mani, whio cqualled thle intrepidity of Mur-
ray, te~mpered withi wildom7 , the profoun~d.f~g~acity
o~f Mlorto~n; the fub~le genius, and insinuating ad-
drtais of Maitland ; or the (iucceusful valour of Kir-
kaldy; all which were, at firlt, employed inl lay-
ing the foundations of the King:'s authority. On
the on e fide, mealu res we re concerted wi th prudence,
an~d executed with vigour ; on the other, their re-
solutions were rath, and their conduft fteeble. The
people, animated with zeal for religion, and prompt~-
ed by indignationI againf1 thle Qsietn, warmly liip-
ported thle K~ing's cause. The Clergy thirew the
wh~ole weight of thieir popullarity into the lame Ifcale.
Ey means of there, as well as by the powerful in-
terpothlioi n of Eniglandl, the King's gove~rnment was

finaly etab~ifed. ary loft even that thadow of

i;ve·reignty, whlich, amidst all her citfferings Tbe
had!( hitjicrto) retaineid amonctg part of her own fIlb-
j} ch· Anld as he was no loniger permitted to ha~ve
al~ln amballhdr ait thie couirt of Englanrd, the only
mark of dignityr which Ilth hadl, for some timl-e, en-
joyed there, the muf·1 enice~forth~ be considered as;
an ex ile fir i pedi of all thet ednr~r:s of royalty ; guar-
ded writh anxiety in1 thec one k;ingdomn, and totally
defrsred or forg, :en! in1 the o~iber.

KIRFIaK A~L Dv and his associates cemained in Drury's Boolr VI.

cultody, and were treated by h~im with great huma- 'V
nlity, till the Qgeen of England, whole priloners Kir 13dp
they were, thould determine their fate. Morton put to
intified th~at they thould Auffer the punilhment due death,
to their rebellion and obitinacy , and declared that
so long as they were allowed to live, he did not rec-
kon his own· person or authorityy lecure , and Eli-
zabeth, without regarding Drury's hon-our, or his
promikcs in her name, gave them up to the Regent's
disposal. He first confined them to Ceparate pri-
fans, and, soon af~ter, with Elizabeth's codnit!t,
condemned Kirkaldy, and his brother, to be hang-
ed at the cross~ of Edinburgh. Maitland, who did Auguff 3-
not expedt to be treated more favoulrably, prevent-
ed the ignominy of a public execution, by a volun-
tary death, and " ended his days, lays Me/llvil, after
the old Roman fathion*". * Mely.

Warl.e the Regent was wreaking his vengeance 241·

on the remains of her party in Scotland, Mary,
mncapable of affording them any relief, bewailed
their misfortunes in the solitude of her prison. At
the fame time her health began to be much impair-
ejd by confinement, and want of exerciie. At the
initreaty of the French ambassador, Lord Shrews-
bury her keeper was permitted to carry her to Bux-
ton1-wells, not far from Tuthbury, the place of her
imprisonment. Cecil, who lately had been created
Earon of Burleigh, and Lord High Treasurer of
S;.ngland, happened to be there at the fame time.
And thourgh no miniffer ever entered morer warmly
inito the views of a sovereign, o~r gave fironger
proofs of his fidelity and attachmen t, than th~is great
mnan, yet such was Elizabeth's d~ifruft of every
person, who approached the Queen of' Scots, th~at
her f~ulpicions extended even to him , and while
Mlary justly reckon;ed himi her mos1 dangerous ene-
my, hie found some difl·itrly in perfulading his own

miff refs,

abow VI.miffrers, that he w~is not partial to that unhappy

Qgeo!·~n '.

r7 THIE duke of Alva was this year recalled from

the governiment of the Nethe~rlands, where his
haughty and oppreflive adminiffration routed a fpi-
rit, in attempting to subdue which, Spain exhaull-
ed its treatures, ruin~ed its armies, and 1011 its glory.
Requielens, w·ho uc~ceeded him, was of a milder
templer, and of a less eniterprizing genius. This
event delivered Elizabeth from the perpetual dil-
quietude, ocedrtoned by Alva's negaciations with
th~e Scottiih Quleen, and his zeal for hier initereft.

TI~ot G H the: kingdom was niow fet~tled in pro-

17 fo~und peace, many of the evils, which accompany

The Re- civil war, were flill fe~lt. The reffraints of law,
gent's ad- which, in timess of public: confusion, are little re-
to eminiara- garded ev·en by civilized nations, were totally de-

cm odi- fpi led by a fierce people, unaccultomed to the re-

ous. gular adminiffration oF juffice. The disorders in

every corner of thle kiingdom were become intoler-
able, and under the protedtion of the one, or the
other fae~ion, crimes of every kind were commit-
ted, with impunity. Thle Regent let himlelf to
redrels their, and, by his industry anid vigour, order
and fcur~ity were re-eflablilhedi in the kingdomn.
But hie loit thle reputation, due to this importan~t
service, by the avarice, which hedifcovered, in per-
fo>rmina, it , and his own exa~tions became more
pern~icirous to the niation, than all thie irregfularities,
which h~e re~trainecd t. Spies and informers were
every where employed, the re~memblrance of old
offences wecre reviv·ed - imagiinary crimess were in-
vc·nted; pectty trespasses wvere aggr-av·aed,; and de-
linqu~ents were~ forced to, compound for theisr lives,
by the paymentr of' exorbitant tines. At thle fame
time, the curreit coin w~as debalcd t, licences we·re

fl;d

* Strype 7. 248, 159 -t See Append. No VIT.
SThe corruption o~f thre coin, during M/orton's adriiiniltation,,

was very great. Al houg~h the qjuantity of current m~oney coin-
cd out ofa pound of Bulionr, wras gradlually increali-d by founrer

paices ,

fold for carrying on prohibited branches of co~m sooK vi.
merce, un usual taxes were impoled on commodities,;""
and all the refinements in opprefi~on, from which~, 74
nations so imperfectly polilbed as the Scots are ulu-
ally exempted, were put in pra~tice. None of there
were complained of more loudly, or with7 greater
reason, than his injluffice towards the: Church. The
thirds of benefices, out of which the Clergy re-
ceived their lubfiilan~ce, had alway·s been slowly
and irregularly paid to colledfors, appointed by
the General Assembly , and durinig the civil wars,
no payment could be obtained in leveral parts of
the kingdom Under colour of redrefling this
grievance, and upon a promise of alligning every
Miniffer a flipend within his own parith, the Re-
gent extorted from the Church the thirds to which
they had right by law. But the Clergy, inflead
of reaping any advantage from this alteration,
found that payments becamne more irregular and
dilatory than ever. On;e M/iniffer was commonly
burdened with~ the care of four or five parithes, a
pitiful salary was allotted him, and the Regent's
insatiable avarice s~eized on the reft of the fund*.

THE death of Charles IX which happened this

year, was a new misfor~tune to the Scottith Queen.
Henry III. who rthcceeded him, had not the fame
attachment to her perth~, and his jealousy of the
houle of Guile, and obleqluiouthefs to the Qu~een
Moither, greatly alienated him from her intere~t.

To6 death of the Duke of Chatelhierault must '~9

Jan. 2 2.

princes; the flandard of fineness iuffered little alteration, and the

mxture of alloy was nearly the lamie, with what is now used.
But Morton mixed a Fourth part of alloy, with every pound of
silver, awl funk, by consequence, the value of coin, in pro-
porcion. He the year a <;9 I all the mloney coined by him was
called so, and atppointed to be recoined. TIhe standard was re-
flored to the famle parity as formlerly. Ruddimu. Praf. to An-
derf. Diplom. p. 74.

*Crawf. Mem. 272, Spoltw. 273. Cald. 2. 4zo, 427-

likewise

~Boor VI.likew~ife be confldered as some Joss to Mary. As

- Y-the parliament had frequently declared him next

'57 heir to the Crown, this en titled him to great respect

among his countrymen, and enabled him, miore
than anly other person in the kingdom, to counter-
ballance the Regent's power.

So)on after, at one of the usual interviews be-

tween the wardens of the Scottilh and Englith
marches, a (cuff~e happened, in which the Englith
were worlted; a few killed on the rpot; and Sir
James Forrdircr, the warden, with leveral gentle-
menn who attended himr, taken pi ironecrs. Eut both
Elizabeth and the Regent were to~o fenfble· of the
tdvantage, which· reluted from the goiod under-
flanding that fubtifted be~twee~n the two kingdoms,
to allow this flight accidlent to initerrupt it.

Attempts THI do~metj c tranquillity of thie kir:dom wans
of- the in fomle danger of bein~g <'dlfui Lud by anothetr
Clergy ;r- caure. Thiough the persons, railiud to th~e dignity
gamiotthe of bithops, poffelled very iGrail reven~ues, and a
F~pdicpal very moderate degree of power, the Clergy, to

whom the Recgent and all his mcatures were be-
come extremely odious, began to be jealous of that
order. Knowing that corruptions fleal into the
Church, gradually, unider h~oniourable namnes, and
upon decent pretenices, th~ey were afraid that, from
fiuch Tmall beginnings, the hierarchy might growt,
in time, to be as powerful and oppredive as ever.
The chief author of there fulpicions was Mr. r\O-
drew Mlelvil, a man, diflinguiihed by his uncom-
mon erudition, by the severity· of his manners, and
the' intrepidity of his mind. But, bred up in rthe
retirement of atl scademy, he was unaicquainted
with the arts of life; and being more atter:;ve to
thle ends whichl he purfuied, than to the means
which he employed for promoting them, he often
defeated laudable designs, by the Impetuch~ty and
imprudence with which he carried them on. 11
qu~estion was moved by him in the assembly,

"L whethecr

cc whether the office of bilbop, as now exercised i; IlOOK Vy.
the kingdom, were agreeable to the word of God."' Y
In the ecclesiastical judicatories, continual com- 5r75-
plaints were made of the bilbops, for negledt of
duty, many of whichi, their known remirsoefs too·
well juffified. The bilbop of Dunk~eld, being ac-
cured of dilapidating his benefice, was found guil-
ty by the allembly. And tie.Regent, instead of
checking, connived at ther~e dilputes about Eccle-
falatical governmentr, as they diverted thle zeal of
thle Clergy from attending to~ his daily encroach-
m~ents on1 the patrimonly of the C:hurch *.

THIE weight of the Regent's oppreflive admini- 56

firationi hard, hithierto, fallen chittly oni those in the He irri-
lower, and muiddle rank, but he began now tojets omeK
take foch flepls, as convinced the nobles, that thest nobles.
dignity would not long exempt thein from feeling
thie effeelts of his powcer. An accident, which was
a freqjuent c3aule of dissention aimong the Scottilh
nobles, occaiioned a dit-erence between th~e Earls
of Argyll an~d Athole. A vass~al of the former
had made fame depredations on the lands of the
latter. Atholce took arms to punilh the offender;
Argy II, to protezt him, and th~is ignloble quarrel
they were ready to decide in the field, whecn the
Regent, by interposing his authority, obliged them
to disband thieir f~orces. Both o~f them had been
guilty of irregu~larities, which, though common,
were L contrary to the letter of the law. Of ther~e the
Regent took advantage, and resolved to found on
lheml a chalrge of treason. This design was re-
vealed to the two Earls by onie of Morton's re-
taine rs. T'he common dnnger, to which they
were exporedl, comp~elled them~r to forget old quar-
rebs:, andl to unneil inl a cideZ conifederacy, for their
mutual defenlce. Thieir jundion rendered them
formidable , thiey derp~iled the fuimmons whichr the
KRgente gave themri to appeair before the co~urt of
Ju~tie, and h;· was obligedl to desist from any fur-

* Cald. A1Temb~lies, a 574, &c. Joholl. Hilt. I 5.

thert

R.OOK VI. ther prosecution. But the injury he intended made

~3a deep imprei~on on their minds, and drew on him
176. severe vengeance*.
5277. No" was he more A~ccefsful in an attempt, which

he made, to load Lord Claud Hamilton with the
guilt of having formed a conspiracy against his life.
Though those, who were supposed to be: his ac-
complices, were leized, and tortured, ·no evidence
of aniy thing crim~inal appeared; but, on the con-
trary, many circumfltances dil~covered his innocence,
as well as thle KRgent's secret views, in imputing
to him such an odious defgsn -t.

TnE ccottilh Nobles, who were almnoft equal to

eh~yturn iheir lonlarchs i~ power, and treated by them

towards with much dilindiiion, oblerved thlele arbitrary pro-
theKing. ceeding~s of a Regent, with the utmost indignation.

The people, who under a form of government ex-
tremely limple, had been little ac~cuffomned to the
burden of taxes, complained loudly of the Regen t's
rapacity. And all began to turn their eyes towards
the young King, from whom they expeancd the re-
drels of all their grievances, and the return of a
more gentle, and more equal adminiffration.

James's J AM ES WG3S now in the twelfth year of his age.
education The Q~ueen, loon after his birth, had committed
and difpo- him to the care of the Earl of Mar, and during the
seen. civil wars, he had resided securely in the castle of

Stirling. Alexander Erikine, that nobleman's bro-
ther, had the chief direation of his education. Un-
der him, the famous Buchanan adted as preceptor,
together with three other matters, the molt emi-
nent, the nation afforded, for Ikill in those f~cien-
ces, which were deemed necessa~ry for a prince. The
young King thewed an uncommon pallion for
learning, and made great progreifs in it. And the
Scots fancied that they already discovered in him,
all those virtues, which the fondnels or credulity
of lubjeds u~irally alcribes to princes, during their
minority. But as James was (till far from that age,

* Crawl. Mem. ass. ·t Crawf. Mem, 287-

at which the law permitted him to assume thiefloo* VI·
reins of· gove~rnment, the Regent did not fi~fficient- ~`~
1ly attend to the sentiments of the people, nor re- '517*
fledt, how naturally there prejudices in his favour
might encourage th~e King to anticipate th~at period.
He not only necgle~ted to secure thle friendship of
those who wecre about the King's person, and who
p'offeffed his ear, but had even exasperated some He is lfu-
of them, by personal ml~urics. Th;eir resentment picious of
concurred with the ambition of others, in infusing the Re-
into the King early rltpicions of Morton's power, gent's
and designs. A Kinig, they told him, had often power.
reason to fear, seldom to lov7e a Regent. Promp-
ted by ambition, and by interest, he would endea-
vour to keep the prinlce in perpetual infancy, at a
diflance fromt his fuibjeas~, and unacquainted with
business. A fi-nall degree of vigour, however, was
ifuflicient to break thle yoke. Subjeats naturally
reverence their Sovereign, and become impatient
of the temporary and delegated juri di~tion of a Re-
gent. M~orton had governed with a rigour, un-
known to th:e ancient M/onarchs of Scotland. The
nation groaned under his op;yrcollos, and would
welcome thle sirs1 profped~ of` a milde~r admninifira-
tion. At present, the King'ss name was fearce
meintioned in Scotland, hiis friends were with~out
ini~uence, and his favourites wvithout honour. But
one effort would discover Mor-ton's pov er to be as
feeble, as it was arbitrnry. T'he fame attempt
would put hims~elf in poffellioni of his just authority,
and rescue thle nation fr-om intolerable tyranny. If
he did not regard his ow·n rights as a King, let
himn lillen, at least, to the crics of his people*.

I'HESE iilggeftirons made a deep impretlion on the A plot

young King, w~ho was trainedl up in an opmsion formed a-
Ilhat he was born to commanid. His approbation gainft the
of the design, however, was of mmall consequence, R~egent
withlout the concurrence of thle n~obles. TIhe Earls

*Mely. 249

four VI o~f ArgyH~1 and nt!ole, tw.o of thie mloll powerful

'f~ o~f th:.a bod~y, werc!e allniatedl with implacable re-

'57 l.unenit againift the Rogent. TSo themi theCabal

i n ti r ii.iigI ca nk) commnuniicatedi the plot, which was
(;n s;ot, andl they ete~rriing warilmly into~ it, Alex-
anlcier Erlikine, u ho~, li~c~e the de-ath of` his brother,
and~ diuring thle mninontiy of his nephew, had the
com mnand of` that fo~rt, and the c~ulodiy of th~e
king's perilo,n admitted thmc~ fecreitly i-nto the
K~ing's pml~inlc~e. TIheyv gave hiim ther famce ac-
counl~t oJf ther miser~y of~ his iitbjc~ts, under the
!-egent's arbiitrary adm~inistration,; they complain-
cJi loudly of rthe injuttice, ~irth w·hich theinkil\·es
ha~d been treate·d , and besought thle King, as thleon-
13· meanss for cirl ·

edraho the g~rievancess of the nation,

to, cal)l a councii ut all the nobl;s. James contant-
edl, and let ters wecre illued, inl his namne, for that
pur'po1e, but the tw~o Ea~rls took care that they
thould be sent only to thrch as wecri kn~own to beat

* Spottiv. n'o g=ood wiljf to M~'orton *.
276. TuiE numnber Of therle was, howSeve, so incon-
Ma78 G fierable, thiat on the day appointed, far thie great-

M 'c c· r par~t oft th~e nobles ai~clrmbkd~ a:t Stirlinlg and so

highly were they inlcenfl~d argainlte Afut oo, thiat

Athlole's intervitew withi thle King, h~e had made a
suint ;!s If` he would rcr~gn the Kegecncy, they ad-
viied the K~ing, writhcut reg~ardlS ing S thisffr, Tto de-

tlon1of~ Go,·trrr:ema: n i:;ra hIsIo\wn: hanlds. Lord Gla-

bu;- ott~ic to lignify th~is reljlution to, M~orton, who was, at
and~rrtires. that time1, inl D~alke~tih, his utilall place of refidecnce.

Nothing3 c~ou~ld equal thc joy~, with~ which this un-
cxi:pCctd rll;,lcrutio filled the natlionl, buit the fiir-
pr[iZe~ I-:cca~l:Cne by theii fe-emngll alacrity, wcithr
w:hichl thc Regent~ def~rcended forom to, high a fla-

tio. H n~ciher wan:tedc thgancity to forese~e the

fehion of an office, for the expiration of which the Boor VI-
law hlad fixed lo difiant a term. B:ut all the four- C r
ces, whence the famton of which he was head, de- 5·
rived their firength, biad either failed, or now fuip-
plied hiis adverf~acies with the means of humbling
him. Thle Commons, the city of I- dinburgh, the
Clergy, were all totally alieawted from him, by
his multiplied opprellions. Elizabeth, having late-
ly bound herself` by treaty, to fend a considerable
body of troops to the allittance of the inhabitants
of the Netherlands, who were firugg=ling for liber-
ty, had little le~iurre to attend to the afailrs of Scot-
lanld ; and as the had nothing to dread from France,
in ahole councils the princes of Lorrain had not,
at that time, much influence, the was not difplear-
ed, perhapz, at the birth of new fadtions in the
kingdom. Even those nobles, who had long been
joined with Morton in fadtion, or whom he had at-
rached to his person by benefits, G!amis, Lindsay,
Ruth~ven, Pitcarn rthe secretary, Murray of Tillibar-
den Comptroller, all deserted his falling fortunes,
and appeared in the council at Stirling So many
concurring circumitances conv·inced M~orton of his
own weaknlels, and determined him to give way
to a torrent, which was too im~petuous to be reTfif-
ed. He attended the chancellor and Herreis to E- March Iz.
dinburghi was present w·hen th2 King's accep-
tance of' the government was proclarimed; and, in
the presence of the people, furrenldered to the k~in~g,
all the authority to which he had any claim in
v~irtue of his office. This ceremony was accom-
panied with fach excessive joy and acclamations of
the multitudr,, as added, no doubt, to the anguih,
which an amnbitiou~s fp-iric mult feel, whe~n compel-
led to renounce (bpTreme pow·rer; and conivinced
Morton how entirely he had loss thle affemtons of
his countrymen. He obtained, however, fro~m thle
King an ad, containmgE the aprobation~o of every
thinig done by hImjl in the xrc~i~le Of. his office,

D 2 nd~

`-~3 fear or cautionl cou11 ld dvile, of all pu~t offe-nces,

',Y crimes, and treal;ns. T`he noble~s, who adhlered

to the King, bounod theserllve-s, under a great
penlalry, to l;rocure the rawicaL~ion of thiis aitt, in
thle Brirt parliamont~ *

Continues cl courNc~L of twe~lve Peers was appointred to
to watch allift the Kinge in the' adminiiitratio n of affairs.
ticens Atnd I~l:,r ton~ defertedl by his on\1 party, and un-
the ad- ablel to ilruiiggl wvith thie fation:, wh~ich governed
verle par- abbilutely~ at court, retrired to one of hiis icats, and
'y. Ifeiemed to elnjoy cith traquciullity, and to be occu-

piedi only ini the a~murlnemets o~f a coun~try life~. H-is
mlind1 /c\'t~~,hoev rs wadteply dikpiucted writh all the

ambt~ion , n d ~lintent o~n ichemes f;;r recove~rin~g
hiis formier g~an~deur. Eveni· in thiis re~treat, which
the peopleI calle~d thle Ly~on's-dent, his wealth and a-
bilities rendere-d h~im formiidable. And the new
Cou;;icifors w cre to, impruident as to rouze him, by
thle precipitancy writh which they hastened to firip
himT of all the remauinis of power. Thiey required
himr to filrrenlder the cJ1llie of EdiinburgIh, wvhich
was flill in hiis p;olillonii Het re~fuled at firfl to do
so, and began1 to pr~epare for its defenlce -, but thet
citizens of Ed~inburg hi hal\ ing t;kEnt; arms, and re -
pulled a part o~f the gal rf(th, wvhich waLs I;·nt out to
guiardi a convoyl of pos.,itio~ns, hie cas ob~liged to
give up thiat ingliorfal t on fourels, w~i th out refll~ance .
This encouragedl his adlverlarics to call a parlia
ment to meet at Ediinbuirghi, and to multiply their
demands upon: himl, inl fIsch a manne1r, as convinced
him thiat nocthin l]el s thian his utter rurin w·ould fa-
tisfy 1·their mee~terate haltred.

1 HEla( pow~er and popularity, however, begani

alread~y to decline. T'he Chanlcefo'r, thle ablest andl
meft mode~rate manI in~ the` pa·rty, ha;vingB b~eca

*Spotlw. 278. CrawlE Memci. zR9 Caki 2 ja2.

~killed at Stirling in an accidental rencouniter be- 800t vt.
xween his follower:Is, andt those of th~e Earl of Craw- V`
ford; Athlole, whio was appointed hiis fiucceffor in
that high offree, the Earls of Eglinton, Cathlnefs,
and Lord Ogilvie, all the prime favourites at
court were either avowed papifts, or flifpe~ted of:
leaning to th1e opini;ons of that jced. rIn an age,
w·hen thle returnl of p~opery was, (0 mulch, and to~
juilly, dreadecd, this gave uiiverfal a~lairm. And
as Mlorton hiadl alw~ays is cated thez pap~ifis with ri-
gour, this unseasonable indulgence ma~de all zea-
Jous P~rotelaints remember~i' th~at circumfi~lane inl his
adminifftration w:ith great pr~ise *. * Sporrw.

Mou roN, to whlom nonie o~f` ther particulars '~mc

wecre unk~nown, thiought iur-' s t·he prope;r ju~nctut hiJ form~er
for letting: to work the: intirument s, whicfih he h~ad authoriiy.
been prepl-aring. HavingZ g xned thle confaJednc e o:
the l'arl of Mlr-, andt of` the Countels hiis mtother!,
he inr;nuatsed to them~ thiat Aletxanider E~rfikie hadl
fbrmedi a1 plot to depr:ive ;:is niepherw of the goj-
vernment oft Stirling~-caffle, an1d thle cufltOdy of the
Kin;g's perrlon 31;

a nd cliy ildulced an ambllitiouls

woman, and a youith of twenty, to t-mplacy force
to preven~t this iiippofed injury. TIhe E~arl repair-
ing 111ddenly, to Stilling,; and beii ng amirtctd, as
usua~l, into the cafllie with hiis arttndants,, seized thle
gates early in the mnorninlg, and turned out his un-
cle, w~ho dreaded n!Io dange·r fr~omn his hiands. The April 26.
soldiers olf the garr~ison Culbmited to him as their
governo~r, anld, with~ little danger, andi n·, effil6r.or
of bl~ood, h~e became ma~tter both of the K~ing's per-
son, and thle for trels $. t Cald. 2.

As even~t I;> unexpectet d occafxonc great con·- 535-

flernatijo: 1 And~ thioug1h Morton's hland didf not
appear 1in the~ execution, he wrs univerfullyl be~liev-
ed to be~ the author of the attempt. The new
Counsellors Saw it to b' necetary, for thci:· own
i~fafty, to chiange their measures, and initead of
purfeing him with such implacable reletntment, to

D) 3 enter

-'~ fary, flill so capable: of creating them trouible. Four

1578. ivere named, oni each Edre, to adjuit their differ-

ences. They met not fdr from Dalkeith. And
when they had brought mratters n~ear a conclusion,
Morton, whio was too tagacious not to improve the
advantage, wchich th;eir security and their attention
to the treaty aff~orded him, let out in the night-rtime

hl
2 for St'lin'g, an~d having gained MLurray of T'illibar-

d~ii, Mvar's uncle, wars adimitted by him into th~e
cattle, an~d mana~ging ma7tters there w·ith his uliial
de-xterity, he foun hiad m~ore entirely the command
o~f' the fort, tha\n th~e Earl ltimfelf. He was like-

iii· ::dmi tcd to a feat in th~e privy coun~cil, an~d ac-
;::CO~ thet thmle ascendan~t in it *

i imeri~i appointed for the meeting of parlia-

j;.ri. ct: 1:.dmlbur~gh now approached, this gave hiim
fbmne ainxwtyt. He was afraid of carryinig th~e young
K~ing to, a city w~hole iinhabitants were so much at
the~ devotioni o~f the adlverlej f~a~ion. He wasT no lels
unu &ng-: to, leavet Jlames behinid at .itirling. In or-
tie; o a- old thn,~ c!il~mirna, he ilrued a proclama-
tion~, in: th:: K;;nl s cname, changing the p~lace of
mneetng: f.com; idi;burgh to Stirlinig-callic. This
Ari:coe ;:nd hiis palrty reprelen~tted as a flep alto-

gethesuncnfilwionl.The King, said they, is

Mlorrtol's p~r;!,lt r - the pet-ecnded~ Counsellors are hiis
slaves, a pas har~ent,, to whlich all the nobles may
repair wit:hout ieatr, and whlele the:y may deliberate
with freedtom~, is ab~lolutely ntecef fary for Iettling the
nation, as ter disorders-- of liich longe continuance.
Eut in! an auemnbly,, calle~d contlrary to all formi, held
wvithini the w~ats of` a garrison, and over a:.ed by
aIrmed~ men~, wvhat fIllety cou\ld membters expedt Z
wrhatt liber ty couldl pret-ail in debatc ? or whatE b-

July 2j. nefit result to the public ? The parliament met,

however, on thle day appointed, and notwithilanid-

* Cald. z* 536.

ing the protcllationl of the Ea~rl of M~ontrose and sooK vr.
Lordl Lilndfay, inl namre of thecir par ty, pr occeeded '- " '
to bulincQ. Thec King's accepi:t~ace of thle gover!- ' #8
ment was confirmed , the ad1 grantecd to~ M'orton,
for his security, ratified, fam~e re~gulations, with re-
gar'd to the numnbers and au thoritry of t he prwvy coun-
cil, weire agreed uporn -, and a pension for life gran-
tcd to thec Cou~ntclS of Mlar, w ho h ad beIen i.b inltr u-
ment~al in brirnging about the late Ievolution*". * Cald. 2.

hv2EANWHItlLE, Argyil, Rthole~, an~d thceir fo;llow\- Fm.

crs, took arms, upon thle fpcciouls yetence of rcef- Yal V.
cling the K~ing from captivity, a thec kin:gldom Argyll and
ft am oppre~ion. Jamies hinmle~!f rmpa~tii ent of thle Aitlolc
servitude in whiichl he was he!ld, by a1 mani wbhum he t3ke anna1
had long bee~n taughlt to hrate, lecre~tly eni~~iacoragd % I~1'
th~eir enterprize,; thioughl, at the fame time, hie \ as
oblige~d not onily to difravo~w them~n in public, buit to,
k1vy forces aga;in~tt themi, anid even to declare, byr
pro'clamation, tha;t he was perfee~ly free: fro~m an~y
.c~nltraint, either upon hiis person, or hiis will. Both~
fidfes quick~ly took the Fzld. Argyll and Athole
were. at thre head of '-000c men , thle Earl of Angus,
Morton's nepbcw, met them with~ an army 5000 Augub s.
floonlg ; neither party, howYever was eager to en·
gage. Morton diftruffed th~e fidlelity of his Own~
troops. The two Earls were sensible that a s~ingle
vi~tory, however compleat, would not be decisive,
and as they were in no condition to unde!rtake thec
frege of Stirling-csttle, whiere the King; was kept,
thieir fireogth would loon be exhauffed, whiile Mor-
ton's own wealth, and thze patronage of thle Queen
of England, might furnilh h~im with endlers re·
sources. By the mnediationi of Eowes, who~m Eli-
zabeth had feet into Scotland to neg~ociate an ac-
commnodation between thle two faCtions, a treaty Elizabeth
was concluded, in codrequlence= of which, Argyll negaciates
and Athole wbere admitted into the Kin~g's presence; ~,

a O~-

some of their party were added to thle privy council ; between

D 4 and Ihemn.

sooi VI. and a Con vention of nobles called, in order to bring

aY~Jiill remainling diffe~renlces to an amicable iifue*.

.179f So loon as James allixmed the govrnrment into
Mem.,307. his own hands, he dispatched the abbot of Dun-

fermling to inform Elizabeth of that event ; to of-
ser to renew the alliance between the two kingdoms,;
and to demand poffeflion of thle ditate, which had
lately fallen to him, by the death of his grandmo-
ther, the Counters of Lenox. Thiat Lady's second
son had left one dauighter. Arabella Stewart, who
was bom- in E~ngland. And as the chief abec~tion
againfit the pretenlion~s of the Scottith line to the
crowvn of' En;glandc, was that maxim of Englith law·,
wihich excludes dea~;s from any righit of inherita;:ce
writhinI the ktingdom, Elizabeth, by granting this
demand, wou!d ha\·e eflablithed a precedent in
J`ames's favour, that might have becen efleemend de-
cifzvep, with regaird to a point, which it had been
her conftalat care to keep undecidecd. Wilhout sus-
fe~ring this dclicate qu" flion to be tried, or allowing
any n M lighit to be thrown on th~at, which the con;-
fidered as the great mystery of her reign, the com-
manded the rc-nts of the estate to be requeftered by
~Lord Burleigh, master of tthe wards ; and by this
methoed of proceed ing, gave the Scot tith Kinig early
warninlg hlow n-cteffo~ry it would be to court hier fa-
vour, if ever he hored ~for filcefs in claims ofg~reater

+ Camd. importance, but eqlually liable to bie controverted*.

46(.AFTF: R many delays, and wirh much difficulty,
'S9·9 th~e contendingI nobles were at last brought to famI~e

agreement. Eut it was followed by a tragical event.

April 24. Mor~ton, in token of reconcilement having invited

the leaders of the opposite party to a great enter-
tainmentr~, Athole the chancellor w~as, so~on after,
takeni ill, and died within a few days. T'he lymp-
to~ms and violence of the dis~ease gave rife to firong
AlpT~icions of hiis beinlg p~oisoned ; and thlougih the
physicians, who opened hiis body, diffe~red in opinion

as to the caule of thle diflemper, the Chancellor's Boait VI.
relation·s publickly acculed Morton of that odious '"
crime. T~he advantage which visibly accrued to rs?9.
him, by thle removal of a man of great abilities, and
averse fromn all his measures, was fulfficient proof of
his guilt to the people, who are eve~r fond of imi-
pu'ting the death~ of eminent perians to extraor-
dinary caule~s*. *Spotwr.

'rHE c,~iee of Chanicellor was beffowed upon gos.

Argyll, whom rthis prefe~rment reconciled, in a great IMirton's
measure, to Morton's adminiffration. Hehad now slegal pr-
recovered all the authiority b~e poffeff~ed during his agamilt the
Regency·, and had entirtly broken, or bas~ed, the famnily or
power and cabals of his enemies. None of the Ham"ilton.
great. families remained to be the objeats of his jea-
louly, or to obitruA his designs, but thiat of Hamil-
too. T'he Earl of Arran, the eldest brother, hiad
never recovered thle thiock, which~ he received from
thle ill fticrecs of his pallion for the QLueen, and had
now altogethier loit his real;,n. Lord JTohn, thle fe-
cond brothecr, w as ini pollfemon of the family estate.
Lo(rd Claud was Commendator of Paisley; both of
themn young men, ambitious, and enterprifmng.
Morton dreaded their influence in the kingdom; thle
coulrtiers' hop~ed to (hare their spoils among them ,
andl as all princes naturally view their successors
with jealoufyl and hatred, it was ealy to infille these
pamTouls into the mind of the young: King. A pre·-
tence was at hand to jufifiy tle m~ost \ iole~nt proceezd-
ings. The pardon, flipullated in the treaty of Perth,
did not extend to th~ose, who were accessary to the
murder of~ the Regents Murray or 1.enlox. Lrdrc
Joihn and his brother were filfpeded of being the
suthors of both th~ese crimes, and had b~een inclu-
dced in a general aA of attaindier on thiat account.
W~ithout summoning themn to, tria~l, or examiningn
a single witness to prove the chairg, this attainder

Wras

Boor. VI. was now thought f~uficient to fubtieca th~em to all

c5 the penalties, which they would have incurred by

r579. being formally conviated. The Earls ofMorton,

Mlar, and Eglinton~, togethler withl the Lords Ruth-
ven, Bo~yd, and Cathcart, recedcive a comimillion
to seize their pedobns and elltetcs. On a few hours
warning, a considerable body of troops was ready,
and marchedt towards Hamnilton~, in h~offile array.
H-appily, the twvo brothers made th~eir efe~ape,
though with great difficulty. But th~eir lands were:
confitcated , the caliles of` Hamilton and Draff~m~
besieged , those- who defended them puniithed. Thec
Earl of Arr~an, though incapable, from his itura-
tion, of committing~ any crime, was invo~lved, by
a Ithameful abuler of law, in the commnnon ruin of
hiis family- , and as if he, too, could have been guilty
of rebellioil, confin~ed a close prison-er. Theiote pro-
ceedings, so, contrary to the fulndamental princi.
pk~s of justice, were all ratified in~ the fubf'cquent

* Crlwr. parliament.*
Mem.3s s. Anoo r this time Mary lent, by· Naue her fecre-
spouiw. tary, a letter to her lon, together with fomejewels

30.of value, and a vett embroidered with her own~

handfs. But as the gave him only the ti tleof Prince
of' Scotland, the messenger was diiinilled,· without

+ Crawr. being admittedr into hisi prelence -t.
Mem" 3'4. THouca Elizabeth had, at this time, no parti-
oen
o -a cular reason1 to fear any attempt of. the Popith prin-
mrariage ces, in Mary's favour, the (till continued to guard
between her with the lame anxious care. The acquilition

oaj~' f Portugal, on the one hland, and the defe~nce of

Duke of the Netherlands, on th~e other, fullly employed the
Alengon. councils and arms of Spain. France, torn in pieces

by intestine commotions, and under a weak and ca-
pricious prince, derp~iled and dilthufted by his own
fiibjeats, was in no condition to di~turb its neigh-
bours. Elizabeth hadl long amuled th~at court by
carrying on a treaty of marriage with the Duke of

A~lengon,

Alengon, the King's brother. Eut whether, at thie Boow VI.
age of forty five, the really inten~ded to marry a ~
Prince of twenty ? whether the pleathre of bein~g '*9
flattered and courted, made her litten to the addrei`-
fes of so young a lov~er, whoml the allowed to vilit
hecr at twa~different times, and treated with th~e moit
diitin~guithing refp~ed ? or whether considerations
of interest, predominated in this, as well as in every
o~ther tranfation of he~r reign, are problems in hil-
tory wchich we are not: concernecd to resolve i Dur-
inig the progress of this negaciation, which was
drawn out to an extraordinary le~ngth, Mary could
expca no alliftance fromi the Flrenich court, and
s~eems to haLve held little co-rrespondence with it.
And thecre w~ias no period in her re~ign, w·herein Eli-
zabeth en:joyed more perfedt security.

MouRroN seems, at this time, to have been equal. TwO ra-

ly secure; , ut his iecuirity wras not to well foun~ded. vornes:
H~e had wea~thcred out one florm, haid cruthed his cendanr.
aIdverfaries, and w~as again in pofkiefon of the sole: over
dircdian of affairs. Eut as the King was now of Jam'ES.
an age, when the charad~er and dif~politions of the
mind begin to unfold themselves, and to become
visible, the smallest attention to there might have
convinced him, that there was reason to exped new
and more dangerous attacks on his power. James
early difoovered that excellive attachment to fa-
vourites, which accompanied him thirou~gh his whole
life. This pallion, which naturally aril~s fromi in-
experience, and youthiful warmth of heart, was at
h~is age, far from being culpable ; nor could it well
be expeated that the choice of the ob~jeds, ·on whom
he placed his affeaions, thould be mnade with great
Ikill. Thec most confrderable of them, was Eline
Stewart, a native of F~rance, and fa~n of a l~econd
brother of th~e Earl of Lenox. He was diftin-
guilhed by the title of ]Lor~d D)'clubgab, an ellate

1iI

Boor VI. in France, which descended~ to him fromt his an-

Scellors, on whom it had been conferredl, ini reward
'579- of their valour, and services to thle French crown.

He arrived in Scotlanid, about this time, on pur-
pole to demand the estate and title of Lenox, to

Sipt. 8. which he pretended a le·gal right. He was re-

ceived, at firit, by the King, with lthe relpedt due
to so near a relation. Thle gracefulness of his per-
fan1, the elegance ,f his drers, and his courtly be-
haviour, made a great impreflion on James, who,
even in his more maturre years, was little able to
reft thiere frivolous charms,; and his affe~ionn flow-
ed with its ufural rapidity, and profusion. Within a
fe~w days after StewYart's appearance at court, he
was create~d Lord Aberbrothock, soon after Earl,
and thien Duk~e of Lenox, Governor of Duimbarton
caf11e, Captain of the guard, fir:t Lord of the bed-
chamber, and Lord High Chamberlain. At thle
fame time, and withiout any of thle envy, or emu-
lation which) is ufulal among candidates for favour,
Captain James Stewart, the recond lon of Lord
Oihiltree, grew into great coi;fidence. But not-
withflanding this union, Lenox and Ciptain Stew-
art were p'erfons of ver y opposite ch~1araders. '1 he
fo>rmer was naturally gentle, hum~ane, candlid;
but unacqluainted with the slate of the country,
and milled, or misinformed by those, whiom he
truff~ed ; not unw-orthly to be the companian of the
young King, in his amdremenlts, but ut terly dil'-
qu"lfied for ading as a Miniff~er, in dired~ing his
affairs. The latter was remarkable for all the vices,
which render a man formidable to his country,
anrd a pernicious couinfellor to his Prince; nor did
he potkfrs any one virtue, to co~unterbalance there
victes, unless dexterity in conduating his own designs,
and an enterprising courage, fliperior to th~e sense~
of danger, may pals by that name. Unlreflrained
by religion, regardlers o~f decency, and unidifmay-
ed by oppolition, hie aimed at objeats, seemingly

uinattai nable ;but u nder a Prince,void of experience, Boo u VI.
and blindd to all the defeCas of thoie, whio had gain- ~~
ed his favour, his audacity was lu~ccelsful ; and '79·
honours, wealth, and power, were the reward of
his crimes.

BoTru the favourites concurred in employing They la-

their whole addreis, to undermine Morton's credit, bourtoun-
which alone obitruded their full poffeion of pow- "ne,,,
er. And as James had been bred up with an a- authority.
verflon for that nobleman, who endeavoured ra-
thler to maintain the authority of a rTutor, than to
nat with the oblequiouloefs of a Miniffer, they
found it no difficult matter to accompli(h their de-
sign. Mocrton, who could no longer keep the
King (but up within the walls ofStirling-caffle,
having called a parliament to mneet at Ediniburgh, Odtob. s7.
broughit hiim thither. James made his entry into
thle cap'ital, with great solemnity , the citizens re-
ceived him with the loudest acclaimations of joy,
and with many expediive pageants, according to
the mode of that age. After a long period of
thiirty seven years, during which, Scotland had
been fubjeated to the de~legated power of Regents,
or to the feeble government of a woman, and had
fuiffered all thle m~ifries of civil war, and felt the
inso~lence of foreign armies, the nation rejoiced to
fe~e the feeptre once more in thle hands of a King.
Fond even of that (hadow of authority, which a
Prince of fifteeni could pff~ers, the Scots flattered
the~mfelves,'that union, order, and tranqluillity would
now be reflored to the kingdlom. Ja~mes opened
th~e parliamnent w~ith extraordinary pomp, but no-
tthing re mar kable patQed in it.

TrHESE demonft~iraions, however, of the people's

lo~ve anid attachm~ent to thecir Sovereigni, encouragr-
ed the favourites to~ contrinue the r infinuiations a-
gainft Morton ,nc ands thle King nlow relided in the
pailace f HI:1y-r oil -hou~re, to whiichi all his fuibjeAs
hiad aceds·, thc cabaI ;! ;ins1 the Ear~l grew~ daily

~fronger,

BOOK V. HrtOnge, and the intrigue, wrhich occalloned his

~~fall, r~ipened gra~dually

M~ro j0. M'o::row be~gan to be fenfble of h~is danger, and
endeavours end~. avoweurd to put a itop to the career of Lenox's
to prevent p~c~irefrmnct, by rep~reienting himr a~s a formidable
them. enemyiiS tol the Reformerd Religiol, a~ fcrett agenit

hou0l~lt oue.T C~le~rgy, apt f to blieve every

rnlnlcIr- of this kindt, Ilucad~ the ala~rm among the

pepe. Et Lenox, enhrrlc out ~f compl-lailance to

hiis mu-;lter, or conv·inced by the argu~me nts o~f some
lea:ne Div~inesti!, whoicm the. King applorinted tu in·-
~thait himn inl the prinicip~les of the Proteflant Reli-
g·ion,: pubic~kly reno~unced rthe errors of Popery,
in riLe Chiurch! of St. Gikts, anid deebl~red h~imklf a
membec~r of th~e Ch urch~ oft Sotcland, b~y s~igning her
CodiemIon of F-aith. Tlhi·, thouigh it didl not re-
move all fUlpiic)ion, nor illen~ce some zealous preach-
ers, abated in a g~re-at degree, th~e frce of the ac-
cufation *.

~ON thle other hand, a rumour prevailed that

M~orton was preparing to seize thec King's person,
and to, carr-y him intoo Englan:d. W~huther delpair
of ma;intalining hiis power, by an!y other means, had
driven him to miak~e any overture of that kcind to
the Enghhli corrt, or whetrher it was a calumny,
invcented b~y his adversa~ries to render him odious,
cannoic t niow be deter~in~edd with ce-rtainty. ls h~e
d:: bred a ;t hiis dieath, thiat fuich a dieign had never
entcere! inito h~is th~ouglhts, th~e lattecr hecms to be

mat probale.It afforded a pretence, h~owever,

for rev'ivingL the 0!1ee of Lord Chamberlain, which

had een
so fae tmedibed.That honour

wais concfe~rred onl Lenox. Alexsander Erskine~-, Mor-
ton's capital e·i~nmy, wa·s hiis deputy , they had
under thiem a ban~d of' Ge~n tkme~n, who( were ap-
pointed con;itantly to attcod thec K~ing, and to guard

*L (CrawF.l Mem. 7 9,. Sp~otfw. 3013 . I d. 3Ze0.

M·· o ::r av

100avoN was not ignorant of what his enemies Boo+ VI.

intended to infmnuate, by filch undrual precautions ~r
for the K~ing's flafety , and as his last relource, ap- Elrb'h5C
plied to Elizabeth, whole proteaion had often flood interpores
him in flead, in his greatest difficulties. In confe- in his be-
quence· of thlis application, Bowes her envoy accuf- hair.
ed Lenox of` pradtices against the peace of the two
kingdoms, and insisted, in her name, that he thould
inflantly be removed from the privy council. Such
an unprecedented demand was considered by the
Counlellors, as an affronlt to the King, and an en-
croachment on the independence of the kingdom.
They affedecd to call in question the Envoy's pow-
trs, and upon that pretence, reflled him farther
audience, and he retiring in disgust, and without
taking leave, Sir Alexander Home was sent to
expostulate wIith~ Elizabeth on the fixbjedt. After
the treatment which her Envoy had received, Eli-
zabeth thoughit it 'oelowv her dignity to admit H-ome
into her presence. Burleigh, to whom he was
commanded to impart his commifion, r-epr~oached
himn· with his Mafter's ingratitude towards a bene-
faatrels, who had placed the crown on his head,
and required him to advise the Kine to beware of
sacrificing thle friendship of so necessary an ally, to
the giddy humours of a young man, without ex-
perience, anid frongly fL~lpeded of principles, and
attachmients, incompatible with the happiness of
the Scottith nation.

TrHIS accusation of L~enox hastened, in all pro- Mlorton

bability, Mortoni's fall. Th'le adt of indemnity, acculed of
w~hich hec had obtained when he resigned the Re- the murderoftelt
gen~cy, was worded with such rcrupulou~s exra~tncs K helat
as almost frleened him from any legal prosecution.
'Ithe murrder of the late King rwas thle only crime,
whiich cooki~ not, wib decency, be inferred in a
Pardon, grantedc by hi~s lon. He~re Morton itill
byv opnr! to, th pena:lti:-s of the lawv. And Captain

BOOK VL rate, if it led to power, or to falvour, entered the

rl counIcil chamber, whlile thle King and nobles were

Dc , aJnembled, and falling on his kinees, accused Mor-

toni of being accessary, or according to th~e language
of the Scottiib law, art a~nd pairt, in the conspiracy
againtt thet life of his Maljefty's farther, and offered,
unde~r the uiual penaties, to verify thils charge by
legal evidenice. M~orton, who was pre~lent, heard
this accusation with furmnefs; and replie~d with a
dildainful fmle, proceeding either frcom contempt
of the infamous ch;arader of his acculer, or from
confciouthefss of hiis own innocence, " that his
known real, in· punithing thiofe who were fulpedted
cos that detdlaitble crime, might well exempt him-
self from any f~ilpicion of be-ing accelfary to it, ne-
verthelels, h~e would ch~eerfully s~ubmit to a trial,
eithier in that place, or in any other court; and
doubted not but his own innocence, and the m~alice
of his enemies, would then appear in the clearest
ligh~t."' Stewart, who was flill on his kne~es, began
to enqluire how he would reconcile h~is beflowing
so many bionours on Archibald Douglas, w~homn he
certainly knew to be one of theu multherers, with
his pretended zeal against thiat crime. Morton
was ready to anwer. But the Kin7g commandted

rrsr. both of them to be removed. The Earl was con-
Januar. 2.fined, firit of all, to his own boule, and then

committed to the cattle of Edinburgh7, of which
Altxalnder Erikine wIas Governor , andt as if it had
not been a flificient indignity to filbject him to the
pow~er of one of his enemies, he w~as, soon aftet,
carried to Dumbarton, of which Lenox had the

Janu. Is. commannd. A warrant was, likewise, iflued for

ayppreending Archibald Douglas s but he, having
received timely intelligence of the ap~proaching
danger, fled into En~glan~d *

*Crawf. Memr 3zj3

THE Earl of Angus, who imputed there violent Booi VI.

proceedinlgs not to hatred against Morton alone,'"
but to the ancient enmity between the houles of ' ss.'
Stewart and of Douglas, and who believed that a
coolpiracy was now formed for the deffrudion of
the whole name, was ready to take arms in order to
rescue his kidmian. But Morton ablolutely forbad
any such attempt, and declared, thiat he would ra-
ther fuffer ten thouland dea'ths, th~an bring an im-
putation on his own charadter by seeming to de-
cline a trial *.

EL IZ ABETH did not fail to interpole, with warmth, Elizabeth's
in behalf of a man, who had contributed Co much meatures
to peferve her influence over Scotland. The late Cemin order to
tranfadtious in that kmngdom had given her great
uneafinels. The power which Lenox had acquired
independant of her was dangerous; the treatment
her ambassadors had met with, differed greatly from
the refpedt, with which the Scots were in us~e to re-
ceive her minilters a and the attack now made on
Morton fully convinced her, that there was an in-
tention to sow the feeds of dilcord between the two
nations, and to f'educe James into a new alliance
with France, or into a marriage with some Popilh
Princers. Full of there apprehenrions, the ordered
a considerable body of troops to be affrembled on
the borders of Scotland, and dispatched Randolph
as her ambassador into that kingdom. He arddref-
fed himself not only to James, and to his council,
but to a Convention of eitates met at that time. He
began with enumerating the extraordinary benefits
which Elizabeth had conferred on the Scottiih na-
tion : That without demanding a single foot of~
land for herself, without encroaching on the liber-
ties of the kingdom in the smallest article, the had,
at the ex pence of the blood of her Clbjeas, and the
treasures of her crown, ref'cued the Scots from the
dominion of France, eitablilhed among them true

* ohnit. 64. Spodw. 3 a .

Vot. II. E Religion,

HO00 VI. Religion, and pu~t them in poffemion of their an-

Y cient rights : Thast from the beginning the had pro-
'5'teded thlore, whlo eripoured the King's caure, and

by her afiflance alone, the Crown had been pre-
I;erVed onI his head, an~d all th~e attempts of the ad-
ver;se fadc~ion? baled: That an unioni, unknown to
thieir ancefoors, but equally beneficial to both7 king-
dom~s, had fiub~ifted for a long period of years, and
though 10 many Popitih Princes had combined to
dlifurb th~is harppy slate of thiings, her care, and
their coniflancy, had h~itherto defeated all there es-
fbr ts: ThatC the had observed, of late, an unusual
coldners, diffrui~t, and estrangement in the Scottish
Couincil, wvhich the could impute to none but to
L~enox, a fubj~ea of France, a retainer to the houle
of Guise, bred up in the errors of Popery, and flill
flifpeded of favouring that fuperflition. Not Ifatis-
fied with having mounted so fast to luch an un-
commonl height of power, which he exercised with
all the rathners of youth, and all the ignorance of
a firanger , nor thiinking it enough to have depriv-
ed the Earl of Morton of the authority, due to his
abilities, and experience, he had conspired the ruin
of that nobleman, who had often exposed his life
in the King's cause, who had contributed more
than any other fiubjedf to place him on the throne,
to resist the encroachments of Popery, and to pre-
serve the union between the two kingdoms. If any
zeal for religion remained among the nobles in
Scotland, if they wvithed for the continuiance of a-
mrniy with England, if they valued the privileges
of their own order, he called upon them, in the
name of hiis mi(trefs, to remrove fisch a pernicious
counsellor as Lenox from the presence of the young
King, to rescue Morton out of the hands of his a-
vowed enemy, and secure to him the benefit of a
fair and impartial trial : And if force were necef~ary
towards accomplithing a design so salutary to the
King and kingdom, he promiled them the protec-

ti on

tion of his Miffrefs in the enterprize, and whatever Boor VI.
alflfance they thould demand either of men or \r
money . rr

But there extraordinary remonfirances, accom-

panied with such an unuiual appeal from the King
to his fubjeats, were not the onily means employed
by Elizabeth, in favour of Morton, and against
Lenox. She perfitaded the Prince of Orange to
fend an agent into Scotland, and under colour of
complimeniting James on account of the valour
which many of his fubjeds had displayed in the
se-rvice of the States, to enter into a long detail of
the reftlers enter prizes of the Popith Princes against
the Protestant Religion -, to beseech him to adhere
inviolably to the alliance with England, the only
barrier which secured his kingdom against their
dangerous cabals; and above all things, to diffruft
the insinuations of thole, who endeavoured to
weaken7 or to dissolve that union between the Bri-
'tith nations, which all the Protellants of Europe
beheld with 10 much pleafuret.

JAIMES 8 COUnRICHOUS Were tOo intent upon the James de-

deftwa~ion of their enemy to listen to there remon- 'emunies
firances. The officio~us interpolition of the Prlince edP -~
of Orange, the haughty tone of Elizabeth's mel- gainithim.
iage and her avowed attempt to excite fixbjecas to
rebel againit their Sovereign, were confadered as
unexampled inflults on the Majesty and inidepen-
dance of a crowned head. A general and evative
answer was given to Randolph. James prepared to
aff~ect his own dignity with spirit. All those f iixfpe-
ed of favouring M~orton were turned out of oflice,
some of them were required to ~itrrenderr thiem-
selves prisoners, the fencible men throughout thle
kingdom were commanded to take arms, and
troops were levied, an~d potted, on the borders.
The Englith ambassador finding that neither the
public manifef10 which had he delivered to the Con-
vention, nor his private cabals with the nobles

*Cald. 3. 6. Strype, 2. 62I. t Cald. 3- 9-

E1 could

Boo· VI. could excite them to arms, fled in the night-time out

of Scotland, where libels againfl h im had been daily

'8 puiblithed, and even attempts made upon his life.

In both kingdoms every thing wore an hoffile al`-
pedt. But E~lizabethl, though the withed to have in-
timidated thle Scottithl King by her preparations,
had no inclination to enter into a war with him,
and the troops on thle borders, which had given
ILuch umbrarge, wyere s~oon dilperled *.

THE greater solicitude Elizabeth dilcovered for

Mlor ton's safety, thle more eagerly did his enemies
drive on their scheme~s for h~is deftwaeion. Captain
Stewart his acculrc was first appointed 'Ttor to
the Earl of Arran, and soon after both the title and
eflate of hiis unhappy ward, to which he advanced
some frivolous claim, were conferred upon him.
The new-made Peer was commanded to conduat
Morton from Dumnbarton to Edinburgh , and, by
that choice, the Earl was not only warned what fate
he might expedt, but had the cruel mortification
of feeing his deadly enemy already loaded with
honours, in reward of the malice with which he
had contributed to his ruin.

[le is tied THE records of the court of fu/liciary~ at this
and con- period are loft. The account which our hiilorians

emd.give of MVorton's trial is inaccurate and unfatisfac-

tory. The whole proceedings seem to have been
violent, irregular, and opprellive. Arran, in order
to extort evide~nce, tortured several of the Earl's
domeftics with unulual cruelty. During the trial,
great bodies of armed men were drawn up in diffe-
rent p~arts of the city. The jury was compoled of
the Earl's known ernmies, and though hie challeng-
ed fetveral of them, his obhjed~ions were over-ruled.
After a thort con~fltation, his peers found him
guilty of concealing, and of being art atnd part in
the consp~iracy against the life of the late King. The
sirs1 part of the verdia did not furprize him, but
he twice repeated the words art atnd part with some

*Crawf. Mem. 318. Strype, a. App. I 38.

vehemence,

vehemence, and added, " God knows it is not fo."' Boor VI-
The doomn,.which the law decrees against a Trai- V`
tor, was pronoun~ced. The King, however, remit- 5'
ted the cruel and Ignominious part of thle featence
and appointed that he thould iuffe~r death niext day,
by being beheaded *.

Do mac that awful interval, Morton poC~ffefd His death.

the utmolt compotiire of min~d. H-e lupped chear-
fully, slept a part of the night in his ulual m .:ner,
and employed the: reft of his time in rcligouis con-
f~erences, and in aets of devotion, with faome Mlini-
fiers of the city. The Clergymnen who attended
him, dealt fr~eely with his conflcience, and preifed
his crimes home upon him. W'hat he confeffled
with regard to the crime for whicb he fuffeired is
remarkable, and rApplies, in some meafoire, the imr-
perfection of our records. He acknowvledged, that
on his return from England after the death of Ri-
zio, Bothwell had informed h7im of the confpiracyr
againlt the King, which the Q~ueen, as he to~ld him,
knew of and approved , that he solicited him to
concur in the execution of it, which, at thiat time,
he ablolutely declined; that, soon after, Bothwell
himself, and Archibald Douglas, in his name, re-
newing their folicitations to the f'ame purpole, he
had required a warrant under the QLueen's hand,
authoriling the attempt, and as that had never been
produced, he had refuled to be any fadrther concern-
ed in the matter. " But, continued he, as I neither
" conrented to this treasonable act, nor afllted in
" the committing of it, Co it was impollible for
" me to reveal, or to prevent it. To whom could
"' I make the dilcovery ? The Qu~een was thle au-
" thor of the enterprize. Darnly was luch a
" changeling, that no secret could be fafeily comi-
"' municated to him. Huntly and Bothwell, who

* spotfw. 3 r . Johnit. 65. Craw f. M~eni. j3 3. Cakil.

3· 45-

E 3 bore

Boor VI. " bore the chief (way in the kingdom, were them-

"z~ selves the perpetrators of the crime." Thiere
c~' ,,,ircmfane, i, t muff be confeffed, go Iome length~
to~wards extenuating Morton's guilt, and though
his apology for the favour he had Ihewn to Archi-
bald Douglas, whom he knew to be one of the con-
Cpirators, be far lels l~atisfadtory, no uncaly reflec-
tions seem to have difquieted his owni mind on
that sccount *. WChen his keepers told him that
the guards were attending, and all thinigs in· readri-
neis, " I praile my God, said he, I am ready like-

wie"Arran commanded there guards; and e-

venl in those moments, whecn the mast implacable
hatred is apt to relent, the malice of his enemiies
couldl not forbear this insult. On the feaff~old, his
behaviour was calm, his counteniance and voice
unaltered , and after fame time rpent in devotion,
hie fuffered death with the intrepidity, which be-
came the name of Douglas. His head was placed
on the public jail of Edinburgh, and his body,
after lying till tim-let on the featfold, covered with
a beggarly cloak, was carried by comimon porters
to the ulual burial-place of criminals. None of his
friends durit accompany it to the grave, or dilco-
ver their gratitude and refpedt by any Ljmptomns

at of Corrow -t.

F& Odious AKR R , no0 less profligate in private life~, than

Araof ;ludacious inl his pulblic conlduac, s(oon after drew the

attention of his countrymen, by hais infamous miar-
riage with the Counters of March. Before he grew
into favour at court, he had been often entertained
in herr humnand's houfec, and without regarding the
laws of horp~itality or of gratitude, carried on a
criminal intrigue with the wife of his benefaaor,
a woman young and beautiful, but according to
the defeription of a cotemporary Historian, " in-
tolerable in all the imperfeations, incident to her

* Crawf. Mem. App. 3. -t Crawf. Mem* 334. Spodiw. 3 r4-

fex."'

fex." Impatient of any reffraint upon their mutual Booir VI.
desires, they, with equal ardor, w~ithed to avow -
their union publickly, and to legitimate, by a mar- 5'
riage, the offspring of their unlawful paflion. Thle
Counters petitioned to be divorced from her hus-
band, for a reason, which no modest woman will e-
ver plead. The judges, over-awed by Arran, passed
rentence without delay. And this infamous scene July 6.
was concluded by a marriage, solemnized withl
great pomp, and beheld by all raniks of men with
the utmof1 horror *. * Spotfw.

A Parliament was held this year, at the opening 3'(·

of which some dilputes arole between Arran and Oao. 24.
th~e Earl now created Duke of Lenox. Arran,
h~aughty by nature and puihed on by h~is wife's
ambition, began to effed~ an equality with the Duke
under whole proteation he had hitherto been con-
tented to place himself. After various attempts
to form a party in the council against Lenox, he
found him fixed 10 firmly in the King's affeations,
that it was impoflible to thake himi, and rather
than lose all in~terest at court, from which he was
banilbed, he made the moit humble Aubmillions to,
the favourite, and again recovered his former cre-
dit. This rupture contributed, however, to ren-
der the Duke still more odious to the nation.Du
ring the continuance of it, Arran affeated to couirt
the Clergy, pretended an extraordinary zral for
the Protfitant Religion, and laboured to confirm
the fulpicions, which were entertained of his rival,
as an emissary of the houle of Guire, and a favour-
er of Popery. As he was iuppofed to be acquain-
ed with the Duke's mos1 Cecret design~s, his calum-
aies were liflened to with more credit, than was
due to his charadter. To the famne cauTe, we
muff aifribe leveral aC~s of parliament unc~om--
monly falvourable to the Church, particularly one,
wvhich~ abolithed thle pradtice, introdu\ced by Mlor-

E 4S to1,

BOOK VI. ton, of appointing but one minister to several pq-

~3rithes.

Eccl 1:T No notice hath been taken for some years of Ec-

icla.clefi~tlical affairs While the civil government un-

fairs. derwent so many extraordinary revolutions, the

Church was not free from convulirons. Two ob-
jeats, chiefly, engrossed the attention of the Clergy.
The one was the forming a lyftem of discipline, or
Ecclesiastical polity. After long labour, and man y
difficulties, this was at last brought to some degree
of perfeaion. The Ass~embly lolemnly approved
of it, and appointed it to be laid before the privy
council, in order to obtain the ratification of it in
parliament. But Morton, during his adminiffra-
tion, and those who, after his fall, governed the
King, were equially unwilling to fee it carried into
execution; and by starting difficulties, and throw-
ing in objedtions, prevented it from receiving a le-
gal landtion. The other point in view was the abo-
lition of the Epifcapal order. The bilhops were so
devoted to the King, to whom they owed their
promotion, that the fundtian itlelf was by some
reckoned dangerous to civil liberty. Being allowed
a feat in parliamnent, and diftinguilbed b~y the titles of
honour, there not only occalloned many avocations
from their spiritual employments, but soon render-
ed their charaders and manners extremely diffe-
rent from those of the Clergy in that age. The no-
bles viewed their power with jealo~ury; the popu-
lace considered their lives as profanle; and both
withed their downfal with equal ardour. The per-
fonal emulation between Melvil and Adamson, a2
mnan of learning, and eminent for his popular clo-
quence, who was promoted, on the death of Dou-
glas, to be archbilhop of St. Andrew's, mingled it-
Ielf with the paflions on each fide, and heightened
them. Attacks were made, in every affetmbly, on
thle order of bilhops; their privileges were gra-

dually

dually circumfrcibed; and at last an aGt was pal- soot vr.
fed, declaring the office of bilhop, as it was then 3
exerciled within the realm, to have neither founda- 5'
tion nor warrant in the word of God; and requir-
ing, under pain of excommunication, all who now
poffeffed that office, initantly to resign it, and to
abitain from preaching or adminiffring the sacra-
ments, till they thould receive permifflon from the:
assembly. The court did not acquiesce in this de-
cree. A~ vacancy happening, soon after, in the fee
of Glasgow, Montgomery Miniffer at Stirling, a
man vain, fickle, presumptuous, and more apt, by
the blemithes in his charadter, to have alienated the
people from an order already beloved, than to re-
concile them to one which was the objea of their
hatred, firuck up an infamous bargain with Lenox,
and on his recommendation was chosen Archbilhop.
The Presbytery of Stirling of which he was a mem-
ber, the prelbytery of Glasgow whither he was to
be translated, the General Assembly, vied with
each other in prosecuting him on that account. In ,ssz.
order to screen Montgomery, James made trial
both of gentle and of rigorous mealures, and both
were equally ineffeatual. The General Assembly
was just ready to pronounce against him the fen-
tence of excommunication, when an Herald enter-
ed and commanded them, in the King's name, and
under pain of rebellion, to flop further proceed-
ings. Even this injun~ion they derpiled. And
though Montgomery, by his tears, and s~eeming pe-
mitence, procured a thort relpite, the sentence was
at last iffuted by their appointment, and publithed
mn all the churches throughout the kingdom.

THE flfflDerS Of the Clergy la a colledtive body,

was not greater than the boldnelsi of some indivi-
duals, particularly of the Miniffers of Edinburgh.
They inveighed daily against the corruptions in the
administration, and, with the freedom of Cpeechi
admitted into the pulpit in that age, named LeR-

nox

Boose VI. nox and Arran as thle chief authors of the grie-

~vances, under which the church and kingdom

'5'3 groaned. The courtiers, in their turn, complained

to the King of the insolent and seditious spirit of
the clergy. In order to check the boldners of
thecir discourses, James iilued a proclamation, comm-
mandingg Dury one of thie most popular IMindl~ers,
not only to leave the town, but to abitain from
pr'eaching in any other place. Dury complained,
to tle judlcatories of the Church, of this encroach-
ment: upon1 the imm~unities of his office. They ap-
proved of the dea~rine whlich he h~ad delivered , and
hie determined to dilregard thle royal proclamationi.
Buit the magiffrates being determine~d to comnpel
himi to leave thle city, according to the King's or-
ders, he was obliged to abandon· hih charge, after
protesting publickly, at the crofCs of Edinlburgh, a-
gainft the violence, which was put upon him. The
people accompanied him to the gates, with· tears
and lamentations, and the Clergy deniounced the
vengeance of heaven against th~e auth~ors of this
outIrage

JN this perilous situation flood the Chruch, the

authority of its judicatories called in quleftion,
an1d theC liberty of the pulpit reitrained, when a
sudden revolution in the civil government procur-
ed them unexpedted relief.

HiS ra. THE two falvourites, by thieir asc-endant over the
younties Kina Pnofflfed uncontrouledi power ini thie king-
engage 8
the King dom, and exercised it w ah thle utmof1 wantonnels.
;o unpo- James uliially resided at Dalkeith or Kinneil, the
pUlar feats of Lenox and of Arran, and was attended by
mjeasures. su~ch comipany, and employed in fisch amulements,

as did niot thiit hiis dignity. The services of
thlole, who had contributed most to place the Crown
on his head, were but little remembered. Many
whol( hadt op)posed him writh the greatest virulence,
on oyed~e the rewards anid hioniours, to wh~ich thle

* Cakid. Affemib. 576---1c;82. Spotffy. 277, g'C. Others

others were entitled. Exalted notions of regal pre- BOOK VI.
rogative, utterly incontittent with the co~nititution '^`
of Scotland, being initilled by hiis favourites intro ",82.
the mind of the young Monarch, unfortunately
made, at that early age, a deep impreflion there,
and became the source of almost all his fubleauent
errors in the government of both kingdoms *.*Cad
Courts ofjuffice were held in almoit every county·, 3-
the proprietors of land were called before them,
and upon the slightest negledt of alny of the nume-
rous forms, whichi are pecubiar to fteudal hobl.ings,
they were fined with unusual and intolerable ri-
gour. The Lord Chamnberlain revived the oblolete
jurifdi~tion of his 05tce oVer the BuLlrroughs, anld
they were fuibjected! to exa~tions no less grievous.
A design feemied, lIkewise, to have been formed
to exalperate Elizabeth, and to diifolve the alli-
ance with her, which all good Protellants etleem-
led the chiet security of their re~ligion in Scotland.
A coloe correspondence was le~t on foot between the
King and his mother, and conftderable progrels
made towards uniting their titles to the Crown, by
such a treaty of association, as Maitland had pro-
jeafed , which could niot fail of endangering or di-
minithing his authority, and must have proved fa-
tal to thole, who had adted againfit her withi great-
elt vigour -t. -t Cald. 3.

ALo.there circumitances irritated thle impatient a sy.

rpirit of the Scottith nobles, who resolved to tole- Tlhe no-
rate no longer the idrolence of the two minions, or bls on
to fland by, while their prefixmption and inexperi- againit
ence ruined both the King and kingdom~. Elizabeth, thlem.
who, during the adminiffration of the f-our Re-
gents, had the entire diredtian of thle affairs of
Scotland, felt herself ·deprived of all influence in
that kingdom ever fance the death of Miorton, and
was ready to countenlance any attempt to refeue
the King out of the hands of favourites, wh~o were
leading him into mealitres, 10 repugnanlt to all her~
views. Tlhe Earls of Mar and Glenlcairn, LalI-~

BooK VI. Ruthven, lately created Earl of Gowrie, IOrd Lind-

f ay, Lord Boyd, the Tutor ofGlamis, the Master

'582· of Oliphant, with leveral Barons and gentlemen

of diftindion, entered into a combination for that
purpole; and as changes in adminiffration, which
among polilbed nations, are brought about slowly
anid silently, by artifice and intrigue, were in that
rude age effteded thddenly and by violence, the
King's lituation, and the lecurity of the favourites,
encouraged the conspirators to have immediate
recourse to force.

Seize the JAM Es, after having resided for some time in
King'sper- At hole, where he enjouyed his f~avourite amulement
Rth en. of hunting, was now returning towards Edinburgh,

with a Cmall train. He was invited to Ruthven-
cailli, which lay in his way, and as he fulpeded no
danger, he went thither in hopes of farther (port.

Aug. zz. The multitude of firangers whom he found there

gave him some uneafinels ; and as those who were
in the recret arrived every moment from different
parts, the appearance of so many new faces in-
creased his fears. He concealed his unealinels,
however, with the utmost care, and next morn-
ing prepared for the field, expedting to find there
some opportunity of making his efeape. But just
as he was ready to depart, the Nobles entered his
bed-chamber in a body, and prelented a memorial
against the illegal and oppreflive saions of his two
f-avourites, whom they reprel~ented as most dan-
gerous enemies to the religion and liberties of the
nation. James, though he received this remon-
firance with the complailance which was necess~ary
in his prelent ficuation, was extremely imipatient to
be gone; but as he approached the door of the a-
partmen t, the Tutor of Glamis rudely (topped him.
'The Ki ng complained, expollulated, threatned, and
finding all there without effedt, burst into tears,
"; No matter, said Glamis fiercely, better childrenr
weep than bearded men." There words made a
deep imprelion on the King's mind, and were never

forgotten.

forgotten. The conspirators, without regarding his Boom VI.
tears or indignation, dilmill~ed luch of his followers J
as they fulpeted; allowed none but their own party 5**-.
to have access to him; and though they treated
him with great refped, guarded his person with
the utmoit care. Th is en terprize is utizally called,
by our hifforians, The raid ofRuthwen '.

LENox and Arran were affonilbed to the last de- Commic

Arran to

gree at an event to unexpedted, and 10 fatal to prison.
their power. The former endeavoured, but with-
out Cuccers, to excite the inhabitants of Edinburgh
to take arms, in order to rescue their Sovereign from
captivity. The latter, with his usual impetuosity,
mounted on horseback the moment he heard what
had befallen the King, and with a few followers,
rode towards Rutbven-caffle; and as a considerable
body of the conspirators, under the command of
the Earl of Mar, lay in his way ready to oppole
him, he separated himself from his companions,
and with two attendants arrived at the gate of the
caffle. At the fight of a man so odious to his coun-
try, the indignation of the conspirators role, and
iint~ant death muff have been the punishment of his
rathnels, if the friendship of Gowrie, or some other
cause not explained by our hifforians, had not saved
a life, 10 pernicious to the kingdom. He was con-
fined, h~owever, to the castle of Stirling, without
being admitted into the King's presence.

TH E King, though really the prisoner of his own Comsad

fubjeats, with whole conduat he could not help dil- Lenor to
covermng many lymptoms of difguff, was obliged leave the
to publilh a proclamation, signifying his approba- kingdom.
tion of their enterprize, declaring that he himself
was at filli liberty, without any restrain~t or violence
offered to his person; and forbidding any attempt
against those concerned i n the Raid of Rutbven, un-
der pretence of rescuing him out of their hands. Aug. 28.
At the fame time, he commanded Lenox to leave
Scotland before the soth of September 4:

*Cald* 3. a34. Spotfw. Sa+. Mdr. 357. t Cald.3 '3$ rs3 -·B

Soon

BOOK VI. SooN after, Sir George Carey, and Bowes, arriv-

eT3 d as ambaffadorss from Elizabethi. The pretext

·eSL
no f tfheir embassy was to inqluire after the King's

opirarors 8safety , to encourage an~d countenance the confpi-
counte- rators wans the real motive of it. By their inter-
nanced by ceflion, thle Earl of Angus, who ever since thle
Elizabeth. death of h~is uncle M/orton, hiad lived in exile, ob-

talined leave to return. And the accetlion of a no-
bleman Io powerful and to popular firengthened

* Cal~j. 3- thle fad~;(Io *
'sz. LENOX, whore attlable anrl gentle qua itieS had

procured him many frien~ds, and who received pri-
vate aflurances thiat the King's favour tow~ards him
was in no degree abated, see~med relolved, at firit,
to pay no regard to a commanld, extorte~d, by vio-
lence, and no less dilrigre-eable to James, than it
was rig~orous with regard to himlelf. Bu\t the pow-
er of' his enemiies, wvho were masters of the King's
person, who were secretly fiilported by Elizabeth,
and openly applauded by the Clergy, deterred him
fromn an enterprize, tle fluccels of which was du-
bious, and the danger certain both to himl~elf, and
to his Sovereign. He put off the time of his depar-
ture, h~owever, by various artifices, in expedtation
either thiat James might make his escape from the
con~firators, or that fortune might present Some
more favourable opportunity of taking arms for
his relief.

Their ON thle other hand, the confCpirators were ex-
conduat tremnely solicitous not on~ly to secure the approba-
approved tion of thieir countrymenl, buit to obtain some legal
bran Ar- fanaion of their enterprize. For this purpore, they
and aCon- pulblithed a long ded~aration,, containiing the motives,
vention of which hiad induced them~ to venture on fiuch an r
eitates. regular flep, and endeavoured to beighten the pub-

lic indignation againit the favourites, by reprelent-
ed in the firongeft colours, in their experience and
infoilence, their contempt to the nobles, their vio-
lation of the privileges of th~e Church, and their

opp~relion

opprellion of the people. They obliged the King, BOOK Vi.
who could not with f`afetzrefule any of their de-'~
mands, to grant them a remillion in the most am- 'ise.
ple form, and not satisfied with that, they applied
to the Alffembly of the Church, and easily procured
an adt, declaring, " that they· had done good and
acceptable service to God, to their Sovereign, and oa. 13
to their native country ," and requiring all sincere
Proteflants to concur with them in carrying for-
ward luch a laudable enterprize. In order to add
the greater weight to this ad, every Minister was
enjoined to read it, in his own pulpit, and to infliat
the centures of the Church on thole whio se~t themT-
selves in oppolition to so good a cause. A Conven-
tion of eflates, assembled a fe w day-s after, passed
an aA to the Came effedt, and granted fill indemnity
to the conspirators for every thing they had done'.

JAMEs was conduaed by them, skirt to Stirling, Lenox's

and afterwards to the palace of Haly-rud-hode~ dleop~a~rtu
and though he was received every whiere with the Scot-
external marks of refpedt due to his dignity, his
motions were carefully observed, and he was under
a rdtraint no less firiat, than at the first moment
when he was seized by the conspirators. Lenox, as-
ter eluding many commands to depart out of the
kingdom, was at last obliged to begin his journey.
He lingered, however, for some time in th~e neigh-
bourhood of Edinburgh, as if he had flill intended
to make one effort towards reflorinig the King to
liberty. Buit either from the gentleness of his own
difpofltion, averle to blood-shed and the disorders
of civil war, or from some other cause, unknown
to us, he abandoned the design, and lec out for
France, by the way of Englanid. The King illized
the order for his departure, with no lesl reludtance Dec. 30.
than the Duke obeyed it. And both~ mourned a
separation, which neither of thiem hlad power to
preveer.r Soon after his arrival in France, the fa~-
tigue of the journey, or the anguith of his mind,

? Cald. 3. a 77, a 87, soo. Spotfw. 3 za.

thre w

soo· VI. threw him into a fever. In his last moments, he

CWr dilcovered such a firm adherence to the Protellant
LjS" faith, as fully vindicates his memory from the im-

putation of an attachment to Popery, with which
he had been uncharitably loaded in Scotland*. As
he was the earliest, and best beloved, he was, per-
haps, the most deserving, though not the most able
of all James's favourites. The warmth and tender-
ness of his Mafter's affeatian for him was not aba-
ted by death itrelf. By many aL~s of kindness and
generosity towards his potterity, the King not only
did great honour to the memory of Lenox, but
let his own charadcer in one of the most favourable
points of view.

Mary's THE success of the conspiracy, which deprived
anxiter a- James of liberty, made great noikeover all Europe;
bout her and at last reached the ears of Mary in the prison

ro. to which the was confined. As her own experience

had taught her what inluries a captive prince is ex-
posed to fulffer; and as many of thoie, who were
now concerned in the enterprize againit her son,
were the fame persons whom the considered as the
chief authors of her own misfortunes, it was natu-
ral for the tendernels of a mother to apprehend that
the fame calamities were ready to fall on his head ;
and fisch a profped did not fail of adding to the
difthers and horror of her own lituation. In the
anguilh of her heart, the wrote to Elizabeth, com-
plaining in the bitterest terms of the unprecedented
rigour, with which th~e herf'elf had been treated,
and bese~eching her not to abandon her son to the
mercy of his rebellious fiubjeAs; nor permit him to
be involved in the fame misfortunes under which
the had so long groaned. The peculiar vigour and
acrimony of flile, for which this letter is remark-
able, discover both the high spirit of the Scottith
Que~en, unfubdued by her fufferings, and the vio-

* Spostw. Jt4:

lence

lence of her indignation at Elizabeth's artifices and so~or VI.
severity. But it was ill adapted to gain the end 3
the had in view, and accordingly it neither procured assa.
any mittgation of the rigour of her own confinemen t,
or any mnterpolition in favour of the King *

HENRY III. who, though he feared and hated ,583-

the Princes of Guise, was often obliged to court Ambaffa-
their favour, interposed with warmth, in order to dors arrive
cextricate Jamnes out of the hands of a party 10 en- Frnerons
tirely devoted to the Engilih interest. He com- and Ent-
manded M. de la Motte Fenclon, his ambassador land.
at the court of England, to repair to Edinburgh,
End to co~ntribute his utmost endeavours towards
placing James in a rltuation, more suitable to his
dignity. As Elizabeth could not, with decency,
refuse him libertyl to execute this commillion, the
appointed Daviron to attend him into Scotland as
her Envoy, under colour of concurring with him
in the negaciation, but in reality, to be a Cpy upon
his motions, and to obitru8t his luccels. Jlames,
whiole title to the Crown had not hitherto been re-
cognized by any of the princes on the Continent,
was extremely fond of such an honoulrable embassy~
from the French Monarch i and, on that account,
as well as for the fake of the errand on which he
came, received Fenclon with great refped. The JUnner. 7.
trobles, in whole power the King was, did not
relish this interpoi~tion of the French court, which
had long loft its ancient influence over the affairs
of Scotland. The clergy were alarmed at the
danger to which religion would be exposed, if the
princes of Guise thould recover any aitendant over
the public councils. And though the King tried
every method for reltraining them within the
bounds of decency, they declcaimed against the
court of France, against the Princes of Guile, a-
gainlt the ambassador, against the en~tering itot
any alliance with roch notorious persecutors of the

Vot.. 11. F Church

*Carnhd, 489.

BOOK V. C }L10CH Of God, with a vehemence, which no re-

Sgllair govern~menit would now tolerate, but which
I~j. was thtn extremelly common. Thieambaffador,

wa ched by Daviton, diffruffed by the nobles, and
e.x poled toi the inifults of the Clergy, and of the peo-
ple, returned into England without procuring any
chiange in thle King's futuation, or receiving any
ald·~ or to a propo:'la\l which he made, that the go-
vernmecint thould be carried on in the joint names
of (imnes, ands the Queen his mother *

;L.E ANW HILE, James, though he difiembled

James el .
cdpel out with great art, became every day more uneasy
oi usec under his confinement , his unealinefs render-
hands of ed him continually attentive to fmnd out a
the con- proper opportunity for makin~g his escape ; and to
rpi'ators. this attention, he at last owed his liberty, which

the King of Franlce was not able, nor thre Qgeen
of England willing to procure for him. As the
con~spirators had forced Lenox out of the kingdom,
and kept Arran at a difiance from court, they
grew secure ; and imagining that time hadt
reconciled the King to them, and to his ficuation,
they watchedi him with little care. Some ocedi~-
onis of dilcord had arilen among themfeives; and
thle French ambaf fador, by fomenting there, during
thle time of his relidence in Scotland, had weaken-

i Camd. ed the union, in which alone their safety confiftedt-.
482. Colonel WLilliami Stewart, the commander of the

band of gentlemen, who guarded the King's per-
son, being gained by James, had the principal
merit in the Lchem~e for refforing his matter to
liberty. Under pretence of paying a vifxt to the

June 2;. Earl of March his grand uncle, James was permit-

ted to go fromt Falkland to St. Andrew's. That
he might not create any fiifpicion, he lodged at
firit, in an open defencelers houle in the town, but
pretending a cuiriority to fee the caff le, no sooner
was:i he enteredi \ith Iome of his attendants whom
he could truss, thian Colonel Stewart commanded

the

* Cald. 3. 2a7. SpotC. 324. See Append. No. Vlli.

the gates to be that, and excluded all the reft of Booa VI.
his train. Next morning the Earls of Argyll,'"
Huntly, Crawford, Montrose, Rothes, with others 's*3.
to whom the lecret had been communicated, en-
tered the town with their followers; and though
Mar, with leveral of the leaders of the fadtion,
appeared in arms, they found themselves 10 far
out-numbered, that it was in vain to think of re-
covering poffefflon of the King's person, which had
been in their power somewhat longer than ten
months. James was naturally of so loft and duc-
tile a temper, thats those who were near his person,
commonly made a deep impreflion on his heart,
which was formed to be under the sway of favou-
rites. As he remained implacable and unrecon-
ciled to the conspirators, during so long a time,
and at a period of life when refentments are rather
violent than lalting, they must either have im-
proved the opportunities of insinuating themselves
into~favour with little dexterity, or the indignation,
with which this firlt inf'ult to his person and au·
thority filled him, mutt have been very great.

His joy at his efeape was youthful and excel~ive. Resolved

He resolved, however, by the advice of Sir James however,
Melvil, and his wisest counsellors, to adt with the tem its
utmost moderation. Having called, into his pre- modera-
fence, the leaders of both Fa~ions, the neighbour- tion.
ing gentry, the deputies of the adjacen t burroughs,
the Miniiters, and the heads of colleges, he de-
clared, that although he had been held under re-
ftraint for fame time by violence, he would not
impute that as a crime to any man, but wuithout
remembering the irregularities, which had been so
frequent during his minority, would pal~S a general
adt of oblivion, and go~verni all his litbjeats with
diftinguilhingf and equal affeaionl. And as an evi-
dence of his (incetity, he vilited the Earl of G~ow-
rie at Ruthven ca~tte, and granted him a full par-
don of any guilt he had contraded, by the crime * Mely,
committed in that very place *. 272.

F' 2 Bu r

soor VI. BOT James did not adhere long to this prudent

--and moderate plan. His former favourite, the

'9 35f~ Earl of Arran, had been permitted for fame time

regains his to reside at Kinneil, one of his country fears. As
Mrcendant soon as the King felt hime~lf at liberty, his love for
over him. biim began to revive, and he expre(Td a firong

delire to fee him. The courtier-s violently opposed
the return of a minion, whole inlolent and over-
bearing teruper they dreaded, as much as the na-
tion detetted his crimes. James, however, con-
tiniued his importunity, and promiling that he
thould continue with him no longer than one day,
they were obliged to yield. Tlhis interview re-
kindled ancient affe~tion ; the King forgot his
promise ; Ar rani regained his ascendant over him ;
and within a few days resumed the exercise of pow-
er, with all thle arrogance of an undef~erving fa-
vourite, and all the rathnefs peculiar to himrelf *.

And the THE firit effedt of his influence was a proclama-
Kiing pur- tion with regardi to those concerned in the Raid of
Cues ano- Rutbven. Th~ey were required to acknowledge
ther plan. their crime in the humblest manner ; and the King

promiled to grant them a full pardon, provided
their future conduat were luch, as did not oblige:
him to remember past milcarriages. The tenor of
this proclamation was extremely different from the
na of oblivion, which the conspirators had been
encouraged to expeat. Nor did any of them reckon
it fa e to rely on a promile, clogged with foch an
equi\ vocal condition, and gran ted by a young Prince,
uinder the dominion of a Miniffer void of faith, re-
gardlefs of decency, and transported by the de-
fire of revenge, even beyond the d~ual ferocity of
his temper. Many of the leaders. who had at sirs1
appeared only at court, retired to their own houres ;
and foreseeing the dangerous florm which was ga-
thering~, began to look out for a retreat in foreign

* Mely. 274. f Id. 278. SpotT. 326. Cald. 3. ~33.

ELIZ AB ETH, who had all along proteaed the Boorc VI.

conspirators, wasextremelydifguff ed with measures '""" "'
which tended so visibly to th~eir deftwuAion, and Eliz -F3.
wrote to the king a har~h and haughty letter, berh's lioli-
reproaching him in a filie, very uncommon among cutatsons in
Princes, with breach of faith in recalling Airran to, behltll of
court, and with im prudence in proceeding so rigo- :h,huanfpi-
roufly against his best and most faithful fubjedts. Auguth 7.
Jlames, with a becoming dignity, replied, that p~ro-
miles extorted by violence, and conditions yielded
out of fear, were no longer binding, when there
were removed; that it belonged to him alone to
chure what Mmititers he would employ in his ser-
vice; and that though he reli~lved to treat the con-
fpirators at Ruthven with the utmost clemency, it
was necessary, for the support of his authority, that
such an insult on his person thould not pass altoge-
ther uncedrured'. * Mely.

EtlZ zB Essrn'letter was quickly followed by WVa!- 2;9·

Emngham her tecretary, whom the appointed her am- SP.'
baffador to James, and who appeared in the Scot- n.,,,, {,.
tith court, with a splendor -and magnlificence, well baffy into
calculated to please and dazzle a young Ps ince. scotlanci.
Wallingham was admitted to leveral conferencess
with James himlelf, in which he in~ifted on the
fame topics contained in the letter, and the Kin;g
repeated his former answers.

Arran fuffering leveral indignitiies, from the ar-

rogance of Arran, and his creatures, he r-eturned
to England, without concluding: any ~new treaty
with the King. Walingham was, next to Bur-
leigh, the Minister on whoim the chiefr weight of
the Englilh administration rulecd , and when a per-
son of his rank, ftept 10 far out of the ordinary road
of bufinels, as to undertake a long journey, in
his old age, and under a declining slate of hlealth,
Come affair of codrequence was ifupoled to be thle
cause, or some important event was exped~ed to be
the effeA of this measure. But as nothin~g cojnfpi-

BOOK VI. CUOus either occasioned, or followed this embassy,

LU it is probable that Elizabeth had no other intention
58s3· in, employing this sagacious Minister thian to dil-

cover, with exacter~s, the capacity and dilpolition
of the Scottith King, who was now arrived at a
time of life, when, with falme degree of certainty,
conjeaures might be formed concerning his charac-
ter, and fulture condua. As James poffei~ed ta-
lents of that kind, which make a better figure in
conversation, than in a~tion, he gained a great deal
by this interview with the Eniglith recretary, who,
notwithfltanding the cold reception be met with,
gave luch an adv~antageous reprelentation of his a-
bilities, as determined Elizabeth to treat him, h~ence~-
forward, with more decency and reCpeat *

ELIZABETH S eagernel~s to proted the conf~pira-

tors rendered James more violent in his proceed-
ings against them. As they had all refuled to ac-
cept of pardon, upon the terms which he had of-
fered, they were required, by a new proclamation,
to surrender themselves prisoners The Earl of An-
gus alone complied, the rel1 either fled into Eng-
land, or obtained the King's licence to retire into
foreign parts. A Convention of estates was held, the
members of which~, deceived by an unworthy arti-
fice of Arran's, declared those concerned in the
Raid of Ruthvenr to have been guilty of high trea-
son ,appointed the aA passed 18(( year approving
of their conduet to be expunged out of the records,
and engaged to support the King in prosecuting the
fugitives withi the utmost rigour of law.

1 ~HE COI~1PiT[ratrs though far fromt having done

anly th;ing that was uncoimmon in a barbarous age,
among mutinous nobles, and under an unsettled
Rtate of government, mult be acknowledged to have
been guilty of an sat of treason against their fove-
reign; and James, w~ho considered their condua in
th is ligh t,hIadgooxd reason to boall of his clemency,

*Mely. 293. C'ald* 3· 258. Jebb. 2. 536.

when

when he offered to pard~on them, upon their confer- 801 K .
sing their crime. But, on2 the other hand, it mult t~·~
be allowed that, after the King's voluntary pro- '83.
mile of a general oblivion, they; had some reason
to complain~ of breach of faith, and could not, w ithl-
out the most unpardonable imprudence, have put
their lives in Arran's power. rS4.

THE interest of the Church~ was conside~rably The Cler-

affederd by thele contrruy Revolution~s. W~hile the ~b;'i i
conspirators kept poif~feon of power, the Clergy rators,and
not only recovered, but extended their privileges. irrtuate the
As they had formerly declared the hierarchy to be: King.
unlawful, they took some bold measures towards
extermin~ating the Epilcopal order out of the
Church ; and it was owing more to Adamfon's dex-
terity in perplexing and lengthening out the process
for that purpose, than to their own want o.f zeal,
that they did not deprive, and perhaps excommu-
nicate all the Bithops in Scotland. WhenI th~e King
recovered his liberty, things put on a very different
afpedt. The favour beffowed upon nr ran, the ent·-
my of every thing decent and sacred, and the ri-
gorous prosecution of those nobles w ho had been
the most zealous defenders of the Protellant caule,
were considered as sure prelages of the ap~proachl-
ing ruin of the Church. Thle Clergy could niotcon-
ceal th~eir apprehenflons, nor view this impending
danger in silence. Drury, who had b~een reffored~
to his office as one of the Minitters of Edinburghi,
openly applauded the Ra~id of Ruthven in th~e pul-
pit, at which the King was to enraged, th~at, not-
withltanding fame lymptoms of his fuibmiffon, he
commanded him to resign his charge in the city.
Mr. Andrew Melvil, being summoned before the
privy council to anfwver for the doArine he had ut-
tered in a sermon at St. Andrew's, and acculed of
comparing the present grievances of thle nation
with those under James ill. and of intimati· g: ob-
liq~uely th~at they ought to be redrefled in the famIe

Fq 4 manne r,

Baor VI. manner, thought it incumbent on him to behave

Swith greater firmnels;. H-e declined the jurifdiAion

of8~ a Civil court, in a caule which he maintained
to be purely Ecclesiastical; the Presbytery of
which he was a member had, as he contended, the
sole right to call him to account for words rpoken
in the pulpit; and neither the King nor council
could judge, in the first inflance, of the dodtrine
delivered by Preachers, without violating the im-
monities of the Church. This exemption from
civil jurifdi~ion was a privilege, which the Popilh
Ecclefia~tics, admirable judges of whatever contri-
buted to increase the luitre or power of their body,
had long ithuggled for, and had at laRt obtained.
If the fame plea had now been admitted, the Pro-
teftant Clergy would have become independant on
thle civil magiltrate; and an order of men extremne-
ly useful to lociety while they inculcate those du-
ties whichi tend to promote its happiness and tranr-
quillity, might have become no less pernicious by
teachiing, without fear or controul, the most dan-
gerous principles, or by exciting their hearers to

hemoft delperate and lawlers sations. The King

Jealous to excels of his prerogative, was alarmed
at this daring encroachm~ent on it , and as Melvil,
by his learning and zeal, had acquired the reputa-
tion and authority of head of the party, he refolv-
ed to punilh him with the rigour which that pre-
eminence rendered nece(Tary, and to dilcourage, by
a timely ieverity, thle revival of such a dangerous
claim. Mellvil, however, avoided his rage, by fly-
ing into England; and the pulpits refbunded with
complaints that the King had extinguilbed the
light of learning in the kingdom, and deprived
the Chiurch of the ablest and most faithful guardian
of its liberties and dilcipline .

THESE violent declamations of the Clergy, a-

gains1 the measures of the court, were extremely
acceptable to the people. The conspirators, though

*Spotl: 33o. Cald* 3. 304*

. dri ven

driven out of the kingdom, still pofi-feffd great in- Boor VI.
fluence there s and as they had every thing to fear C~
from the relentment of a young prince, irritated by '5 4-.
the furious couns~els of Arran, they niever cealed
folliciting their adherents to take arms in their de-
fence. Gowrie, thle only perion among them who
had thbmitted to the King, and accepted of a par-
don, soon repented of a tiep, which~ loft hiim the
efleem of one party, without gaining the confi-
dence of the other; and, after fuffering many mor-
tifications from the King's negled, and the haugh-
tiners of Arran, he was at last commanded to leave
Scotland, and to reside in France. While he wait-
ed at Dundee for an opportunity to embark, he was
inflormed that the Earls of Angus, Mar, and the
Tutor of Glamis, had concerted a sc~heme for fu~r-
priling the caftie of Stirling In his fatuation, lit-
tle perf'uafion was necessary to draw him to engage
in it. Under various pretexts, he put off his voyage,
and lay ready to take arms on the day fixed, by
the conspirators, for the execution of their enter-
prize. His lingering so long at Dundee, without
any apparent reason, awakened the fulpicion of the
court, proved fatal to himself, and disappointed the
Luccefs of the conspiracy. Colonel William Ste-
wart surrounded the houle where he lodged with a
body of soldiers, and in Cpite of his rerfinance, took
him prisoner. Two days after, Angus, Mar, and
Glamis, seized the ca~tle of Stirling, and credting
their standard there, publinhed a manifeffo declar-
ing that they took arms for no other reason, but to
remove from the King's prefetnce, a minion who
had acquired power by the mo~t unworthy a~ions,
and who exercised it with the most intolerable info-
lence. The account of Gowrie's imprisonment
firuck a damp upon their spirits. They imputed it
to treachery on his part, and (isfpeded that as he
had formerly deserted, he hiad now betrayed them.

At

BOOR VI. At the fame time, a fum of money, with which

Elizabeth had promiled to Aupply them, not being

58 duly paid, and their friends and vafahls coming mn

slowly, they appeared irres~olute and dilheartnedi
and as th~e King, who adted with great vigour, ad-
vanced towards them at the head of 20,000 men,
they fled precipitately towards England, and with
difficulty made their eleape*. This rath and feeble
atte~mpt produced such effeAs, as drually follow
dilappointed conspiracies. It not only hurt the
caule, for which it was undertaken, but added
firength and reputation to the Kinig; confirmed
Arran's power; and enabled them to pursue their
measures with more boldnels, and greater Aucceis.
Gowrie was the frirf vidtim of their refentmenit.
Aifter a very inlformal trial, a jury of peers found
him guilty of treason, and he was pubhickly be-
heade~d at Stirling.

Iviy 22. To humble the Church was the King's next
A parlia- flep. But as it became necessary, for this purpol~e,
ment held. to call in the aid of the legifiative authority, a par-

liament was hastily summoned; and while 10 many
of the nobles were bani(hed out of the kingdom,
or forbidden to appear in the King's pres~ence, while
Arran's haughtiness kept some at a difiance, and
intimidated others; the meeting codlified only of
those, who were ablolutely at the devotion of the

severe court. In order to conceal the laws which were
gain-te framing from the knowledge of the Clergy, the
i-hurch. Lords of the Articles were livorn to secrecy , and

when 10me of the Miniffers, who either fulfpeded,
or were informed of the danger, deputed one of
their number to declare their apprehenlions to the
King, he was leized at the palace-gate, and car-
ried to a difiant prison. Others, attempting to
eniter the parliament house, were refused admit-

*Homc's Hist. of Hours of Dougl. 376. Spotl 330.

tance i

tance * and foch laws were passed, as totally Boes VI.
overturned the conflitution and dil`eiphine of` the L
Church. TIhe refusing to aick~owkcdge the jurif.- 's>+.
di~tion of the privy council s the pre-tending an May zz.
exemption from the authority of the civil courts a
the attempting to diminith the rights and privi-
leges of any of thie three estates in parliamei t,
were declared to be: high treason. The holding
Afiemblie~s, whethe~r Civil, or Ecclefiaffical w~ith-
out the King's permrirrhon or appoinitment, the
uttering, either privately, or publickly, in ser-
mnons, or in declamations, any false and fcanda-
lous reports against the King, his anceitors, or mi-
niffers, were pronounced capital crimes t-.

WHEN thele laws were publilbed at the cross of

Edinburgh, according to the ancient cuffomn, Mr.
Robert Pont, Miniffer of St. Cuthbert's, and one
of the Lords of Cfefon, solemnly protefied against
them, in the name of his brethren, becaule: they
hiad been passed without the knowledge or con-
sent of the Church. Ever fioce the Reformation,
the pulpits and ecclef~iatical judicatories had both
been effeemed sacred. In the former, the Clergy
had been accustomed to cedrure, and admonith,
with unbounded liberty. In the latter, thiey exer-
ci led an uncontrouled and independant juri ldiA ion.
The blow was now aimed at both there privileges.
There new statutes were calculated to rendfer
churchmen as iniconfiderable as they were indi-
gent; and as the avar-ice of the nobles had firip-
ped themn of the wealth, the King's ambition was
about to deprive them of the power which once
belonged to their order. No wonder the alarm
was univerfida, and the complaints loud. All the
Miniffers of Edinburgh forsook their charge, and
fled into England. The most eminent Clergymen,
throughout the kingdom, imlitated their example.
Desolation and affonilhment appe~ared in every

* Cald. 3. 365. ( Pad., 8. Jac. VI.

part

soon1 VI. part of the Scottith Church a the people be wailed

" the loss of Pa~tors, whom they eiteemed; and full

3594· of consternation, at an event so unexpeded, open-

ly expressed their rage againRt Arran, and began
to fulpedt the King himself to be an enemy to the
Reformed Religion *.

*Sportw. 333*

THE

# BOOK VII.

THE

HISTORY

O F

SCOTLAN D.

BOOK VII.

WH L LE Scotland was torn by intestine sac- Boom VII.

tions, Ehizabeth was alarmed with the ru-

mour of a projeA in agitation for letting Mary at ' **
liberty. Francis Throgmorton, a Chehire gentle- mon's
man, was fulpeded of being d~e~eply cocernd in co rpiracyli
the de~ign, and on that fulpicionh a ae noaan1N
cuffody. Among his papers were found two lifts, sabeh.
one of the principal harbours of the kingdom, with
an account of their fituartion, and of the· depth of
water in each ; the other, of all the eminent Roman
Catholics in England. This circumitance confirm-
ed the fulpicion against him, and some dark and
delperate conspiracy was supposed just ready to
break out. At firit he boldly avowed his innocence,
and declared that the two papers were forged by the
Qgueen'sa Ministers, in order to intimidate or insnare
him; and he even endured the rack with the utmost
for titude. Blut being brought a iecond time to the
place of tor ture, his resolution failed him, and he
not only acknowledged that he had held a secret
correspondence with the Qgeen of Scots, but dil-
covered a design that was formed to invade Eng-
land. The Duke of Guire, he said, undertook to
filmnith troops, and to conduA the enterprize. The

Pope

soon VII.Pope and King of Spain were to flipply the money

L- necelfary fo~r carrying it on , all the Englilh exiles

'58 were, eager to take arms; many of the Catholics at

hiome would be ready to join them, at their landing;
Mendoza, the Spanilh, amba'ffador, who was the
life of the confrpiracy, ipared no pains in fomenting
the spirit of difaffedAion among the Englilh, or in
hsftening the preparations of thle Continent , and
by his corrlmand, he had made the two lifts, the
copies whereof had been found in his poileflion.
This confellion he retraded at his trial , returned
to it again, after featence was passed upon him ,
and retraded it once more at the place of execu-
tion*."

To us in the present age, who are allifted in form-

ing our opinion of this matter, by thre light which
timne and hiffory have thrown upon thre deligns and
charlaers of thle P-rinces of Guise, many circum-
trances in Throgmor ton's codleltion appear to be
extremely remote from truth, or even from proba-
bifity. Tlhe Duke of Guiie was, at that jundture,
far irom being in a ficuation to undertake foreign
con~quests. Wvithout either power or othece at court ;
hated by the King and pers~ecuted by the favou-
rices, he had no cileifre for any thoughlts of diflurb-
ing the qmuet of theZ neighbouring slates, and his valt
and ambitious mnind was wholly occupied in laying
th-e foundation of that famous league, which thook
th~e thron~e of F;rance. But about the time Eliza.
beth de~etded ·th~is coclpiracy, the clole union be-
tweetn the haul~e of ·GuisE ad Philip II. was remark-
able to all Eiurolpe, · and as thleir great enterprize a-
goindt H-eary Ill. was not yet ·diwlofed, as they en-
deav~ou red to conceal t hat undler thei r thIreateni ngs to
invade England, Throgmorton'sdifo;overy appeared
to be extremely probable ; and Elizabeth, whko knew
how ardently all the parties mentioned by him with·

* Hollingthed, 1370.

ed her downfal, thought that the could not guard Boar VlIL
her kin~gdom with too much care. The indilcreet -
zeal of the Engilih exiles increaled her fears. Not De~·figo
satisfied with incefllant outeries against her severity Mary's ad-
towards th~e Scottish Queen, and her cruel perfecu- herents a-
tion of her Catholic fu~bjedts, not thinking it enough gainft Eli-
that one Pope had threatened her with the fentenceof zabeth.
excommunication, and another had adually pro-
nounced it, they now began to dilperfe books and
writinlgs, in which they endeavoured to persuade
their disciples, that it would be a meritorious saion
to take away her life , they openly exhorted the
maids of honour to treat her, as Judith did Holo-
fernes, and by such an illuffrious deed, to render
their own names honourable and sacred in the
Church, throughout all future ages*. For all* Camd.
these reasons, Elizabeth not only ins lidted the pu- 497-
ni~hment of a traitor on Throgmorton, but comn-
manded the Spanith ambassador inflantly to leave
England ; and that the might be in no danger of
being attacked within the island, the determined
to us~e her utmott efforts, in order to recover that
influence over the Scottith councils, which the had
for some time entirely loft.

THERE were three d~ifferentt methods, by w~hidh She endea-

Elizabeth might hope to accomplilh this; either by ycctnihournto
furnithing such effeAualaid to the banithed nobles,'e la,;R,
as would enable th~em to resume the chief direC~ion ence in
of affairs; or by entering into such a treaty with Scotland,
1Mary, as might intimidate her lon, who being now by gasleg
accuitomed to govern, would be apt to agree to Arn
any terms, rather than resign the feeptre, or admit
an associate in the throne; or by gaining the Earl
of Arran, to secure the dire~tion of the King his
matter. The least was not only the eatieft, and
fpeedieft, but most likely to be l~uccefs~ful. TIhis
Elizabeth ~resolved to pursue ; but without laying

the

sonallI.the other two altogether aside. Withr this view,

t~ he sent Davison one of her principal secretaries, a:

54S man of abilities and addrels, into Scotland. A

Miniffer so venal as Arran, hated by his country-
men, and holding his power by the most precarious
of all tenures, the favour of a young Prince, ac-
cepted Elizabeth's offers without hefication, and
efleemed the acquisition of her proteftion to be the

Auguits3.moft solid foundation of his own greatness. Soon

after, he codfented to an interview with Lord
Hun~dfon the Governor of Berwick, and being ho-
noured with the pompous title of Lieutenant Gene-
ral for the King, he appeared at the place appomn-
ted, with a splendid train. In Hundfon's pre-
fence, he renewed his promises of an inviolable
and faithful attachment to the Englih interett, and
afiured him that James thould enter into no nego-
ciation, which might tend to interrupt the peace
between the two kingdoms , and as Elizabeth be-
gan to entertain the fame fears and jealousies con-
cerning the King's marriage, which had formerly
difquieted her with regard to his mother's, he un-
dertook to prevent James from listening to any
overture of that kind, till b~e had previously ob·
tained the Qlpeen of England's cod~ent*.

Severe Toe banilhed lords and their adherents soon felt
proceed- the effe~ts of Arran's friendlhip with England. As
ingsagainft Elizabeth had permitted them to take refuge in her

dominiions, and several of her Ministers were of opi·

Lords. Dion that the ought to employ her arms in defence

of their caure, the fear of this w~as the only thing,
which restrained James and his favourite, from pro-
ceeding to fi~ch extremities against them, as might
have excited thec pity or indignation of the Englilh,
and have prompted them to exert themselves with

Auguitzz. vigour in their behalf. Eult every apprehenflon of

this kind being now removed, they ventured to call

* Cald. 3- 49s. Mely. 3' 5. See Append. N* IX.

a parliament,

a parliament, in whi'ch an na was passed, attaint· soor VII.
ing Angus, Mar, Glamis, and a great numb~er of '-
their followers. Theireftates devolved to the Crown,
and according to the pradtice of th~e Scottith Mo-
narchs, who were obliged to reward the fadion
which adhered to them, by dividing with it the
fpoilsof the vanquinled, Jam-res deahs out the great-
er partof these to Arran, and his associates.*

NoR was the treatment of the Clergy less rigo- Apina~,

rous. All Ministers, readers, and profeffors of th Cer
Colleges were injoined to lubfcribe, within forty
days, a paper testifying their approbation of the
laws concerning the church~ enadted in last parliz-
ment. Many, overawed, or corrupted by the
Court, yielded obedience; others flood out. Th:e
flipends of the latter were requeffered, some of the
moreadive committed to prison, and nurmbers com
pelled to fly the kingdom. Thlofe who complied,
fell under the fulpicion ors acding from mercenary
or-ambitious motives. Those who filffered, acquir-
ed high reputation, by giving such convincing evi-
dence of their firmnels and sincerity. T~he judica-
tories of the Church were almolt entirely flippreffed.
In some places, fearce as many M~inisters remained,
as to perform the duties of religious worthip; they
soon funk in reputation among the people, and be-
mg "'aprohibited not only frogi dilcourfing of publick

afars, but obliged, by the jealouly of the admini-
firation, to frame every sentiment and expreflion in
such a manner, as to give the court no offence,
their sermons were deemed languid, inlipid, and
contemptible i and it became the general opimon1,
that together with the most virtuous of the nobles,
and the most faithful of the Clergy, the power and
vigour of Religion were now banithed out of the
kingdom f .

*Cald. 3- 527. -j Ibid. 3. 589.
Vo~ t.
II. A

Ma -

Boo1 VII. ME AN WH I LE, Elizabeth was catrying on one o f

e~thofe3 fruitlets negaciations with the Queen of Scots,

'jS) which it hiad become almost matter of form to re-

niew every year. They served not only to smure
thiat unhapp~y princers with som~e profpett of liber-
ty , but furnilhed an apology for eluding the folli-
citations of fo>reign powlers mn her behlalf , and were
of uie to ov·erawe james, by fbewing hiim that the
co~uld, at anly time, s~et free a dangerous rival to dii-
pute his authlority. Thlere treaties (he fuffered to
pr'ceed to w~hat length the pleased, and never want-
edl a p'retnce~ for break~ing ihemn off, when they be-
camec no lon~ger necei~ary. The treaty now on foot
wa~s not, p~erh~aps, moere Encere thian many which
prcceded it , the r-easo~ns, however, which rendered
it inecffe~~tual were far from being frivolouis.

N;ew con- A~s CriChlonl a Jefulit was failing from Slanders

ferytowards Scotland, thle (hip on board of whic-h he
"j~~/li- was a paffenlger happenecd to be chased by pirates,

Swho in that age, often infeffed the narrow fe2s.

Crichiton, in great confulson,, tore in pieces forre
pap'ers in his cuitody, and threw them away , butt
b~y a very extraordinary accident, the wind blew
thiem back into the (hip, and they were imlmediate-;
ly tnlken up by some of the passengers, wiho creried
themn to WYade~, the Cle~rk of thle pr~ivy council. He,
withl great induffry~ andqatienlce, joined thern· toge-
the~r, an~d they were found to contain the acc~ount of
a~ plotr, IOxid to have been formedc by the King oF
Spa~in, andl Duke of Guise, for inv·ading England.
Tihe people were not yet re-covered from the feat
a·d an~xiety occaflouecd by thie confpiracyr, in which
T~hrogmorton had been engaged, and as his dirco-
veries ayppare~d now to bie co~nfirmed by additional
evidence, not only all their former apprehenfrons
recuirred, but thle conflernation became general
anrd exceiv~\e. As all the dangers, with which

England

England hiad been threatened for some years, flowed Boosevi
either immediately from Mary herfell, or from thore, 1J
who made ule of her name to juflify their inlitrrc- 'R
tions and cons~piracies, this gradually diminilhed
the compaflion due to her Intuationi, and thle Eng-
lifh, inflead of pitying, began to fear and hate her.
Elizabeth, under whole wife and pacific reign the
English enjoyed tranqluillity, and had opened lources
of wealth un~known to their anceffors, was extreme-
ly beloved by all her people ; and regard to her saf~e-
ty, not less than to their own interest, animated
them against the Scottith Queen. In order to dif- occa ions
courage her adherents, it was though~t necefrary to an airocia-
convince them, by fame public, dee,~ of the·+,~ ttach- ino
ment of the Englilh to their own Sovereign, and Mary.
that any attempt againit her life would prove fatal
to her nival. Wtith this view, an Af~ciationE was 080. ,9.
framed, the subscribers of which bouind themselves
by the most solemn oaths, " to defend th~e Qu~een
-** againit all her enemies, foreign and domellic s
'* and if violence thould be ·offered to her life, in
" order to favour the title· of any pretender to the
" Crown, they not only engaged never to allow or
** acknowledge the pedlon, or persons, by whom,
" or for whom, such a detestable aLt thould be com-
" mitted, but vowed, in the presence of the Eter-
" nal God, to prosecute such person, or persons,
" to the death, and to pursue them, with their
"L utmost vengeance, to their utter overthrow and
" extirpation*." Persons of all ranks subscribed
this combination, with the greatest eagerners and
unanimnity tf.

MAa r Iconfadered this combination, not only as which

an avowed dfelign to exclude her from all right orgreadyl a-
fliccefion, but as the certain and immediate fore- larms her.
runner of her deltrudtion. In order to avert this,

*State Trals, I. rsa. ·t Cased. 499*

G 2 The

BoonilV1. the made luch feeble efforts as were it ill in her pow·

ic3 er, and lent Naue her secretary to court, with offers
sS4' of more entire resignation to the will of Elizabeth,

in every p~oint, which had been the occafton of their
long enmity, thian all her fufferings hitherto had
been able to extort*. Eut whether Mary adhered
in flexibly to her privileges, as an independent Sove-
reign, or yieldin~g to the neceflity of her situation,
endeavoured, by conceions, to sooth her rival, the
was equally un~ilccelsful. Her firmness was impu-
ted to obilinacy, or to the secret hope of foreign
aliftanc~e her concellions were either believed to
be infmecere, or to flow from the fear of fame im-
minlent danger. Her pres~ent willingoefs, however,
to comply with any ter ms was so great, that Wal-
fingham warmly urged his miftrels to come to a final
agreement with her. But Elizabeth, was per funded,
that it was the spirit railed by the association, which
had rendered her 10 pafllve and compliant. She
a7lways imagined that there was something mnyfte-
rious and deceitful in all Mary's a~ions, and f~il-
peded her of carrying on a dangerous correfpon-
dence with the Englilh Catholics, both within and
without the kingdom. Nor were her fulpicions
altogether void of foundation. Mary had, about
this time, written a letter to Sir Francis Inglefield,
urging him to hasten the execution of what the calls
the Great plot or Defignmentr, without hesitating on
account of any danger in which it might involve
her life, w bich the w~ould most willingly part with,
if, by thiat sacrifice, the could procure relief for to
great a number of the oppressed children of the

she istrea- Church -t. Initead, therefore, of hearkening to the
red with overtures which the Scottilh Qgeen made, or grant-
greater ri- ing any mitigation of the hardships of which the
gOUr. complained, El~zabeth resolved to take her out of

thec hands of the Earl of Shrewsbury, and to ap-

*Camd. ibid. t Strype, 3- t46.

point

point Sir Amias Paulet, and Sir Drue Drury, to BOOK I.
be her keepers. Shrewsbury had discharged his~cc
trust with great fidelity, during fifteen years, 5'
but, at the fame time, had treated Mary with
gentleness and refped, and had always rweetened
harth commands, by the humanity, with which
he put them io execution. The fame polite-
ners was not to be expedted from men of an in-
ferior rank, whole severe vigilance, perhaps, was
their chief recommendation to that employment,
and the only merit, by which they could pretend,
to gain favour or preferment* . Camd.

As James was no less eager, than ever, to deprive 3· soo.Gra

the banithed nobles of Elizabeth's procedion, he new fa-
appointed the Malter of Gray his ambassador to the yourite of
court of England, and entruffed him with the con- the~i~ng's
duA of a negociation for that purpose. An honour
for which he was indebted to the envy and jealoury
of the Earl of Arran. Gray poffeifed all the talents
of a Courtier , a graceful perion, an insinuating ad-
drels, boundless ambition, and a restless and in-
triguing spirit. During his residence in France, he
had been admitted into th~e most intimate familiarity
with the Duke of Guise, and in order to gain his
favour, had renounced the Protellant Religion, and
profeffed the utmost zeal for the captive Qqeen,
who carried on a secret correlpondence with hirr,
from which the expeAed great advantages. On his
return into Scotland, he paid court to James with
extraordinary alliduity, and his accomplishments
did not fail to make their drual impreflion on the
King's heart. Arran, w~ho had introduced him,
began quickly to dread his growing favour , and
flattering himself, that ablence w~ould effacee anly
sentiments of tenderners fromr the mind of a young
prince, pointed him out, by his malicious praires,
as the most proper perso~n in the kingdom, for an

G 3 emnbalyj

BoorVII. embaffyl of such imnportance: and contributed to

C- raile- him to that high~ dignity, in order to halten his

'584* fall. Elizabeth, wvho had an admirable dexterity

in discovering the proper mnitruments for carrying
on her des~igns, endeavoured, by caresses, and by
prelents, to Iecure Gray to her intereit. The for-
mer flattered his vanity, which was great ; the lat-
ter Applied his profufenefs, which was still greater.
He abandoned himlelf without reserve to Eliza-
beth's diredlions, and not onily undertook to retain
the King under th~e influence of England, but ~Ated
as a spy upon thle Scottith Queen, and betrayed to
her rival every facret, that he could draw from her
by his h~igh1 pretenflons of zeal in her service.*

His inte- Ga Av)S credit with the English court was ex-

rc i'tecurt tremely galling to the banithed nobles. Elizabeth
of Eng- no longer thought of employing her power to restore
land. them; , he found it calier to govern Scotland, by

corrupting the King's favourites; and in compli-
ance with Gray's follicitations, the commanded the
exiles to leave the north of England, and to remove

Dec. 3r. into the heart of the kingdom. This rendered it

difficult for them to hold any correlpondence with
their partizans in Scotland, and almott impofllblee
to return thither without her per mifllon.. Gray, by
gaining: a point which James had 10 much at heart,
ri vectted himself more firmly than ever in his favour;
and by acquiring greater reputation, became capa-
ble of serving Elizabeth with greater success -t.

I580· ARRAN had n~ow pofei~t~ed, for rame time, all
Arran's the power, the riches, and the honours, that his

rn6~~,u immoderate ambition could desire, or the fondness

idrolence. of a Prince, who Let no limits to his liberality to-

wa~rds his favourites, could be~tow. The office of
Lord Chancellor, the highest and most important in

*Strype, 3- 30s. Mely. 3 r6. t Cald* 3. 641.

thie

the kingdom, was conferred upon him, even dur- 1300 VII.
ing the life of the Earl of Argyll, who rucceeded C~
Athole in that dignity* , and the public beheld, . r.~i
with aitonirthment and indignation, a man educated onic.~ or
as a soldier of fortune, iegnorant of law, and a con- State,
temner of jultice, appointed to preside in parliament, ^PP- 447-
in the privy council, in the court of teffion, and
intrulted with the Cupreme disposal of the property
of his fellow-fgbjceas. He w as, at the fame time,
g~overnor of the castles of Stirling and Edinburgh,
the two principal forts in Scotland- , Provost of the
city of Edinburgh; and as if by all there accu-
mulated dignities his merit were not fufficiently re-
compenfed, he had been created Cieutenant Gene-
ral over the whoic kingdom. No person was gd-
mtitted into the King's prerence without his permilr
sion ; no favour could ~be obtained but by his mre-
distion. James, occupied with youthful amule-
ments, devolved upon him the whole regal autho-
rity. Such unmerrted elevation increased his natu-
ril arrogance, an4 repdered it itolersble. He was
no longer content with the coqdition of a firbjeQt,
but pretended to derive his pedigrele from Murdo
Duke of A'lbsny , and boai~ed, openly, that his
title to the Crown was prefer able to that of the
King him~elf. But, together w~ith the~e thoughts
of royalty, he retained the masnners, suitable to
his primitive indigence. His venality as a judge
was scandalous, and w as exceeded only by that of
his wife, who, in defiance of decency made her-
self a party in almoit every queion whichl came to
be decided, employed her influence to corrupt, or
to overawe the judges, and almost openly didtated
thieir decilsons t. Hlis rapaciouthiers as a Miniffer
wars insatiable. NJot satisfied with the revenues of

·t Calal. 3- 33'. Scorta~rvct's Staggering State, 7.

G4 so

BOOKVII lo mny~n offices, with the eflate, and honours which

'VCbelongJed to the family of Hamilton ; or with the
ljr greater part of Gowrie's lands, which had fallen to

his thare , he grasped at the polleilions of several of
the nobles. He required Lord Maxwell to exchange
part of his eflate, for the forfeited lands of Kinneil ;
and becaule he was unwilling to quit an ancient in-
heritance for a pollemlon so precarious, he flirred up
againf1 him, his hereditary ri val, the Laird of John-
flon, and involved that corner of the kingdom mn
a civil war. He committed to prison the Earl of
Athole~, Lord Home, and the Mailer of Callils ,
the fir~it, becaule he: would not divorce his wife,
a daughter of the Earl of Gowrie, and entail his
eitate on him ; the recond, becaule he was un willing
to part with some lands, adjacent to one of his
estates ; and the third, for refusi~ng to lend him mo-
ney. His rpies and informers failled the whole coun-
try, and intruded themselves into every company.
The nearest neighbours diftruffed and feared each
other. All familiar society was at an end. Even
the common intercourfes of humanity were inter-
topted, no man knowing in whom to confide, or
whiere to utter his complain~ts. There is not per-
haps in hillory, an example of a minister to univer-
ifally detefiable to a nation, or who more juffly de-
se~rved its detestation*.

ARR ur, nothwithflanding, regardlels of the fen-

timents, and defpillag the murmurs of the people,
gave a loose to his natural temper, and proceeded,
to ac'ts it ill more violent. David Home of Argaty,
and Patrick his brother, having received letters from
one of the banithed Lords, about private burinefs,
were condemned and put to death, ~for holding cor-

*Spots. 337, 338- refpondnce

refpondence with rebels. Cunninghame of Drum- soor VuI.
whafel, and Douglas of Mains, t wo gentlemen of -
honour and reputation, were acculed of having '585-
conspired, with the exiled nobles, to seize the
King's pedron. A single witness only appeared;
the evidence they produced of their innocence was
unanswerable ; their acculer himself not long after
acknowledged that he had been suborned by Arran ;
and all men believed the charge againit them to
be groundless: they were found guilty, notwith- Febru. 9.
itanding, and fuffered the death of traitors*.

ABou'r the fame time, that thes~e gentlemen Parry's

were punithed for a pretended conspiracy, Eliza. coarpiracy
beth's life was endangered by a real one. Parry, sEgl~th.
a Dodtor of laws, and a Member of the Houle of
Commons, a man vain and fantastic, but of a re-
solute spirit, had lately been reconciled to the
Church of Rome ; and fraught with the zeal of a
new convert, he offered to demonfirate the fin-
cerity of his attachment to the religion which he
had embraced, by killing Elizabeth. Cardinal
Allen had publithed a book, to prove the murder
of an excommunicated Prince to be not only law-
ful, but a meritorious adtion. The Pope's Niuncio
at Venice, thle Jesuits both there and at Paris, the
Englilh exiles, all approved of the design. The
Pope himself exhorted him to persevere,; and grant-
ed him, for his encouragement, a plenary indul-
gence, and remillion of his Gas. Cardinal di Comno
wrote him a letter to th~e fame purpole. Eut
though he often got access to the Qgeen, fear, or
f'ome remaining sense of duty, reitrained him from
perpetrating the crime. Happily, his intention
was at last diicovered by Nevil, the only person
io England, to whom he had communicated it ;
and he himself having voluntarily confef fed his March i.
guilt, he luffered the punilhment which it defery-
ed -t.

* Spotl 338. Cald,. *794. t State trialS, Vol.I. 1· Oj.

Tusse

Boorr VII. THESE repeated conspiracies against their S4-

Svereign awakened the indignation of the English

'5 5e ~ parliamnent, and produced a very extraordinary

nA evre, iatute, which, in the end, proved fatal to the
which Qgeen of Scots. By this law the association in de-
proved fa- fence of Elizabeth's life was ratifled, and it was
'al to Ma- further enaded , " that if any rebellion ihall be
ty. " excited in the kingdom, or any thing attempted

'( to the hurt of hier Maje~ty's pedobn, by or for any
" person pretending a title to thle Crown, the Qyeen
" thall empower twenty four persons, by a com-
" million under the Great Seal, to examine into,
" and pass featence upon furch offences a and after
' judgment given, a proclamation thall be iifued,
(' declaring the perlious whom they find guilty,
"' excluded from any right to the Crown i and her
" Majefty's fubjeds may lawfully pursue every one

of them to the death, with all their sidiers and

" ab'ettors : And if any design againit the life of
" the Qgeen take effedt, the perlonls, by or for whom
'e such a detest~able aLZ is executed, and lbeir afurrs,
"' being any wife ass~enting or privy to the lame,
" thall be dilabled for ever from pretending to the
" Crown, and be pursued to death in the like man-
ner ."This adt was plainly levelled at the Qgeen
of Scots ; and whether we confider it as a voluntary
exprefion of the zeal and concern of the nation for
Elizabeth's saf~ety, or whether we impute it to the
influen~ce, which that artful Princers preserved over
her parliaments, it is no easy matter to reconcile
it with the general principles of justice or humani-
ty. Mary was thereby rendered accountable not
only for her own adtions, but for those of others ;
in codeqcuence of which, the might forfeit her
right of fucceion, and even her l~ife itlelf.

*State ~trils, Vol. I. i ta- M ~a r

MAny juffly considered this ad, as a warning SoolsVII

to prepare for the work extremities. Elizabeth's ·
ministers, it is probable, had resolved, by this time, The~rgou
to take away her life s and fiuffered books to lie withwhich
publithed, in order to persuade the nation, that the was
this cruel and unprecedented measure was not only treated,in-ce~d
necellary, but juff *. Even that thort period ofcraid
her days which remained, they rendered uncom-
sortable, by every hardihip, and indignity, which
it was in their power to infliat. Almost all her ser-
vants were dilmiffed; the was treated no longer
with the refped due to a Queen; and though the
rigour of seventeen years imprisonment had broken
her conflitution, the was confined to two ruinous
chambers, fearce habitable, even in the middle of
summer, by reason of cold. Notwithffanding the
s~cantiness of her revenue, the had been accustomed
to diffribute regularly some alms among the poor
in the village adjoining to the caffle. Paulet, now,
refuled her liberty to perform this pious and hu-
mane offiee, wh~ich had afforded her great confola-
tion, amidst her own fufferings. The cattle, in
which the resided, was converted into a common
prison; and a young man, fulpedecd of Popery,
was confined there, and treated under her eye,
with such rigour, that he died of the ill usage.
She often complained to Elizabeth of those: mult~i-
plied injuries, and expoftullated as became a wo-
man, and a Qu~een, but as nopolitical reason now
obliged that Princess to amule her any longer with
fallacious hopes, far from granting her any redress,
the did not even deign to give her any antiver. The
king of France, closely allied to Elizabeth, on whom
he depended for alli~tance, was afraid of efpouilng
Mary's cause, with any warmth i and all his folli-
citations in her behalf were feeble, formal, and in-
eLfficacious. But Caftelnau the French ambassador,
whole compallion and zeal for the unhappy Queen

supplied

*Strype 3* z99.

soon VII-fupplied thle defeas in his infiru~ions, remonfira-

~-ted with fuich vigour against the indignities, to
's~s- which the was exposed, that, by his importunity,

he prevailed at length to have her removed to
Tuthbury , though the was confined, the greater
part of another winter, in her preieat wretched ha-
bitation *.

A breach NE ITH ER the infillts of her enemies, nor the ne-
be'twen gled of her friends, made luch an impreilion on
Mary anpd Mary as the ingratitude of her son. James had

he o.hitherto treated his mnother with filial refpedt, and

had even entered into negociations with her, which
gave umbrage to Elizabeth. But as it was not her
interest that this good correspondence thould con-
tinue, Gray, who, on his return into Scotland,
found his favour with the King greatly encreafed
by the Auccefs of h~is embassy, persuaded him to
write a harth and undutiful letter to his mother, in
which he exprefly refused to acknowledge her to
be Qugeen of Scotland, or to confider his affairs as
conneded, in any wife, with hers. This cruel re-
quital of her maternal tendernels overwhelmed Ma-
ry with sorrow and despair. " Was it for this, said
c' the, in a letter to the French ambassa~dor, that I
" have endured so mnuch, in order to preserve for
" him the inheritance, to which l haven juff right ?
*' I am far from envying his authority in Scotland.
** I desire no power there; nor with to set my foot
*' in that kingdom, if it were not for the pleasure
a' of once embracing a l'on, whom I have hitherto
'( loved with too tender affeation. Whatever he
'( either enjoys, or expeccs, he derived it from me.
IL From him, I never received alliftance, supply,
c' or benefit of any kind. Let not my allies treat
"' him any longer as a King ; he holds that dignity
'( by my codient; and if a rpeedy repentance does
" not appease my just relentment, I will load him

" with

* Jebb, v. 2. 576c598.

<* with a parent's curse, and su~rrender my Crown, Booic VII.
"c with all my pretensions, to one, who will receive -
"I them with gratitude, and defend them with vi- 18
"e gour *." The love which James bore to his mot-
ther,, whom he had never known, nay whom he
had been early taught to confider as the most a-
bandoned person of her sex, cannot be suppose~d
ever to have been ardent, and he did not now take
any pains to regamn her favour. But whether her
indignation at his undutiful behaviour, added to
her bigotted attachment to Popery, prompted Ma-
ry at any time to think s~eriously ofdifinheriting her
son; or whether thele threatnings were uttered in
a sudden sally of disappointed affeation, it is now
n~o ealy matter to determine. Some papers which
are still extant seem to render the former not im-
probable t.

CARES Of aDOther kind, and no lels disquieting, Dangerous

occupied Elizabeth's thoughts. The calm, which Gizkhtato of
the had long enjoyed, seemed now to be at an end ;
and luch florms were gathering in every quarter,
as filled her with jufit alarm. All the neighbouring
nationls had undergone revolutions, extremely to
her disadvantage. The great qualities, which Hen-
ry III. had dilplayed in his youth, and which raised
the expedtations of his fubjeats so high, vanithed on
his ascending the throne ; and his acquiring supreme
power fecms not only to have corrupted his heart,
but to have impaired his underfanding. He soon
loft the esteem and affe~tion of the nation ; and a
life divided between the sufferities of a fuperflitious
devotion, and the extravagancies of the most diffo-
lute debauchery, rendered him as contemptible as
he was odious on account of his rapaciousness, his
profusion, and the fondnels with which he doted
on many unworthy minions. On the death of his
only brother, those sentiments of the people burit

ouit

*Jebb, a. 5 s. See Append. No. X. t See Append. No. XI.

soocvil. out with violence. Henry had no children, and

- though but thirty two years of age, the fitecethaon

585-. of the Crown was already considered as open. The

King of Navarre, a difiant descendant of the royal
family, but the uIndoubted beir to the Crown, was
a zealous Protell~ant. The profperdt of an event, so
fatal to thieir Religion, as his ascending the throne

From the of France, alarmed all the Catholics in Europe, and

thlau;the Duke of Guil'e, countenanced by the Pope, an~d

aided by the Kin~g of Spain, appeared as the de-
fender of the Romith faith, and th~e afierter of thle
Cardinal of Bourbon's right to the Crown. In or-
der to unite the party, a bond of confederacy was
formed, diftinguifted by the na~me of th~e H~oly
League. All ranks of men joined in it with emula-
tioni. The spirit Cpread with the irresistible rapi-
dlity, whichi was natural to religious paflions, in
that age. Tlhe ddltru~tion of th~e Reformation nojt
only in France, but all over Euroipe, seemed to be
the objeA and widx of the whole party; and the
Duke of Guise, the head of this mighty and zealouis
body, acquir~ed authority in the kingdom, far la-
perior to th~at, whichi thre King himl~elf poffeffed.

From the P-hilip II. by the conquest of Portugal, had greatly
power of increased thle naval power of Spain, and had at last
raLilip II. reduced unde~r his domr~inion all that portion of the

Continent, which lies beyond the Pyrenean moun-
rains, and whiich nature seems to have destined to
Iform~l one great monarchy. William Prince of O-
range, whio fird encouraged the inhabitants of the
Netherlands to allert their libertiecs, and whole wis-
dom and valour formed and proteded the rising
comm~onwealth, had fallen by th~e hands of an affal`-

fi.The furperi;or geniu's of the Prin~ce of Parma,

had given an erttire rturn to thle fate of the war in
the L~ow Countries, all his enterprizes, concertred
wvith confiummate sk~ill, and executed with equal
b~rave.ry, had be~en attended with~ fuccels, and the
Dutch~, reduced to thle last extremity, were onl thec

point

po'In of falling under the dominion of their ancient BoolVII.
miaftr.

NON E of those circumftences, to which Elizabethl Wfr 8Hre

hiad hitherto owed her security, existed any longer., ad vigo-
She could derive no advantage from the jealousy, rous con-
which had fubifited between France and Spain , dua.
Philip, by means of his confederacy with the Duke
of Guise, had an equal [way in the councils of both
kingdoms. The Hugonots were unable to contend
with the power of the league ; and little could be
expeded from any diverflon they might ccarate.
Nor was it probable that the Netherlands could
long employ the arms, or divide the firength of
Spain. In this situation1 of the affairs of Europe, it
became necefrary for Elizabeth to form a newp plan
of conduat ; and her wil'dom in forming it, waS
not greater thlan the vigour with which the carried
it on. Thte measures, most suitable to her natural
temper, and which the had hitherto pursued, were
cautious anld Safe , thos~e the now adopted were en-
terprizing and hazardous. She preferred peace, but
was not afraid of war ; and was capable, when
compelled by necellty, not only of defendinlg her-
self with iprit, but of attacking her enemnies with
a boldness, which averted danger from her own
dominions. She immediately furnithed the Huglo-
nots with a considerable supply in money. She
carried on a private negociation with Henry III.
who, though compelled to join the league, hated
the leaders of it, and withed for their defltrudion.
She openly undertook the pr~oteation of the Dutch
commonwealth, and fes~t a powerful army to its
amlitance. She endeavoured to form a general con-
federacy of the Protestant Princes in opposition to
the Popith league. She determined to proceed wlith Refolvesto
the urtmolt hgour againf1 the Qgeen of Scots, whole puninsMa-
fufferings nld righlts ifforded her enemies a rpecio~us ry, and to
pretence for in;vad~ing~ hr dominions.ln She reso~lve~ gain thr

3~t "'E's

troorV1I. to redouble her endeavours in order to es fe<R a cloier

L union with Scotland, and to extend and perpetuate

1585- her indluence over the councils of that nation.

SHE found it no difficult matter to induce most

of the Scottish courtiers, to promote all her designs.
Gray, Sir John Maitland, wh~o had been advanced
to the office of Secretary, which his brother former-
ly held, Sir Lew~is Bellenden the Juffice Clerk,
who had succeeded Gray as the King's resident at

May 2~9. London, were the persons in whom the chiefly con-

sided In order to diredt and quicken their motions,
the dispatched Sir Edward Wotton alon~g with Bel-
lenden into Scotland. This man was gay, well-
bred, and entertaining ; he excelled in all th~e ex-
ercifes, for which James had a pairon ; and amulfed
the young King by relating the adventures he had
met with, and the observations he had made, du-
ring a long residence in foreign countries; but un-
der the veil of there superficial qualities, he con-
cealed a dangerous and intriguing rpirit. He soon
grew into high~ favour with James, and while he
was seemingly attentiveonly to pleasure and diver-
fions, he acquired influence over the public coun-
cils, to a degree which was indecent for a firanger
to poffers *.

Propoles a NoTruINC, however, could be more acceptable
league to the nation, than the proposal be made of a firiat
wi;h Scot- alliance between the two kingdoms, in defence of
land. the Reformed Religion. Thle rapid and alarming

progrers of the popith league seemed to call on all
Protellant Princes, to unite for the preservation of
their common faith. James embraced the overture

July 29. with warmth, and a C~onvention of eflates impow-

ered him to conclude Cuch a treaty, and engaged to
ratify it in parliament -t. The alacrity with which
James concurred in this mea~itre, must not be
wholly areribed either to his own zeal, or to Wot-

ton's

*Mely. 3* 7. t Spotfw. 339-

ton's siddrers; it was owing in part to Elizabeth's soorvn.
liberality. As a mark of her motherly affedtion for '
the young King, the lettled on him an annual pen- 5·
sion of 5000 pounds ; the fame f~um which her fa-
ther had allotted her, before the ascended the throne.
This circumitance, whieb the took care to mention,
rendered a lum, which in that age was far from be-
ing inconsiderable, a very acceptable prelent to the
King, whole revenues, during a long mino~rity, had
been almost totally diflipated *.

B!ut the chief objelf of Watton's intrigues, was Under-

to ruin Arran. Whiile a minion so odious to the mi,,nesAr
nation continued to govern the King~, his allifiance ran's pow-
could be of little advantage to Elizabeth. And er.
though Arran, ever since his interview with Huns-
dane, had appeared extremely for her interest, the
could place no great confidence in a man, whole
conduat was to capricious and irregular, and who,
notwithilanding his protestations to the contrary,
.still continued a secret correCfondence both with
Mary, and with the Duke of Guise. The banith-
ed Lords were attached to England from affeaion,
as well as principle, and were the only perlons a-
mong the Scots whom, in any dangerous exigency,
the could thoroughly truth. Before Bellenden left
London, they had been s~ummoned thith~er, under
colour of vindicating thems~elves ficom his accufati-
ons, but, in reality, to conce~rt with him the most
proper measures for refforing themi to their coun-
try. Wotton purfuedi this plan, and endeavoured
to ripen it for execution ; and it was greatly facili-
tated by an event, neither uncomimon nor confide-
rable. Sir John Forfier, anid Ker of Ferniberft,
the English and Scottith~ wardens of the middle
marches, having met, according to the cuitom of
the borders, about mid-summer an affray arose, and
L~ord Ruffel, the Earl of Bedford's eldclt son, hap-

Vor. I.H pened

*Cald. g. 3os.

BoorVII.pened to be killed. This fcuffte was purely acci-

~3dental, but Elizabeth chole to confider it as a de-
' Sss. lgn formed by Ker, at the infligation of Arran, to

inivolve the two kingdoms in war. She insisted that
both of them thould be delivered up to her , and
though James eluded that demand, he was obliged
to confine Arran in St. Andrew's, and Ker in Aber-

bAllits tdhe deen. During his ablence from court, Wotton
nobles. and his associates carried on their intrigues without

interruptionl. By their advice, the banilhed nobles
endeavoured to accommodate their differences with
Lord John, and Lord Claud, the Duke of Chatel-
herault's two Tons, whom Morton's violence had

tob. 16 driven out of the kingdom. Their common sus-

ferings, and common interest, induced both parties
to bury in oblivion the ancient discord, which had
f~ubifited between the houles of Hamilton and Doug-
las. By Elizabeth's permillion, they returned in
a body to the borders of Scotland. Arran, who
had again recovered favour, insisted on putting the
kingdom in a poflure of defence. But Gray, Bel-
lenden, and Maitland, secretly thwarted all his
rneafures. Some neceffery orders they prevented
from being ilizued ; others they rendered ineffe~ual,
by the manner of execution ; and all of them were
obeyed slowly, and with reludtance *.

WorTron's fertile brain was, at the fame time,

big with another and more dangerous plot. He
had contrived to seize the King, and to carry him
by force into England. But the design was happi-
ly discovered ; and in order to avoid the punish-
mnict his treachery merited, he departed without
taking leave t-.

They re- ME ANW HI LE the banished Lords hastened the
turn mato execution1 of their enterprize s and as their friends
,Scfotland*; and vassals were now ready to join them, they en-

conc.ed e- tered Scotland. Wherever they came, they were
the King. welcomed as the deliverers of their country, and

the

* Spotdw. 34+. ·t Moly. 335*

the moll fervent prayers were addressed to Hieaven soonv~I.
for the luccefs of their arms. They advanced, with- -
out losing a momrent, towards Stirling at the head Z·
of to ooo men. The King, though he h~ad al-
fembled an army superior in number, could not
venture to meet them in the field, with troops,
whole loyalty was extremely dubious, and who, at
bett, were far from being hearty in the caule; nor
was either the town or castle provided for a siege.
The gates, however, of both~ were thut, and the
nobles encamped at St. Ninian's. That f~ame night oc a
they furrprized the town, or more probably it wasNoe.2
betrayed into their hands ; and Arran, who had
undertaken to defend it, was obliged to s~ave him-
felfby a precipitate flight. Next: morning they in-
veied the cattle, in which there were not provi-
fions for twenty-four hours; and James was necef-
ficated immediately to hearken to terms of accom-
modation. They were not to elated with success,
as to urge extravagant demands, nor was the King
unwilling to make every reasonable concellion.
They obtained a pardon in the most ample form,
of all the offences they had committed; the princi-
pal forts in the kingdom were, by way of security,
put into their hands; Crawford, Montrole, and
Colonel Stewart were removed from the King's
prerence s and a parliament was called, to eflabi~h
tranquillity in the nation *.

THovou H.a great majori ty in thlis parliament con -A Parrlia-

sifted of the confederate nobles, and their adhe- ment hld.
rents, they were far from dilcoveringa vindi~five Dec. ro.
spirit. Satisfied with procuring an ad, refforing
trhem to their ancient honours and eitates, and ra-
tifying the pardou granted by the King, they seem-
ed willing to forget all past errors in the adminiffra-
tion, and spared James the mortification of feeing
his Miniffers branded with any public note of in-
famy. Arran, alone, deprived of all his lyonours,

* a*3-79-H 2 firipped

Hoonvl. firipped of his borrowed spoils, and declared an

eenemy to his country by public proclamation, funk

sh-j back unto obsc~urity, and must, henceforth, be

menitioned by his primitive title of Captain James
Stewyart. As he had been, during his unmerited
pr'olperity, the objeat of the hatred anid indignation
of his counitrymetn, they beheld hiis fall without
pity, nor did all his fufferings mitigate their resent-
ment in the least degree.

Church THE Clergy were the only body of men, who
strairs. obtained no redress of their grievances by this re-

volution. The confederate nobles had, all along,
affeded to be considered as guardians of the privi-
leges and dilcipline of thle Church. In all their
manifeffos they had declared their resolution to re-
flore there, and by that popular pretence, had gain-
ed many friends. It was now natural to expedt
Come fruit of there promires, and some returns of
gratitrude towards many of the maf eminent preach -
ers who had fuffered in their cause, and who de-
manded the repeal of the laws passed the preceding
year. Thle King, however, was relolute to main-
tain there laws in full authority ; and as the nobles
were extremely follicitous not to dirguff him, by
infiiting on any disagreeable request, the claims of
thle Church in this, as well as in many former in-
flances, were Sacrificed to the interest of the laity.
The Miniffers gave vent to their indignation in the
pulpit, and their impatience under the dilappoint-
ment broke out in some expreirons, extremely dil-
refpedful even towards the King himself *.

Ij86. iHE Archbibop of St Andrew's, too, felt the

Seffea~s of their anger. The Provincial Synod of
Fife frummoned him to appear, and to answer for
his contem-pt of the decrees of former assemblies,
in presuming to exercise the fun~ion of a Bilhop.

And

* Spotfw. 343-

An~d though he rftufed to acknowledge thle juriC. BaooVII.
diation of the court, and appealed fr·om it to the -"
King, a featence of excommunication, equally in- sG
decent and irregular, was pronounced against him. April I~
ridamfon, with no less indecency, thundared his
archiepiscopal excommunication againit Melvil, and
s~ome other of his opponents.

Soon after, a general asse~mbly was held, in~ whidxi

the King, with fomne difficulty, obtained an adt,
permitting the name and office of a Bilhop flill to
continue in the Church. The` power of the order,
however, was considerably retrenched. The ex-
ercife of dilcipline, and the infpedtion of the ble
and domtine of the Clergy, were commnitted to
Prefbyteries,, in whic-h B~ilbops thould be allowed
no other pre-eminence, but that of prefidinig as
perpetual moderators. TIhey themselves were de-
dlared. to be fubjeA, in the fame manner as other
paltors, to the jurif~diaLon of the General attembly.
And as the dilcution of the tirchbinhoP's appeal
might have kindled un~usual heats in the assembly,
that affair was terminated by a compromil~e. He
renounced any claim of supremacy over the Church,
and promiled to demean himself faitably to the ch~a
rader of a Bi~hop, as deferibed by St. Paul. The
Assembly, without examining~ the foundations of
the featence of excommunication, declared th~at it
thould be held of no effea, and reffored him to all
the privileges, which he enjoyed before it was pro-
nounced. Notwithilanding the extraordinary ten-
derners thewn for the honour of the lynod, and the
delicacy and refpeas; with wh~ich its jurifdiiaionl
was treated, leveral members were to zealous as to
protest againit this decision *.

Tue court of: Scotland was now filled with per- A league

sons, so warmly attached to EJ;zabthLt, thaDt the wNith cag.~

cluded.

* Cld. 3. 894. Sp~tuowood 36.

Hj 3 leagu

BaooxVH. league between the two kingdorms, which had been

'- propofetd last year, mnet with no interruption, but

'r56 from D'Efne4el the French Envoy. James him·-

July 5. self firlt offered to renew the negaciation. Eliza-

beth did not fuffer luch a favdurabzle opportunity to
flip, sad inflantly dilpatcthed Ralndoph to conclud
a treaty, whlich ibe so much defiredb dedne
to whlich~ the Protettant religion was exposed, by
the late comlbination of the Popith powers for its
deftrudtion, and the necellity of a bi~tr confederacy
among thore, who had embraced the Reformation,
in order to ob~ltrued their perniiouis detigns, were
mhentioned as the fonedaetion of the league. The
chief articles in it were, that both parties thould
bind themfrelves to defend the Evan~geliit Religion )
that the leagut tho~uld be offenfive and defsnfive
against all, who thall endeavour to diffrb the ex-
ercife~ of religion in ecither kingdom r that if one ~of:
the two pazrties be levaded, the other~t, notwithttend-
ing anjr former alliance, thould not, direalyor sn.t
direftlyg, allift the invlader a thdt if England be in-
vaded in any part remote (Was9i Scotlsn'd, James
should aift the Qge with 2ob~o horfet and 5~0o
foot ; that if the enemy Isncded or approached within
sixty miles of Scotlarnd, the Kingl fathoud take the
efied with his whole Abrces, in the fghftn manlner, iae
he would do in defence of his ownm kingdom. Eli-
zabeth, in returni undertook· ~ato ad defence oiF
Scotlanrd, if it dhould be~ invaded. Aht the fAme
time, the a~ffilred the Kiing that na 4tep thould be
taken, which mright dero~gCte ib ktay d~egree from

* spotfw. his preventions to the English COiwist. Eliaabeth

S-ex pressed great fa~tisftrairon wki 6l a at *, which ren-

dered Scotland an useful ally, in~cit of a dange-
rous neighb~our, and a~s foded her a degree of focu-
rity on that fide, which all her ahcthRsj~ had airned

at,

at, but none of them had been able to obtain. Boo VuI.
Zeal for religion, together with the b~lessings of --
peace, which both kingdoms had enjoyed during a 'T6
considerable period, had 10 far abated the violence
of national antipathy, that the King's conduat was
univrerfally acceptable to his own people*.

THE acquittal of Archbald Douglas, at this time,

exposed James to much and deserved centure. This
man was deeply engaged in the conspiracy against
the life of the King his father. Both Morton and
]$inny one of his own fervapts, who fuffered for that
crime, had acculed him of being prelent at the mur-
der t. He had elcaped punithment by flying into
England, and James had often required Elizabeth
to deliver up a person to unworthy of her protec-
tion. He now obtained a licence, from the King
himself, to return into Scotland ; and after under-
going a mock trial, calculated to conceal rather
than to detedt his guilt, he was not only taken into
favour by the King, but sent back to the court of
England, with the honourable chara~ter of his am-
baffador. James was now of such an age, that his
you~th and inexperience cannot be pleaded in excure

orthis indecent tranfation. It must be imputed
to the exeffive facility of his temper, which often
led him to gratiFy his courriers at the expence of
his own dignity and reputation $.

No-r lon tufter, the inconsiderate affe~itin of ;Rior Ba.

the Englith Catholics towards Mary, and their bington's
implacable resentment against Elizabeth, gave rife conspiracy
to a conspiracy, which proved fatal to the one ag Ps'
Qtrteen, left an indelible ffain on the reputation of
the other, and prei'ented a Cpedtacle to Europe, of

* Camd. 5'3. t See Append. N*. XII. $ Spotfw.

$48. Cald* 3* 917. H 4 which

Booavil. which1 there had hitherto been no example in the

br ifftory of mankind.

rZS6. DocTOR Gifford, Gilbert Gifford, and Hodglan,

priests ediucatedi in the seminary at Rheims, had
aIdopted an extravagant and enthulia~lic notion, that
thle Bull of Piuls V. against Elizabeth was didtated)
imimediately by the Holy Ghost. Th'iis wild opiniont
they inftilkd into Savage, an officer in thle Spanilh

April 26. army, noted for his furious zeal, ~and darring cou-

rage, andc perfbaded him th~at no service could be
so accept;!ble to Heaven, as to take away the life
of anl exc~ommunica ed Hlereiic. Yavage, eager t~o
o~btain1 the Cr-own of madrtyrdom, bound himnlelf,
byv a th!cmin vowi, to kill Elizabeth. Ballard~, a
Srdk~iking priest, had at tha~t time come over to
P'aris, andi f;,jicited Mendoza the Spani~h amnbal-
fador there~, to p~rocure: an inv-arlon of England,
wh;i'e the affairs of the league were 10 prosperous,
andl the kingdom left naked by le-nding To miany of
the' Q~een's best troo~ps into the Nctheillands..
Pag 't and the Englith ex;les demonltrated the
fruitk (T:cfs olf (1sch an attempt, unkfrs ElizaJbethl
we~re first cut off, or the invaders f~cured of a pow-
erful concurrence on their landing.' If it could be
hoped thait either of there events would happen,
efc~feual aid was p~romised , and in the mnean time

a1~1-Balkirdl was rent back to renewv his intrigues.

He communicated his designs to Anthony Ba-

bington·, a young gentleman in Derbythire, of a
plentiful fortune, andl many amiable qualities, who
having contrasted, during his residence in France,
a familiarity with the Archbillhop of Glargow, had
been fecomm-rended by him to the Qgeen of Scots.
H~e concurlred withi Paget in considering the death
of' Elizabethh as a necessary preliminary to any inva-
ficon. E~allard gave him hopes that an end would
man be put to her days, andl imparted to him Sa-
vn;ge's \vow', whoD was now in L~ondon waiting for

an

an opportumity to strike the blow. But Babington soorrvil,
thought the attempt of too much importance, to c~
rely on a single hand for the execution of it, an~d 15"
propos~ed that five resolute gentlemen thould be join-
ed with Savage in an enterprize, thle success of
which was the fou~ndation of all their hopes. He
offe~red to find out persons willing to undertake the
service, whole honour, Cecrecy, and courage, thiey
might safely trust. He accordingly opened thle
matter to Edward Windsor, Thomnas Salisbury,
Charles Tinley, Chidioc Tichbourne, Robert Gage,
John Travers, Robert Barnwell, John Charnock,
Henry Dunl, John Jones, and Robert Polly, ail
of them, except Polly, whole bustling forward zeal
introduced him into their society, gentlemen of good
families united together in the bonds of private
friendsh~ip, ~thengthened by the more powerf'ul tie
of religious zeal. Mlany codrultations were heldi ; June.
their plan of operations was at last lettled; and their
different parts alligned. Babington himlelf was
appointed to rescue the Qgeen of Scots ; Salisbury The
with some others, undertook to excite several coun- cheme of
ties to take arms , the murder of the Queen, theC'hecoorpi.
most dangerous and important service of all, fell torators
Tichbourne and Savage, with four associates. And
To totally had their bigotted prejudices ex tinguithed
the principles of honour, and the sentiments of hu-
manity faitable to their rank, that without Ccruple
or compundion, they undertook an a~ion, which
is viewed with horror, even when committed by
the meanest and most profligate of mankind. This
attempt, on the contrary, appeared to them no less
honourable than it was delperate, and in order to
perpetuate the memory of it, they had a pidure
drh containing the portraits of the fix affains,
with that of Babington in the middle, and a motto
mntimating that they were jointly embarked in some
hazardous defignl.

Tas

B**.cVII. Tas conspirators, as appears by this wanton and

Simprudent idltance of vanity, seem to have thought

Dig,8 a dilcovery fearce possible, and neither diffruffed the
red by fidelity of their companions, nor doubted the Auc-
waling- cers of their undertaking. But while they believed
bam. that their machinations were carried on with the

moit profound and impenetrable secrecy, every Rtep
they took was fully known to Wallingham. Polly
was one of hiis spies, and had entered into the con-
[piracy with no other design than to betray his affo--
diates. Gilbert Gifford, too, having been lent
over to England to quicken the motions of the con-
fpirators, had been gained by Walsingham, and
gave him sure intelligence of all their projea2s. That
vigilant minilter imimediately imparted the dilco-
veries which he had made to Elizabeth ; and with-
out communicating the matter to any other of the
Counsellors, they agreed, in order to understand
the plot m~ore perfeatly, to wait till it was ripened
into fame form, and brought near th·e point of exe-
cution .

They are il-r left, Eliza-bethr throught it dangerous and cri-
feied and minal to expose her own life, and to tempt Provi-
p"Odn dence any far ther. Ballard, the prime mover in the

whole conspiracy, was arrested. His aGAociates,
d~isconcerted and (truck with attonifhment, endea.
voured to save themse~lves by f light. But, within a
few days, al~l of them, except Windsor, were seized
in different places of the kingdom, and committed
to the Tower. Though they had undertaken the
par t, they wanted t~he firm and -determined rpirit of
alFaffins ; and, influenced by fear or by hope, dif-
covered all they knew. The indignation of the
people, and their impatience to revenge such an ex-
ecrable combination againit the life of their Sove-
reign, hastened their trial, and all of them fuffered

Sept. so. the death of traitors'.

* Canal. 5'5. State Trials, Vol. r. Iao.

THUs

THUs far Elizabeth's conduft may be pronounc- soonavu.

ed both prudent and laudable, nor can the be ac- "P
culed of violating any law of humanity, or of tak'- 56
mng any precautions beyond what were neceifary
for her own lafety. But a tragical icene followed,
with regard to which, potterity will pals a very dif-
ferent judgment.

Toe frantic zeal of a few rath young men sc. Maryislc-

counts sus ficiently for all the wild and wicked de- culed of
signs which they had formed. But this was not the sk Inic
light, in which Elizabeth and her Miniffers chose in the con-
to place the conspiracy. They reprelen ted Babing- fpiralcy.
ton and his associates to be infiruments employed
by the Qgeen of Scots, the ~rel though secret Pu-
thor of so Many attempts againlt the life of Eliza-
beth, and the peace of her kingdoms. They pro*
duced letters, which they aiferibed to her, in Aup-
portof this charge. These, as they gave out, had
come into their hands, by the following singular,
and mylterious method of conveyance. Gifford,
on his return into England, had been intruffed byj
fomne of the exiles with letters to Mary ; but in or-
der to make a trial of his fidelity or addreLs, they
were on ly blank ppe~rsmade up in that form. There
being faefely delivered by him, he was afterwards
employed without farthrer rcruple. Wclingham
having found means to gain this man, he, by his
permaidion, and the connlivance of -Paulet, bribed a
tradermans in the neighbourhood of Chartley, whi-
ther Matry had been con~veyed, who depolited the
et~te~rs in a h'ole in the wall of the caftie, covered
with a look stone. Thence they were taken by the
Qgen, and in the fame manner, her answers re-
turned. All there were carried to Waillngham,
opened by him, decyphered, sealed again to dexte-
roufly that the fraud could not be perceived, and
then transm~itted to the persons to whom they were
direfted. Two letters to Babington, with several
to Mendoza, Paget, En~glefield, and the Englilh

fugitives,

EcooKll. fugitives, were procured by this artif~e. It was

L~given out that in there letters Mary approved of the

Sconfpiracy, and even of the affallination, thiat the
diretted thiem to p~roceed with the utmost circumn-
fpeAtion, and not to take arms till foreign auxilia-.
ries were ready to join them,; thatfThe recommendr-
ed the Earl o~f Arundel, his brothers, and the
young Earl of Northumberland, as proper persons
to conduit and to add reputation to their enter-
prize, that the advilerd them, if poflible, to excite
at the t'ame time lome commotion in Ireland , and
above all, belought thiem to concert with care the
means of her eleape, fuggeffing to them several ex-
pedients for thiat purpole.

T'heindig- AI L th~ele circumitances were opened at the trial
natio~n o of the conirnirators. And while thle nation was un-
tith againatder the influence of thoe ter~rors which th~e affo:cia-
her on that tion had raised, and the late danger iadt augmiented,
account. they were believed without belitation or enquiry,

and Cpread a general alarm. Mary's· zeal for heir
religion was well known; and in that age, exam-
ples of the violent and Canguinary fpiric which it
inspired, were numerous. All the cabals againit
the peace of the kingdom for many years had been
carried on in her name; and it now~ appears evi-
dently, said the Englith, that the fafefty of thle one
Qgueen is incompatible with that of the other. Why
then, added they, thouldi the tranquillity of Eng-
land be sacrificed for the fake of a (trranger I Why
is a life: 10. dear to the nation exposed to the repeat-
ed assaults of an exasperated rivalr ? Th.e cafe Cup-
posed inl the association, has now happened, the fa-
cred pedo;n of our Sovereign has been threatened,
and why thould not an injured people execute that
juff revenge which they had vowed ?

Flizabeth No4~ lentiments couild be more agrecable than
rerolves to there to E~lizabeth and hier Minillers. They thiem-
proceed to selves
the urnioll
ctefflillCSe
zaga ot her.

rtlves had at firit propagated them among the Boo VII
people, and they now served both as an apology,1~6
and a motive for their proceeding to fach extremi-
ties againlt the Scottilh Qgeen, as they had long
meditated. The more injluries Elizabeth heaped
on Mary, the more the feared and hated that un-
happy Qgeen, and came at last to be persuaded
that there could be no other security for her own
life, but the death of her rival. Burleigh and
Walsingham had promoted so zealously all her mea-
fures with regard to Scottilh affairs; and had aft-
ed, with so little reserve, in oppofution to Mary,
that they had reason to dread the most violent es-
feets of her relentment, if ever the thould mount
the throne of Enigland ; and therefore they endea-
voured to hinder an event so fatal to themselves,
by confirming their Miffrels's fear and hatred of
the Scottith~ Qu~een.

MEANWHILE, Mary was guarded with unusual Her do-

vigilance, and great care was taken to keep her ig- meltics,
norant of the dilcovery of the conspiracy. Sir ( 'f ,c.
Thomas Gorges was at lalt sent from court to ac-
quaint her both of it, and of thle imputation with
which the was loaded as acceffajry to that crime;
and he furprized her with the account, juff as the
had got on horseback to ride out along with her
keepers Sh~e was firuck with~ allonithiment, and
would have returned to her apartment, but the
was not permitted , and in her ablence, her pri-
vate closet was broke open, her cabinet and pa-
pers were seized, sealed, and sent up to Court.
Her principal domellics, too, were arrefied, and
committed to different keepers. Naue and Curle,
her two secretaries, the one a native of France,
the other of Scotland, were carried prisoners to
London. All the money in her cut~ody, amount-
ing to little more than 2000 pounds, was recured.
And after leading her about, for some days, from

OnC

Booz VII. one gentleman's h~ouse to another, the was con-

veyve ed to Fotheringay, a firong castle in Northamp-

s -6 ton (htre *.

Delibe- No farther evidence could now be expeded a-
rates con- gainft Mary, and nothing remained but to decide
cernmng what thould be her fate. With regard to this, E-
the me- lizabeth and those ,Ministers in whom the chiefly
thod of confided, seem to have taken their resolution ; but
P,rpqcd there wvas still great variety of femtiments among

her other Counfrellors. Some thought it fufficient
to dismiss all Mary's attendants, and to keep her
under ruch close rettraint, as would cut off all pof-
fibility of correrponding with the enemies of the
kingdom; and as her conititution, broken by long
confinement, and her spirit dejeated with to many
cares, could not long rupport such an additional
load, the Queen and nation would soon be deliver-
ed from all their fears. But though it mig9ht be
caly to secure M~ary's own person, it was impolli-
ble to diminish the reverence which the Roman Ca-
tholics had for her name, or to extinguilh the com-
pallion with which they viewed her fufferingsi
while there continued, infurreations and invalions
would never be wanting for her relief, and the on-
ly effed of any new rigour would be to render
them more frequent and dangerous. For this rea-
son the expedient was rejeaed.

Deter. A PVstIC and legal trial, though the most un-
mmnes to exampled, was judged the most unexceptionable
try her method of proceeding; and it had at the fame
publickly. time, a semblance of juffice, accompanied with as

air of dignity. It was in vain to search the an-
cient records, for any statute or precedlen t, to jul-
tify such an uncommon itep, as the trial of a fe-
reign Prince, who had not entered the kingdors
in arms, but had fled thither for refuge. The

*Camd. p 7.

proceedings

proceedings against her were founded on the saA aarVIL
of lait Parliament, and by applying it in this qr
manner, the intention of those who had framed 'Ls -
that levere statute became more apparent *

ELIZABITH TCCblved that no circumitance of

pomp or solemnity thould be wanting, which
could render this trnf~adion such as became the
dignity of the person to be tried. She appointed,
by a commillion under the great feal, forty persons,
the most illuttrious in the kingdom, by their birth
or offices, together with five of the judges, to hear
and decide this great cause. Many difficulties were
flarted by the lawyers, about the name and title
by which Mary thould be arraigned i and while
the essentials of justice were so grofly violated, the
empty forms of it were the objeds of their care.
They at length agreed that the thould be ftiled,
'C Mary, daughter and heir of James V. late King
" of Scots, commonly called Quecen of Scots, and
" ~Dowager of France t·."

ApTE a the many indignities which the had

lately fuffered, Mary could no longer doubt but
that her deftwa~ion was determined. She expec-
ted, every moment, to end her days by poison,
or by some of those secret means, usually employ-
ed against captive Princes. And leftthe malice of
her enemies, at the fame time that it deprived her
of life, thould endeavour likewise to blast her re-
putation, the wrote to the Duke of Guise, and
vindicated herself, in the firongeft terms, froam
the imputation of encouraging or of being ac-

ceffry o te cnfpracy for 4affalinatinlg Elisa-

beth J. tIn the solitude of

her"ocorp prison, the firange

resolution of bringing; her to a public trial had not

*Camd. Sa9. JohnAR HA I.

l3 Sttrrype, t. g6s.

$ Job, s. st).

reached

Boonvil. reached her ears, nor did the idea of any thing fc

'- "unprecedented, and to repugnant to regal Mvaje-

's"-. fly, once enter into her thoughts.
The rial ON the eleventh of Odober, the commillioners

st Fothe- appointed by Ehizabeth arrived at Fotheringay.
ringcly. Next morning they delivered a letter from her to

Mary, in which, after the bitterest reproaches and
acculations, the informed her, that regard to her
own safety had, at lait, rendered it necessar~y to
make a public enquiry into her conduat, and there-
fore required her, as (he had lived 10 long under
the procedion of the laws of England, to lubmic
now to the trial, which they ordained to be taken
of her crimes. Mary, though f~urprized at this

Mary re- message, was neither appalled at the danger, nor
fures at unmindful of her own dignity. She protefied, in
firlt to the mos1 solemn manner, that the was innocent of
plead. the crime laid to her charge, and had never coun-

te~nanced any attempt against the life of the Qgeen
of England; but, at the fame time, refus~ed to ac-
knowledge the jurifdiC~ion of hier commillioners.
*' I came into the kingdom," said the, '' an inde-
'' pendent Sovereign, to implore the Queen's allil-
"~ tarnce, not to fubljeA myf'elf to her authority.
" Nor is my Ipirit 10 broken by its past misfor.
"' tunes, or 10 intimidated by present dangers, as
" to sloop to any thing unbecoming the Majesty
" of a crowned head, or that will dilgrace the an-
" ceftors from whom I am del~cended, and the son
" to whom I thall leave my throne. If I must be
"' tried, Princes alone can be my Peers. The
" Qgeen of England's fubjedts, however noble
"' their birth may be, are of a rank inferior to
'' mine. Ever since my arrival in this kingdom,
" I have been confined as a prisoner. Its laws ne-
" ver afforded me any proteAion. Let them not
'' now be perverted, in order to take away my

TwE

THE commifllioners employed arguments and in- BooVIL*

treaties to overcome Mary's resolution. They e-
ven threatened to proceed according to the forms '5 -
of law, and to pass sentence against her on account
of her contumacy in refusing to pktad ; ith pedafit-
ed, however, for two days to decline th~eir juril~-
diation. An argument urged biy Hatton, the Vice-
Chamberlain, at last prevailed. He told her, that
by avoiding a trial, the injured her own reputation,
and deprived herself of the only opportunity of
letting her innocence in a clear light ; and that no-
thing would be more agreeable to them, or more
acceptable to the Qgeen their Miltrefs, than to be
convinced, by undoubted evidence, that the had
been unjuffly loaded with foul alperflons.

No wonder pretexts to plausible thould impore ontents

on the unwary Qgeen, or that the, unaffifed, at how~eve
that time, by any friend or counsellor, thould not t ot
be able to dete&t and elude all the artifices of E-
lizbeth's ablest Miniffers. In a ficuation equally
melancholy, and under circumitances nearly limi-
'ar, her Grandson, Charles I. refuled, with the ut-
nlol firmnners, to acknowledge the usurped jurif-
li~ion of the High Court of Jutlice s and potte-
ity has approved his conduat, as filitable to the
lignity of a King. If Mary was less conitant in
ler resolution, it mruft be imputed solely to her
nxious desire of vindicating her own honour.
ATr her appearance before the Judges, whooa il
rere featedt in the great hall of the catle, where
ley received her with much ceremony, the took
are to protest, that by condescending to hear and
> give an anlwer to the~ acculations, which thould
: offered againit her, the neither acknowledged
re jurifdi~tion of the court, nor admitted of the
Ilidity in juffice of those aats, by which they pre-
nded to try her.
V c:. II. TnE'

BooKV1i. THE Ch~ancellor, by a counter-pro~teftation, en-

cy deavoured to vindicate the authority of the court.
T~sac6u~THEN the UCOD 'S Attorney and Sollicitor 0-

Iation a pened the charge against her, with all the cir-
gainit her. cumitances of the late conspiracy. Copies of her

letters to Mlendoza, Babington, En~glefield and
Paget were produced. Babington's confeldion, thoer
of Ballard, Savage, and the other coo~lpirators, to-
gethler with th~e declarations of NI~aue and Curle'
her secretaries, were read, and the whole ranged
in the moss -Cpecious order, which the art of the
law yers could devile, and heightened by every
colour, their cloquence could add.

ManRy liflened to their harangues attentively,

andt w~ithiout emotion. But at the spention Of the
Earl of Arunde~l's name, who was then confined
in the Tower, on fulpicion of being accessory to
the conspiracy, the broke out into this tender and
generous exclamation: " Alas! how much has
" the noble houle of Howard fuffered for my
"' fake!''

H-er de- WTHEN the Qgeen's council had finished, Mary
fence. flood up, anld with great magnanimit~y, and equal

presence of mind, began her defence. She bewail-
ed the unhappinef's of her own STtuation, that, as~-
ter a captivity of niineteen years, during which tfhe
ha3d fuffered treatment no less cruel than unmerit-
ed, the was at lail loaded with an acculation,
whlich tended not onily to rob her of hier right of
fuccellion, and to deprive her of life itl'elf, but to
iralnfm~it hier name with infamy to futture ages:
cThat, wYithlout regarding the sacred rights of so-
vcr~eignt~y, Rthe w::s now furbje~ted to laws framed
again ft pri vate perfonls i though an anoi nted Qgeen,
commannded to appIear before the tribunal of` sub-
jeas; and, like a comimon criminal, hier honour
exposed to, the perulant tong~ues of lawy~ers, ca-
pable o~f walingii hcr wordis, andJ of mnifreprefent-

ingt her a~tions: That, even in this dilhonearable BoorVil.
fic~uation, the was denied the privileges utlially~-y
granted to criminals, and obliged to undertake her 'r5
ow·n defence, without the pretence of any friend
with whorn to advile, without the aid of council,
and without the use of her own papers.

Sun then proceeded to the particular articles in

the accusation. She ablolutely denied any corref-
pondence with Babinigton : The name of Ballard
was not To much as known to her : Copies only of
her pretended letters to them were produced :
Though nothing less than her hand-writing or Cub-
feription was fuff~icient to conviA her of such an
odious crime : No proof could be brough t that
thle letters were delivered into ·her hands, or that
any answer was returned by her dire~tion : The
confellions of wretches condemned and executed
for such a detellable a~tion, were of little weight;
fear or hope might extort from them many
things inonfiftent with truth, nor ought th~e ·ho*
nour of a Queen to be stained by foch vile teaii-
rnony. The declaration of her recretaries ·was
not more conclusive: promires and threats might
estily overcome the resolution of two ftangers;
in order to screen themselves, they might throw
the blame on her; but they could dilcover nothing~
to her prejudice, without violating, in the firi
place, their oath of fidelity; and thieir perjury,
io one idltance, rendered them unworthy of cre-
dit in another : The letters to the Spanith ambal-·
fador were either nothing more than copies, or
contained only what was perfeetly innocent: " I
"L have often," continued the, '' made fich efforts
" for the recovery of my liberty, as are natural to
'' a human creature. And convinced, by the fad
"' experience of so many years, that it was vain to
" expedt it from the juffice or generosity of the
"' Qgen of England, I have frequently fallicited

I : foreign

~'-'""" emp'loy their whole interest for my relief. I

s 986. ,, have, likewise, endeavoured to procure for the

" Englith Catholics some mitigation of the rigour
" with which' they are now treated ; and if I could
a( hope, by my death, to deliver them from op-
" prellion, I am willing to die for their fake. I
" with, however, to imitate the example of Esther,
"1 no~t of Judith, and would rather make intercef-
" lion for my people, than thed the blood of the
L meanet~ creature, in order to save them. I have
" often checked the intemperate zeal of my ad-
"' herents, when either the leverity of their own
"L perfecutions, or indignation at the unheard-of
" injuries which I have endured, were apt to pre-
" cipitate them into violent councils. I have even
" warned the Qugeen of dangers to which ther~e
" harth proceedings exposed herself. And worn
" out, as I now am, with cares and fufferings, the
" profpe~l of a Crown is not to inviting, that I
'' thould ruin my foul in order to obtain it. I
"L am no firanger to th~e feelings of humanity,
" nor unacquainted with the duties of religion,
" and abhior the detestable crime of aiffalination.
" as equally repugnant to both. And, if ever I
" have given con('ent by my words, or even by
"L my thoughts, to any attempt againit the life of
"c the Queen of E~ngland, far from declining thle
" judgment of men, I thall niot even pray for the
"L mercy of God *."

Two different days did Mcary appear before thle

judges, and in every part of her behaviour main-
tained the magnanimnity of a Queen, tempered
with the gentlenes~s and mode~ly of a woman.

Sentence THE co~mmiioners, by Elizabeth's exprels
againtt command, adjourned, without pronouncing any
her.

O~ob.fS·* Camd. 5 20, & c.

lentence,

sentence, to the Star Chamber in We~tminder;sonarVIL
When assembled in that p~lace, Naue and: Curkc~"
were brought into court, and confirmed their for; Lj8
mer declaration upon oath. And after reviewing
their whole proceedings, the commiioners·trs emq
nimnoufly declared MGary a' To be accesso~ry to·Ja-
"' bington's conspiracy, and to have imagined-di;
"' verf'e matters, ·tending to the hurt, death,' and
"' deficuCkion of EHzabeth, coifntrry to thik expreCs
" words of the statute, made Ifdr the cCurity'Df
"C the Qg~een's life ',.

Ir is no ealy matter to detelrmi~ne whether the Irregularr-

injuffice in appointing this trial, or the irregUbri- unhe'h
ty in condutting it, were greateit and moftt di-
grant. By what right did Elizableth claim asutho-~
rity over an independent Qg~ent. 'Was Mary;S)
bound to comply- with thle laws of! a fforeigdh ijqp.
domn ? ow could the fubjefts of lanothetr·rince
become her judges?~ Or if fuish ·art-ip rfa on -royal-
ty were allowed, ought not: thie comnmon fourts
of juffice to have be6en obierved· ? fathe teimubry
of Babington and his associates! was ft elepi'cit,
wvhy did not Elizabeth Cpare them for aifewu wleeks,
and by confronting them w~th: Mar~y,· ober-
whelm her with the full convi~tion of ~her· Qc3ries ?
Naue and Curle were both alive, whd~efore did
not they appear at Fotheri~Ccngy, sad for what
reason were they produced tw the Star-Cham~ber,
where Mary was not present to hear what they
depoled ? Was this fulpicious evidence enough, to
condemn a Queen Ought the meanest criminal
to have been found guilty, upon foch feeble and
inconclusive proofs ?

IFr was not, however, on the evidence prod~u-

ced at her trial, that thle featence agthilt Mary

*Camd. Zas.

I 3 was

so onvic was.founded. That served as a pretence to juffi-

C~J fy, but was not the caule of the violent fleps ta-
rS ken by Elizabeth and her Miniffers towards her

deftrud2ion , and was employed to give some ap-
pearance of justice, to what was the offspring of
jeal~ouly and fear. And the nation, blinded with
r~ef~eament against Mary, and tolicltous to Ltcure
thec lifenof its own Sovereign from every danger,
~oblerved no irregularities in the proceedings, and
attended to no defeats mn the proof, but gras~ped
at fulpicions and probabilities, as if they hiad been
irrefragable demonit rat ions.

'The par- THE~ parliamlent met at few days after sentence
liamient was Ipronoun~ced againit Mary. In that illuthrious
Contiu n ~assembly more ·temper and dilcernment, than are
the rin- to. be found amonlg the people, might have been
tence' eypeded. Both Lords and Commons, however,

were equa~ll~y akder the dominion of popular pre-
judices and pablions, and the. fiare excesses of
7;eal or of fearv: which· prevailed in the nation, are
a~pparent in aU their. proceedings. They entered
wirhjimpa~ege~e upo1n- an .enrquiry into the confpi-
r-amy, and~the dangers; which th~reatne~d the QLgeen's
lify, aud.:lhe 13esce of the kingdomn. All the
papers whuiich 114; been produed at -Fotheriaggy,
were .laid be~loJCtthem. And after mnany vico-
slent invadtive~s pglet9ai the iQ~een of Scots, both
hoolca, unbftumolu~y, ratified the proceed~ings
of the· commr~ilionero by whom the had been

and de- tried, and declared the featence against hexr to
rnand the is jofit and well founded. Not. satisfied with this,
eqxe n'oon they prelenbted a joint addrers, to the Queers, ibe-

' fechiing hier, as the regardecd her own safety, the

prefe~rv~aion of te· Proteflaret relig~ionr, .the welfare
and wiltheiof` her people, to pu'blifh the fentenlce s
ands withot;O farthter delay to inifliat on a rival, nio
less irrec~laimnable than dangerous, the punithment
whic~h the had merited by 10 many crimes. This

reqlueft,

request, didlated by fears un worthy of that great Boon VII.
Assembly, was enforced by reafobns flill more. un- CYI
worthy. They were drawn not from juffice, but '5%-.
from conveniency. The moil rigorous confinerrent,
it was pretended, could not curb Mlary's intrigu-
ing [pirit; her addrels was found, by long expe-
rience, to be an overmatch for the viligance and
jealodyj of all her keepers: The severest penal laws
could not. reitrain her adherents, who, while they
believed her person to be sacred, would delpif~e
any danger to which themselves alone were ex-
posed : Several foreign Princes were ready to fe-
cond their attempts, and waited only a proper op-
portunity for invading the kingdom, and asserting
the Scottith Qgeen's title to the Crown. Her life,
for there reasons, was incompatible with Eliza-
beth's safety , and if the were rpared out of a false
clemency, the Queen's pedfon, the religion and
liberties of the kingdom, could not be one mo-
ment Cecure. Necellity required that the thould
be faerificed: in order to pref'erve thele, and to
prove this sacrifice to be- no less just than ne-cel-
fary, leveral examples in hiffory were produced,
and many texts of s~cripture quoted, but both the
one and the other were. milapplie~d, and diator ted
from their true meaning.

NormsoN, however, could· be more acceptable Elizabeth's

to Elizabeth than an addrefs.in this· train. :t ex- imiUS1La-

thon.

tricated her out of a situation, extremely embarral-
sing; and without depriving her of thle power of
rparing, it enabled her to punith her rival with less
appearance of blame If the cho~le the former, the
whole honour would redound to her own clemency.
If the determined on the latter, whatever was rigro-
rous might now seem to be extorted byr the f;lhei-
tations of her people, rather than to flow from her
own inclination. Her answer, however, was in a

I flile,

HolI flile, which the often used, ambiguous and evativ e
's8.under the appearance of openness and candor , full

'58 of such profemlons of regard for her people, as ferv-

ed to beighten their loyalty a of luch complaints of
Mary's ingratitude, as were calculated to excite
their indignation; and of such insinuations that her
own life was in danger, as could not fail to keep
alive their fears. In the end, the besought th~em
to save her the infamy and the pain of delivering up a
Qgueen, hier nearest kinswoman, to punithment a
and to confider whether it might not fill be pomible
to provide for the public security, without forcing
her to imbrue he-r hands in royal blood.

THE true meanin~g of this reply was easily un-

derflood. The Lords and Commons renewed their
former requeit, with additional importunity, w~hich
was far from being either unexpedted, or offenfive.
Elizabeth did not return any ad~wer more explicit ,
and having obtained such a public faa~tion of hier
proceedings, there was no longer any reason for
protradting this rcene of dillimulation ; there was
even Come danger that her feigned difficulties might
at latt be treated as real ones ; the therefore ad-
journed the parliament, anld reserved in her own
hands the sole dilpofal of her rival's Fate *.

France in. Act, the Princes in Europe oblerved the pr~ceed-
terpores ings' againit Mary with affonithment and horror,
feebly in and even Henry III. notwithdtanding hris knlown

r ofl~ averflon to the houle of Guise, was obliged to in-

terpole in her behalf, and to appear in defence of
the common rights of royalty. Aubelpine his refi-
dent ambassador, and Bellievere who was sent with
an extraordinary commillion to the fame purpole,
interceded for Mary with great appearance of

*Camd. 526. D'Ewes 375-

warmlth.

warmth. They employed all the arguments whlich soorVII.
the cause naturally fliggefied ; they pleaded from ~~
juffice, from generosity, and humanity ,they inter- No. r156
mingled reproaches and threats. But to all these
Elizabeth continued deaf and inexorable; and hav-
ing received some intimation of Henry's real un-
concern about the fate of the Scottilh Cueen, andl
knowing his antipathy to all the race of G~uile, the
tunied, that there loud remonfirances would Lb
followed by n~o violent relentment *

SHE paid no greater regard to the follicitations James en-

of the Scottith King, which, as they were urged deavours
with more sincerity, merited more attention to rave his
Though her commillioners had been extremely ther''s
pareful to sooth James, by publithing a decclaration
that their featence againlt Mary did, in no degree,
derogate from his honour, or invalidate any title
whicch he formerly po~lffeffd ; he beheld the indig-
uities to which his MLother had been exposed with
filial concern, and with the sentiments whiich be-
came a King. The pride of the Scottith.nation
was rouzed, by the insult offered to the blood of
their Monarchs, and called upon him to employ
the most vigorous efforts, m .order to prevent or to
revenge the Queen's death,

A~r· firit, he could fecarce beliseve that Elizabeth

would venture upon an aftion~ 19 unprecedented,
which tended Co visibly to render the persons of
Princes less sacred in the eyes of the people,. and
which degraded the regal dignity, of which, at
other times the was so remarkably jealous. But
as soon as the extraordinary iteps which the took
Pifcovered her intention, he dis~patched Sir Wil-

*Camd. 53r*

liamn

irooxVII.liam Keith to London ; who, together with Doug-

~Lsl las his ambassador in ordinary, remonfirated, in

'sS6. the itrongeft terms, against the injury done to an

independent Que~en, in fubjedting her to be tried
like a private perloo, and by laws to which the
owed no obedience ; and besought Elizabeth not to
add to this injury, by fuffering a featence unjust in
itrelf, as well as dilhonourable to the King of Scots,
to be put in execution *.

ELIZABETH returning no answer to these remon-

firances of his ambassad~or, James wrote to her with
his own hand, complaining in the bitterett terms
of her condudt, not without threats that both his
duty and his honour would oblige him to renounce
her friendship, and to sa as became a lon when
called to revenge his mother's wrongs t. At the
rFdme time he affemnbled the nobles, who promiled
to fland by him in to good a caule. He a~ppointed
ambassadors to France, Spain, and Denlmark, in
order to implore the aid of there courts ; and took
other iteps towards executing his threats with vi~-
gour. The high strain of his letter enraged Eliza-
beth to such a degree, that the wasready to dimitsii
his ambaffadorss without any reply. Bu~t his preps-
rations alarmed and embarrassed ·her-2iniffers, and
at their in treaty the fretrned a soft and e~rative an-
Ewer, premising to CNiftento any overture ftom the
King, that tended- to his mother's I'afity; and to
fulfpend the execution of the featence, till t he ar-
rival of new ambaiffadors from Scotland O.

*~ See- A ppendlz No. XIII.
t Birch. Mem. 1. 52.
( Spotlwood s5r. Cald. 4, 5.

heSANWHI LE,

MQEANWHILE, the commanded the sentence a. BonavHl

gainft IMary to be publilhed, and forgot not to in- "
torm the people, that this was ext'orted fiEOna hCF Dec m. 6.186
by the repeated intreaties.0of both houses of parlia- The Cen-
ment. A~t the fa~me time, the dilpatched L~ord tence a
Buckhur~t and Beale to acquoint Mary with the gainit Ma-
Ifeatence, and~ how importunately the natien de- liked.-
gnanded the execution of it ; and, though the had
not hitherto: yielded to there follicitations, the ad-
viled her .to> pr~epare for an event, which might be-
come nqeiiffry- for recuritag the Protestant religion,
as well as quiering tbe mipds ofthe people. Mary
received the rmfrage not only uithout lyrpptomns
of fear, but with exprellions of triumph. " No
" wonders,faid fbe, .the Fyagilh (hould now thirit
"C for thle blopd~qF a foreigp Emnince, they hasve often
"' offered violence to their· own, Monanchs. But
"L after so many lefferings,· death comes to me as
i' a welcorme deliverer. I arR psoud to thi~nk that
" my life is a eareid of importance to the.Cathioic
", religionc sng:es a m~ar ty 19# if! Iarw cowz widling;
?' to die *. . m:

..Ar·T a4? he: publication z;of tjla, feateqs,~ Mary She
was fhrip~es69Jeeveryl remaini~glmarkr of roeyarby ;itar
The canopy;,of Aatei·w imber sepayet: tas ppiled '~
elown ; Epplesehtered her spanber, and approach- ~pmU
ed her perlps~-wlhout any;itmrY

c moyl, anYrn ap

-Bcared ag~~eFnt~~~FFFF~ :iP her prqlap90.. Shocekoad with
there indig~iitina, and· agf~eded t this graf.-famiic

retiy, tcrWwhisk~;rrrba3 had Hvei been s~ecuitomedi
Mary once more comnp~lined to Elizasbeth: and at
the· fame timesjas her laetrequell, in crated that
!jhF would permit her fervsara to carry hen dead

-dy into. Frapse, to be laid among her ancefters,
.is hallowp<;1 gavand ; that~ rule of her domdltics
pilght he·prelent at her death, to bear witners of

her

*Camd* Sa8. Jebb, s9'.

soorVII. her innocence, and firm adherence to the Catholic

V faithi that all her servants might be f~uffered to
'8 leave the kingdom, and to enjoy those small lega-

cies, which the thould beffow on them, as tefti-
monies of her affe~ion , and that, in the mean
time, her almoner, or some other Catholic Priest,
might be allowed to attend her, and to assist her in
preparing for an eternal world. She besought her
in the name of Jesus, by the foul and memory of
Henry· VII. their common progenitor, by their
near consanguinity, and the royal dignity with which
th~ey were both invefied, to gratify her in thele
particulars, and to indulge her so far as to signify
her-compliance by a letter under her own hand.
Whether Mary's letter was ever delivered to E~liza-
beth is uncertain. No answer was returned, and
no regard paid to her requests. She w-as offered a
Protestant Bi~hop or Decan to attend her. Them
the rejeaed, and without any clergyman to dire&t
her "devotions, the prepared, in great tranquillity,
for the approach of death, which Ihe now believed
to be at no great difiance '.

r5S7. 1~' Jus, without losing a moment, feat new am*

James re- bairadors to Londo~n. There were the matter of
news his Gray, and Sir Robert Melvil.- In order to remove
raiilt-n nk bca Elizabeth's fearrs, they ;offered th~attheir MWafter

a her: would become bountd that no codp~tat- thould be

Jainuary I.. isndertaken againit her person, or thue peace of the

ki!,gdomn, with Mary's codrent , and for the faith-
full performance of this, would deliveir fame of the
molt considerable of the Scottith nobles, as hoffa-
·ges. If this were not thought rfuficient, they pro.
pored that Mary thould resign all her rights and
pretenfrons to her son, from whom nothing inju-
rious to the Protellant religion, or inclonbiftent with

Elizabeth's

* Camd. Sa8. Jchb, s. s95*

Elizabeth's safety, could be feared. The former Booa~virI
proposal Elizabeth rejeaed as insecure; the latter, as 3
dangerous. Theambaffadors were theninitruded to 157
talk in an higher tone s and Melvil executed the
commillion with fidelity and with zeal. But Gray,
with his d~ual perfidy, deceived his Master who
truffed him with a negociation of so much impor-
tance, and betrayed the Queen whom he was em-
ployed to save. He encouraged and urged Elizabeth,
to execute the f~entnce against her rival. He often
repeated the old proverbial featence, "C The dead
cannot bite." And whatever thould happen, he
undertook to pacify the King's rage, or at leait to
prevent any violent effeats of his resentment *.

]EIz ABETH, meanwhile, diicovered all the iy mp- Elizabeth's

toms of the most violent agitation and disquietude ~~
of mind. She thunned society, the was often found tion.
in a melancholy and musing posture, and repeat-
ing with much emphasis, there sentences which
the borrowed from some of the devices then in
vogue ; dut for art feri; s wferiarre, feri Much,
no doubt, of this apparent unealinefs must be im-
puted to dillimulation; it was impoilible, however,
that a Princess, naturally io cautious as Elizabeth,
thould venture on an salon, which might expole
her memory to infamy, and her life and kingdom
to danger, without refleding deeply, and hesitating
long. The people waited her determination in ful-
pence and anxiety; and left their fear or their zeal
thould subside, rumours of danger were artfully
invented, and propagated with the utmost indul~-
try ; Aubefpine, the French ambaffaddor, was ac-
cured of having suborned an affathn to murder th~e
Qu~een. The Spanilh fleet was ladid by 10me to be
already arrived at Milford-haven. Others affirmed

* SportT 352. Murdin, r68. See Append. No. XIV. ta

soonaiR. that the Duke of Guise had landed with a firong

C+r army, in Sussex.. Now, it was reported that the
'587· Northern Counties were inp in arms; next day,

that the Scots ha~d entered England with all their
forces , and a cons~piracy, it was whispered, was
on· foot for seizing the Queen, and burning the city.
Th~e panic grew every day more violent; and
the people, attonithed and enraged, called for the
execution of the featence againfl Mary, as the only
th~ing which could reltore tranquillity to the king-
dom .

Warrant \v;HILE there sentiments prevailed among her
fPeut~orl M ry' bieas, Elizabeth thought the mi he fafelJ venture
iignd to firike the blow, which the had Co long meditat-
Feb. r. ed. She commanded Daviron, one of the recreta-

ries of slate, to bring to her the fatal warrant; and
her behaviour, on that occalton, plainly thewed that
it is not to humanity, that we must alcribe her for-
bearance hitherto. At the very moment the was
f~ubleribing the writ which gave up a woman, a
Q~ueen, and her own nearest relation, into the hands
of the executioner, the was capable of jesting.
" Go, lays the to Davison, and tell Walrlngharn
what I have now done, though I am afraid he will
die for grief when he hears it." Her chief anxiety
was how to lecure the advantages which would arise
from Mary's death, without appearing to have
given her consent to a deed so infamous. She
often hinted to Paulet and Drury, as well as to
some other courtiers, th~at now was the time to diT-
cover the sincerity of their concern for her safety,
and that the expedted their zeal would extricate her
out of her present perplexity. But they were wife
enough to seem not to underitand her meaning.
Even after the warrant was signed, the commanded
a letter to be written to Paulet, in less ambigu-

*Camd. 533- 534.

OUS

ous terms ; complaining of his remithl~efsIn iparing sooWIF~lt
so long the life of her capital enemy, and beggingc~~
him to remember at loai what was incumbent on ';%7
him as an atfeationate fubjeat, and to deliver his So-
vereign from continual fear and danger, by thorten-
ing the days of his prisoner. Paulet, though ri-
gorous and barth, and often brutal in the diftiharge
of what he thought his duty, as Mary's keeper,
was neverthelets a man of honour and integrity.
He rejeated the proposal with dildain; and lament-
ing that he thould ever have been deemed capable
of saing the part of an affsafin, he declared that
the Queen might dilp~ole of his life at her plealure,
but he would never slain his own honour, nor leave
an everlaftinrg mark of infamy on his potterity,
by lending his hand to perpetrate to foul a crime.
On the receipt of this answer, Elizabeth became
extremely peevish ; and ·calling him a dainty and
prcciafe fllowr, who would promnile much, but per-
form nothing, Ihe propof'ed ~to employ one Wing-
field, who had both courage and inclination -to
firike the blow'. But Datviron remofitrating
against this method, as no less dangerous -than dil-
honourable, the again declared her intention that
the featence pronounced ;by the commilioners
thould be executed according to law ; and as the
had already signed the warrant, the begged that
no farther application might be made to her on
that head. By this the privy counsellors thought
themselves fufficiently authorised to psoceed ; and
prompted, as they pretended, by zeal for the
Qgeen's s~afety, or infligated, as is more proba-
ble, by the apprehen~ion of the danger to which
they would themselves, be exposed, if the life of
the Qgeen of Scots were spared, they asse~mbled in
the Council Chamber, and by a letter under all their

*Biogr. Britan. Article Dauifou. hands,

BoorVII~hands, empowered the Earls of Shrewsbury an~d

C'" "Ken t, together with the high Sheriff of the County,
* S - to fee the featence put in execution*.

Mary's be- O)N Tuelday the pth of February, the two Earls
haviour at arrived at Fatheringay, and demandinig accels to

he etthe Queen, read in her prelence the warrant for ex-

ccution, and required her to prepare to die next
mornin~g. Mary heard them to the end without
emotion, and crolling herself i' the name of the
I ather-, andc of the Son, and of the Holy Ghoit,
"~ Th~at foul, said the, is not worthy of the joys of
Heaven, which repines becaule the body must en-
d ure the firoike of the executioner ; and though I
did not e·xpect~ that the Qu~een of England would
fe't thei Birit example of violating the sacred person
o~f a Soverreign Prince, I willinigly submit to that
which providenice hias decreed to be my lot." And
laiyinig her hand on a bible, which happened to be
n~ear hier, the solemnly protefied that the was inno-
cent of that conspiracy which Babington had carried
on againf1 Elizabeth's life ·t. She then mentioned
the requet!s contained in her letter to Elizabeth,
but obtained no fatisfallory adfwer. She entreated
with particular earnefiners, thiat now in her last
moments, her Almoner might be fuffered to attend
her, and that the might enjoy the consolation of
those pious inflitutions preferibed by her religion.
SEven this favour, whichi is usually granted to the

cile't criminal, was ablolutely denied.

Hea attendants, during; this conveiration, were

bathied in tears, and though overawed by the pre-
fnce of the two Earls, with difficulty suppressed
their anguilh , but no founer did Kent and Shrews-
bury withdraw, than they ran to their Miffrefs, and

* Carnd. 534. Strype, 3* 36,, 364. -t Jeb. s. 3os.

burit

burit out into the most pallionatee expreilions Boo VII.
of tendernr and sorrow. Mary, however, not g7
only retained perfeA composure of mind, but en-
deavoured to moderate their eceltlive grief. And
falling on her knees, with all her domeftics round
her, the thanked Heaven that her fufferinlgs were
now so near an end, and prayed that the might
be enabled to endure what still remained with de-
cency, and with fortitude. The greater part of
the evening the employed in fettling her worldly
affairs. She wrote her Tefiament with her own
hand. Her money, her jewels, and her cloaths,
the distributed among her servants, according to
their rank or merit. She wrote a thort letter to
the King; of France, and another to the Duke of
Guise, full of tender but magnanimous sentiments,
and recommended her foul to their prayers, and
her afflid~ed servants to their proteation. At sup-
per, the cat temperately, aginual, and conversed
pot only with ease, but with chearfulnefs ; Ihe drank
to every one of her servants, and aiked their for-
giveners, if ever the had failed in any part of her
duty towards them. At her wonted time the went
to bed, and slept calmly a few houris. Early in the
morning the retired into her closer, and employed
a considerable time in devotion. At eight o'clock,
the High Sheriff and his officers entered her cham-
ber, and found her still kneeling at the altar. She
immediately fierted up, and with a majeitic mien,
and a countenance undifmaryed, and even chearful,
advanced rowards the place of execution, leaning
on two of Paulet's attendants. She was dressed in
a mourning habit, but wit'n an elegance and fplen-
dor, which the had long laid aside, except on a
few feffival days. An Agnus Drri hung by a po-
malnder chain at heClaeck a her beads at her girdle s
and in her hand the carried a crucifix of ivory.
At the bottom of the flairs the two Earls, attend-

Vot.. II. K ed

BOOKVII. ed by leveral gentlemen from th~e neighbouring

- -Co)untius, received her ,and there Sir Andrew Mel-

vil. ,;, the~ maiter of her houkhold, who had been fe-
cluded, fo-r some weeks, from her presence, was per-
mnitteJ to take his lait farewel. At the Eight of a
Mliffrtes whom hie tenderly lo~ved, in fiuch a lituation,
he mielted into tears,; anid as h~e was bewailing her
condition, an~d compainiing of his own hard fate in~
being appointedi to carry the accounit of such a
mournufu! even tinto Scotland, Mary replied, LL Weep
no:t, goo~d M~elvil, there is at prertent greater cause
for rejo~ic~ing. Thiou thalt this daiy fee Mary Stuart
delivered fiom all hier cares, and fiuch an end put
to hecr tedious fidfferings, as the h~as long expeafed.
Rear wvitneis that I die conflant in my religion;
firm in my fidelity towards Scotland,; and unchang-
edl in my affeation to France. Commend me to my
ion. Tell him I havgdone nothing injurious to his
kingdom, to h~is hond~lr, or to his rights; and God
forgive all thole who have thirfied, without cause,
for miy blood."

WornH much difficulty, and after many intreaties,

the prevailed on the two Earls to allow Melvil,
together with three of her men s~ervants, and two
of her maids, to attend her to the fcaffold. It was
ere~ted in the fame hall where the had been tried,
railed a little above the floor, and covered, as well
as a chair, the cuthion, and block, with black
cloth. Mary mounted the fleps with alacrity, be-
held all this apparatus of death with an unaltered
coun tenance, and signing herself with the cross, the
fat down in th~e chair. Beale read the warrant for
execution with a loud voice, to which the listened
with a careless air, and like one occupied in other
thoughits. Then the dean of Peterborough began
a devout discourse, faitable to her prefeat condi-
tion, and offered up prayers to H-eaven in her be-
half , but the declared thiat the could not in con-

science

Ecience hearken to the one, nor join with the other; BoorVII.
and falling on her knees repeated a Latin prayer.
When the Dean had finilhed his devotions, the with '5 7·
an audible voice, and in the Englilh tongue, re-
commended unto God the aff~ided slate of the
Church, and prayed for prosperity to her son, and
for a long life, and peaceable reign to Elizabeth.
She declared that the hoped for mercy only through
the death of Christ at the foot of whiole image the
now willingly thed her blood, and lifting up, and
kimang the Crucifix, the thus addressed, "L As thy
arms, O Jesus, were extended on the Crols, 10
with the ourtfretched arms of thy mercy, receive
me, and forgive my fins."

SHE then prepared for the block, by taking off

hier veil, and upper garmears ; and one of the exe-
cutioners rudely endeavouring to allift, the gently
checked him, and laid, with a smile, thatt the had
not been accuft0med to undress before so msb~y
rpedators, nor to be served by such valets. With
calm but undaunted fortitude, the laid her neck; on
the block 4 and while one executioner held her
hands, the other at the recond firoke. cut off her
head, which falling out of its attire, discove~red hier
hair already grown quite gray, with cares ardid fr-
rows. The executioner held it up itill fireaming
with blood, and the Dean crying o~ut, ** So perith
all Qg~een Elizabeth's enemies,"' the Earl of Kent
alone answered Amen. The reft of the fpeL'ators
continued silent, and drowned in tears; being in-
capable, at that moment, of any other rentiments,
but those of pity, or admiration'.

SucH was the tragical death of Mary Qgeen of

Scots, after a life o( forty four yrar-s and two sent'me a'
monthis, almolt nineteen years of which the passe ans ,on-`
mn captivity. The political parties which weie cerninig
formed in the kingdom, during her reign, have her.

* Camd* 534. Sport. 355. Jebb. 2. $oo. Strype> 3- 383.

Kz 2 fb-

Boor VII. rublifed, under various denominations, ever since

thhat time. The rancour, with which they were

qs67. at firlt animated, hath descended to succeeding

ages, and their prejudices, as well as their rage,
have be~en perpetllatedl, and even augmented. A-
mong Hiflorians, who were under the dominion of
all there pallions, and who have either aferibed to
her every virtuous and amiable quality,or have im-
puted to her all the vices, of which thte human
heart is Cudeeptible, we search in vain for Mary's
real charader. She neither merited the exagge-
rated praires of the one, nor the undiftinguilhing
censure of the other.

Her cha- To all the charms of beauty, and the utmost
raser. elegance of e~xternal form, Ithe added those accom-

plithments, which render their impreflion irrefrili-
ble. Polite, affable, insinuating, sprightly, and capa-
ble of Cpeaking and of writing with equal eake and
dignity. Sadden, however, and violent in all her
attachments, becaule her heart was warm and un-
fulpicious. Impatient of contradiaion a because
the had been accuffomed from her infancy to be
treated as a Queen. No Ithanger, on some occa-
fions, to didlimulation; which in that perfidious
court where the received her education, was rec-
koned among the neceirary arts of government.
Not insensible of flattery, or unconscious of that
pleasure, with which almost every woman beholds
the influence of her own beauty. Formed with the
qualities which we love, not with the talents that
we admire, The was an agreeable woman rather
than an illuffrious Queen. The vivacity of her
s~pirit, not fufficiently tempered with found judg-
ment, and the warmthl of her heart, which wats not,
at all times, under the restraint of dilcretion, be-
trayed her bothi into errors, and into crimes. To fay
that (he was always unfortuinate, will not account
for that long and almnoft uninterrupted fuccellionl

of calamities which befe~l her; we muff likewise Boon VII-
add that the was often imprudent. Her passion for ~
Darnly was rath, youthful, and excellive. And 'sg7.
though the Cudden tradittion to the opposite ex-
treme was the natural effedt of her ill-requited love,
and of his ingratitude, insolence and brutality ; yet
neither there, nor Bothwell's artful addrels, and i~m-
portant services, can juffify her attachment to that
nobleman. Even the manners of the age, licenti-
ous as they were, are no apology for this unhappy
pallion; nor can they induce us to look on that
tragical and infamous scene which followed upon
it, with les~s abhorrence. Humanity will draw a
veil over this part of her charadter which it cannot
approve, and may, perhaps, prompt some to im-
pute her saions to her situation, more than to her
difpolitions; and to lament the unhappiness of the
former, rather than accule the perverseness of the
latter. Mary's fufferings exceed, both in degree and
in duranton, those tragical diffreffes, which fancy
has feigned to excite sorrow and commiseration;
and while we survey them, we are apt altogether to
forget her frailties, we think of her faults with less
indignation, and approve of our tears, ais if they
were thed for a person who had attained muchl
nearer to pure virtue.

WIrn regard to the Queen's person, a circum-

flance not to be omitted in writing the hillory of a
female reign, all cotemporary authors; agree in al-
cribing to Mary, the utmost beauty of countenance,
and elegance of (hape, of which the human form
is capable. Her hair was black, though, accord-
ing to the falhion of that age, the frequently wore
borrowed locks, and of different colours Her eyes
were a dark grey; her complexion was exquisitely
fine s and her hands and arms remarkably delicate,
both as to thape an~d colour. Her flature was of
an height that role to the mnajetic. She danced,

K '3 the

uooxvil. the wa~lked, anid ro~de with equal grace. Her taite

so !r music was juff, andi the both fungl and played

S'SR upon thie lute, withh uncommon Ad)j. Towuards

the en~d o~f her lIfe, the began to gro~w fat, and her
long con--finement and the coldndl s o~f the haultes in·
wh~ich~ Ihe had b~een impriloned, brought on a rhcu-
matilin, which dep:rived her of the use of her limbs.
No m-an1, thys Branitome, ever beheld her person
without admrirationi acd love, or will read her hiltory
withoutC frr.T(W

Non e of her women were fuffered to come near

h~er dea;d body, wh~ich was carried into a room ad-
joining~ thle place of executioni, where it lay, for lfame
days, co~vered withcl a coarse cloth torn from a bil-

liard-tale.he block, the feaiff Id, the apronis of

the exe~cutionlers, and every thin~g flained with her
blood, wer-e reduced to athes. N~ot long after, E-
lizabeth~ appointedi her body to be buried in the
Cathepdral of Peterborough, with royal magnifi-
cence. But this vulgar artifice was employed in
vain ; the pageantry of a pompous fuineral did not
eithee the memory of those injuries, which laid Ma-
ry in her grave. Jamnes, soon after his accei~on
to thle Englith thrlone, ordered her body to be re-
moved to Weiftminflier-abb~ey, anid to be deposited
amnong thec M~ona~rcls of England

Fl~zabeth E iz -. a coI i affected to receive the accounts of
atfet to Mar~y's death~, w~ith thec mos1 violent emotions of

,~mn fuirprize~, andc of con-crn~. Sighs, tears, lamenta-

eah, io ad ounig er all employed to dil-

play the real~ty andi greatness of her sorrow. Evi-
dent markcs of diillimulation andi artifice may be
tracedl th~roughl every period of Elizabeth's pro-
ceedings agiainft the life of the Scottiih Qpeen.
Th1E c rmmiidion for bringing IMary to a public trial
was f~eemningly extorted from her, by the intreaties
of her privyi counsellors. She de-layed publithin~g

the sentence against her, tUi she was twice solicit- BOOKV1Z.
ed by both houl~es of~ Par-liamnent. Nocr did (hle L
lign the warrant for execution w~ithout the utmToft '58
apparent reludtance. One feenc: more of the boldelt
and most folemnn deceit remained to be exhibite~d.
She un~dertook to make the world believe thiat
Mary had been put to dfeathi withouit her kcnow-
letdge, and againfit her wi~ll Andt Da:vi on, who
neither f~ilped~ed her intenition, nor hlis own danl-
ger, was her infirumnent in carrying on this arti-
fice, and fell a vidtim to it.

Ir wa3s hlis duty as Cecretary of slate to lay be-

fore her the warrant for execution, in order to
be signed; and by her command, he carried it to
the Great Seal. She pretended, however, that the
had charged him not to communicate what the
h~ad done to anly person, nor fuffer the warrant
to go out of his hands, without her express permif-
sion ; that, in contempt of this order, he had not
snly revealed the matter to leveral of her Mini-
fiers, but had, in concert with them, assembled
her Privy Counsellors, by whom, withouit her
conient or knowledge, the warrant was Willed, and
the Earls of Shrewsbury and Kent impowered to
put it in execution. 'Though Daviron denied all
this, and with circumflan)ces whiich bear the
firongell marks of truth aind credibility; though
it can fearce be conceived that her privy council,
composed of the persons in whom the most con-
sided, of her Miniffers and favourites, would al-
fetmble within the walls of her palace, and venture
to tranfaA a matter of so much importanice with-
cut her privity, and contrary to her inclination;
yet so far did (he carry her diflimulation, that, with
all the signs of displeasure and of rage, ithe banith-
ed molt-of her Counsellors out of' her prese~nce,

K; 4 anid

s~orxVII. and treated Burleigh, in par ticular, to bar thly, and

Swith such marks of dilguit, that he gave up him-
Is87* self for loft, and in the deepest affhetion wrote to

the Qgeen begging leave to resign all his places,
that he might retire to his own estate. Davison the
idltantly deprived of his office, and committed him
a close pritoner to the Tower. He was loon after

March. brought to a solemn trial in the Star Chamber ;

condemned to pay a fine of to~ooo pounds, and to
be impriloned during the Qyeen's pleasure. He
languilhed, leveral years, in confinement, and ne-
ver recovered any degree of favour or of power.
As her jealouly and fear had bereaved the Queen of
Scots of life, in order to palliate this part of her
condua, Elizabeth made no Ocruple of sacrificing
the reputation and happiness of one of the most vir-
tuous and able men in her kingdom*.

Tu rs solemn farce, for it deserves no better name,

tder furnilhed Elizabeth, however, with an apology to

yours to the King of Scots. As the profpedt of his mother's
Eooth danger had excited the King's filial care and con-
Jrames cern, the account of her death filled him with grief

and rd~entment. His Cubjeats felt the dithonour
done to him, and to the nation. In order to sooth
both, Elizabeth inflantly dilpatched Robert Carey,
one of Lord Hunfdane's sons, with a letter exprelf-
ing her extreme affli~tion on account of that miler-
able accident, which, as the pretended, had happer)-
ed far contrary to her appointment, or mntention.
James would not permit her messenger to enter
Scotland ; and with some difficulty, received a me-
ynorial be sent from Berwick. It contained the tale
concerning Daviron, dressed up with all the cir-
cumitanlces, which tended to exculpate Elizabeth,

* Camd. 536. Strype, s. 37C@.

and

to throw the whole blame on his rathnels or t~reach- saoo VII.
ery. Such a defence gave little f~atisfaftion, and ~
was considered as mockery added to insult ; an~d ' A'.
many of the nobles, as well as the King, breathed
nothing but revenge. Elizabeth was ex tremely fol-
licitous to pacify them, and neither wanted infiru-
ments, nor reasons to gain her end. Leiceiter wrote
to the King, and Walsingham to recretary Mait-
land. They reprdrented the certain deftruition, to
which Jlames would expole himse~lf, if withi the
forces of Scotland alone, he thould venture to at-
tack a kingdom, so far superior in power ; that the
hiftery of past ages, as well as his Mother's fad ex-
perience, might convince him that nothing could be
more dang~erous, or deceitful, than dependance on
foreign aid ; that the King of France would never
writh to fee the Britilh kingdoms united under one
Monarch, nor contribute to invest a Prince to
nearly allied to the house of Guise, with l~uch for-
.midable power a that Philip might be a more. ac-
tive ally, but would certainly prove a more danger-
ous one, and under pretence of allifting him, would-
,ffert his own right to the English Crown, which
he already began openly to claim ; that the fame
itatute, on which the sentence of death against his
Mother had been founded, would juffify the ex-
cluding him from the lucceion to the Crown ; that
the Englith, naturally averse from the dominion of
firangers, would not fail, if exalperated by his hof-
tilities, to applyt it in that matter , that Elizabeth
was dilpoled to repair the wrongs which the mother
had fuffered, by her tenderneis and afftdlion to-
wards the son ; and that by engaging in a fruitlers
war, he would deprive himlelf of a noble inheri-
tance, which, by cultivating her friendship, he
muit infallibly obtain. There reprelentations,
added to the confciod~nefs of his own weaknlefs, to

the

Boo VII.the Tm Illnels of his revenues, to the mutinous (pirit

off some of thle nobles, to the dubious fidelity of

1587. others, and to the influence of that faf~tion, whichi

was entirely at Elizabeth's devotion, convinced
James that a war with England, however juff,
would in the p'refet jundure be altogether impo-
litical. All thd~e considerations induced himi to fiide
his relen~tment, to appear satisfied with the punitr-
ment inflifed on Davison , and to preserve all the
f~emblances of friendihip with the Englilh court*.
In this manner did the cloud which threatened
fruch a florm pass away. Mary's death, like that
of a common criminal, remained unavenged by
any Prince s and whatever infamy Elizabeth might
incur, the was expoled to no new danger on that
SCCOUn t.

Dirgraceor MARY S death, however, proved fatal to the
the Master Mailer of Gray, and ]lot him the King's favour
of Gray. which he had for some time poffelfed. He was be-

come as odious to the nation, as favourites, who
acquire power without merit, and exercis~e it with-
out discretion, ulually are. The treacherous part,
which he had adted during his late embassy, was
no recret, and filled James, who at length came
to the knowledge of it, with altonIthment. The
courtiers oblerved the lymptoms of dilguft arising
in the King's mind, his enemies- reized the oppor-
tunity, and Sir William Steward, in revenge of
the perfidy with which Gray had betrayed his bre-

May ro. ther Captain James, publickly acculed him before

a Convention of nobles, not only of having contri-
buted, by his advice and Iuggeftions, to take away
the life of the Queen, but of holding correlpon-
dlence with Popith princes, in order to fubvertt
the religion eftablithed in the kingdom. Gray,

a Spotwf. Strype, 3. 377.

u nfu pported

unsupported by the King, deserted by all, and BooscVII.
coniclous of his own guilt, made a feeble defence. -I
He was condemned to perpetual banjihment, a j7
punithment very unequal to h~is crimes. But the
King was unwilling to abandon one, whom he had
once· favoured 10 highly, to the rigour of juffice ,
and Lord Hamilton his near relation , and the other
nobles who had lately returned from exile, in gra-
titude for the zeal with which he had se~rved thiem,
interceded warmlyi in his behalf.

HAvINo thus accomplithed the deftruation of one

of his enemies, Captain James thought the junaure
favourable for prosecuting his revenge on them all.
He singled out secretary Maitland, the most emi-
nent both fpr abilities anid enmity to him ; and of-
fered to prove that lie was no less accessary than
Gray to the Qgeen's death, and had even formed
a deligu of dehivering up the King himlelf into the
hands of the En~glish But timne and abience had,
>n a great measure, extinguiiged the King s affieaion
for a minion, who 10 little deserved It. All the
courtiers combined aglainft him as a common ene-
my. And initead of gaining his point, he had the
mortification to fee the office of Chancellor confer-
ed upon Maitland, who, together with that dig-
niry, enjoyed all the power and influence of a
prime Minister.

IN the Assembly of the Church, which met this

year, the Came hatred to the order of Bilbops, and
the fame jealoury and fear of their encroachments,
Qppeared. But as the King was now of full age,
end a parliampqnt was !ingrponed on thiqt ovcation,
the. Clergy remained satisfied with appointing Come
of. their number to repr4('nt their grievances to that
court, from which great; things were expetted.

PR EV f oos to this meeting of parliament, James The King

ateempted a work worthy of a King. The deadly ontempts

. feuds to unu'e

the nobles.

Boor VII. feuds which fublifted between many of the great fa-

Smilies, and which were transmitted from one gene-

'rs · ration to another, weakened the firength of the

kingdom a contributed, more than any other cir-
cumf tance, to preserve a Sierce and barbarous spirit
among thle nobles , and proved the occasion of
many disasters to themselves, and to their country.
After many preparatory negotiations, he invited
the contending parties to a royal entertainment in
the palace of Holy-rood boule; and partly by his
authority, partly by his intreaties, obtained their
promire to bury their diffentions in perpetual obli-
vion From thence he conduated them, in solemn
proceilion, through the fireets of Edinburgh, march-
ing by pairs, each hand in hand with his enemy.
A collation of wine and tweet-meats was prepared
at the public Crols, and there they drank to each
other, with all thle signs of reciprocal forgiveness,
and of future friendship. The people, who were
prefentc at a fpedacle To unusual, conceived the mos0
Iranguine hopes of feeing concord and tranquillity
eftablithed in every part of the kingdom, and refti-
fled their fatisfadtion by repeated acclamations.
Unhappily the effeas of this reconciliation were not
correspondent either to the plous endeavours of the
King, or the fond withes of the people.

T~e firR care of the parliamntn was the recurity

of the Proteflant religion. All the laws passed in
its favour, since the Reformation, were ratified ;
and a new and severe one was ennaed againit semi-
nary Priests and Jesuits, wkhole refl~efs induffry in
making profely tes brought many of them into
Scotland about this time. Two ads of this
parliament deserve more particular notice, on ac-
count of the consequences with which they were
fol lowed.

Tua

TH E one refpedted the lands of the Church. As BoorVII.

the public revenues were not fufficient for defray- ~
;ng the King's ordinary charges ; as the adminiffra- Geaerrl~
tion of government became more complicated and sneensoon
more exped~ive ; as James was naturally profuse, orchurch-
and a firanger to aeconomy s it was necessary, on lns
all there accounts, to provide some fund propor-
tioned to his exigencies. But no considerable fum
could be levied on the Commons, who did not en-
joy the benefit of an extensive commerce. The
nobles were unlaccuffomed to bear the burden of
heavy taxes. And the revenues of the Church
were the only source whence a proper supply could
be drawn. Notwithstanding all the depredations
of the laity imnce the Reformation, and the various
devices which they had employed to seize the
Church-lands, some confsderable portion of them
remained still unalienated, and were held either by
the Bishops who poffeffed the benefices, or were
granted to laymen during pleasure. All there lands
were, in this parliament, annexed, by one gene-
ral law *, to the Crown, and the King was impow-
ered to apply the rents of them to his own use.
The tithes alone were reserved for the maintenance
of the persons who served the cure, and the princi-
pal manflon-hodec, with a few acres of land, by way
of glebe, allotted for his residence. By this great
accellion of property, it is natural to conclude, that
the King must have acquired a vast increase ofpow-
er, and the influence of the nobles have fuffered a

prprtional diminution. The very reverse of this

seem, hlowever, to have been the care. Almost
all grants of Church-lands, prior to this ~a, were
thereby confirmed ; and titles, which were former-
ly reckoned precarious, derived from thence the

larndion

* Part, a . Jac. VI. c. s9-

BoolttII. fancrion of parliamentary authority. James was

'' likewise authorized, during a limited time, to make

'237. new alienations , and foch was the facility of his

temper, ever ready to yield to the follicitations of
hiis servants, and to gratify their mos1 extravagant
demands, that no~t only durinig the time limited,
but throughout his whole rteign, he was continual-
ly employed in bellowing, and h~is parliament in
ratifying grants of th~is kind to his noties; hence
little advantage accrued to the Crown from that
which might have been so, valuable an addition to
its revenues. Thle Bilhops, however, were great
fuifferers by the law. But at this juncrure neither
the King nor his Miniffers were solicitous about the
initerefts of an order of meni, odious to the people,
and persecuted by thle clergy. ~Their enemies
promoted the law with the utmolt zeal. The prof-
pedt of tharing in their spoils induced all parties
to codlent to it; and after a flep 10 fatal to the
wealth and power of the dignified Clergy, it was
no difficult matter to introduce that chanige in thle
government of the Church which soon after toole
place *.

Liffer Ba- THE change, which the othe·r flatute produced
rons ad- in the civil conifitu ion, was nou lets remarkable.
mitted in- Under the Feudal Cyfierm, every Freeholder, or
to 'r~ -vassal of the Crown, had a right to be prerent in
their re- parliamen t. Ther'e Frecholders were, originally,
prelenta- few in number, but polkiffed of great and e xten-
'ives. five property. By degrees, there vast poffetiions

were divided by the proprietors themfrelves, or
parcelled out by the Prince, or split by other ac.
cidents. The number of Freeholde~rs became great-
er and their condition more uniqual , besides the
ancient Barons, who pres~erved their estates and

their

* Spotlwood, 365.

th~eir power unimpaired, there arole another order, sooll VII.
whole rights were the fanle, though their wealth
and in~fluence were far inferior. But, in thole rude '5 7'
ages, when thle art of government was extremely
impefeCd, when parliaments were seldom alffem-
bled, and deliberated on matters little interesting
to a martial people, few of the Lefer BaronsJ took
their feats, and the whiole parliamentary jurifdic-
tion was exercised by the Greater Barons, together
with the EcclefTaftical order. James i. fond of imi-
tating the forms of the Englith conflitution, to
which he had been long accuffomed, and desirous
of providing a counterpoise to the power of the
great nobles, procured an sat in the year 1427,
dispensing with the personal attendance of the lesser
Barons, and impowering those in each county, to
chure two commifiioners to reprelent them in par-
liaiment. This law, like many other regulations
of that wife Prince, produced little effea~. All
the K-ing's vassals continued, as formerly, poffeffed
of a right to be prelent in parliament, and, unless
in some extraordinary conjunaures, none but the
greater Barons attended. But by mieans of the
Reformation, the conflitution had uindergone a
great change. The arillocratical power of the no-
bles had been much encreaf~ed, and the influence
of the Ecclesiastical order, which the Crown uisal-
ly employed to check their ufurpations, and to
ballance their authority, had diminithed in pro-
portion. Many of the Abbies and Priors had been
credted into temporal peerages , and the Protel-
tant Bithops, an indigent race of men, and odious
to the nation, were far from poffefling the weight
and credit, which their predecessors derived from
the exorbitant wealth, and the fisperftitious reve-
rence of the people in this situation, the King
hlad recourse to the expedient employed by James
1. and obtained a law reviving thle statute of 1427 ;

and

Boost VII. and from that time the Commons of Scotland have

CeInt their representatives to parliament. An ad,

'587 which tended to vilibly to abridge their authority,

did not pars with~out oppofntion 'from many of the
nobles. But as the King had a right to Cummon
the lesser Barons to attend in person, others were
apprehienfiv·e of Lecing the houle filled with a mul-
titude of hiis dependants, and codetnted the more
willingly to a law, which laid thiem under the re-
firidion of appearing only by their reprelentatives.

50-8 THE year 1588 began with an universal expeaan-

pr c 1hP~ tion throulghout all Europe, thant it wuas to be dif-
thespania, tanglluthed by wonderful even~ts and revolutions.
Armiado. Several affrologers, according to the accounts of

cotemporary hifforians, had predided this , and
thle rStuation of affairs in the two principal kingdoms
of Euro~pe was Cu~ch, that a sagacious observer, with-
out any supernatural intelligence, might have ha-
zarded the predi~ion, anid have foreseen the ap-
proach of some grand crifts. In France, it was evi-
dent from the affon~ithing progress of the league,
con~duated by a leader whole ambition was retrain-
ed by no rcruples, and whole genius had hitherto
liirmnounted all difficulties ; as well as from the
timid, variable, and impolitic councils of Henry
III. that either that Monarch must submit to aban-
don the throne, of which he was unworthy; or by
l;ome sudden and daring blow, cut off his so rmida-
ble rival. Accordingly, in the beginning of the
year, the Duke of Guise drove his Malter out of
his capital city, and forced him to conclude a peace,
which left him only the (hadow of royalty ; and
before the year expired, he himself fell a vidtim to
Henry's fears, and to his own security. In Spain,
the operations were fisch as prormiled something fLill
more uncommon. During three years, Philip had
employed all the power of his European dominions,
and exhauffed the treasures of the Indies, in vast

preparations

preparations for war. A fleet, the greatest that had~;oosva.
ever appeared in the ocean, was ready to fail from -
Lisbon, and a numerous land army was assembled 585-^
to embark on board of it. Its destination was flill
unknown, thoughl many circuimftances made it pro-
bable that the blow was aimed, In the furtt place,
against England. Elizabeth had long given lecret
aid to the revolted provinces in the Low Countries,
and now openly afforded them her prote~tion. A
numerous body of her troops was in their service;
the Earl of Leiceffer commanded their armies, the
had great fivay in the civil government of the re-
public; and some of its mcoft considerab~le towns
were in her poffemfon. Her fketrs hadf intulted the
coaits of Spain, intercepted the Galleons from the
Weft Indies, and threatened thle colonies thiere.
Roured by so many injuries, allured by views of
ambition, and animated by a luperflitious zeal for
propagating the Romith Religion, P~hilip resolved
not'only to, invade, but to conquer England, to
which his descent from the bodie of Lancaster, and
thle donation of Pope Sixtus V. gave him, in his
own opinion, a double title.

ELIZABETH saw the danger approach, and pre-Condudt

pared to encounter it with the utmott intrepidity.of James
~The measu~res for the defence of hier kingdom were r a~ OC-
concerted, and carried on, with the wildom, and
vigour, which diflinguithed her reign. Her chiief
caire was to secure thie friendrlhip of the King of
Scots. She had treated tre. Queeni his Mother with
a rigour unknown among Princes, the haud often
ofed h~imelf hiarlly, and with conte~mpt, arid
tho~ugh hie hadt hitherto prudentlly flippreffed his
rdentntment of there injuirie~s, the did not believe it
to, be alrtogether extingu~lbed, an~d was afraid thiat
in helr prelent fItu~ationi, it mighit burit out with a
faital \ ib~clnc~e. P'hilipi, feniilbe how miuch an al-
tiance u ib Scot!lanl 'v nobl ~ f!c~ii one Iris nt etrprize,
courted James with thle utmotit a;!~ihiuit. He ex-

V on

I. L i~ec

BOOKVII.cited him to revenge his mother's wrongs; he flat-

' ' tered him with the hopes of tharing his conquests;
18 and offered hiim in marriage his daughter the In-

fanta Isabella. At rthe fame time, Scotland [wvarm-
ed with priests h~is emissaries, who seduced some of
the nobles to popery, and corrupted others with
bribes and promiles. Huntly, Errol, Crawford,
were the heads of a faftion, which openly efpoured
the interest of Slpain. L~ord Maxwel, arriving from
that court, began to afremrble his f~ollowers, and to
take arms, tha3t hie might be ready to join the Spa-
niards. In order to counter-barlance all there, Eli-
zaibeth~ made the warmeit profeflions o~f friend~hip
to the King,; and Alhby, her ambaiffdor enter-
tained him~ wi b magnificent hopes and promilies.
He aliTrred h~im that h~is right of ilcfliccmn to the
Crown ibo!uld1 be publickly acknowledged in Eng-
land ,i that he (hould be created a Dulke in that
k~ingdom, that hie thould be admitted to some
(hIAIe in the g-overnment, and receive a confide.
rable penlio~n annually. James, it is probable, was
too w~ell acquainted with Eizabeth's arts, to rely
entirely on thiere promises. Buit he underitood his
own interest in the present julnctlrc·, and pursued
it with muichi flendinels. He repe~ted an alliance
with Spain, as da~ngerous. H-e refulfed to admit
into his prese~nce an ambassador from thle Pope.
He seized Colonel Semple, an agent o~f the Prince o~f
Parma. He drove many o~f the traffiguing Priests
out of the king~dom. He· marched suddenly to
D~umfries, dilperfetd Mal.xwell's followers, and too~k
h~im pr'ifoner. In a conventio~n o~f the nob~les he dei-
.claredj his refbllution to ad~here invil~nhiby to th~e

fuggeflio~ns of reve'inge, detrerminted to net ii conl-
cer-t with Eizabe~tht, againt theC cannon:~~l enem:Iy I·
th~e Pror-t;tlnt faithr. I u hkig minapr
ture of defe~ncec, and Ir·vied trroops to, cibitruct the~
landing of the Spaniardls. Ile offered to !enid an~

;a rmy

army to Elizabeth's aflifiance, and told her ambar Booivf-
rador that he expe~ted no othier favour from the king r
of Spain, but that which Polyphemus had promiled 15 '
to Ulysses, that when he had devoured all his com-
pamions, he would make him his last modfel *

To a zeal of the people, on this occasion, was Anational

inot inferior to that of the King ; and the extraordi-covenantn'c
nary danger, wnth whichi they were thireatened, fug-of Religi-
grfied to them an extraordinary expedient for theiron.
security. A bond was framed for the maintenance
of true religion, and the defence of the King's per-
son and government, in opporition to all enemies
foreign and domeitic. Th~is contained a confeffion
of the Proteflant faith, a particular renunciation of
the errors of Popery, and the mos1 solemn promiles,
in the name, and through the firength of God, of
adhering to each other in supporting the former,
and contending against the latter, to the utmost of
their power -t. The King, the Nobles, the Clergy,
and the people faibleribed it with equal alacrity.
Strange or uncommon as luch a combination may
now appear, many circumltances contributed, at that
time, to recommend it, and to render thle idea fa-
m~iliar to the Scots. When rouzed by any extra-
ordinary event, or alarmed by any public danger,
thle people of Israel were accuffomed to bind them-
relves, by a solemn Covenant, to adhiere to that Re-
ligion, which the Almighty had eflablithed among
them, this the Scots considered as a fadcred prece;
dent, which it became them to imitate. In that
age, no considerable enterprize was undertaken in
Scotland, wirlthout a bond of mutual defence, which:
all concerned reckoned necessary for their fecurit).
Thie form of this religio~us confe~deracy is plainly
boni ow ed fro~m those political ones, o~f whiich~ Io many

*Camd. 5144 Johnl x 39. Spotdw. 369-
·F DLunlop's C'ollef. of Confeff. Vol. 2. IoS.

L, i inflanlceS

BooxVII.inflances have occured, thie articles, flipulations,
'~ 'nd peculiar modes of expremlon, are exaaly the

'588. fame in both. Almaft all th~e considerable P'opith

Princes were thecn joined in a league for extirpating
thle Reformed religion, and nothing could be more:
natural, or seemed more efficacious, than to enter
into a counter-allociation, in order to oppole the
pro-grels of that formidable conspiracy. To thele
caules, did the CovPnantr, w inich is become To famous
in hilltory, owte iis origin. It was renewed at diff~e-
rent times during thle reign of James *. It was
revivedi with~ great folemrnity, though w~ith confide-
rable alterations, in the year a 6;8. It was adolp--
ted by the Englifb, in the year a 643, and ensor-
ced by~ the civil and ecclefiallical authority of both
kingdoms. The poli ical purpoles to which it was
thien made (b~blervien~t, and thle violent and uncon-
flitutio~nal mealiires wh~lich it was then employed to
p'romote, it is not our province to explain. But at
the junalure, in which it was first introduced, we
rnay pronounce it to have been a prudent and lau-
dable device for thle defence of the religion and li-
berties of the natio~n, nor were the terms in whiich
it was coic~eived, otrher thain might hav~e been ex-
p'eded from men alaJrmed wirh the impending dan-
ger of Popery, and threarned with an invarlon by
the must bigotted, and m~oll pow·erfuil Prin~ce in

Europe~. Pl- r LTP's eagerners to conlquer England dild not
inspire him either withi the vigour or dispatch necef-
fury to enthire the thecel; of to, mighty an enter prize.
His fleet whlich anlghte to have lxile~d inl April, didi
not enter the F o lith cha~nnl-t'l i l thle middcl Ied~July.
It haveredc~ m11y cdayS on! thl e cast, inl eXIpeitatij o
of being joinedt b~y the P~inlce o~f Par:ma:, wh1 w\as
bla,~cked up in thec pr tis (:f Fla: durs~ byv a Dutch

T`he A4r- flquadircn. Continual d~imiltr ss IuL'Lu< Ji:c the Spniards~

seated.

*Cald. 4. ti 2.

whicjbh

which are well known, confp~iredi with th~eir own illBooKVII.
condu<'t, to disappoint thleir enterprize And by-r~
thle blelling of Pruvidence, whlich watched with re- S'
markable care over the Protellant religion, and the
liberties of Britainl, the Englifhl valour Icattered and
defiroyed the Armado on which; they h~ad arro~gant-
ly beflowedi thle name ~f ~Invincible, Afrer be-ing
driven out of thie Engh~fh Leas, they were forced to
steer their courre towards Sp~ain, ro~und Scotland
and Ireland. Many o~f thecm iuffered thipwreck on
theft: dangerous and unknow·n coasts. T`hough
Jamies kept his fubjea~s under arms to watch thle
motions of the Spaniards, and to prevent thecir land-
ing in an hostile manner, hie received with great
humanity 7co w~ho were forced athore by a tem-
pest, and after fispplying them with ne~efIaries, per-
mitted them to return into th~eir own country.

On the retreat of the Spaniards, Elizabeth sent

an ambass~ador to congratulate with James, and to
compliment him on the firminels and generosity, he
had discovered during a conjuneture to dangerous.
But none of Afhby's promites were any longer re-
mnembered -, that Minister was even acculed of hav-
ing exceeded his powers, by there too liberal offe-rs;
and conlcious of his own fadlfehood, or amhamed of
being disow~ned by his court, he withdrew secretly
out of Sco~tland *.

PH L I P, conVinced by fatal experience of his own l09-

rathners in attempting th~e con~quest of England, by Phimp'sin-
a naval armamentr, equipped at to, great a diftlance,'Scotlan9d.
and lubjeled in all its operations, to the delays,
and dangers, and uncertainties, ariling fromn leas
an~d winds, refolvedi to make his attack in another
form, and to adopt th~e plani wh~ich the Princtes of
Lorrain had long meditated, of invading England
through Scotland. A body of his troops, he imagin-
ed, might b~e calily wasted over from the Low Coun-

*John~t. r34. Calmd. <j48.

L 3 tries

BOOK VII. tries to that kingdom, and if they could once ob-

t

- ain footing, or pro~cure afl~fance there, the fronr

s*89· tier o~f England was open and defenceless, and the

northern counties full of Roman Catholics, who
would receive them with open arms. Mean wzhile,
a descent might be threatened on the southern
coatt, whichi would divide the Englilh army, dil-
tradt their councils, and throw the whole kingdom
into terrible convulflons. In order to prepare the
way for the execution of this design, he remitted
a considerable fiim of money to Bruce, a seminary
priest in Scotland, and employed him, together
with Hay, Creighton, and Tyrie, Scottith Jesuits,
to gain over as many persons of diftindtion as pof-

popi~th no-fiible to his interest. Zeal for Popery, and th~e art-
bles con- ful insinuations of there emissaries, induced several

he~ of the nobles to favour a measure, wrhich tended

~ting. Co manifes~tly to the deflrud~ion of their country.

Huntly, though the King had lately married him
to the daughter of his favourite, the Duke of Le-
nox, continued warmly attached to the Romith
Church. Crawford and Errol were animated with
the zeal of new converts. They all engaged in a
correlpondence with the Prince of Parma, and in
their letters to him, offered their fervfce to the
King of Spain, and undertcok with the aid of 6000
men, to render him matter of Scotland, and to
bring so many of their Vassals into the feield, that he
thould be able to enter Englandl, w.ith a numerous
army. Francis Stewart, grandson of James V.
whom the King hiad created Earl o~f Bothwrell,
tho~ugh influence~d by no motive of religion, for he
Hilil adhered to the Proteltant faitrh, was prompted
merely by caprice, and the reftlkf ness of hiis na-
ture, to joiNt this treasonable corref`pondnce.

Febr. ,7. ALL hthee letters were intercepted in England.

Elizabeth, alarmed at the danger whichi threatened
her own kingdom, sent them .immediately to the
King, and reproachinig him wvith· his former lenity

toward

toward the Popish party, called upon himn to check BOOK .I
this fo-rmidablel co-nlpiracy, by a p:ropert leverity.~ ' '"
But Jamnes, thoughl firmly attach~ed to, the Prote:- Th
tant religion, tho~ugh profoundly veriea in the theo:- King's
logical controversie~s bertween the Reformers and maxims
the Chiurch of Rome, though h~e h~adl em:oyed with re-
himlrl, at that early period~ ofT life, ini writing a per:;
Commentary o~n thle Revelatirons, in whiich he
proved the Pope to be Antichrif), had neverthlelefs
adopted, already, thofie maxim~s concerning the
treatmlent of the Roman Cath~oics, to whIIICh he ad.
hleredi through the lef't (,f his ife~. Th~e Roman
Catholics were at that time a powerfuli and adtive
party in Englalnd , they were far from being an in-
considerable faition in hiis- own kingdom. The
Pope and King of Spain were ready to take part in
all their machinations, and to recond every effort
of their bigotry. The opposition of iiich a body
to hlis lucceion to the Crown of England, added
to the averfendsr of the E~nghflh fromn the govern-
ment of fira~ngers, might create him many difli-
culties. In order to avoid theret, he thought it ne-
ceiffry to sooth, rather than to irritate the Ro~man
Catholics, and to reconcile them to his R~icceion,
by the hopes of gentler treatment, and some miti-
gation of the rigour of those laws, whiich were no~w
in force againit them. This attempt, to gain one
party by promiles of indulgence and aC~s of cle-
mency, while he adhe~red with~ all ther ob~tinacy of
a dilputant, to th~e dod-,rines andi tents of the other,
has given an air of mystery, aind even of contra-
dietio~n, to this part of thle King's chiarader. Th1e
Papifts, with thie credulity of a fe61 Itruggling to
obtain power, be~lieved his heart to be wholly theirs ;
and thle Protellants, with th~e jealoury inseparable
from those whio are already in poilellion, viewed
every ad of lenity, as a mark of indifference, or
a lymptom of ap.oilacy. And in order to please
both, Jamecs often aimed at an excellive refin-e-

L 4 ment,

peoaiVII. ment, mingled with diflimulation, in which he

1~3 imagined the perfeation of government, and of-

'89· king-craft, to confiit.
His excer- His behaviour on this occasion was agreeable to
fivC lenity thele general maxims. Notwithflanding the folli-
tothe con'citations of the Qlce~n of E~ngland, enforced by the
fpiratorS. zealous remonfirances of his own Clergy, a (hort

imprir;bnmcen wvas the on~ly puninhment he inflidedd
on Huntly and his associates. But he loon hadi
reaso~n to repent an sat of clemency, so inconfillent
with the dignlity of government. The fufit dei
which the conspirato~rs made of their liberty, Was
to affemible th~eir followers, an~d unider pretence of
removing Chan~cellor Maitland, an able Mlinifter,
but warmly devoted to the English interest, frorri
thez Kinig's eniuncils andi presence, they attempte~d
to seize Jamnes himfl)f.' This attempt being de-
seated, partly by Maitland's y·igilance, and partly
by their own ill conductL, they wnere forced to re-
tire to thle Nlorth, where they openly ercded the
stan~dard of Rebellion.` But as the King's go~vern-
ment was not' generally unpopular, or his mimilrler s
odiouls, their own vassals joined them slowly, and
dilcovered no zeal in the cause. And thle K ag~,
in perlon, advancing againit th~em with fiach forces
as he could (lddenly levy, they dult~ not rely foi
much on the fidelity of their troops, which though
superior in nualiber, followedi them with rehic-
tance, as to hazard a battle; but Riff~ering theni
to difpedel, ~they surrendered to th~e king, and

4pril20. threw themselves on his mercy. Huntly, Errol,

Crawford, and BJothwell were all brought to a publ~
lic trial. Repeated ads of trecafon were cally
provedi against them. The K;ing, howeve~r, did
not~ permit any fe~ntence' to be pronolunced, and
after keeping th~em a few mo~nths in confine-
mnit~, he took occafian, amiidit the public frlti-

visty

;vir and rejoicings, at the approach of his mar. Boonvil.
riage, to let them at liberty . 98

As James was the only descendant of the an- The kig's

clent Monarchs of Scotland, in the dited line, as manrige
all hopes of uniting thie crowns of thle two king. with Anne
doms would have expired with him, as the Earl ot Den-mrk
of Arran, the presumptive heir to thle throne. was
lun~atic , the king's marriage was, on all there ac-
counts, an event which the nation withed for with
the utmost ardour.' He himlelf was no less de-
thous of accomplithing it , and had m~ade over-
tures, for that purpoile, to the eldelt daughrer of
Fre~derizk II. king of Denmark. But Elizabeth~,
jealous of every thing, that would render the ac·-
~ceion of the houle of Srtewart more acceptable to
thec Englilh, endeavoured to perplex James, in the
fadme maunne Ithe had done Mary, and emiployed
as many artifiees to defeat or to r~etard his mlar-
riage. His ministers, gained by bribes and pro-
milts, reconded her intenltionls, and though (Everal
diifferent ambatfadors were fel:t f'rocm Scuc~land to
De;nniark, they produced powers l0 limiited, or in-
lifted on conditions so extravagant, thiat F~rederick
could not believe the king to' be i~n earnest, and
Cfupedting that there was some design to deceive,
or amule him, gave his daughter in marriage to
the Puke of Brunswick. Not dilcouraged by this
difiappointment', which he imputed entirely to the
condud1 of h~is own miniffers, James made ad-
dresses to the Princers Anne, Frederickt's second
daughter. 'And though Elizabeth endeavoured to
divert hint from this, by recommending Catherine
the King of Navarre's filler, as a more advantage-
ous match; though the prevailed on thle pzivy
council of Scotland to declare again0t the alliance
with Denmark, he persisted in his choice. AndJ
derpairing of overcoming the obflinacy of his ow n
mainiffers, in any other manner, he lecretly en·

* Spotdw. 373. Caild. 4. ro3 couraged

BonaI. couraged the citizens of Edinburghi to take arms.

TheTh y threatened to tear in pieces the Chancellor,

'Z9whom they acculed as the person, whole artifices

had hitherto disappointed the withes of the King,
and ethe expedtations of his people. In consequence
of this, the Earl Marthal was lent into Denmark,
at the head of a iplendid embairy. He received
amp'e powers and inflmauions, drawn with the
king's own hand. The mnarriage articles were
quickly agreed upon, and the young queen set
fail towards Scotland. James made great prepara-
tions for her reception, and waited her landing with
all the impatience of a lover, when the unwelcome
account arrived, that a violent tempeRt bad arisen,
which drove back her fleet to Norway, in a condi-
tion7 so thattered, that there was little hope of its
putting~ aga~in to sea before the spring. This un-
expeded difaJppointment he felt with the utmost
fenlibility. He inflantly fitted out some thips, and
without communicating his intention to any of his
council, Cailed in person, attended by the Chan-
cellor, reveral noblemen, and a train of 00 per-

Oaob. 22. son@, in quest of his bride. He arrived alyna
NoV. 24. finall harbour near Uptlo, where the Qgeen then

resided. There the marriage was solemnized.
And as it would have been ralh to trust those
boifierous less, in the winter season, James
accepted the invitation of the court of Den-
mark, and repairing to Copenhagen, passed fe-
veral months there, amidst continual feaiting,
and amnulements, in which, both the Queen and
himself had great delight *

No event in the King's life appears to be a wider

deviation from his general charadter, than thiis fud-
den sally. His son Charles 1. was capable of thiat
excefive admniration of the other sex, which arises
from great sensibility of heart, heightened by ele-

* Mely. 35= SPotdw*377.

gance

gance of taste; and the romantic air of his journey Boorr VII.
to Spain l~uited luch a difp~olition. Eut James was'"
not (bfceptible of any refined gallantry, anid always 5Z89.
express~ed that contempt for the female character,
which a pedantic erudition, unacquainted with po-
litenel~s, is apt to inlpire. He was fretted, how-
ever, at the many obstacles which had been laid
in his way. He was anxious to secure the political
advantages, whiich he expedted from marriage, and
fearing that a delay might: afford Elizabeth, and
his own miniffers, an opportunity of thwariing
him by new mntrigues, he thddenly took the r-elo-
lution of preventing them, by a voyage from which
he expedted to return in a few weeks. The na-
tion s~eemed to applaud hiis condudt, and to be
pleared with thisc appearance of amorous ardour, in
a young Princ~e. Notwirhflanding his abrence so
long beyond the time he expeded, thle nobles,, the
clergy, and the people, vied withi one another in
loyalty and obedience; and no priod in the King's
reign was more remarkable ortranquillity, or
more free from any eruption of those fadions,
yvbich 10 often diilurbed the kingdom.

THE

# BOOK VIII.

THEI

HISTORY

O F

SCOT LAND.

BOOK VllL.

s O N the first of May the King and Qgee ar-
VIII.rived at Leith, and were received by their

fubujeass, with every pollible expreflion of joy. The

The5 Kng lolemnity of the Queen's coronation was condufted
and Quecawith great magnificence , but To low h~ad thle order
Irave so of B~ilhops fallen, in the opinion of th~e public,
Scotland. tatl3 no~ne of them were present on that occafian,

and Mr. Robert Bruce, a Presbyterian M~iniffer of
great reputation, let thle Crown oni her head, ad-
minifflred the fac~ed undion, and performed thle
other cuffoma~ry cerem~onies.

Thle zeal and ficcefTs, with whiich many of the

clergy had con~tributed towards plreferving peace
and order in thle k-ingdomi, during his ablence, re-
concile~d James, in a great degree, to their persons,
and even to thle Presbyterian form of government.

Augut 4.In prelence of an assembly, whichl met this year,

hie made high encomiums on the di~rc~ipline, as well
as the dottrine of th~e church, promiled to adhere
inviolably to both, and permitted the affemnbly to
frame thich ads, as gradually abol;thed all the re-
mains of epitcopal jurildidlion, and paved the way for

for a full and legal establishment of the Prefbyte- Boor
rian model *. VIII.

An event happened soon after, which afforded ~V

the Clergy no finall triumph. Archbilhop Adam-
100, their ancient enemy, having sullen under the
King's dilpleafure, having been deprived of the
revenues of his fee in cod~equence of thle a~t of an-
nexation, and being oppre(Ted with ag~e, with po-
verty, and diseases, made th~e meanest fuimiion to
the clergy, and delivered to th~e afrembly a formal
recantation of all his opinions concerning Church
go'vernment, which had been matter of offe~nce to
the Prefbyterians. Such a confet~ion, from the
most learned person of the order, was considered
as a tellimony, whiich the force of truth had ex-
torted from an adverfadry t.

MEAZwnstF, the king's exceflve clemency to-Diforders

w~ards offenders muhriplicd crimes of all kinds, and in the
encouraged foch aats of violence, as brought hiskingdorn.
government under contempt, and proved fatal to
many of his flabijeats. The hillory of several years,
about thiis time, is filled with accounts of the deadly
quarrels between the great families, and of murders
and affannations perpetrated in the most audacious
manner, and with circumstances of the utmaft bar-
barity. All the defed~s in th~e feudal ariflocracy
wer~e now fe~lt more lenfibly, than at any other pe-
riod in the hillory of Scotland, and universal li-
cence an1d anarchy prevailed to a degree, feairce
confillent with the prefervaition of fa~ciety. Whiile
thec king, too gentle to p~unilli, or too feeble to ad~
v'·iit vigour. (iff~eredc all thiere enormitics to pals

En~ir though~J James connivedf at real crimes An at-

.itc~herilft, which is conmmonly an imgna~lrynr one. (engep or

enroflld his attentio~n, and tiofe lulp;eded ofC ic Botpwell's

f·!r the whocle wei ght of his autlor ity. Many RRna t~he
IerFon)I S ) nitheir extremely'Old,nol(r wrtc~hedlJy p,c)T

* Cald. 4. 204. 1 Spotliv 385. Cald. 4. zl4.

Bo s o f thlis crime, but masters of families, and matrotu

of adeentt rank, and in the middle age of life, were

'59r. seized and tortured~l , ad though their confefflons

contained the most abfuird and incredible circum-
flances, the King's prcejudices, thofre of the clergy,
and rof th~e people, cconfpired in believing their ex-
travagan~es witho~ut hcfitation, and in punithing
the:r persons wit~hout mercy. Some of thele un-
haippy fuffesrers scculed Bothwhell of having confisit-
ed them, in. orderr to knoiw the timie o~f the King's
death, and hlaving employed th~eir art, to rairte thle
florm~s, whichl haid endangered the Queen's life, an~d
had( detainedc Jamres so lo~ng in Denmark. Upon
this eviden·tce, that nllblemnan was committed to

pil.His tur~bulent and hianghty finirit could nei-

the:· I-Ibmir to the restraint, nor bro~ok liich an in-
digniity. Having gained hiis kegciers, hie malde hiis
ccfleae, and imputing the acculation to the artifices
ojf his enemy, thie Chlancellor, assembled his follow-
ers, u~nder p~retene oif driving him fro~m the King~'s
c~ouncils. Beting falvoured by f;,me o~f the Kinig's
attendlants, he was admnitted, by a secret pa~f~iae,
undrlc clouid of nightr, into, thle court of th~e palace
oif flI ly-:road-hodec. He· adva~nced diredtly towaids
the roya:l ·ipartm'ent, but happ~ily, befo~re he enter-
ced, th~e alarml was taken and thle doocrs thatl.Whl

Dec. 27. 10o itremptedc to TUrTR Oyc CD m

10110 tiherl, :I00 to

fa-t fire to othiers, the citizents ~f' Edlinburghl had
time~ to ruin to their armns, andi he efeaped with the
unnirr~t dififiiculty , owing hiis thflety to the darkness~
of~ rlhe nighlt, and~ thle precipitancy with whichi he

ir92. i, rctired towa~rds the N~iorth, andt the King hav·

ii;g uinderedl gI<I~ ivenl a c~ommilion to the Earl of
Hu~ntly, to Purnelt him, andc hiis followers, with fire
anid fivord, he, undeitr ohLour of executing that
comm~iflon, gralrifed hi~s Iplivate revenge, and firr-
rounded the book~ cos the Earl of Murray, burnt it

Fcb. 8. to thle groundi, andli 11ew Murray himillf. Thle

* Mlel 3ss. Sportw. 386.

muir-

murder of a young nobleman of such promiling Boor;
virtues, and the beir of the regent Murray, the dar-~ "HI-I
ling of the people, excited umiverfal mndignation. 9.
The citizens of Edinburgh role in a tumultuous S2
manner; and though they were restrained, by the
care of the magiffrates, from any aGt of violence,
they threw aside all refpedt for the King and his
miniffers, and openly insulted and threatened both.
While this mutinous spirit continued,James thought
it prudent to withdraw from the city, and fixed his
residence for some time at Glasgow. There Huntly
surrendered himself to juffice, and, notwithfland-
ing the atrocioufners of hlis crime, and the clamours
of the people, the power of the chancellor, with
whom he was now closely confederated, and thle
King's regard for the memory of the Duke of Le-
nox, whole daughter he had married, not only pro-
teaed him from the sentence which such an odious
amoun merited, but exempted hiim even from the
formality of a pu'olic trial*.

A swer of much importance was taken, soon as- Prefbyteri-

ter, with regard to the government of the church.anChurch
The Clergy had long complained of the encroach- go0vne2na-
ments made upon thieir privileges and jurif~diaton, blithed by
by thle A~s of the parliament I584, and though law.
there laws had now loft much of their force, they
resolved to petition the parliament, which was ap-
proaching, to repeal them in form. The junau re
for pathing such a mea~isre was well chosen. T'he
King had loft much of the public fav·our, by hiis
lenity towards thle Popith faation, and flill more by
hiis remiffnels in pursuing the murderers of the Earl
of Murray. The chancellor had not only a power-
till party o~f the courtiers combined ag~ainst him, but
wans become odious to rthe peop~le, wi ho imnputed to,
himi every false flep, in the King's condudt. Bothi-
well flill luriked in rthe kingdom, and being secre-tly
fulpported by all rith enemies of Maitiand's admini-
thantion,, was readycl, evecry movment, to renew hi;s

* SpmrTw· ss-.

oudlc~iouls

R o o audacious enterprizes. James, for all there reasons;

VII was extremely willing to indulge the Clergy in their

,59, request, and not only condented to a law, whereby

the arts I584 were rescinded or explained, but he
carried his complaisance fLill further, and permitted
the parliament to eflablilh the Presbyterian govern-
ment, its General Mifemblies, Provincial lynods,
P-refbyteries and Kirk rfeions, with all the different
braniches of their dilcipline and jurilfdi~tion, in the
rnoft ample manner. All the zeall and authority of
the Clergy, even under thle adminiffration of Re-
gents, from wvhomr thiey migh~t have expedted the
mo(1 yartial favour, could no~t obtain the lanaion
of lawv, in confirmation of their mcide of Ecclefi-
a~tcllied gvernmenlt. No Prince was ever less dif-
pc:rdc :haln James to approve a Ifyfem, whiole re-
publican genius insp~ired a pamojrn for liberty, so re-
pugnant to his exalted notions of royal prerogative.
Nor could any averflon be more inveterate than his,
to the suletre and uncomplying charad~er of thie
Prefoyterian Clergy in thiat age, who, mo~re emi--
nent for zeal, than for piolicy, often contradid~edt
his opinions, and cenfreicd hiis conduai, with a fre-
dom equally offenlive to hiis dogmatism as a Theol-
logian, anid to his pride as a King. His situation
ho~wevetr cobliged him, frilequenly to conceal, o~r to
diffemlble his Ientim~ents, and as he ojftcn disguffed
his lidaijeas, by induging the Popiinl famon~i more
thian they appro~ved, he endeav'oured to ato~ne for
thiis, by coic~ellions to thle P~rdbyter ian Clergy,
mocre libera~l than hie him~fclf wo~uld otherwise harve
chdenl to! grant *

lu this parliamncrt, Bothwell and all his aIdhe-

rents were t:;tainlted. Eut he ho~n made a new at-
tempt to thize thre King at Fa;lklanld; and James,
betrayed by some of hiis curtierirs, and feebly de-
fended by others, who withedf we·ll to BothwellI, as
the Chancellor's avowedr enemy, owed his safety to

* Cald. 4. 248, 23z. Spotl: 388-

the

thec Fidelity and vigilance of Sir Robert Melvil, and B 6o at
to thle irresolution of Bothwell's associates *. "-1

SC A CE LY Was this danger over, when the nation a 992.

was alarmed with the discovery of a new and more A new
formidable conspiracy. George Kerr, the Lord conspiracy
Newbottle's brother, being seized as he was ready ofte

2

to set fail for Spain, man~y f~ulpicious papers were
found in his cuffody, and among thele, several
blanks signed by the Earls of Angus, Huntly, and
Errol. By this extraordinary precaution, th~ey
hioped to elcape any danger of discovery. But Ker's
resolution thrinking w hen torture was threatened, he
confeffred that he was employed by these noblemen,
to cairry on a negociation with the king of Spain ,
that the blanks fuibferibed with their names were to
be filled up by Crichton and Tyrie, that they were
infiru<Red to offer the faithful service of the th~ree
Earls to thiat MF~onarch, and to follicit him to lanld
a body of his troops, either in Galloway, or at the
mouth of Clyde, with which, they undertook, in
thle Birit place, to eflablith the Roman Catholic Re-
ligion in Scotland, and then to invade England,
with the whole forces of the kingdom. Sir ~David
Grahlam of Fintry, and Barclay of Ladyland, whom
he acculed of being privy to the consp~iracy, were
taken into cuffody, and confirmed all the circum;
flances of his confeflion t.

THE Dation having been kept for some time in rj93.

conutnual terror and agitation by so many fuccei ve Zealofthe
confp racies, t~e discovery of this new danger comn people.
pleated the panic. All ranks of men, as if the
en em y had already been at their gtes, tho uiceoght
thetmfelves called upon to Itand forth ndfneo
thetir country. The Miniffers of Edinburgh, with-
out waiting for any warrant from the K~ing, who
halppened at that time to be ablentr fro~m thle capital,
andt vusthoult having Ieceived any legal commiioin,
assembled a considerable numbter· of Petr; ands Ba

* Mdyel. 40z. -t Rymler, rG. to09.

V o L. II. M ronsl

LL~VIII. the impending danger. They seized the Earl of
'593- Angus, and committed him to th~e cattle, they exa-

mined Ker, and prepared a remonfirance to be laid
be-fore th~e K(ing, concerning the slate of the nation,;
and the necetllity of profecu:ing the cons~pirato~rs

Amil pro- w~ith becomning vigour. James, though jealous of

a "qevecryry ecroachmen t on his prerogative, and offend-
apcin ed~t wu ubje~ts, who inflead of petitioning, seem-

then. ed~ toi preferibe to h~im, fo~und it necessary, during

thle violence of the ferment, not only to adopt their
y lan, but even to declare that no consideration
th~ould ever induce him to pardon thole, who had

Jnn. 3. been guihty of to od~ious a treason. He lummoned

thei Earls of Hluntly and Errol to ~ilrrender them-
selves to juilice. Graham of Fintry, whom his peers
pronounced to be guilty of treason, he command-
ed to be publickly beheaded , and marching into
the North at the head of an army, the two Earls,
togetherr withl Angus, who had escaped out of pri-
son1, retired to the mountains. He placed garriions
in the caffles which belonged to them a compelled
their vassals, and the Barons in the adjacent coun-
ties, to subscribe a bond containing profellions of
their loyalty towards him, and of their firm adhe-
renc~e to the Pro~tellant faith; and, the better to le-
cure the tranqurility of that part of the kingdom,
conflituted thie Earls of Athol, and Marthal, hiis
Lieute:nants there .

MaIrch r R. He A soI si ni thed t his expedi rion, James retur ned
Elirzabeth to Ed!inbturgh, where he found Lonrd Borrough, an
conlicits extraojrdinary amibaffador from the court of Eng-
hjll to land. Eizabeth, alarmed at thle dilcovery of a
1most the"'confp~iracy, which Ihle confadered as no less formi-
gour. dablelt to Ilar own kingdom, tha~n to Scotland, re-

proa lchd J·ames withi his former remliliers, and urg-
ctd him, aIs hie rcgarde~d thle pr-ekrvation of the Pro-
tcltant rel;gion, or thec dig~nity of his own Crown,

* Spotdw. 39'. Cald. 4· 29'.

to puni(h this repeated treason with rigeur , and if B com
he could not apprehiend the persons, at least to con- Vi1
fircare the estates of such audacious rebels. She \ l
weakened, however, the force of there requells, by
interceding, at th-e fame time, in behalf of Both-
well, whom, according to her usual policy in nou-
rifhing a fadtious [pirit among the Scottith nobles,
the had taken under her proteation. James ablo-
lutely reful~ed to litten to any intercellion in favour
of one, who had so, of ten, and with so much out-
rage, infiulted both his government and his person.
WMith reLgard to the popilh confrpirators, he declared!
his reso~lution to~ prosecute thiem with vigour , but
that he might be the better able to do so, he de-
rnanded a small film of money from Elizabeth,
which the, diithufiful, perhaps of the manner in
which he might apply it, thewed no inclination to
grant. The zeal, h~owever, and importunity of his
own fiibjec~s obliged hiim to call a parliament, in
order to pass an sat of attainder against the three
Earls. But before it met, Ker made his es~cape out
of prison, and on pretence, that legal evidence of
their guilt could not be produced, nothing was con-
cluded againit themn. The King himself was uni-
verfally fisfpededtr of havingr contrived this artifice,
on purpole to elude the requcils of the Queen of'
England, and to disappoint the withes of his own
people. And therefore, in order to rooth the Cler-
gy, who exclaimed lo~udly against h~is conduCd, he
gave way to the pafling o~f an na~, w~hich~ ordained
thosE: who obitinately contemined the cedfures of
the Ch~urch~, to be declared outlaws *

Hm u:r I the terror ex;cited by the Popith conrfpi- Bothwell

racy pof fefedc the~ nation, the cuur~t hadlc been divid. 1urprizeo
ed by two rlival farctions, whicih contended fo~r the the King.
ch~i-f dilredtianr of affairs. At thle head o~f one wa~s
the Cha~ncellor, in w~hem thec Kin~ te; ofe~d entire
conlfidence. F'or that tvery reaso~n, pcrhanps, h~e ha:d

* Cald.4. 343. Spotfw. 393.ParlI 3 Jac. 11 c. i64.

Ma fallecn

So o Itfallen early under the Queen's dilpleafure. Thle

DuI.I)ke f Lenox, the Earl of Athol, Lord Ochiltree,
an3 "d ajl l te name of Stewart efpoured her quarrel,
and widened the breach. And James, fond no leis
~f' dumeltic: tranquillity, than of public peace, ad-
\ifed~ his fav·ouri.e to re-tire, for fomne time, in houpes
thati th~e Qeen's relentment wouldi subside. But
ras he iiood~ in nleeJ, in the present juneIture, of the
alliftanc~e of 10 ab~le a rr.iniffer, h~e had recalled him~
to Ccourt. In ordier to prevent him from recover-
inig his form~ier pow~er, thle Stewarts had recourse to
anl exp~edient no lets illegal than de~rperate. Hay-
inig combined w~ith Bothwellll wh~o was of the fame

J~l 7J 2.. f name, rthey brought himr back fecreily into Scot-

land , an~d fcizing ther gates of the palace, introduced
himn inito the royal apartment with a numerous train
of' armed followers. James, though deserted by all
his courtiers, and incapable of refillance, discovered
more indignation than fear, and reproachiing them
for thieir treachery, calked on thle Earl to £2nith his
treafons, by piercing his Sovereign to the heart.
But Bothwell fell on his knees, and imp~lored par-
don. The King was not in a condition to refuse his
demands. And a few days after he signed a capiou-
lation with this lucceTfsful traitor, to whiom he wans
really a prith~ner, w hereby he bound hiimlelf to grant
him a remiimon fulr all pall offenices, and to prcucrre
thre raitifcatio~n of it in parliam~ent , and in thea mean
time, to JilinifS thle c~anc~ellor, thle mnaftr of Gla-
mis, Lordd Home,n, and Sir George Humne, fromn
his cuCI)\Il~s and prien~fce. Bocthwtll, on· hiis paJrt,
Ccontented to remlove~ frol courtT, though;:l he left
there as mnany of his associates, as hie thiought fiixf
fiicent to prrevent the return of the adverle fa~tion.

Biut It was no~w no caly matter to keep the King

under thle Tfame kind o~f bondage, to which he hiad
ba:rn (,hen7 Clabeit durin~g h-is mninol ity. He disco-
vaud~( t) Iuc~h impantienc~e to thacke off hiis fetters,

that

thiat those who imposed, durst not continue th~e re. Boo we
firaint. They permitted hiim to call a Convention ~ -I1
of thle nobles at Sterhing, and to repair thlithe r him- 53
self. All Bothwell's enemnies, and all who were Heecco-
desirous of gaining the king's favo~ur by apprearingrers his li-
to be so, obeyed the summon~s. Th~ley pronounced berty.
the insult offered to the King's person and authority Sept. 7.
to be hiigh treason, and declared him ab'olved froml
any obligation to observe conditions, extorted by
force, and which violated 10 effezntially his royal pre-
rogative. Jamres, however, 11ill prefetred hiim a
pardon, provided he would sue for it as an na~ of
mercy, and promise to retire out of the kin~gdom.
There conditions Both~well rejeated wiith dirdlain,
and beraking hiimfe~lf once m~ore to arms, attemrptedl
to flirprizs thle Kingr, b~ut finding hi~m oni his guiardl,
fled to thle borders *.

THE King's ardour against Biothwecll, compzred Surpedte

w~ith his flow and evasive proceedings again~st theft~aVoUr.
Popilh Lords, occasioned a general difguf1 among) ppi e
his filbjeats; and was imputed either to an excefliv eLords.
attachiment to th~e persons of those confpiratoirs, or
to a secret partiality towards their opinio~ns, bothi
which gave rife to no unreasonable fears. The
Clergy, as th~e immedfiate guardians of the P~ro-
tellant Religion, thiough~t themselves bound, in
such a jun'ture, to take extraordicnry fleps fo~r its
preservation. And thle pro~vinciall tyn~od of Fife
happening to meet at that timie, a motion was made
to excommunicate all concerned in the late confpi-
racy, as obstinate and irreclaimable P'apills. And sept.2s.
though none o~f the consp~irators refidied within the
bounds of the synod, or w~ere (12bjrea to its juriifdic-
tion, f~lic was thet zeal o~f thet membe~rs, thajt, o\.er-
loo~king, thiis irre ularity, th~ey p~roinrounced a anfl~
them, the fenteceic of excommunlri cati o~n, to whiichi
the adt of last parliament added new ter-rors. And
left this thould be impuited to a few men, and ac-
counted the nA of a fina~l part of the Church, de-

*Carld. 4- 326. Spots. 395.·

M 3 puties

B oo Ie puties we·re appointed to attend the adjacent rynods,
17HI. and to desire their approbation and concurrence.
~-~E~ AN event happened, a few week~s after, which

lis lenity in~creased the People's fufrpicia~ns of thle King. As
towards he was mnarchling on an expedition againf1 the bor-
them. derers, the three Earls com~ing fuiddenly into his
Oct. 17. presence, offered to fulbm-it themselves to a legal

trial , and James, without committing them to, cuf-
tody, appointed a day for that p~urp'ole. The con-
fpirators prepared to appear withi a formidable train
of their friends and vahIals. But, in th~e mean time,
the Clergy, together with many Peers and Barons,
assemb~ling at Edinburgh, remonfirated against the
K~ing's extreme indulgence w'ith great boldness, and
demanidcd of him, according to the regular course
of juffice, to commit to fiure cuffody persons charg-
ed with the highest acts of treason, who could: not
be brought to a legal trial, until they were ablolved
from th~e cenitures of th~e Church , and to call a
Co~nvention of estates, to deliberate concerning the
method of proceeding against them. At the fame
time they: offered to accompany h~im in arms to thle
place of trial, left flich audacious and powerfuil cri-
minals thould overawe juffice, and dic'tate to thle
judges to whom they pretended to submit. James,
though extremely offended both with the irregula-
rity of their procee~dings, and the presumption~ of
thieir deman~ds, found it expedient to put off 'the
day of triil, and to call a Convention of eflates, in
order to quieit the fears and jealoufics of the peo-
plc. B~y being hum;1oulre d in~ this point, theit fils-
picions began gradiually to abate, and the Chancel-
lor managed the Convention so, artfully, that he
himself, togethecr with a few other memn-ber~s, w~s
impow·ered to pronounc~e a finnl lentence upo~n thec

Nov. 25. confptirators. A~fter1 muich deliberation, they or-

doinleed that the thiree Ear is, and thecir associates
thoiuld be exempitet d fr~om all fuirther inqluiry or p~rot

fecution,

fecution, on account of their correrpondence with B oo ie
Spain; that, before the fir~st day'of February, thley~ Ir
thould either fiibmit to the Church, and publickly '593.
renounce the errors of Popery, or remove out of
the Kingdomi that, before the Birit of January,
they thould declare which of there alternativecs they
would e~mbrace; that they thould find forety for
their peaceable demeanour, For the future; and that
if thiey fai led tofitgnify their ch~oice in due ti me, they
thould lole the benefit of this aR of ab~ohrtin, and
remain exposed to all th~e pains of law~ *.

By this lenity towards the consp~irators, James

incurred much reproach, and gained r~o advantage. '594*
Devoted to the Popilh fuperflition, firbminive to
all the didates of their prietts, and buoyied up with
hopes and promires of foreign aid, the three Earls
refused to accept of the conditions, andi continued
their treasonable correspondence with the court of
Spain. A Convention of eflates pronounced them Jan. ts.
to have forfeited the benefit of the articles, which
were offered; and the King required th~em, by
proclamation, to surrender themielves to juffice.
The presence of the Englilh amballador contribut-
ed, perhaps, to thle vigour of there~ poceedingrs. Eli-
zabeth~, ever attentive to James's motions, and im-
puting his reludalnce to punith thie Pop~ifb Lords to
a secret approbation of their designs, had f~en to
Lord Z7ouche to represent, o~nce morre, the danger
to which he exposed himself, by this false modera-
tion - and to require hiim to exercise that rigour,
which~ their crimes, as well as the poftuire of affairs
rendered necet'lary. And though the iteps now ta-
ken by the King silenced all complaints on that hiead,
yet Zouche, forgetfu~l of his ch~arad~er as an ambaf-
iador, enteredl into private negociations with~ flich
of the Scotchi nobles, as dilshpptroverd of the King's
mealitres, and held almost an open correspondence
with Bothwell, who, according to the diual artifice

*Cald. 4- 330. Spotl. 397.

M 4 of

u O OK Of malCCOntents, pretended much follicitude for rer
VIII. forming the disorders of the commonwealth; and

C ~~covered his own ambition with th~e rpecious veil of

59-zeal againf1 those Counsellors, who reitrained the

King from pursuing the avowed enemies of the Pro-
teltant faith. Zouche encouraged him, in the name
of his Miffrefs, to take arms against his Sovereign.

Anewat- RIEANWHILE, the King and the Clergy were
tempt or filled with mutual diftruit: of each other. They
fBoth- were jealous, perhaps, to excess, that his affeations
well's loaned too much towards the Popilb famion , he

fuliped'ed them, without good reason, of prompt-
ing Both~well to rebellion, and even of ~ispplying
hiim with money for that purpore. Little infliga-
tion indeoed, was wanting to rouze luch a turbulent
[p~irit as Bothw~ell's, to any daring enterprize. He
appeared suddenly within a mile of Edindurgh, at
the head of 4oo, horle·. The pretences, by which
hie endeavoured to juff ify this infurredion, were ex-
tremely popular , zeal for religion, enmity to Po-
pery, concern for thle King's h~onour, and for the li--
berties of the nation. James was totally un provided
for his own defence, he had no infantry, and was
accompanied only withi a few horsemen of Lord
Home's train. In this extremity, he implored the
aid of the citizens of Edinburgh, and, in order to
encourage them to a~t with zeal, \he promised to
proceed against the Po~pith Lords with the utmost
rigour of the law. Animated by their Miniffers, they
ran ch~earfully to their arms, and advanced with the
King at thieir head againf1 Bothlwell, but he, not-
withilanding his success in putting to fligiht Lord
Home, whoc had rathly chargled him with a far in-
ferior number of cavalry, retired to Dalkeith~ w~ith
out daring to> attacki the rting. His followers aban-
doned him soon aIfrer, andl dirc~ouraged by 10 many
firecellive disa~ppointments, co~uld never afterwards
be brougtht to vecntuire into thle field. H~e betook~

h imf e 1f

bide~lf to his drual lurking places, in the North of B oo an
En land, but Elizabeth, in compliance with the I,
King's remonfirances, ob aged him to qluit that re--rJ
treat '

No sooner was the King delivered from one dan- Fret

ger, than he was called to attend to another. The cdangers
Po, ifh Lords, in consequence of their negotiation· firom the
with Spain, received, in the rpring, a filpply of mc - Popil~rs
ney fromn Philip. WYhat b~old designs this might in-April 3.
Opire, it was no eafyr matter to conjeature. From
men under the dominion of bigotr y, and w~hom in-
dullgence could not reclaim, thle mott delperate ac-
rions were to be dreaded. The assembly of the
Ch~urchi immediately took the alarm ; remorfitrated
againfl themn with more bitternels than ever; and
unanimoutly ratifmiPl'the se~ntence of excommunica-
tion, pronounced by the lynod of Fife. James him-
self, provoked by their obstinacy and Ingrauitude,
and afraid that his long forbearance would not only
be generally displeasing to his own fubjeats, but giv·e
rife to unfavourable furpicions among the English,
exerted hiimfelf with undufal vigour. Hle onlled a
parliamnent s laid before it all the circt~mflances, and JUne 8.
aggravations of the conrfpiracy; and th~ough there
were but few members parelnt, and several of there
connedted with the conspirators by blood or friend-
thip, he prevalkd on thiem by h~is influen~ce, an1d
importunity, to pronounce the most rigorous fe~n-
tence the law can infic't. T`hey were decl~redl to be
guilty of high treason, and thieir eflates and hoinours
fo~rfeited. At the fame time, flatutes, m~ore revere
than ever, were ennated againf1 the profeffors of the
Poyith Religion.

Holrw to puit this sentence into executio~n, was a

matter of greater dtficulty. Three plowerfull Ea-
rons, cantroned in a part of thle country almaft ir;ce-
Iellible, (blrrounlded with numerous va~las, and
u~pported by aid friom a foreign Prin~ce wrere mo~re

*SPodf. 403. Cald. 4: 359*

tha3n

B o o thian an overmatch for a Scottith Monarch. Noin-

VII treaty could prevail on Elizabeth to advance the

'594· nioney, necessary for defraying the expences of an

expedition against them. To attack them in per-
son, with his own forces alone, might expole him
both to dilgrace and to danger. He had recourse
to th~e only expedient which remained in foch a si-
tuatio~n, for siding the impotence of Sovereign au-
th~ority , he delegated his authority to the Earl of
Argyll, and Lord Forbes, the leaders of two clans
at enmityy with the consp~irators, and gave them a
commilliiion to invcade their lands, and to seize the
cattles whtich belonged to them Bothwell, not-
withila~nding all his hligh pretenflons of zeal for the
Protellent Re~ligion, h~aving now entered into a
close confedrcyr~ wvith thiem, the danger became
evecry day more urging. Aigyil, follicited by the
King, and rouzed by the Clergy, took~ the field at

Bantle ar the h~ead of 7000 men. Huntly and Errol met hint
Gkaelivat. at Glenlivat, with ani army far inferior in number,

but composed chiefly of gentlemen of the low coun-
tries, mounted on horseback, and who brought

Oa. > along with them atrain of field·-pieces. They en-

countered eachi othecr with all th~e fury, which he-
reditary enmity and ancient rivalthip add to undif-
ciplined courage. But the Highlanders, dilcon-
certed by the Birit dilcharge of the cannon, to
which they were little accultomed, and unable to
re~ift the imprefli0n of cavalry, were soon put to
flight. And Argill, a gallant young man of eigh-
teen, was carried by his friends out of the field,
weeping with indignation at their dilgrace, and
calling on them to fland, and to vindicate the ho·
nour of their name *

ON the tfir intelligence of this defe~at, James,

thoruighl obliged tor pawn his jewels in order to raire
money t assembled a finall bodly of troops, and
marched towards the North. He was joined by
the Irwines, Kieiths, Lefleys, Focrbefes, and other

* Cald, .4 408. -t-1 irch. .Mcm. r. r86.

clans

clans at enmity with Huntly and Errol, wh~o hav·- Bo o
ing lolt several of thieir principal followe~rs at Gkln- rl
hivar, and others refusing to bear arms against- the:'`'
King in perso~n, were obliged to retire to thec mocui--
tains. James wasted their lands, put garriions in7
iome of their caffles, burint others, and lidS thle
Duke of Lenox, as his Lieuienalnt in that part o~f
the~ kingdom~, withi a body of men flifficient to re~-
Gtrain thiem from gatherin:g to anly head th~ere, or,
from infesting thle low country. Reduced aIt lai~t
to extreme diffrefs, by thie rigour of the rfedo~n, and
the desertion of their followers, they ob~tained thec
King's permilfon to go beyonid :eas, and gav~e re Popith
curity that they thould necithecr return w~ithout hi L;; ordis dr;-
licence, no~r engageir: in any new intrigues agaii~ vnd " u o f
the Pro~tellant R~eligion, otr the peace of th~e kiil g-dom.,
dom *

By their exile, tranquility w~as re-efltablithe~d in

the North of Sc~otland-, and the firmners and vi-
gour, wh~ichi Jam-es had di~played in his latlt pro,-
ceedings againf1~ th ·m, regained him, in a Sreat
de~grre, th~e confidence of his Protestant fiutjeats.
But, he limnk, in the fame propo~rtion, and soir tie The Ro-
fame realo>n, in the efleem of thle R.,man Cathol- man Ca-
hecs. They ha~d afrerted h~is mother's rightl to th<~ tholics in-
Crown of Engiland with (0 much warmnth, that the\ g a a-
could not with any decency·, re·jea~ his. A~nd th~e Jamecs.
indulgence, w~ith whiich heL affeded to treat th
profelilors of that religion, insp;ired them writh flich~
ho~pes, that th~ey viewed hiis acceflion to thec th~rone
as no undesir-able event. But the rigounr withi
whichl the King: pursued the consp~irators, and the
severe ft latt uts against PopIery to which he hiad
giv·en his codernt, co~nvined themri that theret honres
werec vifzonary; , nd they began to, loo;k about~i ini
<luell oif famne new liacc~elnr, whoen rigohts thecy

migh~ t oppa~Le to hi. Thec Englith Pnpills turned

their eyecs towardis the Earl o~f Essex, who~le gene--
rous miindl, tho~ugh firmly eftablilthed in the P'ro-

*Spotfw. 404. Cald. 37), &c.

tellin t

Boox tellant Faith, abhorred the reverities inflifted in

VI that age, on account of religious opinions. Thoer

'59F· of thle ifme ledR, who were mn exile, formed a

bolder rcheme, and one more faiitable to their litu-
ation. They advanced the claim- of thle Infanta of
Spain,; and Parsons thle Jefuiit publilhed a book, in
whichi, by fulfTe qlotationss from history, by fabu-
louls genealogies, and absurd arguments, inter-
mingled with bitter inveitives against the King of
Sco:s, he endeavoured to prove thle Infanta's title
to, the English Crown to be preferable to his. And
Philip, though involv·ed already in a war both withi
Franice and England, and fe~arce able to defend
the r~emains of the Burtgundian Prov·inces against
the D~utch~ comrmonw~ealth , eall~y grarfed at this
airy payed.t Thle dread of a Spani~h Pretender
to the Crow(n, and the opp,,litin whlich the Pa-
pifts begani to formn againf1 the King's fuccedion,
contrribuited not a little to removet the prejudices of
thie Protestants, and to prep~are the way for thiat
event.

Bothwell BOTHwELL, whole(r name ha~s been 10 often men-
forced to tio>ned as the diflurber of the K~ing's tranquillity,
A7 into andc of thle peace of the kingdom, was now in a
spain. w~retched co~ndition. Abandoned by the Quleen of

England, on account of his confederacy with the
Popith Lords,; excommunicated by the C~hurch for
the fame reason, and deserted, in his diff refs, by
his own followers, he was obliged to fly for fafet y
to Franrce, and thience to Spain and Italy, where,
after renouncing the Protestant faith, he led, many
years, an obscure and indigent life, remarkable only
for a low and infamous debauchery. Thle King,
though extremely ready to s~acrifice the firongeft re-
f~nriment to thle flightre( acknowvledgments, co~uld
ne~ver be loftenedl by his (h~bminlons, nor be induced
to liflen to any in ercemion in hiis behalf.

Twrs year the King loft Chancellor Maitland, an

abLe Miniller, on whom he had long devolved the

*' Winw. hIckm. r. Spodiw. 4o.

whlole

whole weight of public affairs. As James loved him, Roor
while alive, hie wrote, in honour of his memory, a, II
copy ofverles, which, when compared witb the com - s6
poli~ ions of that age, are far from bemng inelegant *. A change

,Soon after his death, a considerable change was in the ad-

made in the adminiffration. At that time, the an miniltta-
nual charges of government far exceeded the King'stsn
revenues. The Qgeen was f ad of expensive a-
miufements. James himse~lf was a firanger to aceco-
noimy. It became neceirary, for all there reasons,
to levy the public revenues with greater order and
rigour, and to huiband them with more care. This
Simportant trust was committed to eight gentlemen
of the law "f, who, from their numbe~r, were called
Gaavi7ns.. The powers vested in them were
ample, and almof1 unlimited. The King bound
himellf neither to add to their number, nor to fLip-
ply any vacancy that might happen, without their
coent~n: and knowing the facility of his own tem-
per, agreed that no alienation of his revenue, no
grant'of a pension, or order on thle treasury, thouldi
be h~eld valid, unless it were ratified by the lub-
scription of five of the commiflioners, all their adts
and decilions were declared to be of equal force
with th~e featences of judges in civil courts; and
in cons qulence of them, and without any other
warrant, any person might be arrefie~d, or th~eir
good·s seized Such extenlve jurifdialon,, together
virth the ablolute difpiofal of the public money,
tlrew the whole executive part o~f the government
i.nol their ha~nds. United among themselves, they
grardually undermined the reft of the King's Mi-
nifte~rs, and seized on every lucrative or honour-
able· office. The ancient servants of the Crown re-

*Spodwr. 4 s .
t Alexander Seaton President of the Semon, Walter Stewart

Commendlator of Blantyre Lord Privy Seal, David Carnegy,
John Linds~ay, Jamnes Elphingiton, Thomas Hamlilton, John Skene
Clerk Regiller, andi Peter Young Elemnorynar.

pined,

Bo a, ~t pined, at beingS obli ged to qu~it their flations to new

men~. The!i favourites, anf young courtiers, muir-

' ired atfn h igs liberahity flinted by

t';eir preferIi:,tionis. And the Clergy exclaime~d a-
gin~ft I;,me o~f th~em as ktnown apocllates to, Popery,
am~i (14we~tced othulrTs of fecrer trlyvo~uring it. They
~c~lrumme their powe·cr, however, n~otwithlitlading; this
gen~crall c;,mbinationn against them ,; and thley owe~d
SIit ntir ly to, th~e ordefr and aeconomy~ whiich they in-
tr >,dilce int~o thle admi:nifii ration of' the finan~ces
by· whichl thie necedaryl~ expences of' government
were moncre eafiCly dcfra.yed, tha~n in any otheor pe-
ri·: c0 of te k·ing') s reig:n *.

Violence Tax1 rumoulr o~f vast preparnuions whlich Ph7ilip
of the n1-\·! Ias 11 to be- car-ryiin on at this time·, tilled bothl

toaniltFrl En a n and Scola~nd wvith- thle dread! of a1 new~ in-
Lords. ·c·ui! nn Jament s to~ok p!roper meatures for the de--

f. nc· of b'ls kingdomn. Eut there did not iciti:,fe the
Zealcr o~f th Clergy, wh-ole fiurliiions of the King's
since~rity bega~n tu revive, andi as he had plermittedd
the wives of th~e banished See~rs to ~vyY thle rents of
their eflters, and to live in their house1s, they
chlarged him with rendering the azi of forfeiture
inerffeetual, by supporting thci avow ed enemies of

M~arch 4.t· he: Protef~~ant faith. The afktmbl v of the Church

tooik unde-r co~nsideration the slate oft the kingdoml,
a~nds havingS appointed n! day of public tf~ing,l: they
fbl-mnly renewedd the Cove'nant, by which thle na-
ti:,n wa~s bouindl to adhiierec to, the Protellant faith~,

I:_i, co~nfi ingr~ of the m: ft eminente Clergymnen, and
of `many B Irons, and gentlcem co~ of diftinetion,
wraited on~l thle K;ing, and la1id befo;re himr a plan for
thez I;·urity· ofthe kii1;;ilgom, and the ~rererv-ation

ofr<igat.ThTy uirtged hlim to approp!ria te the

eilatcs of the banilbedc I r,;ts, as a\ fuind for thie
ma~intenan ce o~f Icolldiers, toi take the firid~let pre-
cau!LticonS T(ul prieVentiin~ iti return of fuiCh· tilrbti-
km~i f uljec~ts i::ua thec clountry -, and to puiltue all who

* Spot!. 4.3, 439.·

1? G

were fulpedted of being their adherents, withi the soon
utmost rigour. ~lII

NOTH(ING. could be more repuignant to the King's 96

schemes, or more dilagreeable to his mnclination, The
than there propolitions. Avers~e through h~is whole Kingr's re-
life, to any courle, where hie expetted opposition m ner
or danger , and fond of attaining his ends, with the n t
charader of moderation, and by the arts of policy, them.
he oblerved with concern the prejludices againit
hi~m whicrh wee gJrowing~ among the Roman Ca-
tholics, and reiolved to make fame atonement
for that part of his conduat, which had drawn on
him their indignation. Elizabeth was now well
advanced in years; her life had lately been in dan-
ger; if any Popith competitor thould arise to dif-
putre his right of falcceiTon, a faftion, so powerfulf
as that of the banilhed L~ords, might be extremely
formidable , and any diviflon among his own sub-
jeats might prove fatal, at a jundture, which would
rejuire their united and most vigorous efforts. In.
flead, therefore, of the additional leverities which
the aiffmbly proposed, James had thoughts of mi-
tigating the punithment, which they already sus-
fered. And as they were surrounded, during their
relidence in foreign parts, by Philip's emiss~aries;
as resentment might difpole them to listen more
favourably than ever, to their suggestions , as del`
pair mighit drive them to still more atrocious ac-
tions; he resolved to recal them, under certain con-
dit~ions, into their native country. Encouraged by
there sentiments of the King in their favour, of
which they did not want intelligence, and wearied
already of the dependant and anxious life of exiles,
they ventured to return secretly into S~otland.
Soon after, they prelented a petition so the King,
begging his permiion to reside at th~eir own houses,
and offering to give Cecurity for their peaceable and
dutiful behaviour. James called a Convention of-
eflates to deliberate on a miatter of iitch imp~ort-
ance, and by thecir adviL·e he granted the petition.

soor So so~on as they were informed of this~, the mem

-1I bers of a comminittee appointed by the bitl affem·-
Is6bly, met at Ediniburgh, and w th all the precipi-

The ramh tancy of fEar, andc of zeal, took\ such refoutuions as
proceed- they though~~t n~ec~effry for th~e safety~ of th~e king-
ings of the dom. Thiey wrrote circuLar~ lettestoT all31 the Pref-
Clergy b teiris in; Sotland , thez w~arned thlem of the a -
ple. pro'actung" dange~r,; they exhorte~d th~em to fbcr up

their peo,,0e to thle dde~nce of their juth ights , they
commaundedd th~em1 to publith, in all the~ir pulpits,
the act of excomnmunicatring the Popith Lords , and
enjineild them to lay all rhofe who were f~ilipteded
of favouing Popery under the fame cenlure, by a
fulmm-ary kcntentce, and withiout oblervin~g the utilal
formalities of tlial. A'nd as th~e danger seemed
toou p~re;ng to wait fo~r thle slated meetings of thle
j udicatories of the Ch urch, th~ey made choice of the
rnocft eminent clergymen in diff~erent corners of the
kingdojm, appointed them to reside conflantly at
Ediniburghi, and to mieet every day w~ith the Mli-
nifters of tha~t c~ity, under thle name of the Stand-
ity Counci'l of the Church, and vefied~ in this body
thle tupreme authority, by ergoining it, in imita-
tion of the anicient Rom~an form, to take care that
thes Chiurch thlould receive no detrimncrt.

THiesE pr-ceedings, no less uniconflitutional thian

unprcuedentied, were manifet~ encroachments on·
thec ro~yal pre~rogative·, and bold flep~s tow~ard~s open
re~b!llon. The~ Kin,'s condfud, howevevr, juftfi~ed
in fumlne degrl-ee (lich exctlfets. His letnity towards
thle Fa. ·its r, fore~pugn ant to the principles of thiat
;!e,: his pea:doning rthe co~nspirators, notwithfland-
ingr repea~~tedl prom'iles to theL contrar~;y , the: refpet
he pafid to I.ad~y f llr tly, whoI( wvas attachedi to the
Ro:mith~ relgicon, nio Iles tha:n hier habfand , his
comrmitting the1( care o~f hiis danughter, the Pr in~crs
Elizabeth, to LaJdy Levingiton, who, was infes~ed
with the fame lispct:iition, the contempt with
wvhich! he tlkedc. cin all ~cdiancils, both~ of thle chaL-

rader

rafter of Minillers, and of th~eir fuindion· , were noor
circuim'ance~s wh~ich might have fil<lk m-inds, not ""'-.
p~rone by nature to jealoury, with fame filipicians ,56
and might hav·e precipitated into, rail c~ounails,
th~ole, whio were far rem-oved from initemperate
zeal. But, however powerfuil th~e motives might
be which~ influenced the Clergy, or ho(wever lau-
dable the end thiey had in view, they conduac~td their
mealitres with no addrers, anid eve·n wvith little pmu-
dence. Jrames dircoivered a fnrtng inc~lination to
avoidl a ruptufre~ with) the Church,, andl jeanlous as
hie was of his prerogative, wocu!r \illinigly h~ave
mader many coI1Cedians for theC fl~jke of peace. E'y
his commnn and, fame olf' the P'riy Cojunlllicers ha~d
an intecrview wirth th~e more mode~rate am n!·r th~e
Clergy, andl enqluired wvhether Hunntly and hiis al-
focia~tes migh:!t no~t, uIpon mak~ing proper acknow-
ledgments~ ,be aga:in receivedl into thle bosom of the
Church, and b~e exemnpted from any further p~u-
nithmenlt, on account of their paii apitlacy and
treaf~ons. Theyi replied, that though the gate of
mercy flood always open for thdie wh~o repe~nted
and returned, yet as there nobhlemen hadc blenn
guilty of idolatry, a crime deservin~g deathl both b~y
thle law of God, andi of man, thle civil magqif rate
could not legally grrant themu a pardon, and( even
thoughl the Chirc~h thould ablolve them~l, it was hiis
duity to, inflidt puninhment up~on themn. Thlis in-
flexibility ini thd~e, wh~o were rrckioned the mioll
compliant of th~e order, filled the K~ing w ith indig-
nation, which the imnprudence and abitiniiacyy of a
private Clergymaln heightelned into rage.

MR. David Black, Aliniffer at St. Andrew's, dil Seditious

coursing inl one of his sermons, accenrdljin to cut duarine
tomn, concerning th~e slate of th~e natis n, adiirmd taught by
thiat ther King~ had permitrted the Pocpi! h Lcrdls to~larck.
return into Sicotlandc, and~ by thatt actoion, hadl dif
coveredi the treachery of h~is own hieart tha;t all
Kings were thc Dev~lsE children , that Satani had

Vo. 1.N nlow,

Vril. England was an atheist; that the judges were mif-

59 creant's andl bribers, the nobility godlers and dege-

nerate, the Privy Counsellors cormorants and men
of no religion, and in his prayer for the Q~een,
he used· there words, WVe must pray for he~r for
famhion lake, but we have no caulc, the will never

Nov. to. do us good. James commandecd himn to be Aum-
The Cler- moned befo~re the Privy Council, to anfiver for f uch
gsedf~pouleedi;tiious exprellions, and the: Clergy, instead of
fence. abandoning him to the punithmen~t, which cisch a

petulant and crminiral a-ittck on hlis itperiors de-
terved, were so imp~rudent as to efpoule his caule,
as if it had bejen the: co~mmon one of thle whole: or-
der. T'he controv·errl c~nc~erning the immunities
of the pulp~it, an~d the rights of the Clergy to testify
against vices of every kind, which had been agi-
tated in 15X4, was now revived. It was pretended,
that w/ith regaird to their tacred funttian, M~iinifters
were fubjea to the Chiurch alone, that it belonged
only to their ecclef~iilical rAperiors to jud~ge of the
truth or faitihood ,f doatrines, delivered in the
pullitl th~at if, uIpon any pretence: whatever, the
King utiirped this jurifdiation, the church woulfd,
fromn thiat mo~ment, fink under se~rvitude to the ci-
vil mlagiftrate, that infle~ad of reproving vice, with
that honest boldness, which had often beeni of ad-
vantage to indiv iduals, and fa~utaryp to the king-
dom, the Clergy would lerni~ to flaitter th~e paions
of thle Prince,, and to c~onu~ive: at thej vice~s of
others, thiat the Kinig's eag~erners to punish the in-
diferetion of a P-rotestant Miniffecr, wh~ile he was toj
ready to pardon the crimes of Po~pilh co-nsp~irators,
called on them to fland on thecir gu1ard, andlr tha:t
now was the time to conte~nd 10< th~eir privileges,
and to prevent any encroachme~nt on thole rights,
of which the chiurch had b~een ini poffellion ever
since the Reformaltion. Influenced by there contifie-

rationls,

rations, the council of thle Chiurch enjocined BlackC So a
to decline the jurifdietion of ther Privy Co~uncil. ~~L
And he, proud of fbich an opiportuniity to dilpi;!y as96-
his zeal, prelented a paper toi that purpole, andi
with the utmost firmnels refufledl to Iplead, or to an-
fiver th~e questions whiich were put to him7. In or-
der to add grearter weight to the~r proceidings, the
council of~ the Church transmitted the dec~linature
to all the Prefbyteries throughout the kingdoim,
and cormmanided ever-y M nifter to fubLecrtbe it, in
teimony of his approbation.

JAMES de~fended his rights with no leTs vigour

than they were attacked. Senlible~ of thie co~ntempnt
under w~hich hiis authoiity mufft fall, if' the cleagy
thouldl be pe~rm~itted, publickly, and wi bi impu~-
nity, to~ calumnniate his mniniffers, and ceven to Ccel-
sure himlet!f, and kno~wing~, by foirme·r texamptlc·,
whatr une~qual repa~rati;, n for tha] oilLn~ces he mijiht
expett fromn the judicatories of thie churchi, ie
urged on the inquiry into B~lack's conduct, and if-
ibied a proclamation, c:ommanding the members
of the counc~il of the church to lea~ve Edinbw;gh,
and to return to their own partihes. Black, in-
flead of fr~bmitting, renewed his declinlature, and
the council, in defiance of the pro)lamation,, de-
clared, that as thry met by the aulthoi;Tty of th~e
c~hurch, obedience to it w:!s a duty still mor,;e sacred,
thaln that whichi they owe~d to, the Kin~g himfnelf.
The Privy council, notwithft.:nding Blaick's r~e-
fulling to plead, proceeded in the trilll and, after
ai solemn inquiry, pronounced h~im gulty of the
crimes of wh~ich he had been ac~culed ; , bt re~ferred
it to the King, to appoint what puinithment he
thould thtffer.

MI AN while, many endeavours were used to

bring matters to accommnodation~. Almott every
day produced rome new fchleme of reconcileme~nt
but through the King's fickleners, rthe obstinacy of
the Clergy, or the intrigues of the couirtiers, they
all proved ineffeltual. Both parties appealed to the

Nz people,

EooK PEOPkC, and by reciprocal and exaggerated accura-

,V ll. ionls, en~deavoured to render each other odious.
1596. Inio'lence, t'edinion, treallon, were ther crimes withi

wvhichl James charged the Clergy; whiile th~ey made
the pullpt~s rebL~und with comp~laints of' his exceive
lenity towards Papiifits, and of the no less excellive
rigour, with w~hich het oppress~ed th~e efla~blithed
Church. Exasperated by Iheir bold inveaives, hec,
at lalt, fentencedl Black to retire beyond thle river
Spey, and to reside there during his pleasure, and
once more co~mmandinlg the membeirs o~f the fland-
ing counc~il to depart from Edinburgh, he req~uired
all the M/inife-rs in the king~domn to fubkcribe a
bunld, obSliging;i themselves to submit, in th~e CEme
mannll e~ a1s other flibjects, to the jurifdiAlon of thle
c~ivil cou~rts, in m~atters of a civil nature.

A tumult TasH1 dcli~five m~eai;bre exuched·c all the violent
in an~~n- pallions, whichi posers dilhappoint d Isaiion·; and
burgb- de~eds no less violent immediately fo~llowed. These

mnuff be imputed in part to th~e artifices of fame
courtiers, who expected to resp advantage from-
the calamtties of their c~ountry, or who hoped~~ to
leiflen the authority of the Octavians, by ingag~ing

the~y informed the Kinl: thiat the citizenis of Edin-
burgh~ were under armns every niLght, and had
plantedl a (1ron~g guard round the boul-hs o~f thecir
minifiers. Jamecs, in order to, yut a flop :o this
ima~ilnary imbitl on1 his go)verlnm. nt, [Inued a pro-
clal;;:innl, commaimnding twenity fou~r of th;e pri;n-
cipal cinlzens to kiave thle towvn, withjn fix hncurs.
On1 the o~tner hiand, thecy w5rote to thle Mnliffiiers,
adviling th:·m rto look~ to theitr ow~n Exifety, as

With~ thec King, andl had bee~n the; authorT of thle 1e-
vere proclamati;on againfri theL citizen~s of Edin-

bugh*.They~j doubred nou more of thie truth of

t' is

* T`hough m~atte~rs were l~lindtroufl aggravnted~ by prrfons,

who w~ithed both palrties to pudu~e violent incalurca i neither of

tb e r

thiis intellige~nce, thian the King had done of that Boo w
whijch he received, and fell as blindly into thle~L~LI
feiare. The letter came to their hiands, juff· as rS96.
One of their number was going to mount thle pul-
pit. Th~ey resolved that he thould acquaint the Dec. s7-
people of their danger, and he painted it, with all
the ifrong co~lours, whiich men naturally employ,
in deferibing any dreadful and initant calamity.
When the f'erman was over, he desired the nobles
and gentlemnen to aiffemble in the Little ChurchG.
Thle whole multitude, terrified at what they had
heard, crowded thither, they promired and vowed
to Rtand by the Church; th~ey drew up a petition
to the King, craving the red re~s of those g~rievances,
of which the Clergy complained, an~d beleeching
hiim to de~liver them from all fuitu:e ap~prehecnfions
of danger, by removing fuich of his Counlnellors,, as
w~ere known to be enemies of the Proteitant reli-
gion. Two Peers, two Gentlemlen, two Eurgeffes,
and two Ministers, were appointed to prerent it.
The King happened to be inl the great hall of the The King
Tolbooth, where the court of fei~on was fitting.ia danger.
The manner in7 which the petition was declivered,
as well as its contents, offended hiim. He gave
an hauighty reply , the petitioners insisted with
warmth , and a promiscuous multitude prefling
into the room, Jamies retired abruptly into another
apartment, and commanded thle gales to be LGme
behind him. Thie deputies returned to the multi-
rude, who were it011 assembled, anud to whiom a mi-
nifter had been readling, in thecir ablence, the itory
of Haman. When th~ey reporte~d that thie King
,had refused to lilten to their petitions, the Church
was filled in a moment withi noiife, threartnings,

there reports were altogether defitute of foundation. As their
Mc/inilters were fuppoled to be in danger, Goine of the more zea-
lous citizens had dectermiined to defend themu, by force of arnna.
Birch. Mem. 2.swo. Huntly had been privately in Edinblurgh,
where he had an interview, if' not with the King, at leadL wubh
some of hiy MVipnilers, Birch. lbid. 239o.

N 3 excerations,

BooK eXecCFMIODS, and all the outrage and confusion of
VIII. a popular tumult. Some called for their arms,
1596. lome to bring out the wick~ed Haman; others

cried. thle i[word of the Lord and o~f Gideon, and
nkr:a in ut n i:h~ the mos1t furious impetuosity, fur-
rounirdedl the Talboo:th, thr-eatening the Kinlg him-
self, and deman:;ding~ some of his Counsellors whom
they namied, that they m;ght tcar them in pieces.
The m~aiffrates o~f the city, patrly by authority,
pa~rtly by force, endeavouredc to qluell thle tumult ,
th~e Kiing attempted to sooth the m;!lecontents, by
prom"iinig to receive th~eir petitions, w·hen prelented
in a r; gular malnner - the M~iniflers, sensible of
their owMn rathnefs in kindir g fuich a flame, fe-
co~nded bo h, and the rage oft the populace, sub-
fidingJ as '·Idde~nly as it hiad risen, they all dispersed,
andl the Kin~g returned to the palace, happy in
having efeaped from an7 infuirrection, which, though
the inflantaneo~us an~d uncocncerted eff~ed of popu-
lar fury, had exposed his life to imminent danger,
and w as confider e~d by him as an unpardonable as-
fro~nt to his authourity *.

As soon as he retired, the leaiders of the malecon-

tents assembled, ini order to, prepare their petition.
Thle F.u-nith-ment of the Popilh L~ords, the removal
of thole Counltllors, whlo were flifpedled of favour-
ing their perfilus or opinions, the repeal of all the
late acts of couincil, lubverfive of the authority of
th~e Chuirch, tog~eithr with an ac' approving the
pr~oceredings~ of the flainding crouncil, wecre the chief~
,f' thteir dtrmand~is. )\ue thle King's indignatiocn was
ftl i. f h~igh, tha;t the dleputies, chlecln for that pur-

qu~ells wh Iichl could not f~ill of kincdling his rag~e a-

He leavesicv new. Ikfie next mcorlning, Jam~es, with all his

and pro- Othecr courts (·Fj ulile, we~re requilr red to lave a city,
ceeds with where it was no, lonoer conbl; ecnt eit her w it h the~ir
re rir - * Spotfw. 47, &c. Cald. 5- 4, &~c. 1irch. Memi.2. 235-
cannaco. lately,

saf~ety, or their dignity to remain,; and the noblemen B oo ii
and barons were commanded to return to th~eir own I.
houses, and not to reassemble without the King's r596
permillion. The vigour, with wh~ich the King adt-
ed, ~truck a damnp upon the (pirits of his adverfa-
ries. The citizens, sensible how much they would
f~uffer by his ablen:ce, and the removal of the courts
of juffice, repented already of their conduaf. The
MIiniffers alone resolve~d to maintain the contest.
They endeavoured to prevent the nobles from dif-
perting; they in~flamed the people by violent invec-
tives againf1 thle King, th~ey laboured to procure
subscriptions to an allociation for their mutual de-
fence; and consc-ious what luffre and power the
jundtian of famne of the greater nobles would add to
their caiure, the M~initlers of Edinburgh wrote to
Lord HaImihron, th~at the people, moved by the
word of God, and provoked by the in7juries offred
to th~e Church, had taken arms; that many of the
nobles had determined to proted~ the Protaltant Re-
ligion, which owed its eftablirhment to the piety
and valour of their ancertors; thiat they wanted on-
ly a leader to unite them, and to inspire them with
vigour; that his zeal for the good cause, no less
than his noble birth, entitled him to that hono~ur:
Thecy conjtured hiim th~erefore not to dilappoint their
hopes and with~es, nor to refulre the luffering Chiurch
that a~id which the to much needled. Lr a
mih~on, initead of complying withi their desire, car-
ried the letter direfltly to the King, whom this new
in silt irri tated to fiuch a degree, thiat he commanded
theL malgiffrates of Edinburgh instantly to ireize their
Minificrs, as manifft-i incendiaries, and encouragers
of rebtili· *n. The magiffrates, in order to regain
the K~ing's favo~cur, were preparing to obey , and
th~e 14im:f!ers, \r saw no other hiope of safety, fled
tow.:rds Enigland * in

THI is unliiccelfiful infitrrecion, inflead of ovcr- hunables

turning~, <flablithed thle King~'s auth~ority. Thlolether pOwe

of the

*Spotlw. 45r. Cald 5. 126. C~hurch.

~N .e Con Jan. 3-

Bo o concerned in it were confounded and dispersed.

V1 And the reft of hiis fisbjcEts, in order to avoid f~ui-
..91 picion, or to gain hais favour, contended who thould

' be mot: forward to execute his vengeance. A Con-

vention of ellt;:es being called, pronounced the late
infurreaTion to be high treason, ordained every Mi-
niffer to ~irbler-ibe a declaration of h~is fubmillion to
th~e King's juriidiation, in all matters civil and cri-
miinal,; imp~owevred magiffrates to commit,, inflantly,
to prita~n any Mlinift-er, whlo in h~is sermons, thould
utter any indecent rcfkd·~iians on the K~ing's condudt;
prohibi ied any Ecclefiiaftical judicatory to meet,
witho(ut thle King's licence, commanded that no
perfun (hou~ld be cleated a magiff rate ~f Edinburgh,
fo~r thle f~lloue, withlout the K~ing's approbation ; and
thiat, in thle mean time, thle prelent magiffrates
thould either difcovrer, and infliat condign punith-
mnent on thle authors of thie late tumult, or the city
itself thould be fu~bjedted to all the penalties of that
treasonable a~tion *.

Abridges A HM E w ith t he authority of the le decrees,James
the privi- resolved to cruth entirely the mutinous Cpirit of his
JfegePnobfhe Cubjis.~s As the Clerg had, hitherto, derived

Ei- th~eir chief credit and fIrength from the favour and

burgh. zearl of the citizens of Edinburgh, his sirs1 care was

to hiumble them. Though the magiflrates submit-
ted to him in the most abjeat terms, though they
vindicated thiemfelves, and the~ir fe~llow citizens,
fromi the molt diflant intentio~n of violating his roy-
al person or autho~rity , though, after the firidteft
fe~rutiny, no circumilnrces that could fax on them
thle filfpicion of pr-emeditrated rebellion had been diT-
covere~d, tho~ug~h many of thec nolbles, and fi-ch of
the~ clcrgy ;Is flill retained a7ny degoree of favour, in-
tc·! cededc I to their be ha~lf; , eithcr ack nowled gments,
no:r initer.','jcedons, wereC of th~e least avail -f. The

Feb. 28. Kinga continueld ineCxrable, thle city was declalred to

*Cald. j. 147. ( lbid~. <. I 49.

ha~ve

·have forfeited its privileges as a corporation, and to aco o
be liable to all the penalties of treason. The capital I1
of the kingdom, deprived of magiff rates, deserted ~
by its miniffers, abandoned by thle courts of juffice,
and prolcribed by the king, remained in desolation
and delpair. 'The courtie~rs even threatened to raze
the city to the foundation, and to eredt a pillar
where it flood, as an everlalting monument of the
King's vengeance, and of the guilt of its inhabitants.
Ait last, in compliance with Elizabeth-, whio intcer-
poled in their favour, and moved by the continual
follicitations of the nobles, James ablolved the ci-
tizens from th~e penalties of law, but at the fame March 2 .
time, he Itripped them of their most important pri-
vileges; r, tey were neither allowed to eledt their
own magiffrates, nor their own miniffers; many
new burdens were imposed on them, and a great
fulm of money was exaded by way of peace offer-
ing *.

JA M S was, mean whiile, equally alliduous, and New re-

no less fliccefsful, in circumscribing the jurifdii~tion sylations·
of the Church. Ernerience had discovered that to~th re-·
attempt th~is, by aats of parliament, and featencesihurch.
of privy council, was both ineffeiiual, and odious.
He had recourse, now, to an expedient more artful,
and better calculated for obtaining his end. The
Ecclefiaical judicatories were composed of many
memnbers; the majority of th~e clergy were extremel-
ly in~digent, and unprovidedi of legal flipends; the
min~iffers ini th~e neig'hbou rhood of Edinbuirgh, not-

~ith~flanding the parity eflabtilhed by the Prefb~y-
teria-n g~overnment, had aliamedl a leading in thle
Chulrch,, which filled thecir b~rethre·n with enivy,
velyey numcrojus body of men·I is iiEfeeptii, le of Aud-
den aIndI tong imprclemons, ani hiable to be influ-

nCe;~d, corruptedf anf o~verawed. Induced b~y thiefi
co mbl~l erat~rios, Jamecs thiought it poifliblte to gain the
Cilagy, whiom h~e had in; vain aIttemipted to lilhdue.

* Spotdw. 434* 444.·

BOOK Proper agents w~ere let to wo~rk all over the king-

domI. ,ln promise~s, flattery, and~ threats were employ-

as97· .c d; the ufiurpario~ns of' thle brethren near the capital

wvere aggravated, the jealouly of their polwer, which
wvas growving in the distant provinces, wa~s augmrent-
ed, and tw~o different General Affemlc~it-s were hield,
in both wvhich~, notwithflanding the zeal and bold-
ners, wherewith a few lead-ng Clergy~men defe~nded
the privileges of the Church, a majo~r-ity declared in
favour of those measures, wh-ic~h wsere agreeab~le to
the King. Many pradices, which~ hiad coninluedd
since the· Reformaition, wvere co~ndemned - many
points of diicipline, which hald hitherto b~een reckon-
ed thered and unc~ontrloverted, were gSiven up ,the
licence, with whic~h minillers dilco:urfed of political
matters, was ret rained , the fr-eedom, wvirh which
they inveighed against p~articular perfonr,, centitred;
featences of lsm mary excommnu nicationl declared
unlawful, the convoking a Genera Al tiffemly, with-
out the King's permtiio~n, pro~hibited ; andl thle right
of nominating m~iniffers, to thle princ~ipal tow~ns,
vteiled in the Crow~n. Thus, the Clergy themse-lves
surrendered priv·ilges, whlich it would have been
dangerous to invade, and vclunitarily ii.bmitited to a
yoke, more intolerab~le th:an any Jamels would ven-
tured to impole by force, whlile. therei whio continu-
ed to oppose his meaicnires, idliead of thecir former
popular topic of' the King~'s vio~lent encroachments
on a jurif~lietion wh·lich didi not, belong to, him, were
obliged to turn the~ir outerics against~ the co~rrupti-
ons of their own ordier *

By thle authoririy of there~ efemb~lies, the Popith

E urls wecre allowed~c to, make· a lublic recan~:tation of
their errors,; were abib>l!!ved from the ICen:ence ofex-
comrmunicatio n , anid rec-cived into the !·llomn of thle
Chuschl. But, not~r man~1y years after, th~ey relapsed
into thecjir fo~rmer error s, we re again reconciled to
the chiurchi of Rn !e, and by thecir ai-ci~lacy j ufifiedc

* Spotlw. 4)33. Cald. 5. (89. 2j33

in fomne degree, the fears and kcruples of the Clergy soo m
with regard to their ablolution. 4si

THE Miniffers of Edinburgh owed to the inter- 57

cenion of there assemblies, the liberty of returning
to their Charges in the city. But this liberty was
clogged in fixch a manner as greatly abridged their
power. The city was divided into diflindt parithes;
the number of Ministers doubled ; persons on whole
fidelity the King could rely were fixed in the new
parithes; and there circumflances, added to the au-
thiority of the late decrees of the Church, contri-
buted to confirm that abrolulte dominion in Eccleft-
aftical affairs, which James poffeffed during the re-
mainder of his reign.

THE King was so intent on new-modelling the

Church, that the other tranfadtions of this period
fearce deserve to be remembered. The O ·tavians,
envied by the other Courtiers, and splitting into
fadlio~ns among themselves, resigned their commis-
sion, and the adminiffration of the revenue return-
ing into its former channel, both the King and the
nation were deprived of the benefit of their regular
and frugal aeconomy.

TOWARDS the end of the year, a parliament wasDec. 19*

held in order to reflore Huntly, and his associates,
to their eflates and honours, by repealing the afTt of
forfeiture pailed against them. The authority of
this supreme court was likewise imployed to intro-
duce a farther innovation into the Church , but con-
formable to the lyfiem whiich thle King had now
adopted, the motion for this purpoie took its rifcEel~T
from the Clergy themflcves. As thez act cF generaltics restor-
annexation, and that eilabllithing thc- P'rc:b terian ed toaleat
government hadl reduced thle few· Bilhops~, wh Io finiiin paria-
flurvivedt, to povterty and contempt - as t hose whoment.
pdneffedl the Abbeycs, and Prio~ries, were mere lay·
men, andt many of them temporal Peers, few o~r
none2: < f thle Ece I l:ief ical orderT rema~ined to, vote in

thle

11 o o thec Crow.n was considerably diminilhed there, and

Vli p roper balan~ce tol the on~er and numbe~r of the

,) no,~~was wa anting. EUnt t he prej udices, thIe nation

hiad coniceived against the name and charadter of
E (hops, were lo vio~lent, that James was obliged,
withl thec utmut,~ care, to avoid thie appearance of a
dcig~n to rrviv·e tha~t order. He prevaikid thecrefore
on the comrmiiicn ap~pointed by last asse~mbly to
coml;plain to thle parlliment, that the Chur1chl was
thec onily bo~dy ;in thle kinigdoml deflitute of its repre-
feariatives in that Iiipre~me court, wrhere it fa~ nearly
conrccern cJ~C ever y order- to ha;ve Iame, w ho were bound
toi de~fend its righ~ts, and to crave that a competent
numbler of` ril Cle~rgy thould be admnitted,, accord-
ing tio anCi:.l nlt cuf10m to a feat the-re. In compli-
an)Ce wh

Uii rit~ rcqueft, an aft was pial`ed, by whlich·

tbut~e ilt InillerTS, on!` whom1~ 1 the ing thouuld conlfer
thle s acant Btlhopirk k~s and Abbeys, were in titled
to a vot~e in pa~rl;;ament, and that the Clerry might
conccivec no jealolou of any encroachment on their~
pril lege~s, it w as rrmirtted to the Gen~eral Aiffembly,
to, dteitrmrrine whlat lpiritual juifun d~ion or auth~ority
in rihe gove:rnmntcil of the~ Churchi t~efe persons

rl'HE Kinig, hiowever, found it no easy matter to

obtann the con~culrnece of- the Ecclefiaical judica-
tories, in wiic~h thet adt of p'arliamecnt met w'ith a
fiterce o,,poi~ition. Thouigh thec Clergy perceivedi
bI >w5 mu~ch Juftrc thiis newv privilege w~ouldJ refleat
u!:on thecir o~rde~r; thloughj they were not insensible
of thle great accelion oft perth~nal pow·er and dig-
nity. whiichi many of thiem would acqu-ire, by be-
in : adlmitted to thec ~ispreme council of the nation,
their; abboiilrrncce of epi~·cop~acy was extreme; and
to, thiat, they I00 ificedl evt.V y consideration of inter-
eft or ambition. All thre King's~ profelionls of re-
gard for ther prelent co~nflitution of the Church, did
niot conlvince thcem of hris Cfmeerity , all thie devices

*Spotfw. 450c. Pal1. I Sth Jac. VI. c. 235.

that

that could be3 inventeld for rtcirain:ng and circum. Boo so
feribing the jurif;liation of thde,r wh~ siue. to be ~vI
raised to this new\ ho(nourT, did no~t dnimimlb the~ir 53
jealouly and fear. Thci r ow n exp~erience ha~d caugh~lt
thiem, with what infinuatinng i~rSI regrel theierarchy!
adtvances, and thoughi admiitted at full wviith or Jef-
rate authoicliy, and under fp~eciour s pretenlllce, s, ho
rapidly it ~extens its domtinioin. "' Vnrndb~ ovri\
this fchemle, said o~ne: of the leadinlg C~lergymen,
wvith wha3t Ccolor:1S ycou please; decck thle ;ntrrder
with thep utmollt art; ulnder all this disguise,. I fee
thc h~orns of hjs mi;tre." The thime lentir-nents pre-
v·ailedc amo~ng many o~f h~is brethlren, anrd induce·- d'
thiem to- re·ject pocwer, and hiono~urs, wiith as muach
zealj, as ever thd~e of thieir order courted th~em.
Many, hiowve:-r, were alluired bry the hopes of' pre-
ferment; the K~ing himfcif and hiis Miniffers em-
ployed thec time arts, whichl thecy haid trie~d lo luc-
celsful!y lalt year; and after long debates, and March 7.
much opi!/,ition, the General Affembnly declared
thiat it was, lawful for I~iiniffers to accept of a feat
in, parliamernt; th~at it wou'd be highily beneficial to
the Church, to have its reprefentaities in that fu-
pireme Ccourt; and that fifty one pertons, a numbler
n,·arly equal to thiat of the EccI~leaftics, who w~ere:
ancie-ntly called to pailiament, thould be choG ln
from among the Clergiy for that purpole·. The1!
manner of thfei r lection, togethier w ith the powas
to be ve~sted in thecm, were left undec~ide~d for th~e
prelent, and furnithed mnatter of~ fuiture delbitera-
(lant .

As thle profpeft of succeeding~ to th~e Crow~n of ri 999

England dr~ew ncarer, James multip~lie~d precauti(on, Janu-s en-
;n Ordler to rlkller It crrtOin. S WSGe 1deavoursr

. with foUc-

mnany o~f thre P'rinces o~f Germ-any by hiis mani:, e cerbrogain
bec lent am~bafaldorss extrraordinarry to, their love enti 8 panry in
Ccolr'ts, inl ordfer to, explain thle julinefs of hris t ie Enc IlglandJ.
to thie Englt throne, and to delire thieir affitta~c~e,
if any competitor Ibould arile to disp-ute his un.-

* Sport. 430. Cald. 5- 278.

doubted

Boo = doubted rights. There Princes readily acknow-

LH. ledged the e quic of hris claim, but thle aid they

could atford himn was difiant and feeble. At the
fame time Edward Brulce abbot of Kinlofs, his
ambaffadlor at the Englith court, follicited Eliza-
beth, with the utmost warmth, to recognize his
title by some public deed, and to deliver her own
fubjeds from the calamities, which are occalloned
by an uncertain or dirputed fiscceflion. But age
had fire~ngthe~ned all the pamlons, which had, hi-
therto, induced Elizabeth to keep this great quel-
tion obicure, and undecided , and a general and
evasive answ~er was all that James co~uld obtain. As
no imprelilion could be made on the Queen, the am-
baffadour was commanded to found the difpolition
of her fisbje~ts, and to try what progrels he could
make in gain~ing them. Bruce po~iletred all the ta-
lents of fecrt-cy, judlgment, and addrers, requilite
for condudting a negaciation, no less delicate, than
important. t\ Miniffer of this chlarader was inti-
tied to the confidence of the Englith. Ml~any of
the highest rank unbofomed thiemfelves to him with-
out reserve, and gave hiim repeated affulrances of
their rerc~ution to asse~rt his m;;ffer's right, in oppo-
fition to every pretender *. And as leveral pam-
phlets were di~perfed, at this time in England, con-
taining obje-tions to his title, James employed some
learned m~en in his kingdom to anfiver there cavil-
lers, an~d to explain thle adivantages which would
res~ult to both kingdoms, by the union of the
Crowns. There· bookls were e~agerly read, and con-
tributed not a little to reconcile the English to that
event. A b~ook publithed this year, by the King
himnlrlf, produced an effed- flill more favourable.
It was intitled Bfir~l,·onr Doronr, and contained pre-
cep~ts concernin~g the art of government, addreifed
to Psiince Henry hiis son. Notwirthilanding the
great alterations and refincements in national raite
finrce thiat time, we mutt allow this to be no con-

Johnak. 24:. temptible

temptible performrance, and not to be inferior to the B o or
works of mott cotemporary writers, either in pu- VIII.
rity of flyle: or jutinels of compoh~tion. Even the L599-
vain parade of crudition with which it abounds, S9
and which now. disgusts us, railed the admiiraion of
that age, and as it was filled with those general
rules, whichi Ireculative authors deliver for render-
in~g a nation hall:y, and of which James could dil-
course: with great p~laulibility, though often incapa-
ble of puitinig therm in pradt~ice, the English con-
ceived an high opinion of his abilities, an:d < xpec~ed
an incredeft of natriona; l honour and pro~tl:erity, ur~der
a Princ~e To profoundtly Hailled in p.olircis, nwh
ga~ve luchi a1 (Jecian~en both~ of' his wildo~m, andc of
his love to hib peoi)cl (. -1 Camd.

THE eencl ~f` Eng~,ilandIs rntiments con:cerni; g spotCp;7.

reprated tremons,;~ his relltciin, C- aton, th~e Poptilh
Archb~ilbopi of Gllil~gow,, whoi had~ fled outr ofi Scot-
land at ther time o~f thle Reforrmaioi~n, to thle poiikl-
sion of thu ctenl oralties of thatC benefice, the~ ap'-
pointing; him hniis Ambaffidor at the co~urt of F>7 Jnce ;
the aIpplaule he beflowed, inl the B.;iilic(on Doran,
on tlole wh~o adhecred to the beet n hiis mother,
Elizabeth considere~d as 10 mnny indications of a
mind alienatedl froml the p·rotitdllt religioin; and
fuq~iefted that he wfouki ICoun revolt fromn the pro,-
feion of it. Therfe futl~ic~ionls fieemed to, be fuLlIy
conlfirmed, by al discove~ry which~ calme from thle Accures
Matifer of Gray, who resided ait thant time in Itaily., 0oni
and who, rathier thlan fuffe~r his intr-iguing rpirit toc\with the
be idle, dermea:ned himnlelf so far as to act as a Ilpy Pope.
fo~r thle Engrrlilh cou,:rt. He Cconv·ceye to EiZabethl
the copy of~ a lette~r, wriitten by Ja~mes to, Pope Cle-
ment VIll. in: whlich thie King, af'ter manliy exp~ref-
fions of regard for thant pontiff, and ofI graiillude
fo~r hiis favair-s, declaredi h~is firm rclolutionl to tr~eat
thie Riomnan Catholics wvith indiulge~nce , and, inl or-

der

II oOnK der tO render the intercourse between the court of
VIII. Ro~me and Sco~tland more fire unt and familiar, he

i-; icuecd rlhe Polpe to promo~te D~rummond, Bi~hop
of Va~iz In, a Scotsman, to thie dignity of a Cardi-
nal *. Eizabeth, who, lad rec~eive~d, by anothier
channnel -t, Icome impeded-~ intenlgence of this cor-
Irefpondence·, was filled with just furprize, and im-
med'~iately' dlifparched-- Bowes into Scotland, to in-
cjuire mo~re furlly intoc- the truth of the matter, and
to, rep:rochni Jamens for an action 10 unbecoming a
Pi~rote:; jm pinlce. HIe was no less affonilbed at the
aCC:; lationl aind wEvith a confidence, wh~ich nothing
b~ut thIe clm~;l; ou rner·s of in noce nce co~u d infpi re, at-
f;·1_ firme the whlc· to be a mecre cailucmny, and. the
lerttr irl iif to be2 Nc·red by h~is ne~nmies, ont purpose
to bring: hisi fincentl y in Religion to be rlufpederd.
El hi; n -itan the Slcretary of slate den·~ied thle mat-
te~r win equl

cq o r!=mni~ty. It came to b, kno~~wn by

avtry (1nguLarI; au~Cdient ,l, wich happ·enedCJ thme
ye~ars afte-r, tha;t th~e inlformation wh~ich Elizabeth
had rtectived wa~s well foulnded, tho;ugh at thet famne
tim~e the Kling's de~clraraions of h~is own ininocence
were pc-rl Letly ~conlflent with tnruth. Cardinal Bel-
lar-minet, in a re;ply whiich he pub~liithd to a conltro-
verfial treaufe;, of which the King~ was the author,
acculed hiim of h~aving~ abndrconerd the favourable
fe~ntimnents wYhIChI he h~ad once entertained of ;he
Roman C~atholic religion, and as a proof o~f this
qluoted his letter to Clemen: VIHI. It was impoml-
ble, any longetr, to believe this to be a fia~ion , and
it was a maitter too delicate to be paiffed over with-
out firic' inqul~iry. Jamnes immediately examined
Elphingito~n, and his confeflion unravelled the whole
mlyftery. He acknowlediged that· he had fbuffled in
thiis letter amon6 oth'er papers, wvhich hec laid before
thie Kiing to be signed, who, fiidpecting no fiich de-
ccit, rub~leribedf it togeth~er with the relt, and with-
out knowing what it contained; that hie had no
otherT motive, however, to this adtion, but zeal for

*, Cald. 333. *) Winw. Mem. vol. i* 37, Ss.

his

his majefty's service; and, by flattering the Roman B oo sc
Catholics with hopes of indulgence under the VIu.
Ki ng ·s government, he imagmned that he was pa- 5Z99-
vang the way for his more eary accefion to the
English throne. The Privy Council of England
entertained very different se~ntiments of the Se-
icretary's condud~. In their opinion, not only the
King's reputation had been exposed to reproach,
but his life to danger, by this rath impoflure; they
even imputed the gun-powder treason to the rage
and disappointment of the Papifts, upon finding
that the hopes which this letter inspired were frufr-
trated. The Secretary was sent a prisoner into
Scotland, to be tried for high treason. His peers
found him guilty , but, by the Qugeen's intercel-
Gon, he obtained a pardon *.

Accoa r w~e to the account of other hiflorians,

James himself was no firanger to this correspond-
ence with~ the Pope ; and, if we believe them, El-
phirigfton being intimidated by the threats of th~e
Engliih council, and deceived by the artifices of
the Earl of Dunbar, concealed 10me circumitances
in his narrative of this tranfa~tion, and falfified
others; and, at the expence of his own fame, and
with the danger of his life, endeavoured to draw a
veil over this part of his mafter's conduat-t.

But whether we impute the writing of this let- Jmameat

ter to the Secretary's officious zeal, or to the King'sgreat pam.s
command, it is certain, that, about this time, to gam the
James was at the utmost pains to gain the friend- Catholics.
thip of the Roman Catholic Princes, as a necessary
precaution towards facilitating his accellion to the
Englilh throne. Lord Home, who was himself a
Papist, was entruffed with a Cecret commiflion to
the Pope ), the Archbishop of Glalgow was an
adtive infirument with thos~e of his own religion 4.
The Pope expressed such favourable sentiments
both of the King, and of his rightc to the Crown of

* Spot. 456, 907. Johnit. 448. -t Cald. vol. v. 322. vi·
'47- $ Winw. Mtem. vol. ii. sy. 5 Cald. vol. vi. '47-

Vos.. 11. O EngSland,

yea; ;s fter, to acknow,\ ledge thie cJligation in a pub-
heu malnner * Sir Jamnes Lin~dsay made great pro-
greis ini gainingS rie Engilh Papifts to ackno~wledge
his Ma~jdliy's title. Of all1 thehe intrigues Elizabeth
rec~icive obfeure hiints, from ditlerent quarters.
Thec ore;i imp~erfealyl the knew, the more violently
the2 fulpe:cted the King's dei~gns, and the natural
jcatoutj* of he=r rtemper increating with age, the ob-
ibrvecd his condiua with greater f u!icitudet than ever.

600.r THe qualioins with regard to the clecaion and

M~arch as. power of the- re ~rcfentatives of thec church, were
H-is regu-
lations finalliy aiccide-d th~is year, by the General Ass~embly,
w~ith re- whic~h met at M/ontrore. That place was cholen,
garci to as m~oll convenient for the miniffers of the north,
rhurch. amon~g wh~lom the Kinlg's influence chiefly lay. And

although great numnbers relotrted from the northern
provinces, and thle King employed his whole inte-
reft, and the authority of his own presence, to gain
a m;a'ority, thle folIlowving reguilations were with dif-
fkcul~y agreed on. That thle General Assembly fball
recomm~end fix persons to every vacant benefice,
which, gave a title to a feat in Parliament, out of
whom thle King thall nominate one; that the per-
son l;b eleated, after obtaining his feat in Parliament,
thall netither propoie, nor content to any th~ing there,
that may affedt the interest of the church, ·ith'out
fi~ecial inflrudtia-ns to that: purpore - that hie thall
be anfiverable for his condual to every General AL-
fem~bly , and fubm~nit to its cenflire, without appeal,
uponi pain of infamly and excomlmunication, th~at
he thall diicharge the duties of a Paffor, in a parti-
cula~r congreganoi-n , that he (hall not ufuirp any ec-
clcfiallticalJl jurifdidion superior to tha~t o~f his oiher
brethlren, that if thec church inflict on hiim the cen-
fiire of' deprivation, h~e thall, there~by, forfeit his feat
in Parliament, thiat: be thall annually resign his com-~
million to the General Assembly, which may be re-
itored to him, or not, as the Assembly, with the

* Cald. vol. v. 604.

Kin g's

King's approbation, thall judge mott expedient for Bo o 6
thei good o~f the Church *. No~thing could be more, Vllt-
repugnant to the idea o~f Episcopal government, 160s.
than there regulations. it was not in consequence
of rights derived fro~m their c:ffice, but of powers
confe~rred by a commimion, that ecclfr~aftical per-
A;ns were to be admitted to a feat in Parliamnent;
they were the reprefentarives, not the liiperiors of
the: clergy. Destitute of all spiritual authority, even
thecir civ·il jurisdiction was temporary. James, how-
ever, flattered himself that they would loon be able
to (hake off there fetters, and gradually acquire all
the privileges which belonged to the epilcopal or-
der. The clergy dreaded thle fame thing. And,
he contended~ for, and they oppofetd the nomina-
tion of there commillioners, not so much on ac-
count of the powers then velled in them, as of thole,
to whiich it was believed they would soon attain "r.

DURING this summer, the kingdom enjoyed an

unusual tranquillity. The clergy, after many firug.
gles were brought under great f~ubjedion, the Po-
pith earls were reffored to their estate~s and hionours,
oy the authority of Parliament, and with the con-
sent of the church; the reft of the nob~les were at
peace among thenlfelves, and obedient to the royal
authority a when, in the midst of this Cecurity, the
King's life was expoled to the utmoit danger, ~byGowry's
a conspiracy altogether unexpe~ted, and almof1 in- confpi-
explicable. The authors of it wh~ere John Ruthvenracy.
Earl of Gowry, and his brother Alexander, the
sons of that Earl who was beheaded in the year
t584. Nature had adorned both th~ere young mnen,
especially th~e elder brother, with many accomplith-
ments, to which education had addled its molt ele-
gant improvements. More learnled, than is usual
among perlons of their rank; more religious, th-an
is common at their age of life a generous, brave,
popular a their countrymen, thr from~ thinking them
capable of any atrocious crime, conceived the most

*Spotfwv.4653>47, Gald. vol. v. 368. t Spotfw. 444.

pa languinle

Bo on langu~ine hopes of their early virtues. Notwith-

Vill- flanding n1t theret noble qlualities, tome unknown
.·600 motive engagedl them in a cont) iracy, whlich, if we

Sadhere to thle accolunt commonly recetived, muff

be tranfmnitted to protterity, as one of- the most
w~icked, as well as one of the worit concerted, of
w·hich hiffory makes any mention.

ON the fifth of August, as the King, who re-

sided durinr: the hunting season in his Palace of
Falklanld, waBs going out to his fponrt early in the
morning;, he was accosted by MLr. Alexander Ruth-
ven, who w~ith an air of great importance, told the
King, that the eveniing before he had met an un·-
known man, of a flifpicious acpedt, walking alone
in a bye path, near his brother's hioue at Perth, and
on searching him, had found, unider his cloak, a
pot filled with a vast quantity of foreign gold, that
he had immediately seized both him and his trea-
sure, and without communicating the matter to
any person, had kept him confined and bound in a
solitary house, and that he thoughit bt his duty to
impart fiich a singular event, first of all to his Ma-
jefty. James imnmediatey fluipedted this unknown
person to be a trafficking priest, fispplied with so-
reign coin, in order to excite new commotions in
the kingdom, and resolved to impower the Magi-
firates of Perthi to call thle perlon before them, and
inquire into all the circuimftances of the flory.
Ruthven violently opposed this reroluition, and with
many arguments urged the King to ridedireedly to
Perth, and to examine the matter with his own
eyes. Mean while the chace began; an~d James,
notwithitanding his parilin for that amnurement,
could not help ruminating on the firanigenefs of the
tale, and on Rtuthven's importunity. At last, he
called him, and promiled when the spo~rt was over,
to set out for Perth. rThe chace, hiowever, conti-
nued long, and Ruthven, who all the while kept
close by the king, was flill calling on him to make
~aite. At the death of. the Buck, he would not

allowu

allow James to Rtay till a freth horse was brought Boocr
him; and observing the Duke of Lenox and the 11
Earl of Mlar preparing to accompany the King, he r6co.
entreated him to countermand themi. T'his James
refused , and though Ruthven's impatience and
anxiety, as well as the apparent perturbation in his
whole behaviour, railed iame frupicions in his
mind; yet his own curiosity, and Rurthven's folici-
tations, prevailed on him to set out for Perth. WVhen
withmn a mile of the town, Ruthlve~n rode fo~rward
to inform his broth-er of the King's arrival, though
he had already dispatched two mellengers for that
purpolCe. At a little di~tance from the towcn, the
Earl attended by several of the citizens, met the
King, who had only twenty perso~ns in his train.
No preparations were made for the King's enter-
tamnment, the Earl app~eared penfave and embar--
raffed, and was at no pains to atone, by his coure
tefy or horpitality, for the bad fare with which he
treated his guelts. When the King's repast was
over, his attendants were led to dtne in another
room, and he being left almost alone, Ruthven
whispered him, that now was the time to go to the
chiamber where the unknown person was kept,
James commanded him to bring Sir Tho~mas Erf-
kine along with them, but, inf~ead of that, Ruth-
ven ordered him not to follow : and condudting the
King up a flair-cafe, and then through several
apartments, the doors of which he locked behind
him, led him at last into a small study, in which
there flood a man clad in armour, and with a sword
and dagger by his fide. The King, who expedied
to have found one disarmed and bound, started at
the fight, and enquired if this was the person - but
Ruthven matching the dagger from the girdle of
the man in armour, and holding it to the King's
breast, "L Remember, said he, hlow unjuitly my fa-
" ther fuffered by your command, you are now
" my prisoner; r, bmit to my diiporal without re-
" Istance, or outcry, or this dagger thall inltantly

G 3 " avenge

13 oo it C avenge his blood."' Jatmes ex~poltulated withr
VIll. Ruthven, in treated, and fAt~teredi him. ~The man,

,, whom he folund in the fludyi), floo~d, all the w hile·,

trembhlng, and dfilinayed, wnholcut courage enther to
aid thec King, or lo re~oind his aggressor. Ruthvey
prorctatd that ;f ther King ra;fed nol outcry, his life
thoulid be Iide, and m Ioved 'oy foinie unkinownl rEa-
son, retired in or-der to, call his brothler, leaving to,
thec man in armouICr th care of th~e King, whiomr he'
boulnd by oath, not to mak~e any noise during hiis
able~nce.

W~H1 IE the King was in th-is dange~' rous ficuiatio~n,

his attendants grow~ ing impa;Etient to, know whit~her
he hiad retired, one o~f Goiury's attendants entered
th~e room·1 hiafily, and to~ld thecm that thle King h~ad
jul1 rode away towiards Falkland. All of th~emn
rushe~d out into thle fireet , an~d the Earl, in th~e ut-
mnott hurry, called for th~eir hockis. But, by this
timne, his brothecr had returned to thle King, and
fiveating tha~t niow thiere was no rem~edy, he be-
ha~ved to die,; offrc~ed to bin~d hiis hands. Unarmed
as Jamen~s was, hec (cocrnal to, thbm~it to that indigS-
nity , andi closing wvith thez ;fallhiln, a1 ferce firug-
g~le· enlued. The mn::i in alllrmour flood as formenrly,

RuthIven towai~rds a w jindo~w, whiichi during his ab.
ienuce her had1i pa;;ilbadd thec pelr;' n w'ith w~homi he
wa~s leftr, to opecn, aried, w~ithl a wViki anid affr-ighted
voice, "L Tireafn!! Treaf;n-! Help!" I am mur-
dered" His'Ii atrtend~n ts hecard, anld knew the voice,;
and 11hw, at the· windrow, a hiandt whichl gralped thle
K'in g's necki\~; wit v-iol;ence. Theyc skew with preci-
pitation to, his al!litanr-ce. Le~no~x andi Mlar with the
greater numnbc-r, ran u'p the prlinicipal fair-cafe,
whezre thcy flund aill th~e dloors (bult, whIICh th~ey
battererd w i rh thI~e u tmo~ft riury, end ea~vouring to bu rft
t hem r Open. " En"t 5ir John~ RamleIy, en ter in

b1;~ y a bnck-

flair, whichi liud to, the aparatmntc~r whiere thle King
v.as$, fo)undc theC dorc) o~pen, and riat~ing; upon Ruth~-
ven~i, whol w s still Ithgglingi withi thc King~, struck

him

him twice with his dagger, and thruff him towards B O OK
thle flair-cafe, where Sir Thomas Erikine ands Sir I.
Hugh Herreis met, and killed him, he crymng witb 16o.
his last breath, "' Alas! I am not to blamne for this
aelion." D~uring this (cuf~e, thle man, who had been
concealed in the fludy, ereaped unoblerved. To-
gjeth~er with Ramsey, Erfkline, and H-erreis, one
W'lilr;n a1 foo~tman entered th~e room where th~e
King was\T, and bes r:e th~ey had timne to that the
d lor, Gow~rie rdbe~7d in withl a drawn sw~ord in each
hland, fiulowedci by leven of hiis attendants wYell
a~rmed:, andc wijth a loud1( voice th~reatned th~em all
writh ifl~ant deathl. Th~ey immed:c-iately thiruL1 the
King into the little finrdy, and fbuttring thle door up-
on him, encunurtred the E;IIl. Notrwithianding the
ineq~uality ojf` numbers, Sir J >hn Ra\msey pierced
Go~wrie through th;~e hear~t, and! he fell down dead
wiith:, ut ut~tering a wo~rd, his followers having re-
ceivedt several wou~nds;, immrediately fked. Three of
th~e K ne's derl:nfendrs wztre likewise huirt in the con-
f-licit. A dlreadful noirecontinued fl~ill at thle coppofiie
doo~r, where many perso~ns laboured~ in vain to force
a ip3nage: and the King being affired that they were
Lety x, M~ar, and his other fnrindss, it was opened
on thec infidel. They ran to the King, whiom thecy
une1x7Cetd edly fou:nd ithe, withi tranfposi ts of congra-
tulation , and he, falling on his kn-;ees, with~ ail his
a tendan Is rou~nd him, offe~red lblemn rlhanks to God
f:,r liich a1 wo~nderf~ul deliverance. The danger, how-
ever, was no~t yet over. The inhiabitants of the
to~n,, whlecl Prov\of1 Gowrie was, andr by whom-r he
was extreme~ly belo~ved, hearing the fate of the two
brothers, ran to their arms, and ~ilrrounded thle
louse, threatning revenge, with many idollent and
opprobrious rpeeches against the King. James en-
deavouiredi to pacify the enraged multitude, by speak-
mg to themn fmm~ the window, he admitted their
magliffrates int~o thle hclre, re~lated to, thiem thle
who~le circumiltanrces of the fac`t , andt their fitry Iub,-
jiding; by de·grees, theyv dlfperfef. On fearchingll

O 4 thec

12oo s the Earl's pockets for papers, that might dircover

VIII his; designs and accomplices, nothing was found but
skoo. a fmnall parchment bag, full of miagical charad~ers,

and words of ench~antment , and if we may believe
thle account of the consp~iracy publithed by the king,
" wh~ile there w~iere about him, the wound of which
" he died, bled not; but as soon as they were
" taken away, the blood guthed out in great a-
" b~undance." After all t~e dangerous adventures
of- this busy day, thle King returned in th~e evening
to F~alkland, having committed the dead bodies of
the twio brothers to the cultody of the Magistrates
of Per th.

The mo- NOTWITHSTANDING the minute detail which the
trie of the King gave of all the circumflances of this confpi-
confpira- raye agingt Iis li(e, the motives which induced the
tors not two brothers to attempt an a~tion Co deteflable, the
easily ex-.
plained. end they had mn viewv, and the accomnplces, on

w~hole aid they depended, were altogether unknown.
Thie words of Ruthven to the King gave Come
grounds to think, that the deftre of revenging their
father's death had infligated them to this attempt.
But, whatever injuries their father had fuffered, it
is fe~arce probabtle that they could impute them to
the King, whiole youth and iubjedtian, at that
time, to the violence of a fac~tion, exemipted him
from being the objeat of relentment, on account of
ad2ions which were not done by his command.
James had even endeavoured to repcir the wrongs
which thle fathrir had if i~rffed, by benefits to his chil-
dlren, and Gowrie hinifeclf, itenlible of hiis favour,
ac~knowle~dged it with the warmest expreflions of
gratitude. Tlhree of the Earl's attendants, being;
con vi~ed of allifting h~im in this affadult on the king's
s~ervants, were executed at Pertl!, 'out they could
give no light into thle motives, whichi had prompt-
ed their maittr to an adlion so repugnant to there
acknowledgmecnts. Diligent se~arch was made for
the perso~n concealed in the fludy, and from him
great disc-overies were expedted. But Andrew Hen-

derfor)

derfon the Earl's fleward, who upon a promise of Bo o
pardon, confeiffd himself to be the man, was as. I1
much a firanger to his malter s design as the reft; 4a s0.
and tho' placed in the fludy by Gowrie's command,
he did not even know for what end that flation had
been afligned him. The whole tranf~ation remain-
ed as impenetrably dark as ever, and the two bro-
thers, it was concluded, had concerted th~eir scheme
without eithecr confidant or accomipliee, with unex-
amp'led (ecrecy as well as wickeidnels.

AN accident, no less firanige than the othier c~ir- sprot's

cumftances of the flory, and whiic~h happened ninedilcoveries
years after, discovered tha~;t th~is opinion, howeve, conce'n-
plaurible, was ill founded; and that the tw·o bro-ing it.
thers had not carried on their machinations all alone.
One Spror, a notary, having whispered among le-
veral persons that he kinew 10m~e ~recrts relating to
Gowrie's conspiracy, the privy council thought the
matter worthy of their attentio~n, and ordered him
to be seized. His confeflion was partly voluntary,
and partly forced from him by torture. According
to his account, Logan of Reftlaring, a gentlemn~~ of
an opulent fortune, but of dissolute morals, was
privy to all Gowrie's intentions, and an accomplice
jn his crimes. Mr. Ruthven, he raid, ha~d frequent
;interviews with him, in order to concert the p~lan of
their operations, the Earl had corresponded with
him to the fame purpole , and one Bour, Logan's
confidant, was truffed with the ferer, and carried
the letters between them. Both Logan and Bour
were now dead. But Sprot affrmed that hie had
read letters written both by Gowrie and Logan, on
that occasion, and in confirmation of h~is teftimno-
n y, leveral of Logan's letters, which a curiefity fa-
tal to himself had prompted Sprot to fleal fro~m
among Bour's papers, were produced *. Theree

were

* Logan's letters were fwve in number. One to Rour, ano-

ther to G~oyrie, and three of thtln without anly dirction ; nor

could

8 0o 0 sc were compared, by the privy council, with papers
VIll. of Logan's hand w.r-iting, and the refernblance was
1600. maindeit. Pe-rlns o~f und~oubted credit, and well

qu~lfied to judg~e (f thle mratter, exa~min ed th~em,
and fuwore to, thetir authenticity. De-ath itself did
not exempt L;,gan from profectu~ion, hiis bones we~re
dug up', and triled for Hikbl Treal~ln, andl by a fen-
ten~ce, equ~~liy odioius a:ndi ;1h-gal ", h~is ];inds were

forftiecd,

coukil Sprot dilover the name of the person to whom they
were writtien Logan gives 060n the afppelat;on of R~yght Ho-
nourable. It appears f omi thiis, howe~tver, and~ from other
w\ords in the letter, ( ,orm. or, that1 there wAere se·veral persons
privy to ther confipir~acy. Th~le date of' the-1 li11 letter is _July
as~th. Ah; Ruthlven hadl conunuiinicated~ thec miatter to Logan
only i· the day b:·~le lbid. It appr:uls froml the oliginal /um-
mons o if Frfulturecc agansnt L~ogar.'s heiirs, thalt Bour, though he
had~ letters addl~relled~ to 'iinl with rcgardl to a conspiracy equally
diang:erors and imipoiitant, was lo illi~terate thant he could~ not
readi " Jacobus Houar, iteranrun p~rodus igniarus, ditti Georgii
" opera ini 1legends omlnibus Icr-iptis aJ~ cunti Inifils, vel perti-
" nen~tibus, u.c·1atur."' Tlhis is altogethic r d~ran~ge, and~ no-
th~ing bult thec iar~~1icilos charadelLr of` Logan1 canI account for
his chufiing fIch a1 confida~nt

I* Hy th R~oman law', perlboIs guilty of theS crimre of H-igh-

Treason mlighlt be triedl even after deaIth. TIhiS praftice wasI
adioptedl by thec Sic,;, wv~itoult any limiitaition, P'arl. I;40. c. (Eg
hea thL' u::Lnited;~ Cexecife or this power was foon)I concc~ved to
be dagci ou.·I': ; anrd the C o~~n was laidl under~; proper reltric-
tions, by no ai;ct 1~ 1). l o2. whlich has ne~ver been printed.
'The ~0.~ w ot o it aT.Lre, l~

And bcaule thle sa~id Lords (i e. the

Lo:rd3; o::~ a tide) think that~ thec thjid adt jriz. in I i to) too ge-
ne~ral, and( psejud~icial l to th:~ E~alns in the Iesnll, thecrefore fta-
rUIes and~ c,;&n.:iS that thc ladll~ ad hall have no place in time
coini~ng, b~ut ag.inli the hcebs oi' therni that notorioutly cominit
a thall conuniiir I~!·luf mje~t agalinik theC KIn;g's pedlon, againit
the~ rehnli f;,r avert~ing the tlirie, andi aai;;Nft thremr that flutil hap-
pen' to' be a;:v thle King's· army lleienarly, and becing notourly
know~n in, n d·: thus,· anrl thie heii s of there per;sons to be called
arnd judi~c. i w;ithin ,'ve years~ after the deceale oft the laid per-
fanrs comm~riAe: · of' the~ 1:iJ. CrimeCS, aInd thle thiJ~ tilme being
bypalrt, th· rthiJ heiin; no\:r or t be· pllrthdc sos th:e lnlre " The

ini r I,( cFrlue for- whichi he wa:s tr iedl; and his heir s were called in
(l'l~.ionl mIore tha).In 1-le ve:nis !:4cs his deatrh. It is remalrkablec
1..;:: thii 1lYltute Eve.:;a no to LodVe beenI alttended to inl the par-

liamntcn

forfeited, and hiis poi~teity declared infa~mous. Sp~rot BooK
was condemned to b~e hanged for mlil~rprifsn of trea7- c
son. He adfheredi to hiis codiellhan to ther lot, and xGoo.
having promiiled, on the featold, to give thle (J,~ce-
tators a sign in confirmatio~n (of the truthi of wha~t
hie had de:oiedl, he thirice claI~pped h-is handcs, afte~r
he was thrown off the laddcr b~y the exe;cutione-r*

liament which forfeited Logan. Another singular circumilance
deserves notice. As it is a maxbni of judtice that no) person can
be tried in ablence; and as lawyers are alway·s tenacious of
their forms, and often absurd in their devices for preserving
themn, they contrived that in any process againfl a edpefn
his corps or bones shall be prel~ented at the bar.Exmlso
this occur frequently in the Scottilh hiitory. After the battle
of Corrichie, the deadi body of the Earl of Huntly was pre-
seated in parliament, before s~entence of forfaulrture was pro-
nounced againfl himt For the fame reason the bodies of G;ow-
rie and his brother were preserved, in order that they miight be
produced in parliament. L~ogan's bones, in compfliance w~ith
the` fame rule, w~ere dug up. M·ackenz. Crimi. LawM. Book I.
Tit. 6. 4. 2z.

* It appears that .4Crchbilhcop Spotfwood was prelent at the

execution of Sprot. Crom. I u; : and yet he s-eems to have given
no cred'it to his discoveries. The manner in which he rpeaks ol
him is remarkable, " Whether or not I (hould mention th~e ar-
" raignment and execution of George Sprot, whio fuffe~red at
'' Edinbur-gh, I ami doubtful. His codtellion, though volun-
" tary and conflant, carrying iall probability. Thelc mann de-
" posed, &c. It fecimed to be a very flation, and~ a miere in-
" vention of the man's own brain, for neither did he thew the
" letter, nor could any wife mian think that G~owrie, who w·ent
" about the treason i0 secretly, w.ould have commnunicated the
" miatter to liach a man as Logan was known to be." p r08.
Spotlw~ood could not be ignorant of the Colemiinity with which
l~ogan had been tried, and of the proof brought of the authen-
ticity of his letters. He himfelff was probalbly prelenit in par-
hamnent at the trial. T'he earl of Dunbar, of- whom he always
tpeaks with the highest refpecct, was the person who direeded
the procels againlt Logan. Suchi a perempftory decc~r ationl a-
gamint the truth of Sprot's evidernce, notwithiandiing all there
circumfltances, is fuirprifing. Sir TIhoma~s HaI-I~lton, the King s
adivocate at that timle, andl af'terwa·rds~ Ea:rl ofi Hal.ingtonr i re·-
precfen ts the proof' prod\ucedl at Ly~n' s trial a~; s emenlly: can
vincing; and in ani orig;1nal letter of his to thie Kingr 'Itt of
june abog. (in B~ibl IFacult ! d)at:eninntemn

oer~ ~ ~ ~ ~ ~ ~ ~~~~(

inwih

h il a en odciJ etusc;o

BOO·K EU T though it be thus unexpe~tedly dilcovered
VIII. tha~t Gowrie did not adt without afiociates, little ad-
16,o. Unional"" light is thrown, by this discovery, on the

motives and initention of his condud~. It appears
almnoft incredible th~at two young men of such dif-
tingulilhed virtue, thould revolt all at once, from
their duty, and attempt a crime 10 atrocious, as the
murdecr of thecir Sovereign. It appears flill more
impro~bab~le, that they thould have concerted their
ulnderta~king with so, little fbrefight and prudence.
If- they inmendedl thiat thec deed fbould h~ave remain-

ed cnce1ed th~ey cooki~ no~t have chiofen a more

improper teenC' f rl rexcutfing it tha~n their own house.
IF they inltended thiat Hende~rl;n Glould have Ltruck
the blow~, they c~ould not hav·e pitched o~n a man
more delitute of courage, that must diredt the
hand of an affamlln nor could they expedt that he,
unflolicited, and unac~quainted with their purpFe~(
\\ ould venture on luch a derperate adion. If Ruth-
ven m~eant to Gtab thie king with7 his own hand, why
did be withdraw the dagger after it was pointed at
h~is breast ? Howw could he leave the king, after loch
a pla~in declaration of' his intention ? Wlas it not pre-
patt~rous to, commlit him to the kieeping of ~ischi a
timind arld th~le all;,eiate, as Henderlon ? For what
P'"'l'"fe didf he watte time, in binding the hands of
anl unar- medi man, wh~oml he mnigh~t e4faly have dif-
patch<Ji weilh his (ivord ? Had Providence permit-
te~d thiem to emnbrue their hands in the blood o~f
thecir So\·ere~in, whallft aantage could have accru-
ed to themn by his death ? and whiat claims or pre-

" When the probation of the fumnmons was referred to the

L~ords of Article s votes, they found uniformly, all in one voice,
the said lummnonss to be: 10 clearly proved, that they seemed to
contend who thould be able moll zealously to exprels the fatil-
faftion of his heart, not only by the miolt pithy words, but by
tears of joy ; divers of the bdt ;rank confetling, that that where-
of they dfoubtedi at their entry into the houle was iow· Io mia-
nifeft, thati they behoved to elleemi themn traitors, who thould
any, longer refule to declare their affuredf res~olution of` the truth
of that trearoni."

tenfionsT

tentions could they have opposed to the rights of his soorr
children * ?Inevitable and inflant vengean~ce, to-V1\
gether with perpetual iofamy, were the only con- r 5oo.
sequences they could exped to follow s~uch a crime.

ON the other hand, it is impollible to believe that

the King had formed any design against the life~ o.f
the two brothers. They had not incurred his in-
dignation, by any cr~ime, and were in no degfree,
the ob~jects of his jealousy or hatred t , nor was he of

* it has been asserted, that, in consequence of the King's

death, the Earl of Gowrie might have pretended to the Crown
of England, as the son of Dorothea Stewart daughter of L~ord
Methven by Margaret of England, who after her divorce front
the Earl of Angus, took that nobleman for her third huiband.
Burnet Hist. of his own timnes. But this assertion is ill founded.
It appears, from undoubted evidence thiat L~ord M/ethven had
only one child by Queen Margaret, which died in its infancy,
and Dorothea Lady Ruthven was not the daughter of Queeni
Margatre, but of Jlannet Stewart Lord Methven s recond wile, a
daughter of John Earl of Athol. Crawf. Peer. 329. Andr though
Gowrie had really been descended froml the blood royal of Eng-
land, the King had at that timae a lon and a daughter , and be-
sides them, Lady Arabella Stewart daughter of Charles Earl of
Lenox had a preferable title to the Crown of England.

-t Sir Henry Neville, in a letter to Sir Ralph Winwood, imn-

putes the death of the two brothers to a caule not mnentioned by
any of our Hiflorians. " Out of Scotland we hear that there
is no good agreement, but rather an open diftidence betw~ixt the
King and his wife, and many are of opinion that the dilc~overy
of fomie affe~tion between her and the E~arl of` Gowrie's brother
(who was killed with himi) was the truest caule and motive of
that tragedy. ' Winw. Mem. vol. I. 274. Whether the follow-
ing pailages in Nichollon's letter be any confirmation of that
fulpalcion, is submitted to the reader. In his letter Sept. 2 2,
160z, he mentions the return of G~owrie's two younger brothers
into Scotland, and adds, " The comning in of there two, and
the Queen of Scots dealing with them, and sending awhay and
furnishing Mrs. Beatrix [their sailer J with fach informaition as
Sir Thomias Erikine has given, hath bred great flpicion in the
King of Scots that they come not in but upon fam~e dangerous
plot." In another letter, January I, I 03 *' Tlhe day of
writmng my laR, Mrs. Deatrix Ruthven was brought by the L~ady
Pailly, and Mrs. of Angus, as one of their gentlew~omnl into
the court in the evening, and flowedl in a chamnber prepa~rcJ for
hMr by the Q~ucca's dirtc2ion, where the Queen had muuch timne and

8: 0 0 a (p~irit so sanguinary, or to, ntcJil for rath and der-

VI perate valour, as to have Littempt<JC to, mirdier them
I(0. in their~'V '

ow ouLe, whcret he weLY vre lurrouanded

with many domelclic·, he onliy wi hIa Ilender and
unarmed trcain, whe~re thecy c~ould cal to, thecir allit-
anice th~e iihab~itants of` a Cobv, at lhe develo'i~n oft
th~eir family, while h~e wais att a di!!ene fromn all aid i
and~i least of' all would hec havL~e Ltchainl t;,r hlis affo-
ciates, in~ Richi an enteriprzr, ther Est)r ofl Ma;r, and
the D~uke of- L~enox, thec formerc conlC~ette in c~lose:
friendship with the houle ofI Gowurie, aind thle latte~r
married to one of the Ear i's litters.

A conjec- WH I CH SOEV ER of thel ~ppofite lyitefS WC CIT1-
tUre con- brace, whether we im-pute theL intenio(n o~f murder
ceangn to Gowrie, or to the King, intupe)~.rable2 dificulties
tion ofthe arise, and we are invollved in cdus knels, mn Itery, and
conrpira- contradidtions. Perhaps thle l;>urce of thle whole
tors. co~nspiracy o~ugrht to- be' fearchcd for deeper, and b~y

deriving it fromn a more rmno~te ca~uth, wc mnay dil:
co~ver it to be Icts cr-iminal1.

Tlo keep thle' King of Scot~s in co~ntinual depen·

dace~I, wa's o)ne great obje:t o~f Elizabeth's policy.
In~ order to, thiis, the rcametim~es sooth~ed himt; and
fumetimes bribecd hiis Mliniffers anid favourites,
and wh~en the failcld of attaining hier end by thele
meanns, th~e enlcouragedl the Clergy to render any ad-
mniniltratio~n t~he diithuflud~c unpop~ular, by decrying
it, or firi·cJ upi (Lme rLaioun of the nobles to op-
pore, aind to overturn it. ~ThL-y, unacquainted with
the arts o~f undc~r mining(, a~ Minill~ry by intrigues,
hafd recourfr- e t, the Ia~der pradtice of rendering
themse~lves mallers of thez K~ing's person, that they
might thlereby obttain the diret~;ions of hiis councils.

and conference with her. Of this the King got notice, and
thewed his dillike thereof to the Queen, gently reproving e
for it, and examining quietly of the Vueen's servants of hthe
famec, and of` other mattercrs thereunto belonging with such dif-
crction and Lecrecy as requirea luch a matter.

Thol~d

Thiofe nobles, whio seized the King at the Raid~~`B of so
Rutbvn, were infigiated, and lilipprtedi by hier. I1
Bothwell, io all hlis wild attemnpts, enjoyedl her Pyc-r soo.
tedliln, and found a retreat in her domninions. The
ccomnedians whiich James had been forming of late
wi.thl the Rom~an Catholic Princes, hiis secret negol-
Sciatio~ns in England with hier (1I1hjeds, and ther miax-
imns b~y whiichi he governed his owcn kinglomn, all
contributed to excite her jealouly.. She dreaded
fame great Revoluition in Scorland to b~e approachi-
ing,· and it was her interest to pr-event it. The
Earl of Gowsrie was one of thle mn pow er, a

·ll of the~

Sc~ottith nobles, and descended firom anrc~eft ers w~rm?-
ly attached to the English intereftH adaot
ed the fame CLyem, and believed the we~lfa~re of hiis
country to be inseparably connedted with thle Lbiabil-
tence of thle alliance between the two kingdoms.
During chis residence at Paris, hie h~ad contraited an
intim-ate friendibip with Sir Henry Neville, the
Qgeen's amrba~ffdor there, and was recomnmenided
by hiim to his Court, as a person of whom great
use might be made *. Elizabeth received himn, als
he passed through England, with diflinguifhed
mnarks ofE refpedt and faivour. Froim all there cir-
cumf~tances, a (hfpticion may arise, thant the plan of
thle conspiracy ag:ainfl the King wans fo;rmedc at thatr
time, in concert wvl ith hr. Euch a tofpyicion p~revail-
ed in that age, anid from~ th:e lette~rs o~f Ni~tchllon,
E~lizabeth's agent in Scotlaind, it appel~ars n::t to b~e
defitare of foundaltion. nEgihti a b
served havering, soir some time, in the m;;uth ~f rthe
firth of F'orth. T'he Earf's two y·oungecr brothers
fled into England, after the ill liccefs of' thec confp~i-
racy, and were proteCaed by Elizabe~cth. Anrd Jamet s
himle~lf, though hie p~rudentlly co~ncearled it, took[
great umbrage at her behaviolur. None, howecvcr,
of Elizabethi's intrigues in Scotlandt tended to, has t
the King's perlon, but only- to, circum~~itibee his au~-
thority, and to thiwart hiis Ichlemcs. Ii iewa

+ W'iew. t. r56.

thIe

Boo i the surest fafe-guiard of her own, and reitrained the
VIll. Popith pretenders to her Crown, and their abettors,
r600. from derperate attempts, to wh~ich th~eir impatiencej

and bigotry might, otherwie , have urged them on.
To hlave encouraged Gowrie to murder his Sove-
reign, would, on hier part, have been an adt of the utr-
most imnprudence. Nor doe~s this seem to have been
the intention of the two brothers. Mr. Ruthiven,
first of' all endeavoured to decoy thle King to Perth,
without any attendants. When the/e proved more
numerous than was expeded, the Earl employed a
stratagem in order to separate them from the King,
by pretending that he had rode away towards Falk-
land, and by calling ha~ily for their horses, that
they mighit follow himr. But thatting James up,
mean while in a difiant corner of the houle, and by
attemnpting to bind his hands, their design seems to
have been rather to seize, than to allaflinate him.
And though Gowrie had not colledted his followers,
so as to have been able to detain him long a prifo-
ner, in that part of the kingdom, by open force,
he might soon have been conveyed aboard the Eng-
lifh thip, wh~ich waited perhaps to receive him, and
he might hiave been landed at Faft-Caffle, a house
of Logan's, in which, according to many obscure
hints inl his letters, some rendezvous of the confpi-
rators was to be held. Amidlt the furprize and ter-
rar, into which the King must have been thrown by
the violence offered to him, it was extremely natu-
ral for him to conclude that his life: was fought. It
was the interest of` all his followers to confirm him
in this belief, and to magnify his danger, in order
to add to the importance and merit of their own
s~ervices. And thus his fear, and their vanity, aid-
ed by the credulity and wonder, which the con-
templation of any great and tragical event, when
not fulily underflood, is apt to ins~pire, augmented
the whole tranfad~ion. On the other hand, the ex-

travagance

travagance and improbability of the circumflances,t B oo r
which were added, detradted from the credit of: VIll.
thore, which really happened , and even furni(hed ;,Y,'
pretences for calhing mn question the truth of the
whiole conspiracy.

THE account of what h~ad happened at Perth Many dil~-

reached Edinburgh next morning. The privy coun_ believethe
cil commanded the Mniniffers of that city initantly see ned
to assemble theit people; and after relating to them by the
the circumitances of the conspiracy formed against King.
the King's life, to return public thanks to God, for
the proteAion which he had so visibly afforded him.
But as the first accounts transmitted to Edinburgh,
written in a hurry, and the circumitances of the
conspiracy w~ere but imperfe(5ly known, and the
pal~ions which it excited fIrongly felt, were indif-
tinat, exaggerated, and contradiatory, the Mi-
nifters laid hold of this; and though they offered
to give public thanks to God for the King's safety,
they refuled to enter into any detail of particulars,
or to utter from the chair of truth, what appeared
to be flill dubious and uncertain.

A FEw days after, the King returned to Edin-

burgh; and though Galloway, the Minister of his
own Chapel, made an harangue to the people at
the public crols, in which he recited all the circum-
flances of the conspiracy , though James himself,
in their hearing, confirmed h~is account; though he
commanded a narrative of the whiole tranfadtion to
be publilhed; the Ministers of that city, as well as
many of their brethren, still continued incredulous,
and unconvinced. Thieir high esteem of Gowrie,
their jealoulfy of every part of the King's condudt,
added to some false and many improbable circum-
flances in the narrative, not only led them to sus*
ped the whole, but gave their f~ulpicions an air of
rcrdibility. But at length, th~e King, partly by
arguments, partly by threats, prevailed on all o
them, except I\4r. Robert Bruce, to own that the
were convinced of' thre truth of th~e consp~iracy. He

V 1.II could

IC~oo. but; cou~ild not 1;y~ tha-t he h~inl;l ch as Ierliaded of

the tahof i. Te Ce ule~t~s or ob~.:in~c~y of a

thc thmle Ijphhi of inlcreduiii~ ty began tlre, irad among

tion! folr initeg: iy andc abiliries, wa~s extremeliy dan-

ger iis Th K11ng was at th~e ut nlf~t pains to conl-

;ince anod to, gain Br uce, bu~t tidndin it impe llible to
rem~ove his doubt;s, he deplrivedi hin of his bene-
fice, and after repe~atedl delays, andi ma~ny atrcempts
utowards a re~conc~ilementl banlilbedC hliml the kinig-

Proceed- TH-E prroceedngso(f parl iament were not retarde~d
ingsotpar- by anly ICcruples if- thbi i, th. Thec dlead bodies of
lin rlnt a- thc tw·o brothelirs weret producca ithere, aIccording to
coorpira. law, anl ind~ictac!'t lor High Treason wals p~referred
tors. aga~int rithm, w itndesl~ wereL examined, anid, by

an unanllimou~lS femene ,C:. their cftines and h~onours
wereTc f~fi~ted,~c thec punli;(hmentI1 due Ito TIIraitors
\\ as infi;ted~ on: theijr deadir boIe,tIS and as if the pu-
nilhmint hrithrltoi~ inl Ile dlid no~t exprers fufficient de-
t cltlatiu ;II f the~ir1 _ I-im s, the(1 pa~tI ~r-cs Ham t enat7 ted th~at

in- or~ re to~ek atrelticennho the memor bof hr thein' mi-g

rati lus tll~ra, e adcun to dc the olprcnf whiche thea
nan(owi n had < 1 rth diine goo dne~ls, ~~nto all g Juuages,
appo in ed heri noth tofhv iugu to e acobfeve an-hth
Ki hnlley, 1.sad day of pbethatmteank boiving t.ewh

hit+ia :1r few wees atercJ, thedeh ofther twobthers; bt he King
bisn~t~ lfe. In the yer 7',i Georgste ~eaorlto of Coeti pubith-
nedl an" ilorical actoun ofrg th ouncl, piracy b the Earl gof

- GorieandRobet Loan f Re~alrg aaint Kin aes

TH~OUG1- G;ow; ie'SConfp~ir-cy o~ccallonedL a sudden 1O OK

a~nd a gre~at alallrm, it wa·~s fuluwJ~ed by nio colnfe- "',t1.

the charge againit the two brothers and Logan their asso~ciat~e.
F-rom1 there two treatises our knowledge of all the manterial cir-
cumiilances of the conspiracy is del ivedl. The evidence which
they contain, one would expedt to be auth~entic and deciftve.
An account of a fadt, (till recent, publithed by royal authori-
ty, and the original depofutions of pe r ons exam~ined in prelence
of the highell court in the nation, ought to convey a degree
of evidence seldom attained in hillorical rela~tions, and to ex-
clude all remaining doubt and uncertainty. 13ut as every thing
with regard to this tranf~adion is dark and problematical, the
King's account and the dlepofitions of the witnesse~s not only vary
but contradiat each other in 10 miany circumltances, that miuch
roomn is (till left for herltation, and hiltorical feepticifm. The
testimony of Henderson is the fulle(1 and moss important, but in
s~everal particulars the King's account a nd his are contradiatory.*
I. According to the King's account, while Mvr. Ruthven was hold-
ing the dagger at his breast·, "' the fellow in the fludfy fl-ood
quaking and trembling.'' Dilli 17. But Henderson lays that
he himself wrelted the dagger out of Mr. Ruthven's hand. D~ilc.
SJ. Cromn. 5o. Henderson likewise boasted to his wife that he
had that day twice saved the King from being flabbed. Dife.
54. Crom. 53. II. The King asserts that Henderson opened
the window during Mr. Ruthven's ablence. Dife. 2 4. Hender-
son depoles that he was only attempting to open it when Mr.
Ruthven returned, and that during the firuggle between the
King and himi, he opened it. Dif. 53,'j 54 romi. 51, 92. III.
If we may believe the King, the fellow in the itudy flood,
during the itruggle, behind the King's back inac~ive and tremnb-
ling all the time. Dlc. 27. But Hendecrfon affrms that he
Cratched away the garter with which Mlr Rut~ven attemipted
to bind the King; that he pulled back Pathren's h~andc while he
was endeavouring to flop the King's mlouth, and thiat he open-
ed the window~. Dife~. 44. Crom S2. IV. By the King's ac-
count, Mr. Ruthven left himl in the fludy, andt went away in
order to mieet with his brother, ands the E~arl caule up the flairs
for the famie purpolet. D~if. 2 3. Hcndferfon depoles that whenr
Mr. Ruthven left the King, "L he believes that hie dfid not pals
fromi the door.'' Cromi. 5 i. It is appairent bothli fomi thle ftu-
ation of the haule, and fromn other ciicumii~ancets, th~at the~re
could not pollibly have been anly initerview betwee~n the bro-
thers at th~is tirei. D~i'e

Henderson was twhic~e e:xamined,, thil at F:alkland~ before the

privy council in Auguli, and next at I'din~bunghl before the Par-
liameniit in N~ovembehr. N~ot tomnto l onw)~01 id~l le'~lcr variatioln
between thlcl depotionliis, w~e hall poin~t out tw~o whlich are re-

an one gencTsof im ortance, and having been concerted
VllI. by th~e two brothers, either witho~ut ainy associates,

ocT r wjtth luch as wee unkInowvn, and chole to remnain

markable. In hiis 601ltdepofstioni Mr Henderson relates the most:
miaterial circuml~ancee of the whole in thele words. " Mr. Ruth-
" ven pulled! out the deponent a dagger and held the fame to
" his M/ajelly's brealt, lying, remrember you ofmy father's mur-
"~ der , YOU jbll24 nouw die for it, and mimting to his Highnels's
'* healr . with the dagger, the deponent threw the fame out of
(" M~r. Ruthven's hands, and fwvore that as God thall judge his
'' foul, that if Mr. Ruthven had retained the dagger in his
"~ hand, the ipace a mnan mlay go fix fleps, he would have firic-
"' ken the King to the hilts withi it." Dire. 92. But at his fe-
cond examnination he varied fromn this in two material circum-
11ances. Fii it the words which he at that time put in Mr. Ruth-
uen's miouth while he held the dagger at the King's breast are,
"' Sir you mru/1 be my prif~onr r; rememrber on my father's death."
Secondily, when he threatened him with death, it was only to de-
ter himl from making any noise, " Holdyour tongue or by Christ
" you jhall die." 2. In his full deporition, the words of Mr.
Ruthven when he returned to the chamiber where he had left
the K in g, are, " Therbte ir no remedy, by God you muff die." But
in his Cecond depofution, "' By God there is no remedy, and of-
" fered to bind his M/ajelty's hands." Cromn. Sr. The mate-
rial w~ords you mnu/t die are omlittedi. The fuft deposition seems
plainly to intimlate that it was Ruthven's intention to murder
the Kiing~ TIhe second w~ould lead us to conclude that he had
no other dei~Tgn thian to detain himi as a prisoner.

'There are likewise famue remnarkable contradittions in the tef-

timionies of th~e other witncifes. I. In the dilcourfe publithed
by authority it is insinuated that the tumlult of the inhabitants
w·as raliled againit the K~ing, andi that it required some art to
pacify thlem. Dif4 . he Duke of Le.nox confirmis this in
his depolritin. Cioii 44. Ani as of privy council summon-
ing the miagi tra tes of Per th to anl'wer for r hat riot is it ill extant.
And yet Andrew Roy, one of the Baillies of the town, depoles
that he himlelf railed the people, and that they took arms mn
order to allirl the King. Cromn. 66. 2. Henderson depoles that
he gave an evative antiver to Mr. Jlohn M/oncrief, who en-
quiredl whiere he had been that morning, becaule the Ea~rl had
collnuandedf him not to cet any mian know that he had been at
Falkland. Dife. F4. Moncrief depoles to the fame purpole.
Cromi. 64. And yet George Hay, af'terwards Lord Kinnoul,
and Chancellor of Scotland, and Peter Hay, depole that the
Earl, in their presence, alked Henderson, " Whom he found
w~ith the King at Falkland ?" Crom. 70, it. Which quellion

C~le m

so, the danger was over, as soon as difoovered. B~ut B o o sc

otlnafter, a confpliracy brokle out in England VI1

agamiit Ehizabeth, whiichi, thiough thie firlt danger ,601
was inflantly dispe~lled, prodluced tragical otthets,
and rendered the coloe of that ( een's reign difinal

and nhapy. s Jaimes was deeply intrefle~ed in

that event, it merits our particular noctice.

Toa court of England was, ait this time~, divided ~lrex'

between tw~o powec frfl fact ion~s,, wiici Cconten~declconfpira-
for th~e supreme direttion of aftairs. Tlhe leader of cy against
th~e one wads Robert D'Evreux, Ealrl cos Eik~x; , ir EI~zabeth.
Robert Cecil, the fun of L~ord Treaalmer Burlcigh,
was at the head of the other. Th~e former was th~e
most accomplithed, and thle moll~ popular of all the
Engliih nobles, brave, generous, affble, thouigh
impetuous, yet willing to lIflen to the councils of
thole whom he loved, an avowed, but not an im-
placable enemy , a friend no lels conflant, than
warm; incapable of difguiing his own sentiments,
or of misrepresenting those of others,; better fitted
for a camp, than for a court, and of a genius that
qualified him for the first place in the adminiffration,
with a rpirit which (corned the iecond, as below his
merit. He was soon dillinguilhed by the Qgeen,
who, with a profusion uncommon to her, conferred
on hiim, even in his earliest youth, the highest hor
nours. Nor did this dimini~h the etieem and as-
fec~ion of his countrymen; but, by a rare felicity,
he was at once the favourite of hiis Sovereign, and
the darling of the people. Cecil, on the other
hand, educated in a Court, and trained under a fa-
ther, deeply fkcilled in all its arts, was crafty, infi-
nuating, induffrious, and though poffeffed of ta-
lents, which fitted him for the highest offices, he
did not rely upon his merit alone for attaining them,

seems to prove that be did not aim at keeping that journey a
secret.

Pg but

B o o but availed himferlf of every advantage, wthich hi~s

VII I. own add reis, or the mifiakes of o~thers affordedi him.

cO-I Two lich mern were fo~rmed to be riva:ls, anld ene-

m~ies. Essex defpIiled the arts of Cecil, as lo~w and
bal~c. To C·c~l, the Earli's magnanim-iry appeared

to e pefaptin ad flly All the military men,

except R~alcigh, favcoured E~ffx. M~ost of the
co~urtiers adher·~d To~ Cecil, whole manners more
lealrly rrefembkd their own.

His corre- As Elizabetl adlvanced in years, the firuggle be-
Cponden~c t ween there Iadionils became more vilolent. EIlfex, in
"'t icith the o~rder to~ firengthien himlcelf, had early courted thle

f ie"ndhiP of the Kingl of Scots, for whole right of
fuicc~ellan~ he wa·s a zealojus adv·ocate, and held a
(.·l;e; cacrretjaondenc botlLJ h()l with him, and with his

pricipl initers.Ctcil, devoted to the Qeen

;Joner, ref;e daily to, new hionours, bjy the alliduity of
hiis r& rvices, and thle patience, w~ith whiich he expeat-
ed the~ rewar~d o~f themr. Whille thle Earl's high Th;i-
r it anJd imI7Petuofary fame~times exrpof~ed him to chcks
f~rom a M~lilrels, who, though partial in her affe~c-
tion: tow\~ards~ himn, could not edfily bear contradic-
ti!:n, and( conferred falVoulrs often uinwillingly, and

:.Mars ewly. is own Gllicitati:;ns, however, fe-

c!-nded~t makinrl~utl · by hiis enemrries, who withed to,
1Cemove' h~imi at adcifkhoce f~rom court, advanced him
to, the -ommar~ndn oft the aIrmy emnployed in Ireland,
a:L linft: Tyro,-cnne, and Ito the c.thee of L~ord L~ieute-
nan~!t ofi that\ kingdom,~: 1 withl a commiion almost

unlimted. is thee~lS, in that expedition, did not

equaf l eitherr his !,wn pIromlife's, or the expedtations

DE~~~ Fiaeh he Qle6en, pcevilh from her difap-

poi~rntmnt, and exarperated againlt Etlex by the ar-
titles ofI h~is cernmies, wrote him a harlh letter, futll

of ned~uios andreproches. Ther, his imps-

of1 his ret·en'menclt,, he pro~polced to carr~y over a part

mIL's fIrom thie Queen'si' prclenc~e, to reinflte~t him- self

self in favour, and in power. But, upon more ma- BOOaR
ture thiou hts, he abandonedl this ralth design, and~ "II H
fettin g fhll with a few officers, dev·oted to his per- r60s.
Con, laInde~d in England, and polled direaly to court.
Elizabeth received hIm, withour any sympto~m either
of affecaion or of difplealure. By pro~per comiplian-
ces and acknowledgments, he might hiave regained
his former ascendant over the Qc~en. But he thought
himclif too d~eeply inijrurd to lubmrrit to there. Eli-
zaibeth, on thle o~the~r hand, determined to faibdue
hiis haughtyr temp~er; aind though1 her (everity drew
fromn him thle mnoft hlumblie letters, th~e co~nfined h~im.
to, tbe Lord Keeper's ho(ure, aind appointed commis-
fi·,ners to, try him, both for his condud during hiis
govetr-nment of Ireland, and fo-r leaving thiat king-
dom u wi thouit he r per mithcn . By th~eir sentence, hie
wais flifende-d fromt all his otlices, except thiat of
Master of the honrfe, and continued a prisoner duir.
ing rihe Queen's plearihre. Satisfied with~ having
molrtified his pride thus far, Elizabeth did not lut-
ser the· fntence to be recorded, and soon after al-
lowe~d hiim to retire to his own houre. During there
tranfaCions, which occupied several months, Effetx
fluduated between the allegiance he owed to his So-
v·ereign, and th~e desire of revenge; and sometimes
leaned to thle one, and sometimes to the other. In
one of the intervals when thre latter prevailed, he
fewr a messe~nger into Scotland to encourage the
King to assent his own right to the fiixceffion by
fo~rce of arms, and to promise that, besides the as-
liftance of the Earl and all his friends in England,
Lord Mountjoy, now Lord Lieutenant of Ireland,
would join him with 5000 men, from that king-
dom. But James did not chufe to hazard the los James's
ing a kingdom, whic~h was just ready to fall intrlcautious
his hands, by a prem~ature attempt to seize it.con~dUa.
Mountyoy, too, declined the enterprize, and Effecx
a~dopted more dutiful sch~emes; all thloughts of am-

? 4 bition

BooK bition appearing to be totally effaced out of his

160r. Tues moderation, which was merely thle effecd

'The wild of diiguft and disappointment, was not of long con-
attempts tinuance. And the Qg~een, h~aving not only re-
of Essex. fused to renew a lucrative grant, which the had for-

merly beflowed, but to admit him into her presence,
that new injury drove a temper, naturally impati-
ent, and now much fretted, to ablolute delpair.
His friends, initead of soothing his rage, or re-
itraining his impetuosity, added to both~, by their
imprudent and intereited zeal. ~After many anxi-
ous consultations, he determined to attempt to re-
dress his wrongs by violence. And conscious how
unpopular such an enterprize would be, if it ap-
peared to proceed from~ motives of private revenge
alone, he endeavoured to give it th~e semblance of
public utility, by mingling the King of Scotland's
initereft with his own. He wrote to James, that
the fadtion which now predominated in the Eng-
2lih court, had resolved to fispport the pretenflons
of thle Infanta of Spain to the crown; that the
places of the greateRt importance in th~e kingdom
were put into the hands of his avowed enemies,
and that unlers he sent amlbaffaddors, without delay,
to infitt on th~e immeditlate declaration of his right
of lilecellion, their mnealttres were so well concerted,
tha~t all his hopes wL~ould be defrperate. James, who
knew hiow dilagnreea~ble (12ch a pro'pof~al would be to
th~e Queen of Englandl, was not willing rathly to
expole himself to he-r diipleafure. But Essex, blind-
ed by resentment, and impatient soir revenge, aban-
doned himself to thiere paflions, and adted hike a
man guided by frenzy or delpair. With two or
three hundred followers, incom~pleatly armed, he at-
tempted to assault a throne, the best- eli~ablilhed in
Europe. Sallying at their h~ead, cout of his own
hereu1, he called on the citizens of L~ondon, if they
<irher valuec-d his life, or withed to preserve the king-

dojm

dom from the dominion of the Spaniards, to take soo re
arms, and to follow his flandard. H-e advanced VI-
towards the palace, with an intention to drive Cccil 164,.
and his fa~tion out of the Queen's presence, and to
obtain a declaration of the Scottilb King's right of
fizccellion~ *. But, though almof1 adored by the
citizens, not a man would join him in this wild en-
terpnize. Dispirited by their indifference, deserted
by fame of his own attendants, and almoff fur-
rounded by the troops, which marched under dif-
ferent leaders into the city, he retreated to his own
bodfe, and without any bold effort, (biitable to hiis
prelent condition, or worthy of his former reputa-
tion for courage, he surrendered to his enemies.

As soon as James heard of Effex's ill s~uccess, he

appointed the Earl of Mar, and the Abbot of Kin-
loss, to repair as his ambassadors to the Court of
England. The former of there was the person, by
wholre means EITex had carried on his correlpon-
dence wjth the King. He was a pallionate admir-
er of the Earl's charafter, and dilpofed to attempt
every thing that could contribute to his safety.
Bruce, united in a close friendlhip with Mar, was
ready to second him with equal zeal. Nor was thle
purpole of the embairy less friendly to Ed~ex, tha~n
the choice of the ambassadors, they were comn-
manded to follicit, in the warmedt man~ner, ft>r th-e
Earl's life, and if they found that the King, by a-
vowing his friends, could either promote their de-
signs, or contribute to their dFafty, they were imn-
powered to lay aside all difguice, and to promlife
that he would put himself at their head, and claim
what was due to him, by force of arms-i . But be-
fore the ambassadors could reach L~ondon, Essex
had fuffered the punihlhment be merited by bis trea- lida.
son. Perhaps the fear of their interposing, in or-.
der to obtain hiis paltdon, haiftenedc his death. E-
lizabeth continuedl, for I;ame tim-e, irrelolute con-
cerning his fate, anid couldl not bring berlell to
Z Birch. Memn z. 477· . l ohnit. 289. Dirch. Mem. 2. 5'?-

con-

So o cons~ign inito thie hiands of th~e executioner, a man,
LkVIIL. who had once poffeffed hier favour so in~tir-ely, with-

,, out a painlful struggle between her relenltment a-

ganinft h~is late m-itconidna~, and her anc~ient affedi-
o~n towa~rds hlim. TLhe diiffrers to? which h~e was
now\ reduced tended naturaliv to ioftien thet fo;rmer,
wbl~le jt rev·ived the latter withi new tenderners, and
th~e intr~rcellion of one fait~ful friend, who had in-
terafl: with the Qgeen;, mightt perhaps h~ave Saved
h~is O~fe, and h~ave prcecured him a remillio~n, which,
oft hierllcif, (e was athamned to grant. But th~is ge-
nerouis nobleman had at th~at time no fulch h n
And Eizabeth~, follic~ited incei~ntly by hecr M~cin;-
fiers, and coffendfed~ wsit the haughtirds5 of Eilex,
who, as the imagined, hor~ncd to, sue for p~ardon, at
la~t co~lmmanded thie sentence to be ylut in executiuln.
No (bolner was thie blow itruck, tha~n ~he repented
of hecr own rathnefs, and bewaniled his death wyijh
the dleepeit thrrow. Jamnes always considered him
as onec, who ha3d fallen7 a martyr to hris fe-rvcce·, and
after his acceilion to the Engplih thirone, reitcred his

* Cama. Ian to h'is hono~urs, as well as all hiis ai~ociates in thie
SpotC consp~irac~y, and di:tingu~rithed th~em wcith his f avounr'
04.' TIin;. Scoutilh ambt~tallhdors, 6ncding that they ha~d
James arrivedc too latre to~ ecscute the c~hiet bufmnefs com-

"' " ""i mirtted to thecir chiarge, no~t only co~ncealed that part
poes iro of their In~~Utrudians w i'h thc utmolllr! care, but con-
Enlglandl. gratulated th~e Q!eel, in their Mifler's name, on

h er halPpy eleape f'rom~ rwh·I an aucdacious conFpi rac y.
Eizab~eth, though~i nor fIranger to the King~'s coirre-
fpnc'dnce" w5ithl EI1ex, or to, that no~bleman's inten-
tioni of at~erting famecs's righit to thle Crown, was
niot willyn that therie thould be kno~wn to the peo-
Iple, andti, for thlat reason~, recceivedl thie coingratula-
tcions o f the Scottith ambaf~bdorss wsithll pIollible

marks ~ ~ ~ ~ ~ ~~l

ofcei

ndgo iladi rder to

I eided~ lot ILumc L~inc in E~ngilcd, and wtre emp~loy-

ed, with great Auccefs, in renewing and extending Boo r
the intrigues, wh~ich Bruce had formerly entered in- Vin.·
to with the English nobles. As Elizabeth advanc-,;~
ed in years, the Englith turned their eyes more and
more towards Scotland, and were eager to prevent
eachi other in courting th~e favour of their future
Monarch. Af~urances of attachment, profetlions
of regard, and promiles of support, were off~ered to
Jamnes from every corner of the kingdom. Cecil
himself, perceiving what hopes Essex had founded
on the friendihip of the Scottish King, and what
advantages he might have derived firom it, thought
it prudent to fland no longer at a difiance from a
Prince, who might so soon beco7me his Matter. But
being trenfible, at the fame time, how dangerous
fixch an intercourse might prove, under a Miffrefs·
naturally jr·lous, and whole jealousy grew fironger
with old age, thiough he entered into a correfp~on-
dence w·ith him, he carried it on with all the fccrecy
and caution n~ceffary in his ficuation, and peculiar
to his ch~aradler. And James, having gained the
man whole opposition and influence he had hitherto
chiiefly dreaded, waited, in perfedt security, till thiat
event thould hanppen, which wYould open hiis way to
the thr:one o~f England. It wvas, wvith some diti-
culty, thatr he raffrained, w~ithin proper bounds, his
adheremts inl tha~t kingdom, w~hc lab~ouring to di-
flinguih thlemfel\-es by that officio~us zeal, with
whiich a Prince, who has a near profped of mount-
mng th~e throne, is always served, urged hiim to al-
low a motion to be made in parliament for declar-
ing~ his right of fucceiorn to the Crown. James
prudemrly dircouraged thiat design, but it was with
no fmanll th~tisfadCion; tha~t he oblferved the ascendant
he was acqur.iring in a co~urt, whlol didlates he hadf
been, 1:> Ijong, obiliged to obety , and w~hich had ei-
ther p~refe~ribedl or th:wartedi eve~ry flep he had tak~en

thn h oecui fhs regs

* Spott'. 467, 47'. BI;rch. Memi. 2. 514-

No ·r-

Boor NOTW IT STAND I Nothe violent itruggles of the
,ylrr. political famtons which divided the court, and the
160L. frequent revolutions which had happened there,
Attempts rlmee the king first took the reins of government into
to civilize his own hands, Scotland had cojoyed unusual tran-
the High- quillity, being undiflurbed by any foreign enemy,
landers. and free from any intestine commotion of long con-

tiouslnce. During this period, James endeavoured
to civilize the Highlanders and the Isles, a part of his
dominions almost totally negledted by former Mo-
narch~s, thioughi the reformation of it wtas an ob~jea
highly worthy of their care. The long peace with
Englaind had afforded an opportunity of tiubduing
the licentious Cpirit of the borderers, and of restrain-
ing their depredations, often no iles ruinous to their
country~men, than to their enemies. T'he inhabi-
tants of the Low Country began, gradually, to f~or-
get the d~e of arms, and to become attentive to the
arts of peace. But the Highlanders, retaining their
natural fierceners, averie from labour, and inured
to rapine, infested their mnore indattrious neighbours,
by their continual incursions. James being follici-
tous not only~ to reprels their inroads, but to render
them dreful fubbits *, h~ad at oifferent times enadtedl
many wife laws extremely conducive to there ends.
All landlordts, or Chiefs of Clans, were enjo~ined to
permit no persons to reside in their eflacts, who
could not find fullcient foirety for their good beh4-
viour, thley were required to make a lill of all ful-
picious petions undler the~ir j~urrilitiaion, to bind
themse~lves to deliver them up to juffice, and to in-
demnify those, who thlould liffer by their robberies,
and, in order to arcertain the faithful performnance
of there articles, the chiefs themselves were obliged
to give hostages to the King, or to puit pledges in
his hands. '1'ree towns, whiichi mighlt serve as a
retreat Ior the induff rio~us, anid a notfesry for arts
and commerce, were appo~inted to be built in diffe-
rent parts of the Highllands, one inl Ca~ntyre, ano-

* Bail. Dor. I59.- ther

th-er in Lochabar, and a third in the ille of Lewis *, Boo so
and, in order to draw the inhabitants thither, all -II
the priviloc "'~ees of Royal Boroughs were to be con- 16oz.
lerred upo~n them. Finding it, however, to be no
caly matter to inspire the inhabitants of those cotin-
tries with the love of induffry, a resolution was
taken to plant among them, colonies of people front
the more induffrious countries. The firfl experi-
ment was made in the isle of Lewis, and as it was
advantageously situated for the filhing trade, a source
from which Scotland ought naturally to derive great
wealth, the colony tranlported thither was drawn
out of Fif~e, the inhabitants of which were well
skilled in that branch of commerce. But before
they had remained there long enough~ to manifeit
the: good effeats of this inflitution, the iilanders, en-
raged at feeing their country occupied by those in-
truders, took arms, and f~urprizing them in the
night-time, murdered some of them, and compel-
led the reft to abandon the lettlement. The King's
attention being soon after turned to other objedts,
we hear no more of this salutary projeA. Though
James did not pursue the design, with that fleady
applicatio~n and perseverance, without which it is
impatible to change the manners of a whole peo-
ple, he had the glory, however, not only of hav-
ing first conceived the thought, but of having first
pointed out the proper method of introducing the
civil arts of life into that part of the Island *.

AFTER having long enjoyed a good slate of health Eliza-
the effed~ of` a found conflitution, and the reward of beth's

.last illnels

uncomimon regularity and temperance, Ehizabeth and death,
began this winter to feel her vigour decrease, and to
be renfible of the infirmiries of old age. Having
removed on a very (formny day romn WVeltminiter to
Richmond, whither the was impyatient to retire, her
complaints increased. She had no formed fevdr;
her pulse was good, but (he eat little, and could a603.
not sleep. Her diltemper feemned to proceed from Jan. 31.

P* rl. rZ87> '596 '597. Spotdw. 468.

BOOK a deep melancholy, which appeared both in her
VIIL ~countenance and behaviour. Shle deli hted in soli-
r603. tude, the fat conflantly in the dark ; and was of-

ten~ drowned in tears.

No sooner was the QIueen's indilpolitio~n known,

than persons of all ranks, andt of all differiint seCts
and parties, redoubled their aI~i licario~ns to thie King
of Scots, and vied with each oth-er, in pro~felthenss
of attachment to his perl;n, andl in pro~mile~s of
thbmillion to his governmen~t. Even l;ome of her
own servants, weary of the: length of her reign7,
fond of novelty, impatient to get rid of thie burden
of gratitude for past benefits, aind expefting to thare
in the liberality of a new prtlinc, began to desert
hier. And crowds of people hurried towards Scot-
land, eager to pre-occupy thle favocur o~f ah~e fsc-
ceffor, or afraid of being too late in pay~ing homage
to him.

ME A NW HI LE, the Queen's dlifearc increased, and

her mielancholy appeared to be feurled and incurable.
Various conjledures were foirmed co~ncerning the
caules of a disorder, from which the seemed to be
exempted by the natural cheerfulnes~s of her temper.
Some imputed it to her beinig folrced, conitrary to
her inclinatrion, to pardon thle Earl of Tyrone,
whole rebellion h~ad for· many yeairs created her so
much trouble. Otrhers imaigined~~ that it arole from
oblerving the ingratitudle of hler c~our-tiers, and the
levity of her people, wh~o behelcd her health declin-
Ing with moflt indecenit iniill~e~rence, and look~ed
f;,rwarJ ttheIl aiccefi n of thle Scotrtilb King, with
an impatie~c~e ·.hijch thecy couldl not con~c~eal. The
mott comimoni opinlion, at thiat time, and perhaps
the molt p~robable, was thiat it flowed from grief for
the Earl of Ellex. She~ retained an extraordinary
regard fo!r the memory of that unflortunate noble-
man - and th~ou~gh (be1 often~ complained of hlis ob-
flinacy, feldoml mnit lionedc hlis namle wir hout tears*.
An accident hiappenied (b~on after her retiring to

*Birch. Mem. a. 503. Richmond,

Richmond, which revived her affeL'ion with new 8 oo
tenderners, and imbitter-ed her sorrows. The VlII.
Counters of Nottingham, bemng on her deathi-bed, 0
dethred to fee the Qu~een, in order to reveal lomne-
tthing to her, without1 di~covering whichi, the could
not die ini peace. WVhen the Qgeen came into her
chamber, the tol~d her, that while Essex lay under
!entencez of death, he was desirous of imploring
pardon in the manner which the Queen hers~elf had
prefe~ribed, by returning a ring, whiich during the
hleight of hiis favour the had given himi, with a pro-
mile thiat, if in any future difirers, het ten~t thlat back
to her as a to~ken, it thould intritle him to h~er pro-
teation; that lady feroop was the perhon he intended
to employ in order to prelent it, that by a millake,
it was put into her hands inflead of laidy Scroop's;
and that the h~aving communicated the matter to
hier bulband, one of Efi~x's mott implacable ene-
mies, he had forbid her either to carry the ring to
the Queen, or to return it to the Earl. The
Countels, having thus dilllo>fed her lecret, begged
Sthe Queen's forgiveness; but Elizabeth, who now
saw both the malice of thie Earl's enemies, and how
unjultly the had fidped~ed himn of' infkcxible obrti-
nacy, replie~d, " God miay forgiv·e y·ou, but I ne-
v~er c;:n ," and lefte the room in cgreat em;otion -t.
F-rom thait mnoment, her piii-rt (Ulnk entilrcv; the
could fo;rce ralte f ood, (be rcfufedi at rthe· m<Jic~in es
preferibed b~y her phlyticiarns , ded~aring~ that th~e
wilthd to die, andr wouldf live no longer. N n

treaty

t This anecdote concerning Elizabeth was furll publithed by

Osborne, Mem. of Eliz. p. 23; is confrired by the tellimiony
of de Maurier, Memn. 260, and by the traditional evidence of
Lady elizabeth Spelman publithed by Dr. Birch. Negoc. 2o6.
Camnden mentions the Queen's grief for Effex's death as one of
the caules of her melancholy. Somle original papers remlain
which prove that this was commnonly believed at the time. Birch
Mem. 2. 5o6. Essex, however, had been beheadled two years
before her death, and there seems to have been no other wcafon,
but that which we have aflgned, why her sorrow thouldl revive
with 19 much violence at to great a difiance of timet. As the

death

BooK treaty could prevail on h~er to go to bed; ,The far on

r 1VI culbions, during ten days and nights, pensive, and
J6o3 silent, holdmog her finger almott continually in her

mouth, with her eyes open, and fixed on the g~round.
The only thing to which the seemed to, give any at-
tention, were the afts of devotion:, per-formed in
her apartment, by the Archbifbop of Canterb~ury ,
and in there the joined with great aypparance of ser-
vour. Wiafted, at last, as <tell by anguith of mind,
as by long ab~linence, the expired vithouut a ithug-
gle, on Thursday the 24th day of M~arch~ in the
7oth year of her age, and in th~e 45th of her

*Camd. reign *
ILln.zBirch. FOR E IGCN~a ISoften accule th~e En~glilh of indiffer-
50m. ence and dikefrpect towvards their Princes. But with-
Birch. out reason , no people are mo~re grateful th~an they
Negoc. to those Mon~archs, who merit their gratitud~e. The

zo. names of Edward III. and Henry V. are mention-

r 'pe' ed by the English~ of this age, with the fame warmth, i

as they were by those, who, (hared in the blellings
and sp~lendor of their reigns. The mlemory of Eli-
zabeth is flill adored in Englanid And the hillo-
rians of th~at kingdom,, after ce~lebrating her love of
hier people, her thgacity in diccerning their true in- ;
terest; ,her fleadinefls in purliling it , her wisdom in
th~e choice of hecr M~iniffers ; the glory the acquired
by arms, th~e tranquillity the lecured to her fisb-
jects , and the increatle of fame, of riches, and of
commerce, w~hich were the fruits of all there,

death of the Counlters of Nottingham happened about a fort-
night before the Qu~een's death, the coincidence of thele events,
together with the other evidence mentioned, adds so much pro-
bability to the (fory related by OLborne, as will entitle it to a
place in hiflory. Tfhe only obje~ion to the account we have
given of Elizabeth's attachmient to Essex, arises from her great
age. At the age of' 68, the amorous patilons are commonly
abundantly cool, and the v iolence of all the pafflons, except one,
is muI~ch abated. But the f~orce of this objedion is entirely re-
mioved by anl Author who has illultrated miany passages in the
English Hillory, and adorned mlore. Catalogue of Roy. and
N~ob. Authors. Attcicle Jff~ex.

juffly

souftly rank her among thle moilt illuffrious Princes. Boore
Even th~e defeaRs in her charader, they oblerve, VIII.
were not of a kind perniicious to her people. Her bJ
excefive frugahity was not accompamied wnth the
love of boarding , and thiough it prevented some
great undertakings, and rendered the fixccels of
others incompleat, it introduced acconomy into her
adminiffration, and exempted the nation from
many burdens, which a Monarch, more profuse, or
more enterprising, must have imposed. Her flow-
nels in rewardi~g her servants fametimes dilcou-
raged useful merit, but it prevented the undeferving
from acquiring power and wealth, to which they
had no title. Her extreme jealoury of those princes,
who pretended to dispute her righ~t to the Crown,
led her to take flich precautions, as tended no less
to th~e public safety, than to her own; and to court
the affections of her people, as the firmest support
of her throne. Such is the pidture the Englith draw
of this great Queen.

WHOEVER undertakes to write the Hiflory of

Scotland finds himrfelf obliged, frequently, to view
her in a very different, and in a less amiable light.
Her authority in that kingdomi, during the greater
part of her reign, w's Ilittle inferior to that, which
she poirf~efel in her own. B~ut this auithority, ac-
quired at firfl by a servic-e of great importance to
thle nation, the exercised in a manner extremely
pernicious to its happinels. By her induffry in so-
menting thle rage of the two contending factions;
by supplying the one with parrial aid , by feeding
the other with~ fu~lfe hopes, by ballancing their
power 10 artfully, tha~t each of them was able to dif-
tress, and neither of1 them to fiiabdue the o~lther;
the rendered Scotlaindi long the feat of diccord~, con~-
f'ution, and b~loodllthed: and hetr craifr cnd intriguer,
effecting whatr the vahallur oif` hr anoL~th~rs couldi~
not accomplith, redulced thati kinngdomn to a Idate,
Of dependanlce on E-nglan~d. Thel ma~xim~s of po-

Vot.. 11. (L, licy,

BOOK lCy, Often little confanant to thole of morality,

maI.,y, perha"ps, i'ltify thiis condua~. But no a 0-

603. lgy can be oifered for hier behaviour to Queen

Mar~iy, a fe~ene of dimrmulation without necenlty;
andl ofe fevelr iy beyond example. In almost all her
other a~icens, Elizabeth is the o,!je~t of our higheRt
admiiratio.n , in thiis, we mutt allow th~at (b~e not
onlly laid aside thle magnanimity, which became a
Qilcen, but the feelings, natural to awoman.

iamnes ~Tnlo rcai Elizabeil th ould neCver permit the quel-
cPro-m tion concerningi the righit of thecellion to th~e Crown
Kim= ot- to be deterrmined ;n parbiament, nor declare her
Enlgland. ownr eleintimnts concerning a p-oint, which the

wifheci to reminir an impenetrable myflery; the
hadf, howiever, formed~ no design of excluding the
Scottith K~ing from an inhelrirance, to which his
tidle w3s unldoubted1. A thort time before her death,
fthe b.oke the silence, whic~h the had to long pre-
served on that fub~jed-, and told Cecil and the Lord
Admiral, " That her throne, was the throne of
Kings, th~at flbe would have no mean person to
al~cnd it, and tha~t her Cousin the King of Scots
thouldi be hier fix-ccllor."' T~ihis the confirmed on
her dealth-bedi. And as roon as (he breathed her
ide', thez locrds of the~ Psivy.Countc;l pro~claimedf
Jame~s KIngI of Engllndi All the intrigues carried
on by fo~reigners, in falvourl of thle Inlfanta, all the
cab,.is formed~ whinir ther kingdom,l to thiplort thec
riiies o~f` L1J~v Ararbella, and the Earl o~f Hartford,
dilappeared'~ · in a1 moment ,lif and no~bles, and peop~le,

aind thch·i an r~i;;n fr the donun)1i:n of tha~nge~rs

P`ri:;ce . A A:;ll\ 'hiiis Iumut!I <1` : y, a motrion m~ade

theL rere3- ii; of I mcie y ieva~nces, bes 1:re llhey calledc

by flifing it, added to his flock of merit with his aooK
new Ma~ter. Sir Charles Percy, brother of the V1-
Earl of Northumberland, and Thomas Somerset ,mos.
the Earl of Worceffer's son, were dispatched to
Scotland, with a letter to the King, signed by all
the Peers and Privy-Counfellors then in L~ondon;
informing himi of the Qujeen's death, of h~is accef-
sion to the throne, of their care to recognize his title,
and of the universal applause, with wh~ich the public
proclamation of it had been attended. They made
the utmost haste to deliver this welcome mefl~age;
but were prevented by the zeal of Sir Robert Carey,
Lord Hunfdane's youngest ion, who setting out a
few hours after Elizabeth's death, arrived at Edin-
burgh on Saturday night, juff as the King had gone
to bed. He was immnediately admitted into the
royal apartment, and kcneeling by the King's bed,
acquainted him with the death~ of Elizabeth, fa-
luted him King of England, Scotland, France, and
Ireland, and as a token of the truth of th~e intelli-
gence which he brought, presented him a ring,'
which his filler Lady Scroop had taken from the
Qgueen's finger after her death. Jamtes heard hint
with a decent composure. Eut as Carey was only
a private messenger, the information he brought,
was not made public, and thie King kept his apart-
ment till th~e arrival of Percy and Somerlet. Then
his titles were I;olemnly pro~claimned , and his own
iubjedts expressed no less joY, than th~e English, at
th~is increase of his dignity. As his presence was
ablolutely necessary in England, wh~ere the people
were extremely impatient to fee th~eir new Sove-
relign, he prepar ed to set out for tha~t kingdom,
without de~lay. He appointed his qlueen to follow
himr within a few weeks. H~e comnmitted the go-
v'ernment of' Scotlanid to hIs P)riVy Coui~ncil. He~ in-
truffed the care of` his chiildlren to dh;i~erent nob~le-
mecn. On the Sundal~y brfl er his depalrture, hie re-
pairedl to the Church of St. Gdies, andc after hearing

a frmnin whiich th~e Preacherr dilplayed thle

Q x grea~tutch

So o < gTreatners of the divrine goiodners in railing him to

the. I, throne: of fiich aI powerful Kingrdom without

!o oppo~inon or bloodflhed, and exhorted him to ex-

Frels his gratitudc,, by promoting to the utmost-,
thle haippinefs and poroperity of hiis fubjeats, the
King: rul~e up!, rnd addrfreling h~imfeilf to the people,
made ma1ny profemoirns of una!terable affeAion to-
wo~rd-s tem,~ p~romiled~~c frequent!ly to visit Scotland,
allured thetm that his Scottilt flibjeats, notwith-
Ocandin~g his able~nce, thould feel that he was their
native P'rin~ce, no lelsj than when he resided among
tthemI and~ mighlt filil trut that~ his ears thlould be
alway~s opetn to their petitio~ns, which~ he would an-
ifwer wiithr the alicr-ity and love of al parent. His
wordCT(s were, rften, interrupted by the tears of the
wchole audience, whio, th~ough they exulted at the
K~ingJ's profp'erity, were melted into sorrow by there

* spotiw. tender declarations '
476. ON the fifth~ of April, he began h~is journey,
Ta'·kes with a 1Flendid, but not a numerous train; and
oPPlion next day be enteredi Berwick. Wherever he came,
throne. immlenre muhtitudes were affem,,led to welcome

hiim; and the p~rincipal persons, inl the different
(Coumies thiro~uih whiichi he passed, diiplayed all
ttb~ir wealthi and miagnifiec~en in entertainments
pre~pare d I;r himr·, at tie~ir houmes. Elizabeth hiad
rlie:cigd 1o long In Engla)nd, tha~t most of her Aib-
jecrts rememnbe~rel no oilher court buit her's, andl
their- notionis of thle mnannert s and dfecorum fiixaitabl
to a Pan11c u'e were n med upo~n w·hat they had ob-
icrvcd there'. It we.;I rioura!l to, apply this flandard
to, the beha~-vio~ur a~nd ackbo:ns of` their new Mo~na~rch,
aInd to, c~omi ar~ h~imi, at firit fights, wcirh thle Q~een!,
o~n whole hrolcne hie wais to> be 1,aced Jones
whoIle~ mnnelil~ rs wre exremcnely dI~~i ren t froml he!r's,

tidredby he ongrifn.He hiad noct thiat flow~-

ing aliIbetsiir, by whI:c~h Elizab~eth capitivatedd the
heartlsl,` ofc~ her I ]cpk- and thlough edly among a;;
fewv whom! he loved·~, his indolecel·t cou~ld noct bearc

the atige ofreu~ringhimM agrceale Cto

mixedl mulhitude. He wvas no ld~s a thranlrer to thaft B oO K
di nit , with which Elizabeth~ tem wred~ her fam~i- _
hiarity. And inflead of that well-ind:~ d frtwd~l:y, ,,
with w~hich fbe confe~rredt title~s of Ihonou~r. h~e be-
flowed them with an~ undiftingur~ ithing I:.>ublon,
that rendfered them no longer maIrks ol <hillmetion,
or rewards o~f mnerit. B-~l thfe"! wCere` the reflec-
tions of` theij few alonie, th mit u

n~li~ de clntinue~d

thieir acclama~tions , and amnidRl thdeic, Jame-iLs en-
tered Lrondon on the 7th of Mayv. and;~ tok peace-
able poffellaon of the hroirne of Engand

THUS wvere unlited two kinjgdomls, dividedt fromConclu-

thie earlieil accounts of (imel, butl defitin~d, by thebi son.
lituation, to form one grea~t mnoinrchiy. And by
this junc~tion o` iis whIOle nativ~e fo)rceC, Gr~eat Brli-
tain hathi rilcen to an emliitnenCe and ani hor) ity i' Eul-
rope wh~ich Enigland and Sc~otlan~d coudi uieve· have
attained.

THE Sots had To long confiderecd their Mo-AZ view of

n7archs as next heirs to th~e Eng~;th throne, thaltthe Revo-
thiey had full leilure to refleit on all th~e confe.10tions in
luen"ces of their being advanced to7 th7at diginity.tche conlti-
E;ut dazzled w/ith the glory of giving# a Sovereign l.bto 01c~
their powcerful enemy, rel!:ing on: the p~artiahtry ofance the
the~ir native Prince, and in fu;ll Lexp ~ftatIo ofaccemion
iharing liberally in thel weakh; andc hlonours heo~fJa"eS
would now be able to beffow, they atedd tlvI.
to the most obvio~us crontciquene s cf- thait great
event, and rejiciced at his acc~itio~n toi th~e th~rone
'of England, as if it hlad been no lets beneficial to
the kinigdom, than honojurable to, the King. They
soon had reallin, hiowever, to adoplt vecry dijfferent
sen~timents, and fromi th~at periodc, we maI;y date a to-
tal alteration in th~e p~ol;iticl cou i l!itu tioni oft SIalnd.

cTMI fciuJal A~ristocracy, whichii hadit bee~n lil-

verted~ in muit natio~ns; of Euro~pe by thie policy of
thieir P~rincers, or hadc b~een unldermlinerd by the' pro-
Scotland. Malny carules had1~ co~ntributed graidually
to augment thie power of the~ Scottish noubles, and

Q3even·I

So o K even the Reformation, which in every oth~er coun
VIll. try, where it prevailed, added to the authority ofI

P the Monarch, had increased their weahlh and in-

fluence. A King, poffeffed of a finall revenuec,
with~ a prerogative extremely limited, and un~irp-
ported by a flanding army, could not exercise mnuch
authority over such potent fub~jedis. He was
obliged to govern by expedients, and the laws de-
rived their force not firom his power to execurte
themn, but fromi the v·oluntary lihbmitho~n of the
no~bks. But though~) this pro~ducedi a 1pecies of gon-
vernmnent feeble aind irregular beyond exampic ,
thoughl Scotland, unde-r thie name, and with all the
ourtward enlfigns of a Ml'onarchy, was really: lib-
jeit to an Ariflorcracy, the people were no~t altoge-
thecr unha~ppy, and even in this w-ild form of a con-
iti:ution, there wvere principles, which tended to
therir ec~urity and advantag~e. 'The King, checked
find overawed by thle nobles, durst venture upon
no adt of arbitrary power. The nobles, jealous of
thie King, w ho~le claims and pretensions wecre m~any,
though hiis pow~rer uas imall, were afraid of irii-
taring thieir diiependants by unrearonable exactions,
and temperedi thc rigulur oft atilloiratical tyranny,
w~ith a rniki~nds anrd equaility to which~ it is naturally
a firanger. Atnd wh:1e· the military gecius o~f thle
feudal go~vernment, re ninerid in vigour, thle vassals
both~ of ~lth Crow~n and o~f thle Ba~ronis were not only
free fromt oppred~ian, but c\,urrte bry thecir fispeiors,
whore powecr and imlportaince were fo~unded o~n
their ana~chment aind love.

BuT, by his acceilioni to th~e th~rone~ of England,

Jamnes aicquired luc~h ani immnenf a; ncccllion of we al th ,
of pow·er, and of rfplenlder-, that thle nob~les, nflo.-
nilbled anld inltimidal;~ted, thoughc'lt it va;in to ~thuggle]1
for privileges which they were now: unable to de-
fend . r a m araneha hytb
rnitted tl, theC vokec lanwcs,, parltial ;o hris Ccun~lTry-

guud fortune, loaded themn withl riches and ho-

DOL1fS

nurlls, and the hope of his favo~ur cojncurred with o o #
th~e dread of his pow'er, in taiming~ thetir fierce end vill.
inidependent spirits. 'The w~ill of ther Prince be- p-
came the supreme law ini Scotland, and the nobles
firove, with emuilatio~n, wh~1o thouldl moist implicily
obey commandls, which they had formerly been ac-
cuftomedi to contemn. Satisfied witht halving faib-
jected thle nobles to the Clown, thie King left themn
in full1 potre~lion of their ancient juri~;li:tion ever
thieir own vassals. Th~e exstenlive rights, velledl in
a feudal Chief, becamne in th~eir han~ds dr~eadful
inftrumnents of oppremlon, and thec miita:ry idea~s on
wvhichl ther~e rights were f.,untded, beinlg gradual~ly
loit, or difregardfed, nothing rema~inedi to correa~
or to miitigates the rigouir wSicl wh~iich they~ wereL ex-
eriledi. Th ol: xaling thecir fortunes b~y
the expence of` frequent attendai;nce uploni the Enr-
gliih cou;rt, and b~y atctempts to imba~te thle m~an-
ner· and luxury of their m-ore wealth~y neighbours,
m~ultiplied exadiaicns upon the people, whio djurtt
fearce utter comnplaints which thiey knew wo~uld ne-
ver reach the ear of their Sovereign, nor move him
to grant them any redrels. And from the union
of thle Crowns, to the Revolution inl1( I88, Sc~otlaind
wa·:s plaiced in a political faculation of all1 others the
Ill0,1 singular, and the moi1 unhial-py -, lu~,tttedd at:
o~nce to the absolute will olf a MoI~narch, anid to the~
opprelnve jurircldidin of an A Ii tiocrlc~y, it thf~fered
all the miieries peculiar to both thlecl fo~rms of go-
vernment. Its Kings were despotic , its nobles were
slaves and trarnts, and the people groaned under
thle rigorous domination of both.

DURING th)is period, the nobles, it is true, made

one effort to thakle off th~e yoke, andi tr) regain the·ir
ancie~nt independency. A4ferc the dea·;th· of JdImeS,
the Scottith nation wns no, longerL viewed by ouir
Monarchs with arny partial affectioln. Cha~rles T.
educatedi among the Englilh, dircovered no pecu-
liar attac~hment to the kingdo~m of which hec was a

Q.,4 native.

BOOK native. And the nobles, perceiving the feeptre to,

VI be now in hands lels friendly, and Cwayed by a
-Lv Prince with whom they had little connedtian, and

over whole councils thecy had little influence, no
longer fatbmitted with the fame implicit obedience.
Provoked by some encroachments of the King on
their order, and apprehensive of others, the re-
Inains of their ancient spirit began to ap~pear. They
complained, and remonfirate~d. An~d the people,
being, at the fame timre, violently dilguiffed at th~e
innovations in Religion, the nobles secretly heigh~t-
ened this disg~ust , and therir artifices, together withi
the ill condua of the court, railed fulic a Clpirit,
that th~e whole naltionl took,! arms agalinf their so-
vereign, w~ith an u~niuln and anim~osity of~ whichi
thiere had fo:mecrly been no example. Charles
brought againfit them; the forces of ]- ngland, and
motwithlrandirng their own union, and the zeal of
the peop~le, the nobics muffl have funk in the itrug-
gle. Emr, the dil;\ffection whlich was growmng a -
mong his Engi~ih fubjedts, prevented the King
from adting with vigo~ur. A civil war brokle out (
in both kingdoms. And after m~an~y battles and
revclutions which are wvell known, the Scottih
no~bles, who sirs1 began the war, were involved inl
the falme ruin with the th~rone. At the Refloration,
Chlarles II. reggained full pu~ffellion of the roya.:l p re-
rogative in Scotland , and thes nobles, who;cLe dia -~es
were was~ted, or thecir spirits b~roken by the calami-
ties to, wchich they hiad beetn expored, w~ere less abke
and le~ss willing thaln ever to resist thle power ofC the
Crowan. Dul~rig th~is reig~n, and that of Jamres

SVHI. the did~ates of the Mhonarch wecre received inl

Scot!and wcith moll alsjeit abushriii on. The po-
verty to whiich m~any of thle nobles~' were reducedl
rendecred thiem meainer ilavecs, andi more into~lerable:
tyra~nts than ever. The peopl,F1· always negleated,
Were. now odious, and loaded w~ith every irgiury, o~n
account of the~ir attachm~ent to religioius and poiliti cal(

real principles, extremely repugnant to thiof adopted Boo a c
bi their Princes. Vlb

THE Revolution introduced cl'ti !·l;u:. '`nvi

the government of Sc~otland. T os h u
thiority of the Prince, or to secure hthe p;ivileges ors
th~e nubles, hiad hi h7erto been ;ihal(l th ~lc ;le Ajredt
of our laws. The iigh s I f th~e i·eople wece Icearce
ever mentioned, were abiega~:rdedl , or unkn~~own.
Attenition began, henctef~ll ward, to I; I::pid~ to thle
weclfare o~f` the peop~le. By the dyn;~ir o ,·r br, their
lib~ertiles were tecured. A ndthe r no

r 1:~ ol- :hetir re-

prekcntatives being increaG 1·\, hthe gl adually ac-
quiredf new weigh~t and confide1-raionl in parliament.
As they camie to enjo~y more Iecurity, and greatrc
power, th~eir min~ds btgan to opIen, aind to, form more
extentive plans of co~mmerce. of indullry, and of
police. But the ar-i.itcratiical spirit, whiichl flillpre-
domninatei, togetherr withi many~ other accide~nts, re-
tarded thle improvemtent and ha3PPiness of thle nation.

ANOTHER great event completecd what thle re-

volution had begun. Thle political power of th~e
no~bles, already broken b~y the union of the t wo
crowns, was aloll)t annih~ilatedi by thie union of the
two Kingdomns. Infleadi of makiing a part, as for--
merly, of the (ispreme alf~em~bly of the nation, in-
flead of bearing the m(ff cunieirable fivay th~re',
the Scott;i nob~lcs are admhi~tedt into thle Bmi-th~l
parliament by their repref entativess only, aInd f~rnm
but an inco~nfidcrable: part of onie of those` bodlies in
which the legifluiv·e authocr-ity is velled. Theyv
themelv·es are exicluded ablolutely from the h~oule
of Commons, and even their eldecft ions are nlot
permitted toi reprdrent thieir counitrymen in that alu

gultaffebly.Nor have their feudanl privileges re -

m~ained, to, compethtl~l e soir this extin ~tion oft th. ir
political auth~ority. As commen~rie adva;·nced~ inl ii
progrers, and go~vernment attained neanrcr to per·-
ftection, therei were inenirrl y~~ chicumleribed, and~i
at latt, by laws no lels falurary to thie pu:blic, thacn
fatal to the nobles, they hav·e been alrol~rt totl l

abolineid .

B OK abolithed. As the nobles were deprived of power,

theh people acquired Jiberty. Exempted from bur-
dens to wh~ich they were formerly fubjedt, Ccreened
fr-om opprefiion, to wvhich they had been long ex-
posed, and adop-ted into a confitiution, whole ge-
nius and laws were more liberal than their own,
th~ey have extended the~ir comimerce, ref~ned their
manners, made improvements in the elegancies of
life, anld cultivated the arts and th~iences.

TH IS fIlrvey of thle political State of Scotland,

in w~hich events and th~eir causes have been mnention-
edf rathecr thaln dev·eloped, enables us to point out
three zeras, f'1(1m eachi of whiich we~ ma~y datre som~e
grea;t alter.'tion, inl one or othe~r o~f th~e thiree dif~e-
rent memberi~is of whic~h thle supre~me leg;llatve as-
femibly ini ou~r con;ltitution is compofled. At thea
Accqi.onl thle Kings~ o Scot)landC one;: thec malt li-
mnited, becamre in anI inflant, thec mufft ablolutre
Prinices in Europe, an~d exrcifed~ a delpotic autho-
rity which thecir Parliam~ents were unable to con-
troul, or their nobles to~ ref~it At the U/nion, thie
feudal aristocracy, whiich~ had faibrlfted so many ages,
and with power i;> exo~rbitalt,, wa\s overturned, and
the Scotrtith niobles voluntarily fiscrendered~ righlts and
pre-emlinences,, peculiar to their order, and reducedl
thiemfelves to a conditioin, wh-ich is ni> longer th~e
terror and envy o~f othcr fdl~jeais. Sinre the Un!ion,
the Co~mmons, anc~iently neglectedi by thieir Kings,
an-d delp~ilerd by thle nob~les, ha~ve emerged inlto dig;-
nity , anld beingp admitted to a partic~ipation of aill~
thie privileges, which thie Enghtlh had purchase~d at
the expeince of f>, muchi blood, mull now be efleem-
ed a body note less considerable in the one kingdom,
th~an thley hlave long! been in thle other-.

THs churfch felt the effea;:Cs of thie abl;olute powF-

cr which the King acquired by hiis accellion, and
its revolutio~ns too, are worthiy of notice. James,
dlurinig the latter years of hiis admuiniitration in Sco(t-
;and, re\vived thc niam~e and oftice of Bilbiops. But
thecy po~ffeffed no, eccletliaftical jurikdidion or pre~-

cmlinencce,

eminence, thecir recvenues were incouldetfrab~le, and J;o o I
they we~re~ farce dllinguilbed b~y any thin~g, b:ut b~y ~tII
thecir fe~at in palrbament, and b~y being the obje61 of
the Cclrgy's jea·louly, and thle peop~le's hatred The
KingS, dtlilghtedi with thle sp·le~ndor andi au;thority

whih te Eglfh ilhpseljo~yed, and eatgur to>

ettfed an union in ccclellafical po,!icy, which he: hadi,
in vain, atrtemptedl in the civil go~vernmnent, r-esolved
to bnog;~ bohl Churchecs to anl exact cojn'ormity with
eaich othecr. Th'lree Scotin~en~ wvrre coni;·crated Bi-
thop~s at London. Fromr them~, thleir brethren w~ere
ccomma.~nd ed to rereive orders. C'eremnl\nie s unknow n
in Scot land( were impnfedr~t. A~nd though1 thle clergy,
I-·! ob qioc~~us thian thle n!,bles, boldly opposed thiere
ininovaitions, Jamenis, long; prudl~ited and well Lkille~d
in th~e artb of ma~nagingS themr, obtained at length
their com~pliance. But Charles I. a fuiperfitious
Prince, unacqu~ainted withi the genius of thle Scots,
imlprudentt and precipitant in all the meafbres he
pursued in that kingdom, prefling too eagerly the
reception of the Englith liturgy, and indircrectil
attemlpting a refuimptio~n of ch~urch lands, kindledi
the flames: of civil war, and the people being left
at liberty to indulge their own withes, the epilcop~al
churchl was overturned, and the Presbyte~rian go-
vernmenit and diilcipline were re-eliablilhed with
ne~w vigou~r. 'Together wvith monarchy, E,,ilcopuc~y
was refforedi in Scotland. A form of governme.nt,
so odiou~s to, the people, reqluired force to uphol·ld
it, and tho~ugh the whole rigo~ur of authority, andd
all the bairbar:ity of perfecutiocn were employedl in
its firPPort, the averlio~n of` the natio~n was inflar-
mo~untablel, and it fliblriftedi withi diffic~ulty. A
Recvolution:, the~ inclinati:,ns of theu people wecre
thoughtl~ wo:rthy thie a:tentioni of the ~ltgillalture, the
Prethy teri~i an overnment was agir~n eflablithed, andll
bIng;! raltihed by5 thle U~nion, ics fllll maintaine ~i inl
thle K~ingdfo m.

Nora

B3o o NOR did the influence of the Aiccellion extend to

VI the civil and ecclefia~tical conflitutions alone,; thle

genius of the nation, is taite and [pinit, thmngs of
a nature flill more delicate, were se~nsibly affedetd b~y
thiat event. Whel~n learninga revived in thie fifteenth
and fixtreemh centuries, all thy~ modlcrn languages
were in a slate equally barbarous, de~void of ele-
gance, of vigour, and even of peryic~uity. No
author thoug~ht of writing in languages 10 ill adapt-
ted to express and emnbellirh his faimenti~cis, or o~f
erecting a wo~rk for immcrtaliry, w~ith luch rude
anid perithinig materials. A~nd as thle (pirit, whichi
prevailed at that timne, did not oweo its ,ifeL to any
oriiginal eff ;rt of the~ huma;.n min~d, b~ut \ as e~xcited
by adm~iratrionl of thle ancients, the~ir crn:,;om ltos
were e~ttemed not only the ftandalrds (:state1, andi
of Ientiment, b~ut o~f (lile, and even the languag~es
in whiichi they wrote were thought:ll to, be peculi~ar and
almost consecrated to learniirg ands the mu~les. Not
only the manner of the ancients was imitated, buit
their language copied ; and extrav~agone as the at-
tempt may appear to w~rite in a dead tongue, in
which men were not acculfrome ~ to think,and whiich
they could not rpeak, or even pronounce, thle CAc-
cers of it was altonithin~g. As they fbrmed their
stile upon the purest mo~dels, as they were uninfeat-
ed with those barbarilms, whiich the inaccuracy of
familiar conversation, the affedation of colurts, in-
tercou rfe with It angers, and a thiouthndi otheir caules
introdctuce into living languages, many mioderns have
attained to a degree of ele~gance in theoir Latin com-
politions, which the Romans thlemlelves fe~arce pof-
leffed beyond the liminis of the Auguilan age.
WhYlile this was almnoft thle only species of competii-
tion, ands all authors, by using o~ne comm~on lan-
gulage~, co~uld be brou;ght to a nearer rcomlpayitanr,,
thle Scottilh writers were noct infei ~.r to thlofe of alny
clther nation. · The happyr geniius of Buchannan,
equ~aliv formed to, cxcel in p~rose andc in verle, mo~re

various, more original, and more elegant, than th~at B o o
of almaft any other modern who writes in Latin, VIII.
refleals, with regard to this particular, the greatest
lultre on his country.

BU'r th~e labour attending the fludy of a dead

tongue was irklome, the unequal return for their
induffry which autho:rs mect with, w~ho could be
read and admired only within the narrow circle of
the learned, was mortifying, and men, inflead of
wasting half their lives in learning the langu~age of
thle Romans, begani to refine and to polish their
own. The modern tongues were found to be fill-
ceptible of beauties and graces, whiich, if not eqlual
to those~ of the antient ones, were at least more at-
tainable. And the Italians having first s~et the ex-
ample, Latin was no longer ufedi in the works
of tate , it was confined to books of science ; and
the Politer nations have banithed it even from there.
Thie Scots, we may preflure, would have had no
caule to regret this change in the public taste, and
would flill have been able to maintain some equa-
lity with other natil·ns, in their pursuit of literary
honiour. The Englith and Scottith languages, de-
rived from the famne sources, were, at the end of
the fix:eenth century, in a slate nearly similar, dif-

feigfrom one another somewhat in orthography,

thiough not onily thie words, but the idioms were
muich thle fame. rThe letters of se~veral Scottith
ftlatefien of' thlat age are not infe~rior in elegance
or in purity, to those of the Englilh Ministers withi
wh~om they corresponded. James himself was maf-
ter of a flile far from contemptible; and by his :
exa~mple and encouragement, thle Scottith langlag~e
mighlt have· krept pace with the Englith in reine·-
mnent. SFylland mi gtht have hadi a series of auth~ors
in ars own, a:s wellI as inl the L~atin language, to bosR a
of . and theL ulnprovlement in taite, in the arts, and
In thle loeceticts, whi~ch ij~read over thle other p-ohtlh-
edl nat~ions ot E~ulr, e, would not~ hav·e been; un-

5I

vill.; begining to drop~ the dec of Latin in works of

t~~3 ate, andt to make trial of the firength~ and com-
p'als o~f th~eir owvn languages, Scotland cealed to be
a kinlgdom. The transports of joy which~ the Ac-
celio~n at fi~rfl cccalloned, were f;,cn over , and the
Scocts, buing:2 at nc~e dieprived ors all the otricas that
rdfne or animate a people, of the presence of their
P~rince, oi' the c;!ncourfe of nobles, of thle fpl>endor
and1 elegalnce of a~ cou·irt, an universal dciection of
Ijpirit seems to~ halve rize~d the: nation The Cor~t:
being w~i~thr-awn, no domnefic flandard of propriety
an~d co~rreetners of fpeechi rema~ined, the few com-
rofltins Ihat Scotrlandi prodiuced were tried by the
Eng'irn iirarndr~d. and evtery word or phrase that
vallirid in~ th~e leafit from that, wa~s conidemined as
b~arba~r us , w~here;as, if the twor narions h-ad conti-
nlued diitinct, eachi mnight have retaiined idioms and
forms of lpeechl peculiar to itfulf - and there·, ren-
dered fath~ionable by the example of a court, and
supported by the authority ol' writers o~f reputation,
wvould ha~ve been considered in thec iame lighlt with
thle varieties occ~alionedc by thie ditferent dialec~s in
the~ Greek tonguie, wrou!J have b~een marked as beau-·
ties, andi, in many caifcs, used p~romliicuouly b~y the
authoris of bo~th nations. Butr by rthe Acceiliorn,
rith Enghilh nraturally becam-e th~e f;,le ~jiidges and~
I exg:vers I1o language, and reje~eled as (AitJrcinis,
i\very foirml of fpeeLCh to which) therj ear was not aC-
call~ mud_ N(, w idi thet Sentcs, whd~ie the intercocurfe
beCtween' thle twVo nations w ais mrconf~derable ", and
oni;·.nt pr eJud~iiCes were still 10 violcnt als to preven~t

imlitation~,

* A\ rema~rkable proof of thle little intercourse between the

Engliih alnd Sicots, befo;re the uniioni of the Crowns, is to b~e
foundii in two cuiious I~paprs, onei p~ublithecd by Ha~;ynes, the·
o~he~r by Strypec. In1 the yeanr LS67, Elizaibeth cnnunand ed thle
fPihop of' Lond!on totake a thrvey of` all the ithlngers within
thec citie'S of L~ondcon andi W~cthinirit er. B~y hlis rep~olt, whiich is
va iy mrinute', it appea~rs that\ thre wholeO numbler of Scots at tha~t

tuneir

imitation, poff~ers the means of refining their own Boo so
tongue ac~cording to the purity of thie Englilh stand- VmI.
ard. On the contrary, new corruptions flowed into CV
it from every different source. The Clergy of Scot-
land, in that age, were more eminent for piety thian
for learning,; and though there did not arise many
authors among them, y·et being in poffefion of thle
privilege of ditcourfing publickly to ;he people, and
their sermons being too lo~ng, and perhaps too fre-
qluent, such haily produations could not be elegant,
and many slovenly and incorredr' modes of expref-
sion may be traced back to that original. The
pleadings of lawyers were equally ·loose and inaccu-
rate, and that profeflion having fulrnilbed more au-
thiors, and the matters of which they treat mingling
daily in common discourse and butinels, many of
those vitious forms of Cpeech, which are denom~i-
nated Scott~iafou, have been by them introduced into
the language. Nor did either the language or pub-
lic taste receive any improvement in parliament,
where a more liberal and more corredt eloquence
mnight have been expected. A1L business was tranf-
adted there by the Lor~ds of Articles, and they were
so servilely devoted to the court, that few debates
sarfe, and none were conduated w~ith the spirit and
vigo~ur natural to a popular affemlbly..

Tiues, durFIIng the wh·lole seventeenth century, the

Engilih were gradlually refining~ therir language, and
ilher ~tate, in Scotland th~e fo·rmer was miuch de-
baledi, and thec laltter almnolt enti-ely 1011. In thle
beginnin: o'f thiat period, both nations were emerg-
Ing~' out ofbarba~rity; but the difiance between themn,
\whichi was th~en inconsiderable, became, before th~e

t~ime was 58. H-aynes 1 g. A fisrvey of the famne kcind was
madnce by Sir T'homas Row, L~ord M/ayor A. D. 156s. The
niumberc of Scots had~ then inlcreafed to as~. Strype 4. Supplement
NL' 1. OnI theL Acceli)lon of Jamles a confliderabjle numb11er of
Sccotp, elj)>u.ljly of( theC hlighe ranki, refobr : d to Erng!:lnd, but
at we·I not till thc re un a that the inociClourl e b)tMetwcl the twoU

end

so o K end of it, immenrc. Even after (c~ience had oncec

V11 dawned upon rthem, thle Scots seemed to be sinking

backe into iginoranice and ob~curity , and adtive and
intelligent as they naturally are, they continued,
while othecr nations were eage~r in thle purruit of
fame and knowkagdre, in a slate of' languor and
flo~pefadtion. Th!is, hlowever, muift be impuited tor
thie unhap~pinels o~f their political lituation, not to
any defc;t of genius, for no thoncr was the one
removed in any degree, than thie other began to dif-
play itlelf. The ac'` abolithing the power of the
Lords of Articles, and other ialutary laws paiffd
at the Rervolution, having introduced freedom of
debate into thle Scottith Parliamnent, eloquence, with
all the arts that accompany or perf~ed it, became
immediate objec'ts of attention: and rthe example
of~ Fletchler of Salton alone is fufficient to thew 1
that the Scots were still capable of generous lenti-
ments, and, notwirhflanding fame peculiar idioms,
were able to express thermfelves with energy, and
with elegance. I

A~T length the Union having incorporated the

two nations, and rendered them1 one people, the
diilinations which had fiibfifted for many ages gra-
dually wear away , peculiarities disappear , the
iamne mianners prevail in both parts of the ithond
rthe Iime au~thors are read and admnired, thle fame
entercai-~ilnments are freqluented by the elegant and
pn:lite . and the fam~e standard of talle, anid of pu- I

rit inlanuag, s elabiftd.And the Scots,

after bcint~ Iplaced duringi a whole century, in a
1i;m I:i. n cno les fatal to the liberty than to the
tale~;1:~ ::rld (eu f thle nation, wYere at once put
I:o i·!lp~ll (ia o privilege: s more vatuluale tha~n thos~e
wvhichthel~ir nceffe!s h~ad flr~merly en7joyed, and
eve·ry obibltioc n thant hal:( retarded their pursuit,
or prevented their acquilition of literary fame, was
totally remouved.

A~P P EN~'

# APPENDIX.

AI.P PE N D IX.

N~o. I. (Vol. p.I 1 3.)

1A MEMORIALA T of certain poiints meet for

[' ]the re/lort yr ibe re~lmn ·f` S oT r . co Dto the anienr~tt

luPrates, t is to b~e noted, that the belt worldly felicit~y Sth Au-

that Scotland can have, is either to continue in a perpetual gulf 'j 59i

peace with the kingdom of England, or to be made onie mo- Cotton.
lnarchy with England, as they both miake but one island, divided Lib. Cal.
fromi the rell of the world. 8 t o. fol.

IF the firil is fought, that is to be in perpetual peace with' j7. From

E~nglandl, then mluf1 it necessarily be provided, thrat Scotland a copy io
be not so fubjeft to the appointmntrrs of F'rance, as is pre- recrfary
feenly, which, being an antient enemyi to England, feeketh Cecii a
always to miake Scotland an inltrumnent, to exercile, thereby, hand.
their ·Imalice upon Elngland, and to miake a foot-ttool thereof to
look over England as they m~ay.

Tle REFORE, when Scotland thall come into the handfs of a

mere Scottith man in blood, then may there be hope of such
accord, but as long as it is at the commiandment of the French,
there is no hope to have accord long be~twixt these two realms.

TH eRE So ne feeing it is at the French King's commandsplent

by reason of his wvife, it is to be confadered for the weale of
Scotland, that until the have children, and during her ablence
out of the realm, the next heirs to the crown, being the houle
of the HIamiltons, thould have regardl hereto, and to fee that
neither the crown be imnpoled nor waited ; and on the other
Cide, the nobility and commronalty ought to force that the laws
and the old cuitomls of the realmn be not altered, neither that
the country be not inipoverilhed by taxes, empreft, or new
imnpoffs, alter the mianner of France; fo~r provifson wherein,
both by the law of G~od andi man, the French king and his wife
miay be moved to reform their miilgovernance of the land.

AND for this purpole, it were good that the nobility and

commions joined with thle next heir of the crown, to seek due
reformration of such great abules as tend to thle ruin of their
country, which mutut be done before the French grow too Lthoug
and inflelnt.

E'l Ra, That it may be providled, by codlent of the three

ellatts of the land, that the landl mayy be: tie fromi ali idlolatry

Vu r. 11. R~ likea

ral council miay be had where the Pope of Romie have not
the feat of judgmient, they may offer to thew their caule to be
mioil agreeable to Chrift's religion.

NEX r, to provide that Scotland might be governed, in all

rules and offices, by the antient blood of the resim, without
either captains, lieutenants, or soldiers, as all other Princes
govern" their countries, andJ efpecial~y that the forts miight be in
thle hands of mere Scottith men.

TuHRavr, T'hat theyr might never be occalloned to enter

i-nto wars againflt England, except England thould give the Brit
caule to Scotland.

So ur n ov, That no noblem~an of Scotland thould receive

penl~on of France, except it were whilst he did serve in France,
for otherwise thereby the French would thortly corrupt many,
and betray their own country.

FtF-nov, T'hatno of~e, abbey, living, or commodity, be

given to any but mere Scottilh· men, by the assent of the three
ellates of the reshn.

So XTn, That there be a councel in Scotland appointed in the

queen's ablence, to govern the whole realm, and in those cafes
nlot to be direated by the French.

SE veNT no, That it be by the said three efistes appointed

how the queen's revenue of the realm thall be expended, hove
much the queen thatl have for her portion and estate du-
ring her ablence, how much thall be limited to the governance
and defence of the realm, how much yearly appomnted to be
kept in treature.

IN there and fach like points, if the French king and the
ueen be found unwilling, anld will withiland these provilions
for the walle of the land, then hath the three estates of the
realm authority, forthwith to intimnate to the laid king and

*queen their humble requets ; and if the fame be not effeaQually

granted, then humlbly they may commit the governance thereof
to the next heir of the crown, binding the fame allo to oblerve
the laws and antient rights of the realm.

PaNArtLv, If the queen thall be unwilling to this as it is

likely the will, in refpedt of the greedy and tyrannous affeAion·
of France, then it is apparens that Almighty God is pleased to
transfer from her the rule of the kingdom for the weale of it,
and this timne mut be ureed with great circumfp~erion, to avoid
the deceipts and tromrperies of the F'rench.

ANo then may the realmn of Scotland confider, being once

made free, what means mlay be deviled by God's goodnels, to
accord the two realhns, to endiure f~or timne to comne at thle plea-
sure of Abuig~hty God, in whole hands the hearts of all prin-
Cces be.

No II. (Vol. I. p. a 82.)

A letter of Maitland of Lethington's thus diretted,

To my loving friend James. Be this delivered at London.

UnISTAsrND by the last letter I received from yow, that zoth~anu-
discoursing withzoroutyeupnhemteofco-a

land, and commoditeys may enfew to that realm, hereafter giff 60 C tT
se prelently allift we with zour forces, ze find a nombre of the Lib. Cal.
contrary advvl~e, douting that we fall not at length be found 8. ix.
tr uty fr ends, nor mean to contynew in conflant ametye, albeitF
we promnile, but only for avoyding the prelent danger make zow ro h
to serve our turne, and after being delivered, becum enemies as original in
of before. For profc quhareof, they alledge things have patt his own
betwixt ws heretofore, and a few prefumptlones tending; to the hand.
Fam end, all grounded upon mrithuf ; quhilks, at the fir~it licht,
have Come thewe of apparence, but gif men wey not the circum-
flances of the matter ; but giff they will confer the tyme past
with the prelent, confider the nature of this caus, and eltlae
of our contrey, I doubt not but judgment fal be able to banilh
miftsuit. And firth I wad with ze thould examyne the causes
off the old inmitye betwixt the realms of England and Scot-
land, and quhat moved our ancellours to enter into ligue with
the Frenche; quhilkts by our (toreys and regittres off anti-
quiteys apea to be thele. The princes of England, some
tyme, alledgi~gng a certain kynde of foreraintye over this realm i
some tyme upon bye courage, or incited by incur lions off our
bordourares, and femfrable occarlons, mony tymes enter-
prifed the conquelt of ws, and fa far furth preilt it by
force off armes, that we wer dryven to great extram.
iteys, by loss of our princes, our noblemen, and a good part
of our cuntrey, fa that experience taught ws that our
owne fIrength was fearfe fufficicen to withltandi the force of
England. 'The Frenche sour auncient enemiyes, considering
well how nature had la placed we in a iland with zow, that na
nation was able la to annoye England as we being enemyes,
foucht to joine ws to theym in ligue, tending by that meCC, ane toc
dtoun zour armyes fromn the invasion ofFaceanoc
cupy zow in the defence offztour country at homne, offering f~or
that effift to beltowe some chargecs upon ws, and for comn-
patring of theyr purpos, choyfed a tymie to propone the matter,
quhen the fi-reche memlory of` injuria lately receaved at zour
hands, was fa depely prented on our hartes, that all our myndes
were occ~upiedl how to be revenged, and arme ourlelfe~s with the
;powar off a forayne prince laga 1. ziur enterprise~s thereafter.

HIS sswes the; beginninlg cati our confederacy w·i:5 Fran~ce.

At qubilk tymer, our cronicli·s miake mlention,, that ioame o~f Ihe

Ra w 'y Lett

wyfelt iorefa~w the perril, and Tfmall frute thould redound toi
w.S therelof at lenth : zir h~ad affedCion fa blinded jugemnent,
that the ad v ie of the mnaili pal t owercame the bell. The maill
part of all querells betwixt ws since that tyme, at leall quhen
rthe pr'ovocaion came on our lyde, hes ever fallen out by theyr
procuremient rather than any one caus off our felfes: and
qubenlaever w~e brack the peace, it come partly by theyr in-
tvlcements, partly to esche~w the conquest inte ndecrby that realmi.
B~ut now~ bes Cod's providence la altered the caie, zea changed
it to the plat contrary, that how hes the Frenfche taken zour
plarc, and we, off vetry jugemnent, becumi delyrous to have zow
in thieyr rowmeni. Our eyes are opened, we espy how uncare-
tul they have been of our wteik at all tyme~cs, how they m~ade
tws ever to ler ve theyr tuirne, drew us in mailt dangerous wc!ys
f;,r thtyr cniiommodite and nevertheless wad not flyck, ore
tymeuts, against the natour of the ligue, to contrak peace,
leaving w~s in weyr. W'e fee thiat their support, off late zere·,
wes not g:rantit for any 3ffeftion they bare to ws, fobr pyrie they
Sand olf our eflate, for recompense of the lyke friendlhip
rchawin to theymn in time off theyr afilialions, but for amibitioni,
and infaciable cupidite to reygne, and to mak Scotland ane ac-
ceffory to the crown of France. This was na friendly office, r
but mlercenary, craving hyre sarre exceeding the proportion or
thieyr defervinig ; a hale reahn for the defence ot a part. W~e (
feec theym manii ettly attempt the thing we fulpe~ted off zow; i
w~e feared ze mnent the conquell off Scotlaod, and they are
planely fallen to that w~ork ; w~e hated zow for doubt we had
ze ment evill towards ws, and fall we love theym, quhilks
bearing, the namne offtrends, go about to bring ws in maill vile
serv\itude ? Git` by zour frendly support at this tyme, ze fall
d~c!~re that not only fute ze not the ruyne o~f our country, but
w·Ill pr-lcerve th~e bberCtie thereof' firom conqueit by (trangeares,
lGil not ther occalion of' all inianitie with 20w, and ligue with
theyml, b~e take-n away ? TIhe caule~s being remioved, how fall
the rtfeaes~ riimane ? Th~le faRT of conqueLl mad3~e ws to hlate
zow~ aInd love theym·~i, the cabi elhanged, clhen wie fe~e theyml
plane~ly aIttemip! cdlnquet,, andl zow ichaw w~s f rendthip, fall we
noct h::ue them.II, andJ thiour ·Iocw ? if we· have Ichawne la
I're.\ conltanr e, contil~~nuin Ex macny treamcs in ami~tyy with theymi,

I0 I::, ith zu: ·w, thlar :ti` fal! nationesmay w1nvcius gu ia ct lplefour '

Iii r~ :-e wB f.Iy, thh; mlater ma~y be reconcylerd, and thecn

Ilcun· I u,; oire bI;,e. I think weill peace is the endlt of all weyir,
bu:t on ti' ze: mc iay he * B~redl, we will never th thr tlult that

I:.~:l.nl:!'o~l n, t w~e w~il bet conte nt to foireglo the ameitye at

! I:<!,/r ne: o a t' ing up~l.~C 1 ring ws)~C (In fu:lpcll~ll:Ion 1

w ithzo.

to a mailt manifelt danger, and becum a pray to theyr tyranny ?
Quhais aid could we implore, being dettitute of zour friend-
([hip, gif they off new wald attemlpt theyr formar enterprif'e
CQuhat nation myght help ws giff they wald, or wald giff they
might ? and it is lyke eneuch, they will not Rtick hereafter to
tak theyr tyme off ws, quhen dirplefour and grudge has taken
depe rute on baith lydes, feeing ambition has fa impyrit ower
theyr reason, that before we had ever done any thing myght
offend theym, but by the contrary plealed theymn by right and
wrang, they did not flick to attemipte the subversion of our
hale (tate. I wald ze thould not elteeme we la barayne of
jugement, that we cannot foresee our swne perril ; or ifa
foolilche, that we will not fludy by all god~e mreans to enter-
tayne that thing may be our fafetye ; qubilk confiftes all in
the relaying of zour friendships. I pray zow confider in lyke
care, when, in the days of zour princes off maift noble memlo-
ry king Henry the VIII. and king Edwardl the VI. meanes wer
oipened off amiytye betwixt baith realls ; w~as not at all tymles
the difference of religion the onley flay they wer not embraced ?
DId; not the craft of' our clergy and power of theyr ad~herents
subvert the: devift~s of the better fort ? But now has God off~
his-mercy removed that block f~urth off the way : now is not
theyr pra~ise lyke to tak place any mare, when we at commne
to a conformiity off do~trine, and profes the famie religion with
zow, quhilk I take to be the firayteit knot off amiitye can be
devired. Giff it may be alledged, that fomie off our country-
mien, at ony tyme, violated theyr promis ? gift ze liss to way
the circumilances, ze fall fynd the promis is rather brought oni
by necel'ite, after a great owerthraw off our men, then conunert
off fe will, and tending ever to our great inconunlodite andt
diecay off our haill Ra~te, at leift fa taken. B~ut in this cafe,
fall the preservation off our liberdie be inleperably joinedi with
the keping off promneffe, and the violation off our fayth cart
ws in mlaill milerable servitude. Sa that giff neyther the feate
off God, reverence of manl, r eligion, othe, pi omnile, nor war Id-
ly honeitye wes futficient to bynd ws, yet fall the zeale off` our
native countrey, the maintenance otf our owne Rate, th~e thfety
of our wyffes and childrene fromt slavery, comipell ws to kepe
promiffe. I am assured, it is trewly and fiucere~ly mient on our
part to continew in perpetual amietye with zow; it fall be ut-
tered by our proceed~ings. ~iff ze be as delyrous of it as we
ar, allurances mray be devyled, qluharby all partyes will be our
of doubte. There be gode mieaines to do it, fit initruments
for the purpos, tymie serves weill, the inhabitants of balli
realms wi~h it, God hes wrought in the peoples harts on b;ayth
parties a certaine Itill agrreoemen upon it, never did, at say tymer.
J`o many things concurre at onies to knyt It 'LIp, the ditpolitioin
off a fe~w, qiuhais hauts ar~e in Godiu hanlls, maly usak up thc·

it3 hale,

hale. I hope he quha hes begun this work, inainteyned it
qubile now, by the expedtation of mnan, Tlae perfyte it.

I pray zow, let not zour men dryve tymie in consultation,

quhether ze fall fipport ws or no. Seying the mater ipeaketh
for itfelfT, thiat ze mann take upon zow the defence off our caus,
giff ze have any refpeat for zour awne weill. Their prepara-
tives in France, and levying of men in Germiany (quheyroff I
am Ilately advertiled) at not altogydd~er ordeyned for us, ze at
the mark they shote at ; they feke our realme, but f~or ane
entrey to zours. Giff they thould dfire·tly fchaw hottilitie to
zow, they knaw. zo wald miak redy for theyme ; therefor they
do, by in~ered mneanes, to blind zow, the thinig, they dare not
as zit planely attemipte ~They feme to invadle us to th' end
that haiving affemibiedl theyr hale so. ces fa nere zour bordours,
they mnay unlok it to attack zow : It is ain; off theyr al~l fetches,
ma~king a fchew to one place, to lyghton ane other. Rem~emn-
ber iioa·r overtly zour placesj about Boulougne were a~ffizeit,
andl carryed awaiy. ze being in peace as now. How the enter-
prise of Calaiis wFas fynely diiremibled, I th~ink ze have no~t fa1:
lo~ne targo~tten Beware ot` the third, p ·event theryr policy b
pmu~ence. Giff ze let not the lyke difpolition preiently in
they:ni, ze i: nath;ing. It is a grosse· ignorance to mlilknaw,,
wvhat all n-tcions planely I(peks off. Tlak helfe me zay not here-
after, "' Haid i wiltl ;" ant· uncomnely featence to procede off a
wdre m en's Iinath. That is on wares chanced on to zow,
quhHi!: %2 C tyvcom nonly w lifed, that this countrey m, ght be di-
vor-ld Ir.,ui tae FrIen:Lche, and· is fa commie to pals as w~as mlait
exped::nr~t tc, for u. Fco; giff by your intyfleinent we had taken
thez m~terr in handt, ze my~ght have titlpedted we would have
been ontrulty frundis, ands na langer continued Itedf~ale, then
p-·· il hadl appealre~l But now, quhen off our self, we have
con~ceyved the- hatered~. provokedl by plivate in~juries, anl rthat
thieyr evil dealing with w\s hes deserved~ our irinimiye, let no
mn1: doubte but they fall lynd ws enemyes in eine~ll, that la
ungently bts deme~yned our counticy, anid at quh.ais hands we
canl look for noth~ing but all extiremitye, giff ever ri cy may get
thle up'per handc~ Let not this occasion, fa. happely offered,
cea;-pe zowv gitf zedo negleding thle prelent oppontunitie, anrd
hoping to have ever go te luk commeii fleping up owits
to be~ fearred z3ur enemyie waxe to great, and afrght
afterwardfs quhen ze waldl, ze fall not be able to put himl
downn ; and theni, to zour Iunart, after the tymec, ze will ac-
knowvledge tour er-ror. Ze hnve felt, by ex;,eriene, qubiat harmne
comic b otF ove·r fight, and~ truilinig to ·r >ur enemlyes promlelfe.
Werl offe'r zo~iw the occallon, quheyrby tour formier lolfe~s mayn
bec re payred. Qabilk gif we let over Ilydec, lirlifering ws to be
owetrrun, quha then, I pray zow·, fall flaiy thec Fliedlche, that
the~y thIl not invad z~~ ow inl zorUi ow n boulndej, Jjck it iS thei)r ]lu:\
ro reygoe~, that they can neyther be Content withi they fr ~brit·n

pref ect,

prelent, nor reit and be satisfied when they have gode luck, but
will ftli follow on, having in theyr awne brayne conceaved the
imiage of' fa great a conqueR, quhat think ye fal be the end r
Is ther any of fa finall jugemient, that he doth not foresee al-
readly, thiat theyr hail force fall then be bent against zow ?

It fall not be amtis, to confider in quhat cafe the Frenfche be

presently. They·r eflate is not always fa calme at hamle as
every man thinketh. And trewly it wres not theyr great redaines
for weyr miade theymi to tak this miater on hand, at this tyme,
but rather a vayne trutt in their awne policy, thinking to have
found na ref~tilnce, theyr opinion hes decenved theymn, and
that rnakes themi now amazed. The eflatcs off the emipire (as
I beare) has futed rcilitution off th' Im~perial towns Metz,
Toull, and Verdun, quhilk m~ay grow to famte berynes ; and
all thiing is not a calme within theyr awne countrey, the les fit
they be prelently for weyr, thle miare opportune etiirne ye the
timie for zow. Giff the lyke occaflon were offered to the
F-red~che againf1 zow·, wey, how g!adly wo~culd they em:brace it.
Ar e ze not efchamedt of tour (ktuth, to ipare thieym that hies
;I Aheay comipaffed~ zour- celti uuaon, g~itT theymr wer able ? Con-
fiderr w~ith zoui self qub~ilk is to be choylta ? 'To weyr againlth
themlr out with zour reakneii or within~ ? iff quhill ze flape,
we fal be overthrowne, the~n fall they not fayle to fute zow in
%our awnie countrey, and ule ws as a f~ote fRole to overloke zow.
But fomec will fay, perh~aps, they meane it not. It is foly to
think they wald not giff they wer able, quben before hand they
flick not to giff zour arnnes, and d~urpe the flyle of zour crown.
Then quhat difference there is to camip with~in zowr owne
bounds or without, it is manifest. Giff twa armuyes Diouldt
camnp in zowr country, but a mloneth; albeir ye rewcavctd na
othier harmie, zil thould zowr loffie be greatar, nor all the charge
ze will nede to bess ow on our fuppoi t willdraw to, befydtes thle
difllonour.

Le r not men, that eyther lack gode advise, or ar not for

per-ticular refpeAs we~ln aff·eae to the caus, miove tow to sub-
traA mour helping handl, by alledlging thiings not apparent,
for that they be pollible. It is not, I grant, unpomible that
wec miay recceave condiitiones of peace· , but I fee little likely-
hode tha~t our enemlvess will offer ws fak as will remlove all mii
tr uit, andlC giff- we wald have accepted others, thre miatter had
benie lang: or now comipounded·~ Lect tow not be m~oved for
thant thecy tcrnle wes rebelecs, and tliffaneslc our jut- que~rell
wvith the nam~le of cons~piracy againirt our loverayne. It is
Mir- beynec s r7 \ ht wve maineta\yne. It is thle )lber~ty off hir reaktne
we fLudy to preserve, with~ the hazardl otf our lyves. We are
not (God knawetlh) conune1L to this paynt for wantonecs, as n ien
unrpacient of' rewil, oir willing to Ichlake off` the zoke of' go-
vernemnent, but t d~r-a ·.-::ie to it by necelitic, to avoyde the ty-
ranniy of Ltrangeares, kcaking to def \iaude w~s of law.fill govern-

It 4 men~it.

ment. G~iff we thiouki (stter fthangeares to plant thmlelifes
peacealbly in nil the 11sentrhes of' our realmre, fortify the fey·-
pot-ec, andJ ma1;id imp~crtantr places, as an1 entlre to a plain con-
quest, niow in the ulnnorite' of our Love. une beyngl furth of the
rean'ne,, thoukil .ne niot be thought oncareful 017~ the commnoni
weill, 'wltrayan s of our natis e c-ouniti e~v, ands evill iub~jetts to
hir nI ·,ic ? ( hat other opinion could tchle have of ws r
Miipt:7 the niot ilutly herc~atter call u~S to accomIPt, as negligent
usiniillcres: ? (;: Ithangea·res thouldl br thus futfolred to broke
thle chefe oth e;cs, be·are: thec hail rewl, alter and p~ervert our
lawes an : ilberty at thryr- plclour , muyght not thle people eileerin
our nloblemen~l lunworthy theC place of` counfalours ( We't miean
·na wCyle to ilubtra;k our ob,\:~rC:eac from1 our fo)verane, to defr~aud!
hiir heynes· off her dlew reverence, rents anid reven~ues otff hi:
crow~n. W~e fEke nath;:!g but thatr Scotll:ual ma~y Tremane, a\s of
berfor,T' a fre reabile, Icew!it by bit byenes and hir miinitteres
bo~ne mlen of thec 1-(;n ; an~d that thle lucceflion of thet crown
many remaneilc withi theL law1L tul oder.

I wr.uo not ze I`,u!J r >t la lyttill elleme the friendship OF

Sco~tlands, :Miar zi jui~;e it not w~orthy to be emibraced. It M131
bec na thllljl commoiteO!i L for Zow~ Io be: detlivered off' the anoyar.ce
oi 10 neir a nyghtbour, qubais inhniiitye mnay mor0e trouble zow,
then·r off' any other niation alb~ei: tw·yfs as puillant, not lyeng
~r y .Iarche a ith 2·w\. Befyd s that ze fall not nede to feate
the Inrvail off` any pr ince lacky!ng the comimodite to invade
·Iow~ byv la. :, con oui hand. Conf~~lue quhat ruperfluous charges
Ze beffOWe unl th forjtification an~d keping of Bjarwick ; qlubilk;

ze y eaue >a mlean fMlowme, having ws to frendfes.

The rebn ofliit ( Ireland, Iing ot natour a gode andl fertill coun-
ti.r I, by :\iCo off` thet continewalld unquietne~s ondl lak of

play.ze kow t be' rather a b~urthen unto tow then great

adv9 . .an gifit w'ere p~a~ceable' maly be very com~-

suadio 1 v pa iticationl < uhayroff`, It is not onknowne to

·row\ quhat~ I· vic_ we ar sk~in to do. Refule not thcvt comi-

albreit Iis nt upl n lryti sn te on
tre,' 51:I· to, (ll;I c ,vw the· Iv:.c, ana areT( theC ilther to be emi-

v InuaJ.i Iorthe z>r a ar, alm a e m ilen t

.uted

or an cy ad~t~ ve: it was~

~~ not t; e fJp to comerj by .c)~

hous ison fyre ; T'hus I bid zow hartely fareweill: From Sant
Andrews, the 20th of January, ' 5 59.

No. Ill. (Vol. I. p. 1S89)

Part of a letter fromn Tho. Randolphto Sir William~ Cecil, from

the cam~p before Leith, 2c~th of April, a 960.

I ILonly, for this ateni, dilcha·ge miylelf of my promire An Orig(-

to the earl of Huntly, who Io deiireth to be reconllutnended nal in the

to you, as one, who w~ith all his beart favoureth this caule, to the Pa.per us.
wltennlolt of his pow~er. Hlalt the wolds that cam~ie out of his tice.
muthrl were able to perfunde an unexperienced man to Ipeak tarther
in his bcehalf, thian I da~re be bold to w ite. I leave it to your honour
to judge of' him, as of a mnid not unk nown to you, and will miyfelf
always miea~ure mny thoughts, as he shlall de erse to be spoken of
H ith miuch difficulty. and great periualion, he bath iubbleibed
w·ith the rett of the lords to join themi in this a~tion ; what~bom-
ever be can invent to the f~urtherance of this caule, he hath
promllkd; to do. with foleiran protellation, and miany words; he
trutlet·h to adlj(in miany to this caule; and faith f urely tha3t no
usian thall lic where he taketh part. He hath this day ~Lublribed a
bond between E;ngi:nd and this nation 3 he faith, thaot there
w~as never thing rhat likced him~ better.

No. IVT. (VTol. 1. p. 2.)

Randolph to Cecil, a oth Augutrs 60. From Edinburgh.

S INC CE the 2g~th of July. at what timne I wrote lail to your

LD onor, hae hardof oting worth the reporting. At An Oiig;-

this piethnt it miay please you to know, that the nrott part of the nal inl the
noblels are here at ived. as your honour (hall receive their nantes Papcer Ot-
to wri inig. '1 he call Of H-untly exculeth himnlelf by an inFusnIlity 1;ce.
ini his leg. His lieutenan t fr thisu (iUle is the lord of Lidi~ngton,
chofeni speaker of the parliamient, or harangue· naker a; thefelc m~en
teami It. Tlhe !irit day of their fitting in parlialentt will be· on
TIhurfliay next. Hitherto, as mnany as have been pre!ent of the
lords have conlununed and deviled of' certain heads then to be pro-
pounded, as, who thall be Ient into Fr~lance, who into Enrlaind.
Itis much easter to fnin them than ther other. It seeelltth Aiinot·
to be reso;lved upon thalt for E~ngland~ the Malettr ot Mlaxwcl. anrd
Ilabd of Lidingtyon. S~o F·rance, Phas ro~w and the julticec Clerk.
Alto the(y hlave consulted wh-omi thev think meetecl to namei for
the XXI V. oi the which thre XIl(. counth lors luilt be codent.
'I'hey internd very thiortly tor I~nd away Dingwall th~e herlJI~ into
1 `rance, with the namies of th~of they th1All chule ; and allo) 1o
rrcquiie the king andJ queen's condest unt~o this pad.nelr~int.

TIhe~y

They have deviied how to have the contradt with England con-
firmed by authority of parliament; how also to have the articles
of the agreement between them and their king and queen ratified.
There things yet have only been had in comnmunication. For the
confirmation of the contradt with England I have no doubt ; for
that I hear miany men very like the lamne, as the Earl of Athol,
the Earl of Sutherland, the L. Glamis, who dined yefferday with
the L. James. The L. James requefied mne this prelent day to
bring thle contraa unto him. I intend allo, this day, to ipeak un-
to the L. Gray, in our L. Gray's name, for that he promiled in
any hearing to subscribe, and then prelently would have done it,
if the contraGt could have been had. For the more ass~urance
againfl all inconvenients, I would besides that, that I trult it thall
be ratify'd in parliament, that every nobleman in Scotb~ud had put
his hand and let his feel, which may always remain as a notable
monument, tho' the sa of parliament be hereafter dilannulled.
If it might, therefore, stand with your advice, that thi· lorJs
might be written unto, now that they are here prelent I. thrlat es-
fed, or that I might receive fromn your Honr. fomie earneit chiarge
to travel herein, I doubt not but it would serve to good purpote.
If it might be also known with what fubitantiall and effe:tious
words or charge you desire to have it confirmned, I think no great
difficulty would be mrade. The Earl Marthal has oft been moved
to fubkcribe, he ufeth uto delays than the men judged he would.
His son told me yellerday, that he would rpeak with me at lei-
sure, so did alro Drumlantick; I know not to what purpole : I
have caused L. Jam~es to be the earneffer with the L. Marthal,
for his au~ority's fake, when of late it was in consultation by
what means it miight be wrought, that the amrity between there
Iwo realms might be perpetual; and among diverse men's opinion,
one Laid that he knew of no other, but by making theml both
one, and that in hope of thalt mo things were done, than woulJ
other wife have ever been granted; , the earl of Argyll adviied himl
carneftly to flickr unto that, that he had promiled, that it thould
pals his power, and all the crafty knaves of his council, (I am
bold to afe unto your H-. his own words) to break lo godly a pur-
pole. This talk liked well the allillers, howfolrnever it pleased
him to whom it was Cpoken unto. T'he barons, who in timne pall
have been of the parliament, had yefferday a convention amnong
themselves in the church, in very honet oand quiet fort ; they
thought it good to require to be restored unto their ancient liberty,
to have voice in parliamient. They prelented that day a bill unto
the lords to that effedt, a copy whereof thall be Cear as loon as it
can be had, It was onlwered unto gently and taken in good
par t. It was referred unto the lords of the articles, when they
are cholen to resolve thereupon.--Hrre follows a long:
paragraph croncernins thr /orycatE~ions of Dwnbalr, {:fr.---

This prelent moraig, via:. the 9th, I under flood, that the lords
intended to be at the parliament, which cauled me somewhat to
stay my letter, to fee what I could hear or learn worth the repor-
tmng unto your Hone. The lords, at ten of the clock, assembled
themfrelves at the palace, where the duke lieth ; from whence
they departed towards the Talbooth, as they were in dignity.
E~ach one being ser in his fear, in luch order as your H. thall receive
them in this Icroll. The crown, the mace, the sword, were laid
in the queen's feat. Silence being commanded, the L. of Liding-
ton began his oranion. He excul'ed his infufficiency to occupy
that place. He made a brief dilcourfe of things paltt and of what
necellity men were forced unto for the defence of` their country,
w~har remedy and support it pleased God to fend them in the timle
of their necelfay, how much he were bound heartily to acknow-
ledge it and to requite it. He took away the perfuallonthat was
ii nmany men's minds that lay back, that mildeemed other things
to be mecant than was attempted. He advised all eflates to lay all
particulars apart, and to bend themselves wholly to the true ser-
vice of~ God and of their country. HIe willed thens to remember
in what slate it had been of long time for lack of government,
and exercile of jultice. In the end, he exhorted them to mutual
Imity and hearty friendship and to live with one another as menbers
all of one body-He prayed God long to maintain this peace and
amiity with all princes, especially betwixt the realms of England
and Scodand, in the fear of God, and lo ended. The clerk of
register immediately Road up, aind asked them to what mlatter they
would proceed . It was thought necessary, that the articles of the
peace thould be confirmed with the com~mon codrent, for that it
was thought necelfary to lend them away with speed into France,
and to receive the ratification of them as soon as mlight be. TIhe
articles being read, were iimmediately agreed unto: A day was
appointed to have certain of the nobles subscribe unto them;, andi
to put to their leals, to be rent away by a herald, who thall also
bring the ratificanion again with him. 'The barons, of' whomn I
have above wrictten, required an adlwer to their reqlueR, Come-
what was said unto the contrary. The barons alledged for theml
cu~tom and authority. It was in the end resolved, that there thould
be cholen fax to join with the lords of the articles, and that if
they, after good advilement, thould find it right and necessary for
the commonwealth, it thould be ratified at ;his parrliamelnt for a
perpetual law. TIhe lords proceeded immlrediately hereupon, to
the chulfing of the lords of the articles. The order is, that the
lords spiritual chure the temnporal, and the temiporal the Ipiritual,
and the burgelfes their own. TIhere were chosen as in this other
paper I have written. TZhis being done, the lords departed andl
accomnpanried the duke, all as far at the tlaw, (wvhich is the gdte

gomng

going out of the high fireet) and many down into the palace
where he lieth. The town all in armour, the trumipets founding,
and other mulick such as they have. Thus much I report unto
your honour of that I did both hear and fee. Other folemnities
have not been used saving in timnes long pall the lords have had
parliament robes, which are now with them wholly out of' ule.

TH E names Of as many earls and lords rpiritual and tearporal

as are assembled at this parliament.

The duke of Chatelherault.

Earls. Lords. Lords Spiritual.

Arran. Erikine. St. Andrew's.
Argyll. Ruthven. D~unkell.
Athole. Lindley. Athens.
C'rawford. Somervill. The bilhop of thelIlerI
Caflils. Cathcart. Abbots and Priors,
M~arihdll. Hiumie know not howmnany.
Morton. Livingflon.
Glencairn. Innermieth. t
Surherland. Boyd.
Calthods. Ogilvy.
Rothes. Fieniing.
M/onteith. Glamlis. 1

Gray.
Ochiltree.
Gordon.

The Lords of abe Ar ticles.

Spiritual. Temlporal. Barons elefied to beI

of the Artic~les.

Athens. The Duke. Maxwell.
Illes. Argyll. Tilibardine.
Lord Jamles. Mad~hall. Cunninghambecad.
Arbroath. Athole. L~ocheavarr.
Newbottle. Morton. Pitarrrow.
Lindoris. Glencarin. Lundy
Cowpar. Ruthven. Ten Provoffs of the
Kinrols. Erlkine. chief towns, whichr
Kilwinning. Boyd. alfboare of' the Ar-

Lindsay. ticles.

So that with the Subprior of St. Andrews, the whole is 36.

Ir were too long for mne to rehearle particularly the diipo-

tition, and chiefly the affettions of there men, that are at thiu

thie chosen Lords of the articles. May it satisfy your Hon'.
for this timne, to know that, by the common opinion of men,
there was not a fubltantialler or mnore fufficient number of all forts
of' men choren in Scotland there many years, nor of whom mlen
had greater hope of good to infue. This present morning, evia.
the n oth, the L. of Lidington made me privy unto your letter i
he intendeth, as much as may be, to follow your advice. Somne
hard points there are. He himlelf is determined not to go into
France. He alledgeth many reasons, but rpeaketh lealt of' that,
that moverh himn molt, which is the example of the lalt, that
went on a miore graceful message than he thatl carry, and flood~ on·
other termis with their prince than he doth, and yet your honour
knoweth what the whole world judgetb.

Petition of the leifer Barons to the Parliament, held Aug. I g60.

MYlords, unto your lordihips, humbly means and thows, we Inclofedt

the barons and ticeholders of this realm, your brethren in Ran-

in ChriiR, That whereas the caures of true religion, andi coma- dlolph's
mion well of this realm, are, in this present parliamnent, to be letter to
treated, ordered, and eltablithed, to the glory of G~od, and mlain- Cecil,
tenance of the common wealth : and we being the greatest num'l s <;th Aug.
ber in proportion, where the laid caules concern, and has been' '560.
and yet are ready to bear the greatelt part of the charges there-
until, as well in peace, as in war, both with our bodies, and with
our goods; and feeing there is no place where we may do better
service now than in general councils and parliamients, io giving
our beQ advice, and realon, vote and counl'ell for the furtherance
thereof, for the maintenance of virtue, and punirhment or vice,
as ule and cultom had been of old by ancient afts of parliamnent
obierved in this realm; and whereby we underltand that we
ought to be heard to reason, and vote in all caul~es concerning the
coiinuonwealth, as well in counfells as in parliamnents ; otherwile
we think that wharlomnever ordinances and lIatutes be m~ade con-
cerning us and our eflate, we not being required and fulf'ered to
reaten and vote at the n sking thereof, that the fame thould not
oblige us to Itand thereto. 'Therefore it will ple~ase your lorclnhipsu
to take conctderation thereof, and of the charge born, and to be
born by us, fance we are willing to terve truly the conuniion well
oi this realm, after our efiate, that ye will, in this prelent pars.
liiment, and all counfells, where the commonin well of the realmi
is to be: treated, take our advice, counfell and vote, Io that, wirh-
cut the lamie, your lordlhips would fulfer nothing to be paledl
anrd concluded~c in parlianwarrt o~r councils aforclsind ; and tha~t all
a~th of publilunentt m~ade·, in rine~s p~ai, clrncerirnin Us for ucrU

confirmed, approved, and ratified, and adt of parliament made
thereupon. And your lordships adfwer humbly beleeches.

Of the /uccePf of :Anl petition, the foll/oring account is given by

Randolpb ; Lett. to Cecil, 19 Aug. r 960, The matters conclu-
ded and past by comiimon conlent on Saturday lalt, in litch folemio
fort as the firlt dlay that they assembled, are there. Firdt, that
the barons, according to an old a& of parliament, made in the
timne of Jamres I in the year of God a 4zy, thall have free voice
in parliamnent, this aA palled without any contradii~ion.

No. V. (Vol. i. p. 209.)

A letter of Thomas Randolph, the Englilh resident, to the right

worthipful Sir Wibliam Cecil, knt. principal recretary to the
queen's majefly.

9. Aug. I Iave received your honour's lettrers of the firfl of this month
a 46 . written at Of yes in Es sex, and also a letter unto the lord James,
Cout. Lib. fromt his ktinf~lan St. Comle out of France, in this they agree
B. to. so. both that the queen of Sc~otland is nothing changed of her pur-
3Z. pole in home coming. I allire your honour that will be a flou:

adventure for a sick craled womian, that may be doubted as well
what mlay happen unto her upon the seas, as affo how heartily
Jhe may be received when the cometh to land of a great number,
who are utter ly persuaded that the intendeth their utter ruin. come
when the will i the preparance is very finall whensoever that the
arrive, Ccarcely any man can be persuaded that the hath any luch
thought in her head. I have thown your honour's letter unto the
lord j lae, lord Morton, Lord Ledington, t hey w i h as your honou r
doth, that the m~ight be Ltayed yet for a space, and if' it were not for
their obedience fake, famie of them care not tho' they never saw
her face. T'hey travel w~hat they can to prevent the wicked de-
viles of thec re naichievous purpoles of her minilters, but I fear
thiat will always be found that filij hujus leculi, they do what
thety c.;n to itand with the religion, and to mnaintain amitiy with
their neighbours; they have affo need to look unto thems~elves,
for their hazard is great, and that they fee there is no remedy nor
safety for thcindelves, but to repole themflelves upon the queen's
maijflyv, our forereign's favours and support. Friends abroad
they haYve noea, nior maRny in whom they miay tru~t at houser.
Thercre are in mrind thortly to try what mayr be ass~ured at of the
qiUee's m a"jetty, and what they miay assuredly perform of' that
they intend to olfer for their parties. 'This the queen orScotlandJ
ab~ovr· all other thinigs doiubteth i this the feeketh by all means to
pa tenlt ; anld hath caul'ed St. C~omle, in her n~amle, earneltly to
write to chulrge hlim~ that no such things be attem~pted before her
rcanin~g homei . for thtrl it is laid, that they too already arrivedi
here out u of Enghod for the purpole~, whart femiblant fomever the
noubliemen du uuke, that they ate grieved withi their queen s re-

fulblb

fafal, that cometh far from their hearts. They, intend to expos-
tulate with me hereupon. I have my answer ready enough for
themn. If the thrust all Englishmen out of this country, I doubt
not but there will be fomne of her own that will bear us some
kindnels. Of me the (hall be quit, so soon as it pleafeth the queen's
mnajelty my miff rels no longer to use my service in this place. By
such talk, as I have of late had, with the lord James, and Igrd of
L~idington, I perceive that they are of mind that immediately of
the next convention, I thall repair towards you wish their deter-
mlinations, and resolutions, in all purpoles, wherein your honour's
advice is earnefily required, and thortly looked for. Wharlomn-
ever I desire myfelt, I know my will ought to be lubjea unto
the queen my lovereign's pleasure, but to content myself, would
God I were 10 happy as to serve her majetty in as mean a (tate as
ever poor gentleman did, to be quit of this place ; not that I do
in my heart wax weary of her mlajelty's service, but becaul~e my
time and years require tome place of more repole and quietners
than I fmnd in this country. I doubt also my infufficience whers
other troubles in this country arise, or ought thall be required of
mne to the advancement of her majelly's service, that either my
will is not able to comnpals, or my credit fufficient to work to that
effied, as perchance shall be looked for at my hands. As your
honour hathr been a Imeans of my continuance in this room, so I
trust that I thall find that continiual f~avour at your hands, that 10
loon as it thall fLand with the queen's majefly's pleasure, I may
give this place unto some far worthier than I am myself, and is
the mean season, have my course direAed by your good advice
how I may by my contrivance do some luch service, as may be
agreeable to her majelty's will and pleafore.

THESE feW WOrds,· I am bold to write unto your honour of

myself. For the reit, where that is withed that the lords will
floutly continue yet for one month, I aiffire your bonour that
there is yet nothing omitted of their old and accuffomled manner
of doing, and feeing that they have brought that unto this point,
and thould now prevail, they were unworthy of their lives.

I FINo not that they are purpoled To to leave the m~atter. I

doubt mnore her mnoney, than I do her fair words ; and yet can I
not conceive what great things can be wrought with forty thou-
sand crowns. and treasure of her own here, I know there is no r'ure
or ready means to get it. The lord of Lidington leaverh nothing
at tbas time unwratten, that he rhinketh may be able to latisfye
your desire, in knowledgre of the prelent slate of things here.
H hatfoanever cometh o;f that, he findeth it ever best, that the
comle not ; but if the do com~e, to let her know, at the tirit,
w~hat the Ishll 6od, which is due obedience, and willing service,
rs theemb~race Chaii, and deri~e to live in pe~ace with her neigh-
bours. By lurch lettCerls yoS h avC lait ftcCWCOd, yOUT h00000

Ilomewhat

I'omewhat underflanderb of M'r. Knox himself, and also of others,
what is determiined, he himnlelf to abide the uttermoi), Rrd other
never to leave hiMl until God have taken his life, and thus toge-
ther with what comf~ort fomever it will pleafeyou to give him by
your letters, that the queen's majeltl doth not utterly condemni
himn, or at the leaf I in that point, that he is so fore charged with by
his owna queen, that her miaiefly will not allow her domng. I doubt
not but it will be a great comifort unto him, and will content many
others; his daily prayer is for the mnaintenance of unity withl
England, and that God will never fuffer men to be so ungrate,
as by any perfuarion to run beadlong unto the detru~tion of
themi, that have feved theit lives, and rellored their country to
liberty. I leave farther, at this time, to trouble your honour,
defaring God to fend luch an orniity between these two realms that
G~od mray be glorified to them of this world. - At Edenburgh the
9th of Augutt, 1 96r.

N~o. VI. (Vol. I. p. 20~.)

A letter of Queen Elizabeth to Qcueen M~ary.

To the right excellent, light high and m~ighty princesse, our

right dear and well beloved latter and coulm the queen of
Scotland.

t6th of IG i7h' T exrcellent, right high, and mighty princesse, our
Aug. right dear and right well-bel<,ved sailer and codfin, we greet
1561. Pa- you well. T~he lord of St. Cofmie brought to us your letters,
per Office, dated the 8th of this present at Abbeville, whereby ye signify,
from a that although by t he answer brought to you by Monsieur Doyzell,
Copy. ye might have had occalton to have entred into lome doubt of

ou~r annity, yet after certain purpol~es passed betwixt you and our
amibalTadfor, you would alfure us of your good mieaning to live with
us in amlity,, and for your purpole therein ye require us to give
credit~ to the: laid St. C~oline We have there-unto thought good
to anliwer as toiloweth. T~he Iame St Cofmie hath made like de-
claration unto us on your part, for your excule in not ratify~ing the
treaty, as yourlef miade to our amba7ssador, and we have briefly
enfit ered to every the (amie points, as he can thew you : and if he
th.all notr I;0 co, yet least in the mnean tealon you might be induced
tol t hink th:Ht vour reafonsu has satisfied us, fomnerally we a lure you,
th:ct to our requells your adrwer cainnot be reputed for A rthi'-
f::Etion. F·or we require no benefit of you, but that yOU wi[
1 .'crm niyour pr on~inet whecre-unto you are bound by your sea arlt
! our hand1(, for the refulal w~hereof we fee no reason alledged cRI,
serve. N'either cover we any thing, but that which is in your oLIn
pOw'er ai Queetn of Scotland, that which yourlelf in words 3o t

(peech doth confers, that which your late bufband's our good bro-
ther's amnbaffadors and you concluded, that which your own no-
bility and people were made privy unto, that which indeed made
peace and quietners betwixt us, yes that, withour which, no
perfedt amnity can continuet betwixt us, as if it be indifferently
weighed, we doubt not but ye will perceive, allow and accomn-
plith. Neverthelefs,perceiving by the report of the bringer, that you
miean furthwith upon your cominig home, to follow herein the ad-
vis~e of your council in Scotland, we are content to furpend our
conceipt of all unkindnels, and do as fre you that we be fully re-
solved, upon this being performed, to unite a sure band of amity,
and to live in neighbourhood with you as quierly, friendly, yea
as alluredly in the knot of friendthip, as we be in the knot ornP-
rure and blood. And herein we be so earnefily determined, that
the world thould fee if the contrary thould follow, (which God
forbid) the very occasion to be in you and not in us ; as the flory
witneffeth the like of the king your father. Our uncle, wNi~h whom
our father fought to have knic a perpetual bond by inviting to
comein this realm to York, of which matter we know there re-
main with us, and we think with' you, sundry witnesses of our
father's earnelt $ood mezning, and of the error whereunto divers *
evil councillors toduced your father; or finally where it feemethi
that report hath been made unto you, that we had sent our ad-
.miral to the seas with our navy to empeache your pairage, both
your servants do well underttand how falle that is, knowing for
a truth that we have not any more than t wo or three Tmall barks
upon the seas, to apprehend certain pirates, being thereto en-
treated, and almoit compelled, by the earnelt complaint of the
ambassador of our good brother the king of Spain, made of certain
Scottithmen haunting our seas as pirates, under pretence of let-
ters of marque, of which matter afowe earneltly require you,
at your colrning to your reailme, to have fomne good confaderat~ion,
and the rather for rerpe8t that ought to be betwixt your realme
and the countries of us, of France, of Spain, and of thle hodre of
Burgundy. And so, right excellent, right hiigh and mighty prin-
cels, we recommlend us to you with most earnest request, not to
negleat there our friendly and fillerly offers of friendihip, which,
b~efore God, we mean and intend to accomplith. G;iven under
our signer at Henyngham the 16th of Auguff, in the third year
of our reign.

No. VIl. (V~ol. I. p. 244.)

A letter of Randolph to the right hionourable Sir William Cecil,

knight, principal Icecetary to the queen's majefly. I Cth of

Maf' 1563.

OFlate, until the arri\·al olmIonfieur la Croch, I had nothing P'apel at-

worth the writing unto your honour.-De3fore his coninag. 6ce fromi

we had so little to hint upon, thiat we did nothing but pals our thle O.igi-

theei in fedi~s, banquetting, maiking, and running at the ring,
and luch!\ike. He brought with himn luch a numibe~r of letters,
Lndi fclic abun lance at news, that for the space of three days,
\·e gavn\e ou Il~vesj to no bing elie but. to reading of writings, and
hearing ot' tales ma~ny 10 vruely reportedi, that they might be
comiparedl to any that ever L~uciane did write de resris narrationi-
bus. Amiong all his tidings, for the molt allired, I fend this
unto your honour as an undoubted truth, which is, that the car-
dinal of L~orrain. or his being with the emiperor, mnoved a ma~r-
riage bet·ween his youngeRt 100, the duke of Aulthuche, and this
queen, wherein he hath so far travailed, that it hath already
comie unto this point, that if the Emnd it good, the f~aidi duke will
out of ha7nd Ilend hither his amibaffador, and farther proceed to
the conllianunation hereof, with as convenient Ipeed as may be;
and to Ihe intent her mnind may be the better knlown, la Croch is
lent unto her with th~is me~I~ge~ l~iom the cardinal, who hath
promniled umio the emperor, to hav· w'ord again before the end
of May , and for this caulela Croch is readcy for his departure,
and hiis letters writing both day and night. 'This queen being
before advertized of his towardnels, by m-any means, hath fought
facr off, to know Iiny lord of Murray's mind herein, but would
never Io plainly deal with him,, that he could learn what her
mieaning is, or how the is bent. She ureth no man's council, but
only this man's that lat arrived, and afteredly until the L. of
Lidington's return, the will do what the can to keep that secret,
and becaule relolution in his ablence cannot be taken, the will,
for this timne, return la Croch with requcl~, to have longer time
to devile; and after, with the moss peed the can, the fully pur-
poleth to advertizre himi, I mean her uncle the cardinal, of her
miind. Of this matter the L.. of Lidington is miade privy. I know
not whether by some intelligence that he had before his departu re,
or since his arrival in France·, diivers letters have passed between
her gr'ace and himi, whereof as mluchh as it imiported not greatly
the knowledge of, was commnunicated to fomec, as much as was
written in lypher, is kept unto themselves. Whether also the L.
of Licdington hath had conference with the Spanith anrbaffador
in E~ngland of this miatter, or any like, I leave it unto your ho-
nour's good mieans, to get ttue kniowledge thereof. Guesses or
liurmiizes in so grave mlatters, I would be loth to write for verities.
1 his as so your honour may ta!ke for truth, that the emperor
hathi offe~red with his 100, f or this queen s dower, the counly of
TI' roll, whrich is laid to be worth 30,000 franks by year. Of
this miatter allo, the rhingrave w~rote a letter unto this queen, out
of France not long lince. TIhis is all that prelently I can write
unto your honour hereof, as I can come by farther knowledge,
your honour thall be informled.

leav n received your honour's writings by the Scottilh man,

tiat fIrlt cam~e inrto there parts, he brought as so letters unto this

queen

queen fromt the L,. of Lidington, their date was old, and coni-
rained only the news of France. I perceive, divers ways, that
Newhaven is forre closed, but I ami not Ib, ignorant of their na-
ture, but that I know cthey will Iay as miuch as they dare do, I
will not lay as the prov·erb doth, ' canis tim~idus fortius latrat.'
From~ bence 1 do aifure themi, whial it mens fomnever they ma~ke,
or how pitifial fourever their mone b~e, they are like to receive but
finall comafort, for all their long allit·. W~e fland daily in doubt
what triendfhip we shlall need ourielf, except we put better order
unto cur misruled papilts, than yet we dlo, or know how to bring
to pals, that we mnay be void of the~ir combel~r.

'To miorrow, the I fth of this instant, thle queen departeth of

this town, towards Edenborough If myi hap be good, you thall
rhoroughly hear lotine mierry tidings of thec Bp or St. Andrews;
upon Wcdnelday next he Ihall be atrreigned, and five other priests,
for their massing at Eaiter tltt. T'hus m~olt humibly I take Iny
leave; at St. Andrewa the '5th of May, jS63.

No. VIII. (Vol I. p. 251.)

Letter of Randolph to the right honourable Sir William Cecil,

knight, principal secretary to the queen's miajo~ily.

MV1AY it please your honour, the ;th of this inflant, Rowletf, roth ofA-

thsqueen's lecretary, arrived here; he reporteth very ,,IIril

honefily of his good ulage, he brought w~ith him mlany letters app;e O -~
unto the queen that camie out of France, tull of lamentation and 6ice fromt
sorrow. She received flom~ the qlueen mother twro letters, the the Ori i-
one contained only the rehearral of' her griefs, the other rtgnity nal in hiJ
the flare of France as then it was, in what fort things were ac- w ad
corded, and what farther was intended for the appeaflng of theowhad
dircords there, not Mniffrutingg but th.(t if reason could not be had
at the queen of England's hands, buit that the realmi of France
thould fmd her ready and willing to cupport and defend thle right
thereof, au byl friendlhip and old alliance between the two realmis
the is bound.

How well there words do agree with her doings, your honour

can well confadjer, and by her wri:ings in this fort unto this queen,
(which I off~ute your honour is true·) you miay alliaredly kn~ow,
abat nothing th~all be leli undone of her pa ct, Ihat may m1OVe debate
or controverfac between this queen andi ourr Sovereign.

I r was much miuled at by the queen hLer!C·lf how this new

kindnel camie about, that at this timell the rcceived two long letters
written all wH~h her ownI hand~, laying, all thre timie tance hier re-
turn the neverr rece~ivedl halls Io miniy b~nes, as wecre in one of the
letters, which I canl yikit telliy by Ilhe q!ueei'h own lay~ing, anid
other good allia~nce, whiere hbbestoi~ I have niot bee~n Jclt ived.

I can al:o farther affee your hlonour, thlat t)is queen bath fayed
thait the knoweth, now, that the trienidthip or the queen's mnajeC-

1yayLovereign miay fthod her miore inl Iead, than thalt of her

goo aother in Franlce and as the is delirous ~f` theml both, 10

wvill the not loie the one for the or her. I mnay also farther assure
IYour honour, that whtiitomever thle occatlion is, this queen hath
iomne w:hat in her heart that will burfl out in timle, wthich w·ill runni-
fell that lonie unkindfnet hath paifed between themi, that will
not be ealjy forgotten. In talk fomnetimes w~ith mnyfelf, the frith
that the queen miother might have uled the mlatter other wife
thian the hath done, and doth much doubt what thall be the luc-
cers of her great drfire to govern alone, in all things to have her
will. Seeing then that prelently th~ey (Land in luch terms one
with the other, I tho t it belter to confirmi her in that mind, (rhis
queen I miean) than to Ipeak any word that miight caule her to
conceive better of the other. Aind yet I am, assured the thall re-
ceive as friendly leittrs, and as mnany good words fromi this queen,
as the other did write unto h~er. Whether the queen m~other
will Cpeak any thing unto the L. of Lidington of that purpole,
the did write unto this queen of, I know not, but if the do, I
think it hard if your honour can get no favour thereof, at his
return, or 1 perchance by fomie mieans here. It may, perchance,
be written only by that queen, to try what ad~wer this queen will
give, or undei ltand what ruind th~e beareth unto the queen's
ma~jefly our lovereign. The queen knoweth now that the Earl
Bothewell is sent for to London. Shle caused a gentleman of hers
to enquire the caule; I answered, that i knew none other, but
that his takers were in controverly who rook him, and that it
thould be judged there. I know that the thinketh much that he
is not lent into Scotland. It is yet greatly dou bted that if he
were here, he would be reserved for an evil initrument. It'
the Lord of Lidington have not beenl plain with your honour
herein, he is in the wrong to rhole who are his friends here, but
snoR of all to himlll~t~ There comies a vulture in this realm, It
ever that man comie again into credit.

No. 11 (Vol I. p. 298.)

TIhe oration mrade by W'illiam Maitlarnd of Lethington, younger

secretary for the timne, in the parliamnent holden by our love-
reign the king's mother, queen of this realm for the time, the
tiie of the rettituttion of Umqyuite Matthew Earl of Lenox.

MY lords and others here convened. Albeit, be that it has

pleaied her mlajelly m~olt graciously to utter unto you, by

her own mouth, ye may have fufficiently conceived the cadre of
this your prelent afembly; p et having her majelty's comnmand-

alient

ment to lupply my Lord Chancellor's place, becing preiiently a3
ye fee decealed~, I ami willed to exprels the: iune footewhat m~ose
at large.

No rouR it is, how, in he: higrhnes's mi~not ity, a procels of

forfaltour was decreed againt mly lord1 of'LenioY, fbr certain of`-
f'tnces alledged coulnritted by him, Ipec~iied in the dfomie andi cen-
sement of Parliament given thereupon ; by· reason whereof he hias
this long time been exiled, and ablent forth of his native country,
how grievous the fame has been unto him, it has well appearedl
by divers his faites, sundry ways brought unto her ma;jerly's
knowledge, not only containing niiorl humblel and due fubmiifron,
but always bearing witness of his good dievotion to her Majelly
his natural princels, and earnett affcetion he had to her Highnels
mioR humble ferv ice, if it thould please~ her manjelty of her clemenc-
cy to aiake himn able to enjoy the benefit of a fu'ojlad ; any
refpe~ts miight have mioved her Highnels favourably to incline to
his requell, as the anciency of his bodre, and the farnamle he
bears, the honour he has to appertain to her Inajefly by atllnity,
by reason of my Lady MaIrgaret her highnels's aunt, and divers
other his good considerations, as also the effedtuous reque~t of her
good filter the Queen's Maijefly of England, whole earneR comi-
mnendation was not of les(1 mioment, befidles that of her own na-
tural, her majefly has a certain incl~ination to pity the decay of
nobli houles, and as weheard, by her own report, has a great
deal more pleasure to be the infirumnent of the uphold, m~ainte-
nance, and advancement of the antient blood, than to have mnat-
ter mniniffred of the decay or overthrow of any good race. Upon
this occalion, her majefly the more tenderly looked upon hlis re-
quest, and her good lilter the Queen of England's favourable Ile-
ter, written for recommendation of his caule, in confcidration
whereof not only has the granted unto him her letter ofredi;tution,
by way of grace, but also liced~ed himn to pursue, by way of'
redudion, the remedies provided by the law for such as think
themfrelves grieved by any judgmient, uniordlerly led, and to have
the procels reverled ; for examnination wNhereof, it has pleased her
majelly prelecntly to asse~mble you the three ellates of this her
realme, by whole advice, deliberation, and decilson at her m~a-
jefly's mind, to proceed forward upon his comiplaints, as the
mierits of the cause, laws of the realmi, and pradtice obler ved in
such cafes. will bear out, I might here end, if the miatter we
have in hand give me not occallon to fay a ti-w m~ore wasus, not
far different from the fame fub~jeQ, wherein Iwould extend the
circumltances miore largely. Ifl I eared not to offend her high-
ness, whiole pre fence and miodcl1 nature abhors lo~ng Iteaking and
adulation, andi 10 will comrpel usc to speak luchi thin~gs, as maiy
teensi to tend to any good~ andi p *ClOft polint , and; ~lexi it th·,u!J b

comlpted to me, as that I were oblivious, ifl thould amit to put
you in remnembrance, in what part we miay accept this, and) the
like demionfirations of her gentill nature; whiole gracious bha~i-
viour towards all her Cubjects, in general, may serve for a goodl
proof of that felicity, we miay look for under her happy gove n -
Inent, 10 long as it thall please G~od to grant her unto us , f or a
good harmlony to be had~ in the comon~a weill. the oflices be-
tween the prince and the fabjea~s mult be recipraque; as b~y her
Iinaje~ty's prudence we enjoy this prelent peace with all foreign na-
tions, and qulcetnels amlong yourelvl~es, in loch fort. tha, I !hink
jufftly it miay :·e afirnied SCcotlandf, in no mran's age that prethatly
live;, was in greater tranquility , 10 is it the duty of nl! uR her~
loving fubjeas to acknlowledge the fame as a molt high benefit,
proceeding: from the good governmient of her mnajcefly, declaring
ourselves thankful for the fame, and rendering to her ma~jesty
1lch due obedcience, as a jult prince may look for at the hands ot
faithfist andi obedient 1ubjefts. I mlean no forced nor unwilling
obedience, which I know her nature does detest, but foch as~
proceed~s ~liam the contemiplation of her modell kind of regimlent,,
w~il for love and dluty fake pr-oduce the fruits thereof. A goodi
proot have w~e all in general had of her majeity's benignity thele
three years, that (he has lived in the government over you, and
mnany of' you have largely ratled of her large liberality and frank
dealing, on the other part her hrighnershas had large appear-
ance of your dutiful obedience, Co it becomes you to continue, as
we have begun, in consideration of` the miany noble examples of
her clem~ncyy above others her good qualities, and to abhor and
deea lt all false bruites and rumiours, which are the mos t pellilent
evils that can be in any commnon weil, and the lowers and inven-
tors thereof. Then miay we be well allired to have of her an
sioott graCcius princesse, and the molt faithful and loving fubje~ts;
and to, both the head an~d the miembers, being encouraged to
maiintain the harmiony and accord of the politic rbodies, whereof
I mlade mention before, as the glory thereof thall appertain to her
ma~jefy, so thall no Tmall praile and unspeakable commodity res
dound the~rethrough to you alluniverfally her f~ubjedis.

N~o X (Vol. I. p. 267.)

T7he perils and troubles thalt may prelently ensue. and in time to

comne fbllow, to thle Queen s miajefly of England, and the
flare of this realmi, upon the marriage of the Queen of Scots
to thle Lo~rdt Drley.

Ii 1 S TI, rlhe miinds of fisch as be affe·~ted to the Queen of

Scous. eber fbt erielf.or for the opinion of her peec

a: rlhis cron.II Or for the desire to have charge of the formie of
;r !'g;on in thui Icnho,, or folr the dilcontentation they have of the

Qucen 5

comifo~red, and induced to dev'il and lab~ou r how to baing their
defa~res to pass; and to miake fomie citimatne w·hat persons thle~c
are, to the intent the quantity of' the dacnger mray be w·eigh~ed ;
thle famie miay be comipaff~ed in those forts either within thec leaksc
or without.

Toli f;rit are linch as are fpecinily devo·tedl to the Qgecen or

Scott·, or to the Lordl Darley. by bondl of blood! and al;ibmee , aS
thi1r all the houle oi L~orrain andl Guile for her pnrt, and ths Ea:rl
of Lenox and his w'ife, all lisch in Sicotlandl as Iw~ of therir IWoodc
aInd have rececived difple:;!'ires by the D)uke of` Chdrcdhelrault anJI

this reahin and other counitiris, tha~t are decv,,ted to th= authorityr
of Romre, and miliQke of the religion now Ieceivedl ; and in thete:
two forts are thefubitance of thenal comiprehended, that thall take
com for t in this marriage.

NEXT therefore to be considered whait perils and troubles thel;e

kind of mien thall intend to this reatlm.

FIas r, the general (cope and\ mairk of all their desires is, and

always thall be, to bring the Queen of Scotts to have the royal
crown of this realm; and therefore, though the devilees miay
vary amiongft themfeclves for the com~pafling hereof, accordiing to
the accidents of the timnes, and according to the impedimnents
which they ihall find by means of the queen's mlajefly's salions
and governments, yet all their purpoles, dr ifts, d~eviles, and prac-
tices, thall wholly and only tend to make the queen of Scotts
queen of this reahul, and to deprive our lovereign lady thereOf ;
and in their proceedings, there are two mianners to be cons~idered,
whereof the one is far worle than the other ; the one is intendedl
by them~, that either fromt malicious blindneis in religion. or for
natural affedion to the queen of Scotts, or the lord LGarley, dio
persuade themflelves that the laid queen of Scotts hubl prelently
more right to the crown than our lovereign lady the queen,, of
which fort be all their kindred on both tIdes, and all luch as as a
devoted te popery, either in England, Scotland, Irelanrd, or
elsewhere; the other is mieant by them, which, wilh lels malice,
are perluaded that the queen of Scotts hath only right to be the
next heir to lucceed the queen's majelly and her iffure, of whiich
fort few are without the realm, but here within, and yet of themr,
not To many as are of the contrary, and fioro thes~e two forts thatl
the perildeviles and praatices proceed. Fromt the thit, which
imagine the queen of Scotts to have perpetually right, are to be
looked for there perils. Firit, it is to be doubled the devil will
;inect lome of themi to imangine thre hurt of the life of our diear
forereign lady, by luch means as the devil thall iuggelt to themr,
although it be assuredly hoped, that ah~nighty C~od will, as hel
liath hitherro, graciou ly pro'eR and preferrve her from~~ luch~
dangers. Secondly, there will be artemiptedl, by p~ertisalois, by

8$ 4 base

brutes, by rumiours, and luch like, to alienate the minds of good
lubjeats firo thle queen s majelty, and to counciliate them to the
queen of Scotts. and) on this behalf the frontiers of the not th will
be miuch tolicited and, laboureds. Thirdly, there will be attemnp-
ted caul~es of fomei rumiults and rebellions, rfcelaly in the northi
towaids Scotland, 10 as thereupon miay foliow ibm~e open e~nter-
prize ser by violence F'ourthly, there will be, by the laid queen a
council and f riends, a new league mnade with France, or Spain,
that thall be offederve to ab-is realmi, and a f~urrherance to their
title. And it is affo very likely, that they will let a foot as many
praAics as they caln, both upon the frontiers and in Irehoid, to
occnlion the queen,'s anlqelly, to encreafe and continue her charge
thiereby·, to treain her fromn being mnighty or potent, and for the
attemrpting of shI theft things, miany deviles will be imnagined,
frarni time to tunie, aInd no negligence will therein appear.

FROw the le~cond fort, whic~h mean no other favour to the

queen oF Scotts, bu~t th~at thre thouldf lucceed in title to the queen's
unijltly, is; not miuch to be feared, but that they will content
theml lrves to lee not onlyj thle queen's ma~jelly· not to mnarry, and
1;b imrpeachi it, but to hope th'at the queen of Scotts thall have
ifue4, which they will think to be miore pleafible to all meKn, be-
caulet thelreb the crowns of England and Scotland Ihall be united
in one, and thereby the occalloo of war thall ccale ; with which
perfuation many people m~ay be seduced, and abuled to incline
themselves to the part of the queen of Scotts.

Toll remdiefs againit thele pet ils.

A Duplicat.

4th Jlune A summary of the consultation and advice given by the lords and

I 5 s.Others of the privy council. C'ollededi out of the sundry and

Cott. Lib. leveral Ipeieches oi' the laid coundellors.

so. '39-' Lor~d Keeper. Mlr. Comptroiler,

Lord Treaiurer, M~r. Vice C~hamubrlain,

i Derby. Mir. Secretary,

Earls of 4 Bedtord, Cave,

(L cacefter. Peter,
1.0.J Admiiral, Mlalon.
Lortd Chamrberlaijn

Qu~elions propounded were there two.

'-. TRSTI, whtat perils miight ensue to the queen's majelly, or

,th;E realhn. of the marriage beCtwixt the Queen ofScotts.

:Drc the Lordi Danrn)v.

L. WLhjt war;C ilcet to be dlone, to nvoid or remnedy thd ami~e.

TIo the Fir d.

Th'ie pulis being fundr y, and( very mnany, were tedluccJl by

few,~ < udellers int~o only one.

A P PENDIX. 28r

i. Firit, that by this miarriage, the Queen of Scotts, (being

not married) a great numrber in this reshni, not of the worit lub-
!eas, mn~igt be alienaeted in their mrinds fromn their natural duties
to her madjelky, to depend upon the faccefs of this mlarriagge of
Scotland, as a miean to eltabliln the luccrllion of both the crowns
in the iifue of the iamie miarriage, and so favour sil deviles and
praAices, that thould tend to the advancement of tbe queen of
Scots.

2. Secondly, that considering the chief foundation of them,

which furthered the marriage of the lord D~arnly, was laid upon
the truss of such as were papifts, as the only mieans to reffore the
religion of Romie, it was plainly to be Ieen, that both in this realm
and Scotland, the papifts would molt f~avour, miaintain, and for-
tify this miarriage of the lord Darnley, and would for furtherance
of fac~ion in religion, devil~e all means and prad~ices that could be
within this reahui, to dilturb the ellate of the queen's majeity,
and the peace of the realm, and consequently to atchieve their
purpoles by force, rather than fail. B~y some other, there perils
having indeed many branches, were reduced, though somewhat
otherwise, into two forts, and there were in nature luch as they
could not be calily levered the one from the other, but were knit
and lincked together, naturally for maintaining the one with the
other. The firlt of there fort oi perils was that, by this marriage
with the lord Darnley, there was a plain intention to further the
pretended title of the queen of Scorts, not only to succeed the
Queen a roajefty, as in her belt amity the had profell~ed, but that
to occupy the queen's efkate, as when the was in power, the did
manifeltly declare.

THI a econd was, that hereby the Romith religion thould be

created, and increased daily in this realm, and thele two were
thus knit together, that the furtherance and ma~intenance of' the
title fLaid, in turthering of the religion of Rome within chis realm a
and in like mlanner the furtherance of the fame religion (tood by
the title, for other wife the title had no foundation.

Proves of the firit.) And to prove that the intention to ad-

vance the title to dillurb the queen's usajelty, mull needs enlue,
was considered that always the intention and will of any person is
most manifell, when their power is greatest, and contrary when
powrer is Cmall, then the incention and will of every perion is co-
vered and lels frees So as when the queen of Scotta power was
greareft, by her marriage with the dolphin of France, being as`-
terwards French king, it muanifettly appeared of what mind (he.
and all her friends were. using then manifenlly all the means that
could be deviled to impeach and dil'poffels the queco's majefly,
firlt by writing and publithing herfell in all couritries queen of Eng-
land s by granting charters, parents, and conuniillions with that
stile, and with the armis of Enlglrnd,, both the F'rench and Scotts.
w~hich charters remain Itill undefa~ced,; and to profccute it with

I ed

effeA, it is know~n w~hat preparations of war were mnade. and rent
into Scotland , and) wchat other forces were alffembled in foreign
countries; yea, in what ma~nner a thamlethl peace was maide by
the French with king hI'l;lp, to emnploy all the forces of France,
to pursue all the m~atters b~y force, which by Gorls providence,
and the queen's marllrj:y contrary power, were repelledl ; and afl
ter wards, by her- hufband~'s death, her fortune and power b~eing
chaniged, rhe intention began to hide illelf, and ab~hongh by the
Scottith queen a commiif:ar ys an accord was miade at Edenbrough.
to reformii all those tidles, and~ claimns, and preten~cs, yet to thiis
tlay, by delays andj cavillations, the ratitication ofl that treaty hath
b~een defe~rredl. And io r ow, as loon as the thall feel her powe~r,
th~e w~il l (t the Camne again abroad, andj by coniidering of luch er
rors as were coaumitted in the firit, her si ends and allies will ameind!
the thmec, and proceed fithflantially to her puipole. By lomie it
was thought plainily, that the pesil was gre~ater of this mnarriage
w2ith the lord Darnley, being a tubjeA of~ this realm, than with
the a ghtieft prince abroadf; for by tbis, he being of this realm,,
and having for the caule of religion, and other relpeAs, m~ade a
party here, thould encreale by force with dim~inution of` the power
of the reahun, in that wharroever power he could mnake by the fadc-
tion of the papiit, and other discontented persons here, thould be
as it were dedufted out of the power of thlis realm : and by the
marriage of a fIranger, the could not be all~ured of any part here ;
Io as by this marriage the thould have a portion of her own pow-
er to serve her turn, and a fmnall portion of adverlaries at home in
our own bowels, always seen mIore dangerous than treble the like
abroad a whereof the examnples are in our own flories many, that
foreign powers never prevaried in this realmi, but with the help
of fomne at home. It was also rememibered, that feeing now be-
fore the attempt of marriage. it is found, and mianifef~ly seen,
that in every corner of the realm, the f~Aion that moil f~avourerh
the S~cottith title, is grown Itout and bold, yes leen mlaniftltly in
this court, both in hall and chamber, it could not be (but except
good heed were Cpeedily given to it) by this marriage, and by
the prnAice of` the tautors thereof, the fame fation would thort-
ly encreale, and grow i0 great and dangerous, as the redrels
thereof would be almno(t delrpe~rate. And to this purpole it was
rememnbered, how of late in peruling of the lubtlance of the
justices of the peace, in al~l the countrys of the realmi, Icantly a
third was found fully as fused to be, truffed in the ma~tter of reli-
gion, upon which only Ithing the queen of Scots title Joth hang,
and lamie dfoubt miight be. that thle friendfs of the earl of Lenox,
ands his hiad miore knowledge hereof than was thoughit, and there-
Jpy miade avant now in Scotlandl~, and their pirty was to great in
I :gagbou ;1 the queen's maije·tty duri~t not attem~pt to contrrary his

reIrgeAn inl rlhh fur t, was the futui of thle peril- dfeclared, being'

heing notw~ithilanding more largely and p!ainly Tct out, and mnade
lo apparent by manny l'bre argumecnts, as no one of` th~e councjl
could~ deny thanu to be but miany, and very dangerous.

Second Quellion.

THE quellion of this conflirlttion was what were mleett to be

done to avoid there perills, or else to divert the force thereof f remi
hurting the reakul ; wherein there wecre a great numbher of par-
ricular devises propounded, and y·et the muore part of` them was
redluced h~ by oic into three heads.

I. ToII f irit thought necessary by all perron·, as the only thing

of. the mloti mnoment and efficacy, to remledy all thelre perrils, andL
mnany others, and luch as without it, no other remedy could be
found fufficient, and that was to obtain that the queen s Inajefly
would mnarry, and miake therein no long delay.

. ToH E tecond was to advance, eftablilh and fortify indeed the

profeilion of religion, both in Scotland, and in England, and to
deminith, weaken, and feeble the contrary.

3. To ae third was, to proceed in s~undry things, either to dii-

appoint and break this intended mnarriage. or, at the leaf), there-
by to procure the fame not to be to hurtfill to this realm, as
otherkife ir will be.

Tn afrit of there three hath no particular rights in it, but an

earnef and unfeigned desire and faire, with all humblenels, by
prayer to Almighty God, and advice and council to the queen's
majesty, that the would differ no more time from marriage,
whereby the good rubjeas of the realm might (tay their hearts,
to depend upon her majelly, and the iifue of her body, without
which no furery can be deviled to ascertain any person of conti-
nuance of their families or poileries, to enjoy that which other-
wife thould come to themn.

SEcGND, concerning the matters Of religion, wherein both

truth and policy were joined together, had these particulars.

FIR s , whereas of late the adversaries of religion in the realm

have taken occalson to comfort and increase their fa~tion, both in
England, Scotland, and abroad, with a rumour and expedation
that the religion thall be thortly changed in this realm, by means
that the bilhops, by the queen's maqjefly's commandment, have
of late dealt threightly with fomne persons of good religion, be-
caule they had forborn to wear certain apparel, and luch like
things, being more of form and accidents, than of any fubitance,
for that it is well known that her majety had no mecaning to com-
fort the adversaries, but only to maintain an uniformity as well in
thing~es external, as in the fubitance, nor yet hath any intention to

maeany change of the religion, as it is ef~lalithed by laws. It

was thought by all mien very necessary. for the flipprelling of the
pridec and arrogancy of the adverlaries, indiscetliy hereby to notify,

by

by her special letters to the two archbifhops, that her formner com-
miandmnent was only to retain an uniformity, anld not to give any
occasion to any perron to mnisjudge of her mnajelly, in the change
of any part of religion, but that the did determnine firmly to main-
tain the formn of her religion, as it was eltablinhed, and to punilh
fach as did therein violate her laws. And in there points, some
also withed that it might pleale her archbilhops, that if they thould
fee that the adversaries continued in taking occallon to fortify their
fallion, that in that cafe they thould ulre a moderation therein,
until the next parliament, at which timre, loose good, uniform,
and decent order miight be deviled, and eftablilbed, for luch
ceremonies, so as both uniformity and gravity m~ight be retained
amongst the clergy.

ToH se~cond m~eans was, that the quondam bilhops, and others,

which had refuled to acknowledge the queen a majetty's power
over themi, according to the law, and were of late dirperfed in
the plagure time to sundry places abroad, where it is known they
cease not to advance their faftion, might be returned to the tower.
or Ibome other prison, where they miight not have fisch liberty to
seduce and inveigle the queen's miajeity's fub~jefts, as they daily do.

Tw e third mieans was, that where the bishops do complain

that: they dare not execute the ecclefaiaical laiws, to the further-
ence of religion, for f~ear of the premnunite wherewith the judges
and lawyers of the resho,. being not bedt adhetecd in religion, do i
threaten theml, and in many cales lett not to pinch and deface
themu, that upon luch cafes opened, some convenient authority
mnight be given them, from the queen's majefly, to continue du- ·
ring her pkleauie.

TusE fourth was, that there were daily lewd, injudicious and

unlawf ul books in Englilh brought frorn beyond feae, and are
boldly received, read, and kept, sad especially in the sorth, fe-
ducing of grear numrbers of good liabjetts, the like boldnels
whereof was never les eredi in any other prmncefs's time, that Lbome
ftreight order might be given to avoid the fame, and that it might
be considered by he jurdges, what ma~nner bs crime the fame is,
to maintain fisch books, made dircilly agarinlt her mrajelty's au-
thority, sad ma~inlaining a Foreign power, contrary to the laws of
the realmi.

Tu e fsilh was, that where a grear number of monks, fr yers,

and fisch lewd perlons are fled out of Scodland, and do serve in
Engtland, especially in the North, as curates of churches, and all
lisch of them as are not tound honet and conform~able, may be
banithed out of the realm, for that it appearesh they do low fe-
dition in the reakn,, in manny places, and now will increase alwir

Joines. ''1u s frixh, where lGothy having eccler.fullcal livings. are on
thle oljher rrsue the Iea, and tionr thence mraintain Iedition in the

reakrn; that livings miay be better bellowed, to the commodity
of the reahui, upon good tubjefts.

To` l eventh is, that the judges of the realm, having no Imall

authiority in this realm in governance of all property of the realm,
miight be rworn to the queen's miajefly, according to the laws of
the realm, and lo thereby they thould for coolcience fake maintain
the queen's majefly's authority.

T'he particulars of the third intention, to break and avoid this

rnarriage, or to divert the perils.

FIR st to break this m~arriage, considering norbing can likely

do it, but force, or fear of force, it is thought by some that thele
mieans following miight occallon the breach of the marriage.

r. Tust~i the earl of Bedford repair to his charge.
2. Tn Ar the works at Berwick be more advanced.
3. Tu or the gartifon be there increased.
4 TNATr all the wardensput their frontiers in order with rpeed,

to be ready at an hour's warning.

5.~ Tnr** lame noble person, as the duke of Norforik, or the
ealof Salop, or luch other, be feat into Yorkthire, to be lieute-

nant general in the North.

6. Tu'Ar preparations be made of a power, to be in readiners

to serve, either at Berwick, or to invade Scotland.

7. Tn ATr prelently lady Lennox be conunitted to lome place,

where the mlay be kept fromn giving or receiving of intelligence.

9. TuAt the earl of Lennox and his Lon may be sent for, sad

required to be fewt homle by the queen of Scots, according to the
treaty ; and if they thall not comne, then to denounce to the queen
of Scotts the breach of the treaty, and thereupon to enter with
bo~tility ; by which prolceeding, hope is conceived (so the fame
be done in deeds and not in thews) that the marriage will be avoi-
ded, or at the lealt that it m~ay be qualified fro ni any perils;
and wharloever is to be done herein, is to be executed with rpeed,
whillt the has a party in Scotland that th~oureth not the mnarriage,
and before any league made by the queen of Scots with France
or Spain.

Sons other allows well of all there proceedings, saving of pro-

ceeding to ho~lility, but all do agree in the rett, and also to there
par ticu larities follow ing

so. TrHAT the earl's lands Upon his refurla, Of his To00 S efu-

sing, thould be seized, and baltowed in gift or cultody, as Lhall
pleale her mlajcity, upon good iubjetts.

SI.· TuA~r all m~anife(L favourers of the earl, in the North or

ellewhere, be inquired for, an~d that they be, by sundry means,
well looked to.

s 2. THAr inquiry be made in the North, who have the

liewardlhip of the queen's majdlty's lands there, anld that no

peIlon,

perron, deserving miilruit, be ulf~ered to have governlance or
rule of any of her 1lalje~ts or lands in the Norrb, but only to
retain their fees, and mlore truity person have rule of~ the iamle
peoples lands.

I3. T~hat all frequent pdf~ages into this realm, to and fromt

Scotland, be retrained to all Scottith men, saving inch as have
life~t conduft, or be clpecia~lly recommlrended from Mr. Radn-
dolph, as favouters of the realmn.

'+. T~hl. Ibom intelligence be ured with such in Scotland,

as favour niot the marriage, and they comiforted fromn timie to
timie.

15. Tuar the queen's miajelly's houfhold, chambler, and pen-

fione~rs, be better seen unto, to avoid broad and uncomily Cpeech
aled by sundry againit the slate of the realm.

16. THAr the younger ion of the earl of` Lenox, Mr Charles,

be removed to fomle place where he mray be forth comring.

17. Tuar~ considering the fa~tion arnd ride of the queen of

Scotts, hath now, of long time received great favour, and con-
rinued, by the queen's ma1:jelly's favour herein to thle queen of
Scotts and her miniffers, andc rhe lady Cathaiine, whom the laidi
queen of Scotts accompited as a comnpetor unto her in pretence of
title, it may pleale the queen's mlajefty, by lome exterior aft, to
thew fame remifion of her dis~pleasure to the lady, and to the
cearl of Hartford. that the queen of' Scotts thereby may hnd
some change, and her friends put in doubt of lunther proceeding
therein.

a 8. ToH 9T wholoever (hall be lieutenant in the North, Sir

RaJlph Sadlcr may accomipany him.

19. Tu AT With speed the realmn of Ireland may be committed

to a new governor.

20. Ps Nr\ta , that there advices being confadered by her

maijelty, it ma1y pled~e her to chure which of them the likerb,
and to put theml in execution in deeds, and not to pals them over
in consultations and lpeeches.

F'Oa it is to be ass-ured, that her adverlaries will use all mneans

to put thieir intention in execution. Some by praftice. lome by
f orce, when timre thall ier\·e, andJ no timie can serve To well the
queen's maje~ly to interrupt the perils, as now at the firit, before
the queen of' Scotts put poles to be fully lettledc.

No.

No.~ XI. (Vol. I. p. z76.)

Randolph to the earl of Leiceller, from Edinburgh the 3s(1 of

July a 909.

MVIAY it please your lordihip, I have received your lordfhip's Cott. lib.
(hip's favour towards use, whereof I think miy self alwaysCo fol.za16.
allured, that what other mithap soever befall me, I have enough An Origi-
to comfrort mnyfelf with ; though Ihave not at this time received nal.
neitber according; to the need I itand, nor the neceflity of the
servile that I aml imployed in, I will rather pals it, as I miay with
patience, than trouble your lordship to be further futer for me,
w·hen there is so little hope that any good will be done for me.
I doubt not but your lordrfhip hath heard by such information,
as I have given from hence, what the present slate of this
country is, how this queen is now become a miarried wife, and
her huiband, the self fame day of his marriage made a king. In
their desires, hitherto, they have found so much to their con-
tentment, that if the reft succeed and prosper accordingly, they
may think themfetlves much happier, than there is appearance
that they thall be, so many dilcontented minds, so ranch mil-
liking of the lubjefts to have there matters thus ordered, and in
this fort to be brought to pars, I never heard of any marriage,
so little hope, so little comifort as men do talk, was never seen,
at any timie, when men thould miol have thewed themlfelves to
rejoice, if that consideration of her own honour and well of her
country had been as appertained in so weighty at cafe. This is
now their fear, thr overthrow of religion, the breach of amidec
with the qlueen's mrajefty, and the deftruftion of as many of the
nobility as the hath milliking of, or that he liketh to pktch a
quarlie unto. To fee all there inconveniencys approaching, there
are a good number that miay looner lamient with themselves, and
complain to their neighbours, than be able to find remnedic to
help them, some atempt with all the force they have, but are
too weak to do any good, what is required other wayts, or what
mneans there is made your lordihip knoweth ; what will be an-
Iweared, or what will be done, therein, we are in grear doubr,
anid though your intent be nev~er to good unto us, yer do we so
miuch fear your delay, that our ruin thall prevent your sup-
port when council is once taken. Nothing to needfull, as rpeedy
execution. Upon the queen's manjelly, we wholly depend, in
hrer miajefly's hands it Itandeth to lave our lives, or to fulfer us
to perith; greater honour her marjedty cannot have, than in
that which lieth in her majelty's power to do for us ; the lumis
are not great, the number~s of men are not many that we defare;
many will dayly be found, tho' this will be some charge ; men
grow dayly, though, at this time, I think her mlajdlty thall loore

but

but few, her friends here being once taken away, where will her
anasjelly find the hike; I Ipeak lealt of that whichl I think is meat
earnettly intended by this queen, and her butband, when by hiu,
it was lately said, that he cared mnore for thle papilts in England,
than he did for the protetalnts in Scotland , if theretore his hops
hie so great in the papills of England, wvhat may your lordilhip
believe that he thinketh of the protellan's there , for his birth, for
his nurritour, for the honor he hath to be of kine to the quien
mly miiitrefs. if in pref~erring those~ that-are the queen's ma~jedt(Ie
worlt lubjedis to thoite that are her bell, he declareth what Iiind
he beareth to the queen's miajeties self, any mian mlay fay it bi
slenderly rewarded, and his duty evil forgotten ; he would now
feemn to be indiffe~rent to both the religions, the to d~e her mat~r,
and he to come sometimes to the preaching , they were married
with all the folemnities of the popith timie, taving that he heardi
not the mlals,; his ipeech and talk argueth his miind, and yet
wouldi he fain feemi to the world~ that he were of Ibome religion,
his words to all mnen, againtt whom he conceiveth any diipleafure
how unjult soever it be. 10 proud and Tpitull, that rather he'
leemeth a m~onarch oif the world,. than he that, not long since,
we have seen and known the lord Dalrnly ; he looketh now for
reverence of miany, that have little will to give it himn; and fomie
there are that do give it, that think himl little worth of it. M41
honor that miay be attributed unto any mnan by a wife, he hath i:
wholly and fully ; all prailes that miay be Ipoken of himn, he
lacketh not fromr her fel1; all Jignities that the can indue himu with,
w~hich are already given and granted ; no mnan pleaferh her thai
contentech not him, and what miay I fay mnore, the bath given over
to himl her whole will, to be ruled and guided as himnfelf bell
liketh; L

he can as miuch prevail with himi, in any thing that r!

againlt his will, as your lordflhip mlay with mie to perfwade that I
thould hang miy self ; this Ilat dignity out of hand to have beea
proclaimied king.lhe would ha ve i t de ferred u n till it were agreed by
parliament, or he had been hiallelf of 2 1 years of age, that things
done in his namie might have the better authority. He would,
in no cafe, have it deferred one day, and cither then or never,
whereupon this doubt is rilen amiongit our men of law whether
the being clad with a hulband, and her husband not twenty one
years, any thing without parliamient can be of firength that io
done betweenl themll; upon Saturday at afternoon, there mlatters
were long in debatting. And before they were well refo ~ed
upon, at nine hours at nighlt, b~y r bree heralds, at found of the tr ain-~
pet, he was procaimeind king. Trhis was the night before the
mrartsage; this day, Monday at twelve of the clock, the lordit
all that were in the roun, werre prele~nt at the proclaimiing of hill
again, where nio mnan said 10 miuch as amien, laying his fathier
that cried out aloud God save his queen. TIhe mannner of' the
mairriage waPS in thiis fort, upon Sunday in the miorning between

five and fIx, the was conveyed by divers of her nobles to the
chapell; the had upon her back the great mourning gown of
black.. with the great wide mourning hood, not unlike unito that,
which (he wore the cloulfull day of the buriall of her hulband i
the was led into the chapell, by the earle of Lenox and Athol,
and there was the lef~t untill her husband came, who also was
conveyed by the lamie lords, the mlinidter priefis, two, do there
receive themi, the bands are alked the third time, and an infiru-
mient taken by a Nar'tour that no mian said againlt themn, or alledg-
ed any cause why the marriage miight not proceed. The words
were Ipoken, the rings which were three, the middle a rich dia-
niiond, were put uponi her finger; they kneel together, and miany
prayers said o\ er themi, the tarrieth out the mals, and he taketh
a1 kil:, andt leaveth her there, and went to her chamnber, whither
whithin a Ipace the followeth; and being required according to the
solemnity, to calt off her cares and leave alide those forrowfull
garments, and give herlelf to a miore plealent life, after fomes
pretty ref~ufall, more I believe for m:nner fa~ke than grief of
heart, the luffer!ed them that Itood by, every mian that could aIp-
proach to take out a pin, and 10 being commiired to her ladies,
changed her garmrents, but went not to bed, to fignifie to the
warid, that it was not lull that mnoved themi to mlarry, but only
the necellity of her country, not, if God will, long to leave it
deflitute of an heir. Sulpicious men, or such as are given of all
things to miake the worlt, would that it thould be believed, that
they knew each other before that they camne there, I would not
your lordship (hould so belie~ve it, the likelihoods are 10 great ra
the contrary, that if it were pollible to fee such an aCdt done, I
would not believe it. Alter the marriage followe:h colnlcnonly
great cheer and dancing : to their dinne~r they were conveyed by
the whole nobility; thle trumipers f;oundt; a largels; cried; mainy
thrown about the houle: in great ;ibundance~, to risch as were
happy to get any part ; they dine both at one table, the upon
the upper hand, there far ve her thd~e earls At hole Sewer. M/or-
ton C~arver, Clauiv~ord cup bearer; thell- rerve him in like otrrces,
earrlu liglington, Calfels, and Glencairn,; after dinner they' danced
a while, and then retired themfielves till the hour of lupper ; and
as they dined 10 do they sup, fomie dancing there was, and so
they go to bed , of all this I have written to your lordship I ami
not Oculatus re~tis, to this, but of the verity your lordship thall
not need to doubt, howfover I camie by it i I was sent for to have
been at the fispper, but like a curr~ih or uncourtly carle I re-
fuled to be there; and yet that whiich your lordthip ma;y tluink
mright~ move mec miuch, to have had thle fight ot Iivny iltreis, of
whoml there eighteen days by juff account Igot not a fight, ~I a
Iny lord taken by all that fort as a very, evil pedo;n, which in mly
heait I do ·ell allow, and like of m~ryself the better, sori yet cani
I not find cither honel\ or good rhat liketh their Jouings; I

V m,. II. I' lin,

leave at this timie fisrrherr to trouble your lordshi~p, craving par-
clon f~or myi! long silence, I have m~ore ado than I am able to dif-
charpe, I walk now miore abroad by night than by day, and the
day too little to dicharge uiylelfof that which I conceive, or
recei·ve in the night. A-s your lordlhip, I ami thre, is partaken
of loch le~tters as I wtrie to MVr. Secretary, so I trust that
he thni he to this, to Gi\ve me of a little inhour, to write the
Itinle ag in, m~oll humb\ly 1 take my leave at Edlinburgh, the Ilat

No. XII. (Vol. 11. p. 279)

Lctter o~f the earl of Bedfordl to the honourable Sir Wi~lliamn

( ecl knr. her maqjefly's prin~clpal lecretary, and one of` her
high;'nels s pri vy cou~ncil.

z2dof Sept. ~it'~'FTER my h~earry cocincendations, th·i; da~ nt noon, cnp-
I 96i. tain Hlic;welll came bi:her, who brough~t with himl the
I..loer-OE- quee':'" nI'smj:1v's !etterS containing her tiall relolution, and pledulre
t:ie fron~it for all things he hadt in chlFrge to give informaton~c oi, Iaving
thec Oroigi !hat I-·r the aid of the lords of the congregation, there is nothing

"l de:errminred, or as the Itleadrpreifed in the Came letters, and for

that purPole received 1, this mnorning, a letter Iubloribed by the
duke, the earl of M~urray, G;lencarne, and others, craving to be
ho!pen with 300 barquchulvers out of thiis ganrifon, for their
better d~efence. Andi albtit, I know right well the goodnels of
thieir cauie, andi the queen's ma~jeity our forereign~s good will,
and care tow~ardis themi; and do dlo underfland that it wvere very
requilite to have themi holpen, for that now their c.?ule is to be
:n this mannner decided, and thatr it now itandeth uJpon their utter
orverthrow anid undoing, lirie the quleen's part is at the least
grou~:, and they not multch abhove lo000 , beficdes, that the qiaeen
hath ha~ruc]ihnivetrs, and theY hlave none, and do vet want the
powue r hec ;he ealrl of A\r!:,IVe thoukil bring to thcni, who is
not ye~t jcined with thebsr;I have thecrrupon thought good to
pray lou to be a mean3~ to ILarn her majneitv a plealirre in this be-
hnl, w\ hyi, and how, r hall antiverr them., or other wife deal in
th;s mrattcr, r.0w :It tI;s rhcir extremne necellity. F'or on the one
fid!e. hethl thereu!pon~ ribir wa'rr ruin andi overthrow, and the
mnirc-tale ])v'lbvric:: ": edgIon: 0 there; and, on th~e other Isde,
to uI~1\enture lb, g eatlrc an w cighty a matter a thliS is. (alb'eit it be'

r.:UntP~l, nd r:l hy·~~ toi beingI per.adventurer,uopn our head3
l:OI; wl.it. untI r.n:h! 1!n the mlean unlie to Icave the place unljil-

rr-fuply 1(,- 12 t· unneI~; nal by that( meC.I~ :ans) tl , to leave the

fc.ioni new\ b~~ pa re prepating;; to !i~s know not I w\hot to thy

1u;s

how IIto1

do AdCotu ore 1 .I word thaef, as

n- thnt

having so many times written touching this matter, no reforute
determnination cometh. And lo between the writing and looking
for anfwuer, the occallon cannot pars, but muli needs proceed ands
have lucceis. God turn it to his glory ; but surely all mnens
redfon hath great cause to fear it. Such a push it is now comie
uinto, as this little supply would do much good to advance God's
honour. to continue her majefly's great and careful memory of
them. and to preserve a great mnany noblemen and gentlemen.
It it b~e not now helpen, it is gone for ever. Your good will
and offeftion that way, I do nothing millruff, and herein thatl
take lisch good advice, as by any means I can. lIreceived fromi
there lords: two papers inclosed, the effect whereof thall appear
unto you. For thore miatters that captain Brickwell brought, I
thail nnlwer you by mry next, and herewith fend you two letters
from Mr. Rand~olph, both receivedl this day. By him you thall
hear that the proteltants are retired fromt Edenborough furfther off.
So as I hope your resolution for their aid thall comie in timie, if
it comne with rpeed, for that they will not now so prese~ntly need
theml; and so with my~ hearty thanks commnit you to God. From
Berwick, this 2d of Sept. IS569.

Nuo. XIII. (Vol. I. p. 279.)

The queen to the earl of Bedford.

SPON the advellrmizments laely received From you, with iz Sept.

such other things as came also from the lord Scrope and a 969

Thomns Randolph, and upon the whole matter well considered, Paper Of-
we have thus determi~ined. We will, with all the speed that we 6ice.
can, fend to you 3000 i. to be thus used. It' you Ihall certainly
undeditand that the earl of' Murray bath luch want of money,. as
the im~prelling to himn of I coo i. mi~ght (land himn in flead for the
help to defend himself, you thall presently let himn secretly to Un-
derltand, that you will as of yourlclf. let himt have to much,
and to we will that you let himi ha:ve, in the mioll Ifocret fort that
you can, when the said tim thall com~e to you, or if you can,
by any good mieans, advance hint fame part thereof beforehand.

'1 b~e other 2000 1. you thall caule to be kept whole, unipent,

If it b-e not that )ou hail l ee neccellry caute to imnpreft famie
palt thereof to the now numibers of the (oo root men, and t oo
horti men ; or to the cating out of` wages of Lisch workm!en, as by
fickn~els, or other wife ought to be drichargedl. And where w\e per-
teive, b~y your sundry letter::, the <amell·~ requllt~~ of the tahi~
earl oMurra and his aflciates l, the they mlighlt have, at th~e
Ib:ll. 300 of cour sol)diers, to aid themii. A~nd thart \00 allo
w~:ite, that thoc' wve would not rcornumed~l yau to give (IILIm aid, set
if we w.ouldC but winikatyu on heiadfe o
blvnme yo ta fr attremlpting luch thnlGs,, a:, yo`u abbh the h11 ut,

well, you thall underhavnd for a truth, that we have no inten-
tion, for miany reipects, to mia~intain aIny other psinces fubjefts,
to take armns against therir lovereign; neither wouki we willingly
do any thingR to give occasion to m~ake wars betwixt us and that
prince. w~hich has <a~uledl us to forbearr, hitherto, to give you
any power to let theni be: aidled w'ith any mecn. IBut now, con-
ftiering we take it, that they are puttzed, niorwithltanding their
humbtle lubmritionl, and otffer to be ordered~ and tried by law andi
judtice whiich being Icfuled~ to theml~, they are retired~ to Domn-
frice, a p~lace rwar our well m:0ichies, as it feemezth there to de-
tend themlcive.·, andl adding the~reunto the good intention that
prccently the French king pretendecth, by leniding one of his to
joini w~ih lamle one of ours, and joinrty to tre~at with that queen,
and to indruce hier to turbear this mlanner of viole~nt anid rigorous
ploceeding :Igainlt her lutllyett, for which purpole, the French
amb~assador hecre with as has lately written to that queen, where-
oi answir i· danily· looked f~r, to the intent in the miean timie the
laid lords thould not be opp~effed and ruined for lack of lo~nie
help to defend themr, we are conternt, andi do authorize, if you
thaill fee it ncceir~ly for their diefence. to let themn (as of your
own ad~venture, and without notifying th~at you have any direfti-
on therrin f~oro us) to have the niumbier of l00 soldiers, to be
taken either in whole handls, or to be drawn out of all your bands,
as you thall fee caule. Anrd to cover the m~atter the better, you
thall tenai~ thele numbiers to C'ar ltle, as to be laid there in garrilon,
to def; ndi that m~arch, now in this timie that 1Lch powers are on the
other Cpart drawing to thole fromniers, and so florrn thence as you
thlall rec caurle to dirett of, the tarie r~nubers or any of themi may
m~oll covertly repair to the talid lordfs, w hen you thlallexprety ad-
verrize. that you f end them~ that ;cid only tor the~ir defence and not
therewith to Iinake war agairllt the queen, or to dto any thing that
may offendl h er per son. w heren y·ou lhall I;opreci Iely deal with theml,
that they miay perceiv·e y·our case to be luchl as it it thould other-
wife appear, your dlangesi thoculd be t0 great, as all the thiends you
have could~ not be abbl~ to lave you toward~s us. Andl Io we aflure
you our conrciecnce mo~ve~th us to cha~rge· you, so to proceed with
themi, for o~the~rwie thian to p~rcderve themn toiin ruin, we do
not yic·!J to give thai, n aid of' moine!· or men . Andl yet we would
n~ol that wrher cos shlce were· knlowl 1)To be uI act, but rather
to, be c~over~ed with your ownl delite anid attempi~t.

n~o. XIV. (VlI .M )

Randtolph to ICecil, froml E`dinblurgh, 9th Feb. '569g-6.

AnOrgi humb~tle <'u y coulde~lred; w'hat to write' of the pedefnt
na, tate of the countr uIi

am to ncertirun, by realoni of thre

daily alterations of mens minds, that it maketh me much flower
than, orherwife I would. Wi:hin thele tew days, there was
Ibome good hope. that th~is queen would have thewed Ibome fa-
vour towards the lords, and that Robert MJelv~in thnuld have re-
turned unto themi with comlfotrt, upon fomec condition·. Since
that timie, there are comie out of France Clernau by land, andl
TIhorneton by sea ; the on~e fromi the cardinal, the other tromt
the bilhop of Gladgow. since whole armial neir her can there
be good word g~otten, nor appearance of any goodl intend~ed
theml, except that rthey· be able to perlfwade the qulen's ow~jelty
our lovereign to- miake her heir apparrnt to the croun of' Eng-
Iland. i write of this nothinig lefi thatn I know, that ther hath
tpoken. And by all merans that the thinkech the belldoth travaile
to bring it to pdis. TIhere is a brandl ltely deviled, in wli~ch the
Ihre pope, the emrperor, the kfng- of Spain, thle duke of Savoy,
with divers princes; of Italy, and th~e queen miother fulpected to
be of the famle confederacy to mrainitain papiltry throughout
Chaiiio~ndfom,; this band~ was feet out of F'rance by Tfhornetonl,
and is Ibbleribcd by, this queen, thre copy thereof rema~ining w·ith
her, andl the principal to be returned very thortlic asI heair by
M~r. Stephen W'i~iln, a fit minitler for such a devlith dlevilei; if
thle coppie hereof mayl be gotten, that fthall be fonRt as : conveni-
ently n ny·. M~oclieur KRanabellet camei to this toun upon MIon-
dlay, he Ipoke that nigh~t to the queen and her hulband, but not
long; the next dlay he had long conferecn~cs with themn both,
Oner norhing camee to the knowledge of sny whereof' they in-
treated. I cannor (Speak w~i~h any that haith any hope that there
wMlj be any goods donie tar thle lords by bic, though it is laid that
he hath very good will to do th, to the utterm~of of his power.
He I ; odged nea;r to the court, and liveth upon the q~ueen';

hag Upon Sundaly the order is givcn, w~hecact means

r;lide to mlany to be pre~lnt that day at th:~ mial~s. UpCon Candle-
Ianals day there canried their candfles, wi:h the qjueen, hler hdT-
Iand.l the earle of Le~nou, and e~arle At:hol; divers othecr lords
hiave been called together and required to b:e at the miafs that
dlay, lonsie have promiiled, as Caff is, Molcngome~rie, Secon, Cathl-
Iels. O~thers have refufedc, as Flemning, L~evinglton, L~indlay,
luntley and) Bothel; andl of' themi all Hmbjtell is the floutetf,
buit worlt thought ol ; it was mioved in council that mals: thouldl
have been inl St. G;iles church, which Ibeliese was rather
to tem~pt merin'.: miinds, tha~n intended~ indeed: She was of Iare
litndledl ;agin to f;ndl Robert Merlvin to negaciate with luchr as
i':e trutletih i~in amonlGL thle qri en's unrjelly s Iubjefts, or whiole
goods wili;. th;9 wA·y I tru~t that thle bruit is greater than the
tr uthi, but in thecre ma~tier-s, her usanjefty is too wife not in timne
to be w-are, and~ provide for the worlt; some in that country are
thought to be privie unto the bands and confedercie of` which
I have wr it ten, whereot I ami sure there is lamlle thi~gs, tho'
perchance of all I hauve not heard the truth ; in this court divers

I'1 3 quad~es,

qualles, contentions, and debates; nothing Io m~uch fought as
to mlaintain usirchief and ditorder. David yet retaineth Ilill his
place. niot without heart grief to m~any, that fee their lovereign
guide~d chiefly by tinch a fellow; the queen hath utterly refuied
to do any good for miy lord of' Argyll, and it is laid that thall be
the firlt voy;age that the will mnake ftier- the is delivered of` her be-
ing with child ; the bruit is commnon that Ithe is, but hasdly be--
liteved of` miany, and of' this. I can assure y·ou, that there have
of late ap~peared lom~e tokens to the cont~raiy.

N'o. X V. (\'ol. I. p 294.)

Part of a letter fromt the earl of` Ikcdfou~l and M/r Theo Psandrollph

to thec jo:ds of` the counicil of` Enigland ;romi H-alwick, 171h oft

Mach 66 ni O'rig~inal ini the Coltun Library, Cadlig:ul

Ul. to. lot 372.

27t Ma.T It I NGc of' to onI1!li iC mlalters, as we do, andl fy· clinge

r306. 1LuCh varictie ini the IupaulS, wt. have~ Iayche ado to JAcusle

thec veritie: which maiketh~ us the fluwc i andl loother to put any
th;ing inl w~r) tinge, to the entewlle w.c wokiJ nct that your honourn,
and~ b~y y.ou ther q1ueen's ma1JeliC, Cur love~reigne, thould not be6
ad\·atited but or the verie tro bc as w·c c.an pollible. Tlo this
end! we thought goodi to Lcced up captacin Carewe, who was in1
Edinbourrg e atlc the l,

s eos the laslt aftten1:ptte, whfo rpoke therle

w~ith dhalei, and alterT thai w~ith thle quee'cl) Ids and her biulhaiid
conformi 1o that, w~iiCh weS have learned by others, Irld kno~w
by this reporte, w~e li nJ the famse, contione~d by the pa tie~s self~,
that w4ere there prelent and addimtel unto there that wc'l extco-
tors of the a~te.

Totlls we· tvndc for certain, that the queen's hufbaind being

entered into aa \chemnent fulpicion of D~avid, tha~t by ).14 us bas
th)" S

age w conun~itfecJ, which was modl agaynike to ~lthe queua,

honour, andJ not to bet borne of' his pes te, lyrlte commiiunricated
his myI ad~e to Ccrorge D~uglas, who lynding his 13lonowes 10 greag
fought all the m! eans he couldl to pu; lomne re~ed;Le to h;: gi ll,;
and coii:miunicating the l::ie~ untro m~y lord Ruthen byg 12he king
canorlannillcnent no other wave coulde be found then thatl Davidl
th~ould be tMen out of` the wave. Wh'erein he was;i to earrclt
andi dayly~ Ic proff the lau.e. th~at no refle could ber had unnH~! it
wvas put in1 execution. Tlo thCis that wa;s fou nd good, that1 th 11· J~1
M~oNon and load Lindfa~ye thould be mrade~ prcl ie to thr' inatlr~ e
that the~~ ire ght have theirC f kuds5at ll,1nfeI, yl nea~de ICequiC ed
whlijch c.Iu:Le themi to affenable~ 10 mlaynly, as chaic though~t 1ur-
f~icint a,;ainit at c tymie, that this dertenniination of rlthins rhould
be puLt i;; exeicutiOne~ 3 whicht wa'S demus~iUCed the iXth ofI this

inftanme 3 dales afore the parliam~ent thoulJc begyne, at whcich
<m~e the layde lord~es were affutred, that the cries Argyle, Mlor-
raye, Rothes, and their comlplyces ·iholde ha~ve been frufeited,
?·f the king could nor be perrhaded through this m~eans to be their
fr iends : who for the ddy~re he hade that th~is inte~nt thouki
rake effeft th' one ~wae, was content to yidlde, without all dithi
cublie to t'other, with this condition, that thaic thould give their
codrents, that he miight have the crown miatrimionial. He was
to imipatient to fee there things he thw, and were daylye bioughte
to his cares, thatter

Ilg f he dayly prclffed the laid Jord Kurhen, that

arnanilede -unto the· wsorid. that hie appiov\ed the afte, was coun-
tent to be at the doing of' that hlimleb~.

UroN Saturdiave st nlight ncirc unto nu~i of thec cloc-k the~

king conveyeth himbitcl, the lord Ruthen, George Dug~lals, andl
tw.o others, throwe hris ow~ne chamr~ber by the privy Ilayers up
to thle quceen's ch~aciber going to which there is a cab~inet about
asI foot Iquare, inl the 11aneC.a li:;iC low, rcpojing b~ed anrd a tab!c,
at the which1 they were litting at lispper thle queenr, the L.jy
Argile, and D.avid w kh hi~s cap~p uponi hii headi. Inito the~ Cd-
binet theie coierth in the king anrd Cout Ruthen, whio w.ibedc
D~avids to come forth, Lay)ing, that w·a- no plarce for h~imr.Th
quicen frid, cthat it was her will. Helr howmband antivered~e, thiat
y' w~as againit her honiour. T~he lord Ruthen ti~de, that he
4hould kcrne better his deutie, and olkring to have taken himr by
the armn, D~avid took the queen by the blychtes of her gowni and
put himfellf behind the queen who wol~e gladice hiave (YLad
hIim:l Eut the king ha~ving, looled his hand, and holding hecr inl
his armls, Daevid was thrust out of the cabinet throw the bed
chamlbe~r inito the chamiber of pretens, whatr were the liord Mor-
ton, lord L~indley', who intending that night to hlave rrdervedf
byrrn, and the next day to hiang him., lo useO~ being atxlt hil,,
that bore hrym evill w~ill, onle thrust himl into the boddir w~ith a
daggeir,· and after byml a great miany orlhers, to, that he had in
his body above wunds. 1: is tobl for certyne, that the
kcinges own dagger was leti (ticking in himr. W~heathe~r he fluck
hiun or not we cannot be heie celtayn. Hie was not f~ylayn in 1Ihe
queen a pre~lens, as was taiJ?, but goingC doU~i u the Itayies out of'
the chamiber of prekcns.

'l'HERE relitanend along rymne with thc· queen her howfband~

and the loid Ruthen. bhci mad~e, as we hecre, great interec~iion,i
that he tholdi have nio harmll. Zlhe bbu~ed d greailce hecr ~owilba.IJ
that w~as rthe attor of' so frul a Jeed·~. I slita e
untlwer, thaut DHvid hald 11nose comsI;l~C anic as er buddic then he
for the Cpace of two muonths ; and trherclose: for her honour and~
his own contentment he gave his coalent thact he thould be saken
away. "( It is no:" (faythe the) " the womian 's part to feeik the
" hufband," and therefolc in thiat the lault was his own. He1L
laid that when he caule, thie eiiher wold niot or made~ heridfi

T1 4 i.

" and your farewell." Then were pity layth the lord Ruthen,
he is your mrajelly's burband and mull yield dutie to each other.
" W hy mray I not," laythe the, " leave himi as well as your wiie
** did her husband )" Other have done the hike. The lor d R~uthen
said that the was lawfully divorced fromt her husband, and for no
such caule as the king found himlelf greve. Befydets this man11 was
mezn, bui~e, enemie to the nobility, thamie to her, and deficutti-
on to herfelt and country. '' Well, faith the, that thall be dear
" blude tofom~e of you, yf his be Ijpylt.' God so, bJ. layb
the lord Ruthen; for the muore your grace thowe yourikif of-
fended, the world will judge the worse.

Het a buibanld this tymie Ipeakethi litle, herself continually

weeperh. T'he lord Ruthen being ill at ease and wetak calleth
for a dfrink, and laythe, " TIhis I mrull do with your mlajeftius
** pardon," and perfundleth her in the best lort he could, that
Ihe would pacify her self. Nothing that could be said, could
p!eale her.

Ix tthis m~ean timne there role a nomb~re in the court ; to pa-

clt\· whl:ch thiere wt nt ciown the lord Ruthen, whio went ftiryt to
th~e cries H~un~tly, IHo,1hwell and Athoil to quiet themn, and to aT-
furec thernl (or the king: thant nothing w as intend againit themn.
Th'lere not withlanding taking fear, when theie heard that my lordi
Miurray wold be there the next day, and Argile meet themi,
Huntly and Hothwe~ll both get out of a window and so depar c.
Atholl hadi leave of the king with Flyth and Glandores (who was
lately called D~eyfkr-y the pet on of Owne) to go where they; wold,

Sand bring concord~e out of the court by the lord of Lidington.

Theie went that n'ght to 1lich places, where they thought them1-
selves in m~ol1 fautue.

HF.FORE Ihe king least talk with the queen, in the he ring of

the lord Ru then the was contents that he thold lie with her that
night. We know not how he * * hinulelf. but cause not at her,
and exculed bymflelf to hiis friends, that he was 10 fleepic, that~
he could not wake in due Ieafon.

TuHEs were in this comrpanie two that camte ini withi the

king; the one Andr~ewe CarC of Fawdenfide,~ whiomi the queen
fayth woukl have Itroken her with a dagger, and one P~atrick Ba-
kmnine, brother to the juficec clerk, who alro her grace laythi,
offered a dag againlt her belly with the cock; downi. He hateu
been earnc-lly in hand with thle lord Ruthen~r to kniow the varitiL',
but he affoureth us of the contrarie. '1 hecre w~ere in thec queelc'l'
chamnber the lords Robert, A~rthur Arikin, onie or two otheLrs.
TIhey at the Birit of fring to usI..ke· a defence, the lord Ruthivenl
drawd his dagger, and 4 mer weap~ons then, that were not drawnl
nor seen in her prelens, as we alC by thijs lord alluned.

LThle

(The letter afterwards gives an account of the flight to Dun-

har-'a~lle, whither refor ced unto thle lo! ds Huntley and IRodwell:
That the earl of MVoiton and lord Ruthven find themfielveu left by
the king for all his fair promniles, bonds and tub criptions Ilhat he
had proteitrte before the council, that he wa~s never con~enting to
the death of D~avid, and that it is fore againRt his will: "' 'Ihat
"· oi the greant rlbdtance Danvid had there is aluch Ipoken, some
(* fGy in gold to the value of Is mJ. ~Iis apparel was vesly good,
"~ as it is laid, 28 pair of velvet hole. IHis chamnber webl !ur-
** nifhed, armiour. dagger, pyfloletts, harquebules, :z iw~oids.
(1 Or` all this nothing Ipoyld or lacked iaving 2 or 4 dla~ggr.
"' He hadl the cultoedy or all the queen s letters, which all were
" drlive~red unlookedi upon. W'e hear of a juill, that he had
(" hanging about his neck of Ibome tprice, that cannot be heard

"
f e had upon his back, when he was nayn a night gown

"' of Jam~afk furredi, with a l'atten dublet, a hole of ruf~er
" velvet."

N'o. X VI. (Vol. I. p. 30'.)

Part of a letter from Randolph to Cecil, Ja3n. tG, r569-6.

...-

- CA NOr tell what mirlliking of late there ha'h heen

between her grace and her bulband. he, press: ·5 ear-

nefily for the manninionial crown, which the is loth hadtily to
grant; but whling to, keep Ibomewhatt in flore, until the know
how well he IE wasth11 to enjoy luch a lovereignty : and there~fore
it is thought that the palliamelnt for a timie lhall be deferred, but
hereof' I can write no certainty.

From Mr. Randolph's letter to I'ecretary Cecil.

T HE ju'fice-clerk in hard terms, mlore for his brother's 4 April,

caule than any delet,, andl as fa· as I can hear the king a 96h. Pa-

of all other in w·orld, for neither hiath the queen good opinion of per Of~ce
him for attemlpting of any thing that was againlt her will. nor from the
the people that he hath ienried to m~anirett a matter, being proved OiiginaL.
to be done by his coirnsuanthueint, anid now himfeltl to be the
acculer and purs~uer of themi that did as he willed themi.. Thi~s
Scott, that was executedl, andl Murray that was yellerday ar-
reigned, were both acculed by him. It is written to mie, for cer-
tain, by one. that upon Mlondaiy lait Ipoke with the queen, that
the is determnined the houle of' Lennox Ihall be as poor in bcot-
land lasever itwas. TIhe eari continueth lick, fore troubled in
mind~; he laith in the abb~y, his 100 has beern once with himn,
andl he once with the queen, fance the causle to the catlle. The
queen bath now seen all the covenants and bands that passed be-
tween the king and the lords, andt now findeth that his declara-
tion, before her and council, of his innrocency of the death of

Dav id,

David, was false; and grievously offended that, by their mean;,
he thould se~ek to comie to the crown miafrimonial.

Part of a letter fromn Randolph to Cecil from Berwick, 2;

Ap'il, a 466.

-TH~ERE is continually very mnuch (peech of the

Sdilcord bectw2een the queen and her husband., (0

far that, that is conunlloniv said and believed of himfeclf, that M~r.
Jamels T'hornton is gone to Romei to sue for a divorce between

ho.It is ve~ry certalin that Mlalevafier had not spoke~n with

himl withinl there three dayi)s. He is neither accomnpanved nor
looked u po n oanly noblemal~n, attendecd upo n by certain of his owni
Irlvanlts. andi~ fax or le~ven of' thec guard , at liberty to do, and go
wherer and w\hat he will, there hiave no hop~e yet am;ong th emfelves
of cquietnetl-;

Day m~\~r'. brothecr namiedf Jafeph, whio cdume this wvay

w~ith Mllclralecr, uniknow~n to any mian hecre, is b~ecom~e facrtuar
rin his brothc s p~lsce.

No. XVI~I. (Vol1. I p. 30; )

T~he earl of Bedford to Cercil, 3d Auguff, 1966.

T E queen and h~er husband agree af:er the old manner,

or rthe wofe.She careth but very seldom w~ith himi,

lieth not, nor keepeth comipany w~ith him~, nor loveth any such
as love himn. He is 10 tar out of her books, as at her going out
of· the caffle of Edinburgh, to remiove abroad, he knew nothing
thereof It cannot for miodtl~y, nor w~ith the honour of a queen,
be reported what the laid of himi. One Hickman, an Englithr
merchant there, having a water spaniel which was very goods,
gave himn to M/r. Jamies Melvil, who after wards, for the plea-
Lure which he law the king have in such kind of dogs, gave himl
to the king. TIhe queen thereupon fell miarvelloutly out w~ith
Melvil, and called himn d~issembler and flatterer, and laid the
cooki not truit one, whio would give any thing to such one as
the loved not.

The earl of' ~e~dford to Cecil, Aughlt 8.

THE dilagreemenrt bertwen the queen and her hufbdnd con-

tinueth or rather Increale~th. Rutbert Melvill drawing,

homnewards, within twelv~e mles of E~dinburgh, could not redl
where to find the queen; fubh which timle the is comie to E~din-
tunR gh, and had niot twelve horles arttnding on her. TIhere was
not then, nor that I canl hear of' rince, any lord baron, or other
no~blemuan in her comipany. Th'le king her husband is gone to

~umn-

Dunderm~rling;, and paileth his tim~e as wed as he may7 ; having
at hiis tlirewell, toch countenance as wouuld ma~ke a haiband heavy
;1t rlis )wcas c.

Sir John SoRter to Cccil, 8 Sept. fromn Berwickr.

q' HE meucen kath her husband in Guiall eltirnation, and rhe

Ie~lul of` Lcnno~X cause not in the qucca's fig~t lince thle

dearh o' IDavy.

Sir John For fier to C'ecil, it t h Dec.

T HE~~I ears of` Iothwell is appointed to receive the amnbefft-

dtor, andC all thingS' for Ithe chriillening are at hislocad-

fi10p's appointmentt and the aun.e is fo~rce~ly· w il IUkcc or thea
nob~;ihty, a· is i.id~. Tlhe king an~d quee~n is prelendly at C'inig-
.!rladr, but in litrle grea:ct favour than he waIS ail the wh~ile pai't

Adverti~lemn,~ts out of Scotlandi freas the earl of Bedfiord.

TrH AT'I the king and the queen agreed well together woA ft

darys, after her comning fioin ----- , and after any lord Aupu

of (Vlurray's com~ing to Edinburgh, somle new ditcord has hap. 5- a
peed . 'he queen hath declaird to mly lord of MUrray that er Of~ice,
the king be-ars ~iml evi~l w~ill, and h;Y as th to her, that he is der- nth
remalinedl to kitl himl. fm~din~g rutal- that Uth doth bear him foth sis
miuch com~pany: and in like mranner, ha~th willed usy lead otnl.
Mancray to lpicrte it at the king, which he did a few nights riace
in the qu~eca's p~rercex, and in she b~atinlg of divers8. Th'e k~ing
conleilfed, that reports were marde so hrim, that say· lord of Mur -
rays wa~s niot hris 1Tiend, which madce him speak t~hat thing hel Ie-
pented; ?.ndl the queen atffu lued, that the king h~ad spoken iuch
w~ords unto her, and confeffed bcfore the whole bookli, distt the
could nol be content that chherT heC or anIy othe' tho)uld ber Us-
friend to mly Jlrd of' Mlurraty. My lord of Murray ouerec~lrd
t~he fame Rtoudy, and uled hia: pe~ech very mrodefly, in th~e: use~
timie the king depu~nted ves y gs leved ; he cannot bear thats a~.G
queen thouldl ute Iaciliarrity tither with mian or womn~l, and et -
pecially thc ladie~s of Arguike, Murray, an;d Maurre, who keepc
mrott compnyl;l w~iih her. Muy lord of M~ussay and lIodwlu·l1
haveC been.I or evil words for the L,. of' Ledtinlgton, (LCLj·C IbC·
q;ueen~, for hc· ndlI ficir jamelalouc'h ad new\ consefr lomn ·.edin·-
L1,n, withl his an:werr upon luchl headis or ,rtic es ats Mbothwell Jrnd
h~e thouldt aglree upon, whliCi~h bing Irepostedto0the 100i~ c.odllin
llhe qUen~i'b pr etbac, made~ anlerT, tbut1 are he pt led wbb

i~ lich

und1~! aS was deilised, he Ibo~ula~part w~iit hiis Ii~c. Myu lord of

Mury ihidl ftlouly to hliml, th:Lt twen11);1 y 11~L

as ~ I

hood me a e

:hould bjle Ithir livet cle he real:C Ledi:gton. 'IlTh cqueen jjpake

r:Jxhing,

that I hear of, have not mlet. The queen after her hunting causer
to Edinburgh, and carryeth the prince thence to Stirling with her.
T'his lail Saturday was executed a servant of the lord Ruthven's,
who confeff~ed that he was in the cabinet, but not of council of
the faGt. The queen bath also opened to myv lord of Murray,
that money was sent from the pope, bow much it was, and b~y
whom, and for what purpole it was brought.

Nuo. XVIII. (Vol. I. p. 3'9-)

Part of a letter fromt Elizabeth to Mary, Feb. zo,' 5 69 A

copy interlined by Cecl. It contains an adiwer to a complaining
letter of Mlary's upon the impriloning of~ the Bilh\op of Rols.

r F TE R this (I. e. Mvary s landing in Scotland) how
Spatiently did I bear with many vain delays in not ra-

tifying the treaty accorded by your own conlnliflioners,, whercby
I received no finiall unkindnels, besides the mIanifold caule of sus-
picion that I might not hereafter truss to any writings. Then
followed a hard manner of dealing with me, to entice my sub-
jeat and near kidmann, the lord Darnly, under colour of private
thits for land, to come into the realm, to proceed in treaty or
marriage with him without my knowledge, yea to conclude the
Fame without miy assent or liking. And how many unkind parts
accompany'd; that fa8t by receiving of my fubjeas that were
base runnagates and offender s t home, and enhanfing them to
places of credit againlt my will with mrany luch like, I will
leave, for that the remembrance of the fame cannot but be noy-
some to you. And yet all thele did I as it were furpprels and
overcome with my natural inclination of love towards you ; and
did after wards gladtly, as you know, chrilten your lorr, the childi
of my iaid kridmnan, that had before to unloyally offended me.c
both in marriage of you, and in other undurilial ulages towards
w~e his fevereign. How friendly arllo dealt I by mnelfages to re-
concile him, being your bulband, to you, when others nourithedt
dilcord betwixt you, who as it feemedJ had more power to work
their purpoles, being evil to you both, than had to do you good,
in refped of the evi I had received. Well I will overpals your
hard accidents that followed for lack of following miy council.
And then in your matut extremity, when you was a priloner in!-
deed, and in danger of your lif~e fromn your notorious evil wi;
lers, how far fromi my miindl was the remlemnbrance of any for-
mer unkindnels you had thewed wre. Nay how void was I
of relped2 to the delsgns which the world had seen attemptedi
by you to my crown, and the lecurity that might have enthued

to my slate by your death, when I finding your calamity to be
great, that you were at the pit's brink to have ruiferably lo~t your
life, did not only intreat for your life, but 10 threarned Come as
were irritated againit you, that I only may lay it, even I was the
principal caule to save your life.

No. XIX. (Vol. 1. p. 333 )

Letter of Q, Elizabeth to QL of Scots. Thus marked on the

back with Cecil's hand.--opia Litrarrrum RegicP Majellaris ad
Reginamn SclofkWtn. VII. Aprf $1.

MDA M E, yous syant trop molefib par M. de Crocq, Paper Of-

je n'euffe eu si pen de consideration de vous falcher de fice.

cette lettre, ft les liens de charith vers les ruinez, et les prieres
des nl.iferables ne m'y contraignaffe~nt. Je entens qlue an edit a
eti- divulguet de par vous, madame, que ung chalcun, que veult
jullifier que ons efti les mieurtriers de votre teu mari, et mon feu
codfin, viennent a le faire le xiime de ce miois. La quelle chole,
commec c'ell plus honourable et neceffTaire, qui en tel cas fe pour-
ra faire, ne y e~tant cache quelque miltere on fineffe, ainfi le
pere et~amis du mort gentelhommne m'ont humblement re uis,
que ~je vous priaffe de prolongue le jour, pource qu'ilz cognoinlent
que les iniques Le font combines par force de faire ceque par droift
ils ne pourront pas faire ; partant, je ne pass mais finon pour
I'amour de vous mecme, a qui il touche le plus, et pour la con-
folation des innocens, de vous exhorter le leur conceder cette re-
quefle, laquelle, 11 elle les feroit nie, vous tourneroit grandement
en fouppon, de plus que j'elpere ne penfez, et que ne voudries
volontiers ouyr. Pour I'amour de D~ieu, madame, ulez de telle
fincerite & prudence en ce cas qui vous touche de 11 pres, que
tout le monde aye raison, de vous livrer comme innocente d'ung
crimne si enormie, chose que si ne filles, feriez dignement eibloye
hors de rancz de princesses, & non fans caule takte opprobre de
vulgaire, er pluror que cela vous avienne, le vous fouhakterois
une sepulture honorable, qu'une vie maculee ; vous voiez ma-
dame, que je vous unaire comme ma fille, et vous promners, que
1 j'en euffe, ne luy foubaiterois mlieuix, que je vous defrer, comn-
me le Seigneur Dieu mec porte telmioignage, a qui je prie de bon
co-Eur de vous inspirer a faire ce qui vous Ccra plus a honneur, et
a vos amnis plus de consolation, avec usles tres cordialles recomn-
melndations coniune n icelle a qui le fouhaire le plus de bien, qui
vous pourra en ce monde avenir. U~e Welt.. ce d jour de Jan-
vier * en halle.

* A mliallae in thle dante corre~ted wk~ih Cecil's hand VI~ll@

N~o.

No. XX. (Vol. f. p. 346.

A letter fromt England concerning the murder of kirag

Henry Darnley.

E fMr- AVINGI the commodity of this

beaego

owiea e ~rsuI, yrer M~r. Clark, I ,ho t

ton's Ar- gotowieaewwrsuoyo.I have recd. CbotUC
chives. writs fromi you ; and fame I have leen Lately lent others from,
Bundle B3. you, as nam~ely to the earl of Bedford of the 16th. of May.

o.2r. have participat the conttnts thereof to fisch as I thought meet,

this mlekle Ican assure you ; the intelligence given hithe'r by the
French wals untrue, for there was not one papilt nor protellant
w~hich didl not content that juflice thould be done, be the queen
myv favng aid andI support, againit 1Lch as had committed ill
m~urd~er in your country , but to lay truth, the lack & coldness
did not rite froml such as were called to council, but from tisch
as rhouldf give life and execution thereunto. Andl thrther, I as-
Iare you, I never knew no matter of ellate proponied which hadf 10
m~any iavourers of all for as ornations as this had: yea, I can lay unto
you. no mann promoted the matter with greater affedtion, than
the Spanish ambafa~dor. A ad sure I am, that no ma3n dare open-
ly be of any other mind. but to affirm that wholoever is guilty
of this mlurder, handfatted with advoutre, is onworthy to live.
I thall not need to tell youi, which be our letts and ilayes bror
all good th ags here. You are acquainted wAith them as well w

L Neds I miuft confers, that bowfoeverr we omit occallons of be-

nefit. honour and rlrety; it behoverb your whole nobility, and
namely lItch as before, and after the murder. were deemecd
to allow of Bodwell, to prosecute with Iword and juttice
the punithmlent of` thole abomiinable eats, though we lead you
hot a cold aid, and~ albeit you, and divers others, both honourn-
hie and honell, be well known to m~e, and landry others here, to
be julnifiable in all their nsalons and doings . yet think not the con-
trary but your whole nation is blemnithed and infamic by these do-
ings which inly~-j pffed~ Inmong you. HI hat we thall do I know
not, neither do I write unto you affmerdly. for we be ~hbjed unto
m~any I1utations, and yet I think we thall cirher aid you, or
continue in the defence and fireguard of your prince, 10 as it
arppea to uS that yo1 miean his lthteguard indeed, and not to run
t: c fortune atl France, which wibr be your own delthuaion, it
ryclu be u~nadvle·ld. I knew not oiie, no not one of any quality or
r-itate in this cocuntry, w~hich doet allow of` the queen your so--
vereign, bult wvould glad~ly the worrld wcre rJ of her, lo as the
Emtie were done~ w it he a;r tar thei nMod~er, that is to lay by ordinary
juflice. T hr: I thodJ the 23d of' Mnay.

No. XXI. (Vol. I. p. 353-)

Part of a letter from Sir Nicolas Thragmorton to Cecil, I th of

July, a 567, from Berwick.

SIR, Your letter of the 6rh of July, I received the roth An Origi-

at Berwick, I am sorry to fee that the queen's majefly's nal.

difpoition altereth not towards the lords, for when all is done, it Paper Of-
is they which muff iand her more in flead, than the queen her fice.
cou~in, and will be better inltruments to work some benefite and
quietners to her majelty and her realmi, than the queen of Scodland
which is void of good famle.

A letter from Sir Nicolas Throgmorton to Cecil from Faicalliec,

a c fJuly, I57

SIR, as yow might perceive by my letter of the as th July, I Paper Ot-
<7lodged at Fa ticlie that night, accompanyed with the lord fice.
Humec, the lord of Ledington, and James Mlelvin, where I was
intreated very well, according to the slate of the place, which is-
faster to lodge prisoners than folks at liberty, as it is very little, so
it is very fIrong. By the conference I have had with the lord of
Ledington I find the lords his associates anrd he hath left nothing
unthought of, which may be either to thir danger, or work them
facrty, wherein they do not forget what good and baseo France
may do them, and liktewife they confader the Came of England E
but as farr as I can perceive, to be plain with yow, they find
more perril to grow unto them through the queens majeflys deal-
ing, than either they do by the French, or by any contrary fd~tiono
amongeft themfrelves, for they wifore themselves the queen will'
leave them ini the bryers if they run her fortoun, and though
they do acknowled~ge great benefit as well to themn, as to the
realm of England by her majefty's doings at Leith whereof:
ttrey lay mutually her majeclly and both the realms have received
great fruit: yet upon other accidents which have chanced lance,
they have oblerved luch things in her m~ajcdlys doings, as have end-
ed to the danger of fisch as the hath dlealt withat, to the over-
throw of your- own delignments, and little to the therty of any
partv ; and upon thele confadierations andc dilcourfes at length,
mlethinketh I findl A difpoth'ion in themi, that either they miindl to
:ruke~ their bargain with France, or ilfe to deal neither with
France nor yow, but to do what theTy !1hall think mleett for their
I'ate and thlelr t, and to ul~e thei: remedys~ as occallon Ihall move
'hlem; mneaning ncithcr to imitate F·rance nor England. uintill
Iinch timie as they have mlade their bargain alfuredlly with onec of
''Vo; for they th~rink ; crlr:enient to, p Ialcard wirb yow bolh

'er whle
ni -Ea so th t w ne b d o Le IrTgan's

no better anlwer is ma~de to the letter, which the lords did fend
to hecr ajnyoci), and likewise that they hear nothing from yow to
thcir Inristadian, J have adiwered as well as I can, and have al-
kagedJ the ir own proceediings so obfcurly with the queen, and
theb~ unce:taiinty hath occationed this that hath happened, and
thler, to,<. her angedcly hath lent mie to thle end I miay informi her
tjhr ughily or the Ilare of the miatters. and upon the declaration
o t\ir unic nd· and intents to 1Lch purpoles a· thall be by mie pro-
poled on, their mlaieflys beha!i unto theml, they thall be realonably
and rTiljutely' answ~ere·d At thire things the lord of~ Ledinlgton
Giiiedi andc Ihooke his heiad, and laid It we c better for us low
would tel v;-( ·t ,1 than neither to do us nor your elves good,
as I Irer me , ~.he endj that will p ove, 4' if their be any tiuth
in Ledr~i·c ·, L~a C`rocq is gone to, ,r ocure Ramnboilet his coming
hitber (· m can of lIk- quality, and to deliver themr of thieir queen
tor eve , w~ho thlall lead her ,ife in France in a abbaiy redluled, the
prince at rlhe F'rench devotion, the reailm governedf by a council of
their ekc~tiont of the Scottilh natlon, the forts ocommlitted to the
cuitociy or iuch as thall be chloitn am~ongll themferlives, as yet I
find no gr ear likelihood that I th~all have accers to the queen, it
is objeaed~ they miay not to di pleale the F'rench king, unless they
weie ture to find the queen of E~ngland a goods liiendr; and when
they o~nce· by mly accets to the queen h~ave oiffnded the F·rench,
then they lay vow will mlake your profit the~reofro thei;r unldoing;
and as to the queens liber:v, which was tbe firlt head that 1 proj-
poled, they laid that thereby they did perceive that the queen
wants their undoing, for as for the relt of the miatters it was but
folly to talk or themn the liberty going before; but said they), i
you will do us no good, do us no harm, and we will provide for
our selves. In the end they laid, we thould reuL~e our own comi-
niodicy, before they concluded with any other, which I thould
hear of at myl) corning to Edint a by miy next I hope to lend yow
the band concluded by H uniltons, Argyll, Huntly, and that
tadtionl not to nuchh to the prejudice of the lords of Edinri, as
that w·hich was Ienr into F~rance ; thus having no mnore leasure
but comlpell'dl to Iceap on horltback with the lords to go to Endin',
SI bumibly take uny leave at from Faltcadle the t z'h of July '5 b;

TIo Sir Nicolas 'Throgmorton being in Scotland. By the

queen the a 4th July a 967·

TRUS TY and w~ell be'oved we greet you well, though1

we thi~nk that the caurces will often charge upon vnr

of accidecnts, let we'L Ihink, for s~undry reipeats, not amiifs, that
as low thall deatl with the lolrds having charge of' the young
prince for the conunrii~ttin of hbuI in~to our realmi, 10 thall yow

allu

as so do well, in treaty with the queen, to offe'r her th~at where
her realmn appenreth to be iubject to sundry troubles from tiie
to timne. and thereby (as it is mranitefHi her Ion cannot be free, if
The shall be contented that her Con mnay enjoy liuerty and quie~tnels,
within this our realmr, being to nearr as the knows it i· , we tha:(
not faill to yield her as good fuerty therein for her child, as can
be devised for any that miight be our child born of our ow~n
body, and Ih~ll be glad to the~w to her therein the trew etifed of
nature; and herein the may be by yow rememibred how miuch
good miay enrue to her 100 to be nourithed and acquainited with
our country , and therefore, ail things confidlered, this occation
tor her child, were rather to be f~ought by her and the f iendls of
himn, than offered by us ; and to thiis end, we meian that yovr
thall Io deal with her, both to flay her indeed fioro inclining to
the French pratti , which is to us notorious ·o convtey htr andl
the pr ince into France, and albo to avoid any Juff offence,
that the mlight herea~ter conceive, if the thould hear that we
thould deal with the lords f or the plance.

Sir Nicolas Throgmorton to queen Eli;zabeth, I4th July ' 557,

fromi Ldjinburgh.

ITmay please your majelly to be adverti ed, I did fignifie unto An Origi-
Mr. Secretary by my letters of` the ' nd z of July. nl.

the day of mine entry into Scotland, the c.:mets of mv Ith;y, my> t'aper Of-
lodgings at FafIcattle a phice of the lor H Funles, wvhe e wa~s fce.
met by the inid lord and by the Icrd L~idingeton, andc what had
passed in conference betwixt us, whilerl I waS at the laid Fatt-
calile. Since which timle, accomlp nye d~ with the lords afo>rehli.,
and with 400 horres by the~ir appointmnent fo~r my better condud,.
I came to Edn' the 1z'b of this prelent· T~he '3'" being iun-
day appointed for a folemrine coniriununon in this town, and also a
folemnne talt bei;ng pubilhed, I coult not haive coinfrence with
the lords which be affa~nbledi wi: in il is ruon n as I ddaTred~, that
is to lay the earls of' Atho~le ·no Mol~rton, !ihe L·ritd um~e, the
lord of L~idington, Sir Jamies Ban;Olr ca],!ain of' the caffle, M/r.
Jamies IMi G~ill and the pat Traent or thec rtlillan

NEVERTHELESS I IrIaJ, mieans by the lord of I iington that

they would ule no protraifte of tiine in adrne audfience, ro did I
lIkewise to the earle of Mlolon. wh·oml I mret by chance ; Iwas
anlwered by these, both, that :ibt-ir the day were deflined to
fac~ed exercite.:, tIhch as we·re there of` rl h council w·ouldl con-
fills upon any suoyen touching mel acc, fs unto cthese .ndi miy coni-
ference wirh themn, and takic allo that ;n the ahecrnoon eitherr
they would comie to us~e, or I thould healr floln themii Abolut
4 of the clock in the afrernoon the Ilaid I ph dayi the lordJ

ofLdnton cause to miy lodging~s, and~ Jcclared un'o n.0

have p.iuience: thoughi they had defterred miy conrerence with
themi, w~hich was grounded prinicipally upon the ablence of the
earlies of M~ar, andl Glencairn, the lords Semlple, Crighton and
others ofi the council, flying also that they did confider the miat-
tess w h hch I was on you r behalf` to treate with them of,
werr: o: great ilpo~r tance, as they could not faiisfy nor conve-
nl·_ntly · rec~e wi·th mie. nor give mie annlwer without the advice
of' the lo~rds, and; ot~hcrs the-ir alla~ciates; the lord of Lidington
aIL o thid unto mie, thite whe:re he perceived, by hiis private con-
ference with IIne in miy journey hitherwardls, that I presse~d greatly
to, halve f'petedy access to thr queen their lovereign, he perceived,
by the= lords andl others which were htere, thant in that miat'er
the~rl: w is great dliffiulty f~r mainy re~p ast, but Ipecially becaule
they b uti ;cllded to, the F ench~ am'tl, ;ldor eIi like accels, which
bei·ng granted~ unto us:. m~ight greatly ofiendteFecam
rer wht-irh thev ~!1::1 J and1 intend~ed to elchewv ; f~r the~y did not
shad b. youar !nn ] dus deading~s with themii hith:rto, that it be-

and go aDac whhm:aniuwe~!red tht as to their re-

fun~h, mO1:! u ::0) :!he French amnbatfadoir, mnonfieur de Ville Roye
we ispchu thl1it~~ ;rth~ of Fran~ce before th;-e acc:does here hap-
penecd, andl~ bb(cca rrn as to impeach~ the queens miatri-

agewit th caieof Bothel, (t;,r to, indeed Tfance mly coming

ha hecr I learnedl his conunllluiion tended· to that end, andj to mlake:
oir~r to the qucca at another m~arriage) andl as to monsieur de
C~rocq. he cooki have no o:Jer f~orth of France concerning there
mattrers fInze they happned; and there'ore they m~ight very well
i ?Ih! them~ 11 pe~tedi to have conlerence with thle queen, lealt
t.!-y adg~ht treate of matters in this tare without infirudtions and
th rather do harmi then gotod; but your mlajetly being~ adverrized
Ls all inlgs whi-ichi had chanced, hadl lent usie hither to treat
\with themnl, tor thle well oi the reailo, for the confe~rva io n
cor thecir honors andc credir, and fr~r their fiscrty ; and I miight
b·1h\·lyiby unto hhni, tha~t your m~ajcity had~ better deserved
tha~n the~ Fre~nch hadi. H-e 'i:id, for hi· own part, he was much
boUnd( uselr yourl mateclly, aild hadf always tound grent f'avour and
coundy,: ib Ii ~ag,~ and b to be plaiin with you, S"' fayed he,
thieie i; not Imany oi this atTemibly thalt have found 10 great obli-
gar;.ic 3t the qlueen! yoT ur ereigns hands, as at the French
kings: for- the ctrles of Mo(r tonl and G~lencalirn be the only perlons
v, b.ch ·ook~ benlcfth Ib the qutens maljrtly's aid at Leith, the reft of
thec noleme--n weec not In th~e adtion, and we think. said he, the
(!Ieven ami~je liy yo uir ;overe~ign, by the opinion ·of her own council,
;:rul:11 llr Mh worl, ~Oo!L as great benefit b·y thiat chanrge as the realm
of Ecotilir:J. Or 'any CartiCUlar pelon ; and not to talk with vow
aslan amlbaffador,, but w~ith 5r N~icholas T'hrogrlnorton, miy lord

M or too,

Morton, and such as were in pain for the death of Davie, found
but cold favour at the queens ma1jrftys hands, when they were
baniihed forth of their own country ; but I would all our
whole comnpany were as well willing to accomplith the qjueen
your sovereign intents and desires as I ami, for mine own part, I
am but one, and that of the meaneR fort, and they be many
noblemen and such as hiave great interedt in the matter, mary yove
fhnll be affeured I whill imploy mnyfelf to imploy moy credit, and all
that I may do, to latisfie the queen your m~iltrels, as miuch as
lyeth in mne, and for your own part you bave a great mnany
friends in this assembly, with miany other good words. B~ut for
conclufzon 1 mnuff take this for an answer to stay untill the o~ther
lords were comie, and thereupon I thought meet to advertize
your majesty what hath pd~ed, and howIN far forth I have pro-
ceeded , your expedtation being great to hear fromi hence

AND flOW tO advertize your mnajelly of thle slate of all things,

as I have learned since my comiing hither, it m~ay pleasE your ma-
jelly to underfland as followeth.

'f HE lU~ecn Of Scotland remaninet'h in good health in the caltle

of L~ochieven, guarded by the lord Linfsy and I ochieven the
owner of the houle; for the lord Ruthven is imployed in ano-
ther commnil~on, becaure he began to thow great favour to the
queen and to give her intelligence. She is waite~d on with S or
6 ladys, 4 or 5 gentlewomnen, and a chamnberers, whereof
one is a French woman. T'he earle of Buchan, the earie of
M~urray's brother, hath also liberty to come to her at his p!ca-
sure i the lords aforesaid, which hiaie her in guard, doe kieep her
very fIrairly, and as far as I can perceive, r heir rigour proceedeth
by their order froat there mien, becaule that the queeir will not by
any mieans be induced to lend her au~hority to profecu re the miur-
der, nor will not content by any perfwarion to abandon the lord
Bothell for her huiband, but avowerb conitantly that the will live
and die wirth himt; and faith rhat if it were put to her choice to
relinquilh her crown and kingdlom, or the lordt bot~hell, the wcould
leave: her kingdom and dign~ity, to go as a fir::ple damferll with
himi and that the will never codlent that he th1r: fire: woife, or
have mnore harm than herflfl

AND as far as I can perceive, the principall c~ule of her de-

tendion ·is, for that thele lords do fee the queen b~eing of 10 ser-
vent affcc~ion towa3lrd the endeI liothell as the it:. and being put
at, as they thould be comapeild to' be ;n continuall arms, and to
have ocati~on of many battles, he being with mlanifell evidence
notorioully derre~e to be the principal! m~urde~re , and thle lords
mieaming protc~ution of judiice· againt himr accoidinrg to his
nierits.

Torr lords mecan nifo a divorce be w ixt the queecn and himi,

as a anarriage not to be fUfferted for manny refed,tCu which IcpJ-

U1 ran)ow

ration cannot take place if' the queen be at liberty, and have
power in her hands.

TuIEv do not also forget their own perill, conjoined with the

dalnger of~ the prince, but, as far as I can perceave, they intend
not eithier to touchI ther queen in suer ty or in hionor, for they do
ipeak of her wri b re;'pect and reverence, an~d do afirmn, as I do
learn, that thec cond~itions aforefaidt acconi:pifted, they will both
put hier to liberty·, 3nd reltore her to her e~taee.

Tu1ESE has1~ have for the guard of' theil tow'n 4:o H-arqu-

builers wh~ich be in very~ good ord~er, for the entertainmient of
which comipany , untril 61l mnatters be com~pounded, they did
sue un!:o> yoIuTr maji(y, to aid themI with fUChI (u1 of malny, as
hat~h beecn me~ntioned~c to ~ir Secretary by the lord of ;iainigtons
wrrbing amno~n~ing as I perceive to ten or twelve choufand crouns
of thle

~!I un were la:'r~ advert:ized ;hat the French King doth minds

to, lend Whe:r mnovi. our de la Ch·;pcll dez Ursine, a kniight of the
Fre::ch orde~r, andJ a!lway~s wcll offectlonate to the houle of Guvre,
andJ howfuevicer la FourcL, Vlilbroy, nndi du crocq have oded~ ln-
gunge in the quceens favour and to thes~e lords dillailvantrage there,
to yo~ur rlxijeny; la CrTocq doth carry w~ithi himl 1Lch miatter as
thall be litrle to tbe queen s adivantage; to as it is thought thle
F~rench king,, upon hi;s coiniing to his prelence, wil r·'· Ithr faisfie
the lord~s, than pleatri~e the clueen ; for they have thei· party 10
wecll undce, as the French will rathler miake their profit by themn,
than any othecr w~ay.

FIE REWIT1I I tendi your mlajety the last hond agreed on, and

ilgned by the Hamihilon , the: earle of Argyll, Huntly, and 1Ln-
dry others at D~umibarton.

Ne vtaaus fTLL ~.Iine any condagS to this town, the HIamil-

ton· have Ient untro mre a ge~nrtleman o;` thcir Lirnamc namiedf Ro-
be~rt Ham~il:00 w5ith a le~tes from~ th~e Wihop of SI. Aind w': and
t).;:'lbot c·f A~rblo b., the copiy whereof 1 tcnd your ninje~ll andl
Iiniie an war· unrco rhem, ratrling to the bearer the declaratron of
fam~e 1h;11s. au the~ 1:- < J by hiu· unto mie.

To~ o neI~ ot` Ar;: t; b1.\;h. in Jike mianner, lent another unto

nwr lir;, n IrLrer 71u; c- emi;:. I hive uied hbul~ as I didf the othen,~i
the coppy; of~ Lo:h w:· ichi kcrters I len youir rlnjc·;y alto. I! be
lord! HBarvs hubLl :ID; (;nm UsuZO me but not Wlrtta, and I have

Asnes.· r

;5I ~ the zo~ da;y of this mlonth~ there is a generall al-

few ~::,::y a ::,:1 C:In c:mes thires, andJ boroughs towns of this
scululi, ri:lndl ofI I'uch as be contentedi to rep~:ir to thele· lords
to 11h; tu·: n1, v·.h c: it is: rho~gh~t the w~hole Ita'e of' this miat-
ter Mi b Ie L..::au ed·, and I fenr mle mnuch to the q~ueen's d~lid-
Varntage adi, r:In,~ r , unkcfr the lord of Liding;Tton and fane 0-
thaes wh~ichl be~ but: afuc~ted unto her do provikl loamer remecdy;

th c. no peo

iri:U: -' , wh.i'ih hadve aliddci in thll Join~gs, Jn greatly

dilhoniour

dishonour the queen, and miind seriously either her decprivation,
or her delthu~tion ; I used the bell means I can ;conl;Jering the
fisrie of the world here) to pro:oge this assembly, for that ap-
peareth to me to be the bell rem~edy : I m~ay not ipeak of dtiff;u-
tron of it, for that miay not be abiden, and I thould thierebly bring
miy self into great harred and perril. TI~he chietelt of the lords
which be here prelent at this timie dare not thow to miuch lenity
to the queen as I think they could be contented, for tear of the
rage of the people. T'he womein be molt furious and imipudetnt
againlt the queen, and ) et the men be mad enough ; so as a
flranger over bufic miay loon be miade a sacrifice amnongelt them.

T ~wHEE Was a great bruit that the Hamiltons with their ad-

herents wouldt put their force into the fields againtt the zqth ot'
this mnonth, but I do not find that intent Io true', acS the conunIon
bruit goeth.

? HE Carl f OFArgyll is in the high lands, where there is trou-

ble amiong his own countrymen.

THii E arie Of Lennox is by there lord~s much desired here,

and I do bei~ve~ your ma~jeity ma~y to d~e himi, and direCft himl, as
he fhalfl be ab~le to promiott your put pole witrh thelc m~en.

71 n earle of Argy~ll the Haniiil~ons and~ he be inorampatlibe.

--I dJ tind :Imiongti the Hlamiions, Ar gyll adrc the comipany tw~o
firange and fundlry humlours.

HaL~rl.r.oh' do mnake Ihow of the liberty of the qlueen, and

prosecute that with great earnefinels, becaule they would have
these: lords dd~troy her, rather than the thould be recovered tcicn
themi by viokence; another timie they seem to desire her liberty-,
and B~othell's cadhruAtion, becaule they would comipals~ a miarriage
betwixt the queen and the lord of Arbroth.

TIHE Calje Of Argyll doth alffeft her liberty, and Bothwel!'s

defirufion, becaule he would mrarry thle queen to his brother.

Ah'o yer nether of themi, notwithlt. uding the~ir open concur-

ance, (as appeareth by their bond) doth diicover the~ ir inds to
each other, nor miindl onie end ; Kinox iz not here, but in :he wc:t
paris, he and the re(1 of the minirilters will be here at the ge ite
affemlbly, whos aullerity againtil the quee~tn i l~ear as mluch as
any mran's.

By some con'errence which I had with fomne of this councill,

me thinke:h that they have intelligence that there is a dilpolition
in the queen of Scotlarnd, to leav\e this reahni andi to retire herself
either i! to E~ngland, or into F'rance, buot miolt willingly into
England, sot iuch -- and~ mlillikcings as the knoweth hath
been, and is merant unto her inr Fl ance, 1·leaving! the regimelnt el-
ther to a nurther of perlious deka~gued,, ;Ind author ized by her or
to forue one or miore.

AN o it please your majrly, I think it not anilsi to put yow

mn remiembranr ce, that in care the 13aid queen comie into England
by y-our allowance, wirthout the F~rench king's content, the
thall ILoole her dowery in F~rance, and have little: or nothin~g

U 3 fromr

with the king s Con~ctenentnt the may be an infirument (if (he can
recover tavour as time will help to cancell her dirgrace) either
b~y mratching with ollbme husband of goodi quality, or by fomle
other devile, to work new unquietness to her own contry, and so
condequently to your mrajefly's.

TIH ERE FORE it Imay pleale pOUT InajCly (O COn (10[ of this

m~atter, and to let mie know your plealure with convenient rpeedl,
how I (h~all anlwer the famIe, if it be propoundied unto mec, either
hyv thle queen, or by the counci~l, as a piece of the end andl coml-
p'olitoion i or I aml liine, of late, the hath reemned tery deltrous
to hiave the mlatter brought to pats, that the mnight go into Eng-
land, retaining her edtate and juritaiction in herself, though Ihe
d~o not exerciie it; and lIkewire i underliand that famie of this
council whhich be Ialea aIt~;tctt to her fintety do think there is no
other way to lIvr her. ' bui Allnighty God preserve your
a njety~ in health. honor, and all felicity , at Edin' the s4:'
July '56~7.

Sir Nicholas Tragm~orton to queen Elisabeth the a 8th of July

a 367, Iromi Edinburgh.

An Orig;_ T may please y~our majelly, yow might perceave by my letters
nal. J.os the It,', how fadrr I had proceded with thele lords, and,
3'aper OI- whiat wcs their an rwer ; since which timie I have rpoken particu-
fice~. larly wi~b the earle Mlo: on, the lord of Lidington, and Sir Jameics

fEaltour captain of' thiis catlle, at whole handis I cannot percceave
that as yet accels to the queen to Lochleven will be granted mle,,
itnying themfetlves flill by the ablence of the loids and others
th:eir asso~ciates, which ('hey· lay) they look for within tw~o diay ;
andl for thiat I findl, by likelitood and apparent prefumlptions,, th ar
ruine accels to the queen w~ill hardly be granted, I have thought:
good not to defetr this dirpatch uniill I have a resolute oniLwecr
in that thanner..

May~ it thrrefore please y~our enljelly, to underland Robert

MeIlvin retuinedi fsoml the clueen in l~ochievenr, to this town, the
(th Of U ?!~, End brought a et~tetr fGami her written of her own
hiand to :Icle lords, wh·~ich dioth conta~in as Iunde f rlan malttr ·;
followeth - A reqluel unto thanti to hasve conrJeiation o~f her
heabbl, and if` they w~ill not put her to liberiy. to change the place·
of' leethnin to !Ith cattle of Stirlingl to the em~li the naillth have.L
the ccli n :t rnt comlpany of herr i.!n, andi if' they·! wll anrt chinge
hier t Iooi .o chlezven, th1e requir ed to hsve lameic o:hcer gtntlewount i

in haIive Iv· af'l a bcary, to hav\e Trene mdellfl miinidecr.---

To~ ha~e :no imbiroi ae~r to, dlraw 1Llh Iruch work as the w~ould b~e

ing1 iie governmenlt ofI the :Conlr II;c I:;skc:hi rto offess, whfich
;Ire t ut prod~rlyy tojuched l I Iher lintr, the i'a ricula'ity,. be

is to commit it only and wholly to th:e car'e of Mullrray·; the
the other is to the lords whiole nlles s e~nlue, aiiltrlfe with :iuch
others, as they thall call urno themi, thatr is to !iiy. tihe dluke of
Chiatteha.ult, the earls of Mlorton, M2/urray, Ma~r a~nd G;lencairn.

SilE hath writtellOf! u!o Itlei (114( I miigh!t Iave c;ciis un a

her.------She requbecth flurbher, that if' they: w~ii no~t treat her
aInd regard~ her as thecir clueen, y·et to ue lie~r- s thec k~ing thir~i
Ioveieign's diaughter, (whjoml Ilnnoy of 1he:i~l knew1M and aS thei·r
prince's mlother.. She w·ill byu no m~ean· )ieldl to aba:nton I!o:l:u0
for her b~ulband, nor relinquilh hWu; wihut ild e
aiolt h1Arm of al, and haidenetr h thecle lIcd· to g eait flus·i:y
aga·infl her.

SHE yie~ldeth in words to thle prosecution of the, miurder.
In HAv E the meanz to let her k~now th~at youvr Ii.jclyv hathi

fooit m~e hither for her re~lief:

In ar e a!so perfwad~ed her to cons rn:: hrfl to reouc

IBothell for hier hiumand~ andj to be Ccntenltedj to frlfer a divorce to
pa's betwixt themn~; the hath feet mie w~ord thant ~th n:ill in r'o way.s
con'rnt unto tha;t, b~ut rathecr die; grouindb;:~ har;llE upon ti is
reason, takinig herflcl to be leven we~eks gonie w~ith1 child, b~y
renounic;in I~~liotell, the thiouldl acknow·ledg hcrlc~lf to beC with
chikil < f a b~allardc, and to have fo:-;reite hrc bono~ur. wbi~ch~ tie
will no! do to die fo~r it ; I have perl; ·ivaded hier to liave her o·n a!
lile and! her child, to choose· the lealt hatJl condirion.

M'R. Knor arrivedl here in thiss tonH the loth of thlis Iloonth,.

wiih whomi I have had fomie conference, andt wiith Mr C`Iaig
affo, the other ruiniller of thi; tow n.

J H Av e perlivadledl with thiemi o preach and perfivad~ Ieleny,

I find themr b~othi very nullere, in, thI~s conference, w~hat they_
thall do hemantter I know not, they ate fuliil;hed wk~h mnlny ar-
gumeints, folse forth of the Icripture, Ijame fo~rh of bitrifelcS,
bluie gro~unded (as they la\·) upon the law~s oi this n~ahnr. I u.e
upon prnftices ufedl in thiis reshn.l and fomei Irupon [he cond~iiOnlS
arid oth ma~de by their prince at her coronntion,.

T1H t bilhop of G~a loway uncle· to the exile of H-untley h.uki

Sent hither to there lords, that his necphew~l Lhe eaile and famie 0-
thers of that i~ue anly, at ~inllithgowV or a~t jStirling, have l'oiie
conuoiiunicaiion withi famie appointed on this frde-, RIffuring themii
that there is a good dilpolitioni in the lords of` the othier party to
concurre wiih thele, as fuiing furtheri th it thley will1 not difl·nt
fbr triffies or unneceduly thinrgs, andl (as I ami give·n to: urnd-rRient)
they can be plcealed the quetss'd rehar~int 1Le cominlu'd, unt~ill r~th
miurdler b~e purl'ed in al per for:, w~Irrl)

h rlhy the ,lepation oft t!,e

qurern alld Ialiochu i; hpiedll~~, the prcieeva.iron at th p· in~lce, the
le~curity for all meltn, andr~ a good (Jord el<~rl !0k onlc the\CII gmeanCn
of` the realli in tranlquility.

ChrArra Clerk, which hati I;> long !ervced in D~enmarsk ~nd

fe~rvel at N'ewhaven, d~id th~e st fti nhs~m~
cd withi onie of hisidits orrte h

aI ,togee

US 4 Lane

great e(lituiation with there lords both for his skill, his hard~yners,
honefly an!d willingnelsi in this adlion , whereupon Clerk hath
reired himlfelf ; the~ir quarrel was about the thjp which took
Blacketer, which thip was appointed by there lords to go to the
nor th of ScotlandJ to im~pearch the pf~nge of the earle H~othell, in
cafe he went either to the illes, or to any other place ; by the death
of this ma\n this entcerprize was Jalthed.

ToI bijhop of Gal~lowaiy is come to Linrlithgow, and dothi de-

fe~e to Cpeak with the lord of !.idington.

To`1~ n bbot or K;!Milwining bath feait for Sir Jamnes Balfour, cap-

tain of' th~e calli to hair conferenceic with himi.

As I whrote unto yocur maI~je 'y in mly 1211t, the Hamniltons now

findl no mastterT to (lifever these lords andl themi alunder, but would
concu:r Io all thing< (yea in anly extranitiy aganirrt the quee~n) Io
us theyy mlight bellucl oth :c· the ince of` Scotland were crounedl
k)ng, ronJ~ thould~ diie· wthout ;iiiue, that the earle of L~enox s Icen
liv~ing ibi util not inha~it thre croun of` this re~akn, as next heir to

A\sn I.ilthouc h the lordfs and councelors speak reverently, m~ild-

ly, ana ~ ;

chr tary their qlueen, ro as Icannot gather by their

(parch; -I; intendoirn to rawh~ly or vio~lrnce, yet I do tind by intel-
li·g nce, tha~t the cluee~n i? in voyi greait pe.il of her life, by reaicon
tha.t lthe people affeni:ble~d at th~is convention do miind vehemlently
h dlirwtfitruton of he~r.

Ir1 is a? pul,: Tincl,

fr nc ongfl all the people, and amongfl all

e~ates. (:nving of the counse~lors) that their queen hath no uoo ee
libecrty not priviledge to coi~nunit murder nor adfultery, than any
other priva:e person, neither by G~od's laws, nor by the laws of
the reahui.

T'HE carI Dathell, and all his adherents and associates, bt i ut

to the horn by the ordfinary juitice of this tow'n, named~ thec
lords of the rfelion, and coinunandowint given to all thirriffs, andi
all other otlicers, to apprehend hhln, andt all other hi· followecrs
andi re ceiptor. T----!he (i atIcf Halt hell'r porter, and~ one of hi~s
othecr fru:itors or his chiambelr, bein~g apprlhfended have cnln-
felled thch~ !uronyr) circulnfltances, as it applemetch evidendly, thatt
he thec :~:c .ir a was onle of the principa.l e-xecuror· of thle miur-
der, in his ownI pe~rson, accomip:iriedi whrh lundry others, of
wvhich! numbe!,r I cannot yet certainy ]-Lan the' namcs b~Ut of hreerc
of` themn. thalt is to 1Ay, twvo of thc O:iniition,'s ot I ivoidlJ;I
andi one Ha!ybo~rn of IBohaun, the lordfs woul bt e gladl thar ncone cat
the Illcndeals th~ould have an~y Ifavourl or rceipit iin Enghedr:;. ;ind
E~Ccret thei~r deflire is, that the oilke~s up~on rlhe baselL~ non~i i

S can~r :.ndt 'Ileming,, whicar have ba l.ltthere', hlavi u(1tely ;1lue1

FGrow dfaily be~twvi t thJc: lordsJ, andC thakl whillCh heldo! o !r, an nor-

whi~l~anding there lords have sent an hundred andi ffty harqlu-
butheis to Stirling, to keep the town and pathgee forom lurprize ,
and to have they done in like mianner to St. Johniton, wrr:ch be
thc tw'o palI~cgcs from the north, andl wett to this towni, I do UI)-
derfland the captain of D~unbar is mIuch bursedi in fo:;yinym th~at
place, I do m~ervile the carriages be not imipeachedl othcrwiie than
they be.

Or latre thiis queen hath written a letter to the captain of Ihe

thid cal!L· w~hich hath been furpried ,l and thereby~ maitter is dil-
covered whiicr nraketh little to the queen's adlvantage.

Ta'Hup, hdV;Ing none othier miatter w~orthy your maj~eny's know-

ledge, I bele-ech G;od to prosper your majelly w~ith lon~g life·, per-
fcd health, and prolperous telicity. At Edinburg the r~th of
july, a 367.

Letter of Sir N~icholas Thragmorton to the right honourable the

earl of Lecicelter, knt. of the order, andi one of thle lords of
her mrajety~'s miott honourable privy Council.

B3Y mny formier t!ifpa:ches sent to her majefly, andl Mr. Secre- 2~4thofJu l

tar y, 11nce the a zth of July, your lordtihips mligh t have ly, r 96-r.

perce;vrtd th~e (tate of this country, andl to what end thele usrat- Paper-Of-
ters be like to cum,ic 10 aos not to trouble your loldlhip with many fice fromn
words, thiis quee~cn is like very· Ihortly to be deprived of her roy- the Origi-
al ceflate, he~r in~ to beC crowned kinge, and the: detainred in piifon nal.
\w;hbin thi· role.IJ1 and the fame to be governed, in the young
k ag'`s namne, by· a councel, confrlting of certain of the nobility,
oni: wher w~ife mecn of this reahu, t o as it is eaf to be Leen that
the p'ower andl abiltry to do any thing to the coinunodity of the
rlu: ns uindfl~y, and the reahni of England, will chie·fly, and in
Ilanlierc wJLmi,IV rcit in the hands of there lord·, and others their
af;tirockne, :ire~mbled at Edinb~urgh. Now i: thes queen s miajelly
aI tiill perfilk in her formrer opini~on towad~s tle qlueen of Scot-
land, (unito, whomn the shall b~e ;rble to do0 no goodl) then Id
p~lainly 11e th-.ur thell lords; and~ all their accomptl ces w~II becomie
as goo1 F`rnchl i as the F·rechi~ kingi can withl, to all inten~rts an~d
purp'ole·. And as for th~e Hlamrihonei, the eairls o' A~rhult,
Hiunt~lv, andi that tladion, th~ey be al:cady l0 thir inchalnted that
mayI!. IIs there· need:cth littledc~~ie :o (baw themnl to thle Frlench
c:evotio~n. The),n this is the s~Late ofC things: th) come) to pal; of this)
country', thatI F'rrance ha" Scotland~ nlow as mIuchI cl'njoincd unto

thenn: to:hpuplsa ver it was; andi whatn <.n Inrunwntli~i,

bh~:~lik )cou in1 (;im, (for 'lis hiigh t~ime) how~ to ad~vile her <na~-

lad; to be in hel~ put" Ion r ttebltoL tM eoh

Anld

And amongit other things, that I can imagine, for the firli de-
gree, nothing is more mieet to bring this to effeft, than to allure
this company here affemibled, to bear her majelly their favour.
Somie talk hath passed between the lord of Liddington and mle, in
certain confe~rences, about this mnatter. By him I find, that when
her majesty thall have won there men to her devotion, the princi-
~al point that will mnake them conformiable to deliver their prince
snto Eagland, will rett upon the queen, and Ihe realms enabling
him to the lurccefion of thle crown of E~ngland, for fault of iifue
of the queen's majifly's body, some other things will affo be re-
cquire~d, as the charge of the laid prince and his train, to be at the
charge of England. I do well perceive that there men will never
he brought to deliver their pr ince into England, without the for-
mer condition, for the luccumon of England,; for (faith Lididing-
ton) that taking place, the plince thdil be as dear to the people of
England as to the people of Scotland; and the one will be as
careful of his preiervation as the other. Other wife, he faith, sil
thiiogs confadertcd, it w~ill b~e reporrted that thle Sottilhme n have
put their prince to be kept in safety, as those wvhich conunllit the
theep to be kept by the wolves. So as for conciufion, your lord-
thips miay perceive here w~ill be the (cope of this mlatftr. As unto
the deliver ing of himn upon holtages, he layetrh, let no mian thinik,
that the condition of the luccellion not being accomtplilhed, the
nobility and gentry will never confeni to leave themlfelves dellitute
of their forereign, upon any ho~tiges, neither upon any prousiles,
nor likelibood oft good to issue in timie to comie. It were not gJ~ood for
yourrelves (faith he) that the matter were so handled ; orthen
you thould adventure all your goods in one thip, which might
have a dangerous effect confideiing the unwillingners of the
queen your lovereign to confeat to citablithing any licceff r to the
crown. And then, how unmiere were it, that her miajdlyv having in
her poffllion already all litch persons as do pretend to it, or be in-
heritable to the crown, to have our prince allo in her curtody. For
to there might follow, without good capitulations, a IGrange andi
dangerous illise, tho' the queen your mnillreCs do think that luch
imaoginations could not proceed but froml bury heads, as you have
uttered unto us on her behalf What is come to path; since IInY ila
dispatch, and how far forth things are proceeded, I refer your
lordship to be informed by uay letters feat unto her majely, at this
time. And so I pray abuiighty G~od, prese~rve your lordship in
m~uch honour and lelicity. Ar Edinburg this 24th of July, a 467-

It may please your good lordship to make mry lord Stuard

partner of this letter.

The

The queen to Sir Nicholas Throgmorton,

By the queen.

TR US TVand right well beloved, we greet you well, for 6th of Au,I

time remrained in thore parts, without expedition in the charge
committed unto you, we think it not meet feeing: there hath not
followed the good acceptation and fruit or our well meaning~ ro-
wards that Rate, which good reason would have required, that
you thould con:inue there any longer, our plealure, therefore,
is, that you Ihall, immiediately upon the receipt hereof, fend
your servant M/iiddlemore unto the lords and ellates of that realm,
thatc are assembled together, willing him to declare un 0 the~m,
thiat it cannot but fzeem \ ay firange unto us, that you having
b~een lent from us, or Iuch good Intent, to deal with th-m, in
maitters tending so much to their ow~n goier, and to the bencfit
of the whole estate o~f their country, they hal e To far forgoc ten
themselv;es, and to fRighly regarrded us and our good meaning,
not only in delaying to hear you, arnd defen~ing youir access to
the queen their iovereign, but alio, which is Ithangelt of all, in
not youchlafing to make any antise unto us. And ab~ho' thetee
dealings~ be luch, indeed, as w~ere not to be looked for at their
hands, yet do we tind their usage and proceedings towards their
Sovereign and queen, to overpass all the red, in so Ltrange a
degree, as we for our par t, and we fuippole the whole world be-
sIdes., ca1nnot but thinlk them to b.ve theres n gone To far beyond
the duty~ of sub~jects, as mutt needs remain to their perpetual
tauche for ever. And therefore he thall lay, rhat we hav\e tho't
good, w~ithout confuoming any longer time in v·ain, to rev·oke you
to our pette!nct·, requiring them to grant ),ou li cionce andt p~alport
to to d~o, w'hich when you th3ll hale obtained, we will thzt yo·u
make vour repair hbbier, unto us, w·ith as convenient fpe;? as
yoCu may. G~ivenl, t'c.

Indotr ed bth Auguf1, r567.

Th~Irogmorton to the right honourable Sir WYilliam C'ecil, kniuht,

ar~e of her MLajelly's privy coun~cil and principaLl ecretary,
geic theres,

SI R,

18 7 HAT 1' hav\e learned, ftince the arfial of my lord

of1 I2:h Angr.

AlUrr. , andr Montll. 'e l~innard,l von) shal ufrcltnde ib r i('?- lP-

b~y mny letter to; her Mljeltly, at thiis time~c. TIhe Frenchl do, ini i'er Onlke
tr ir ncgocuntins, ai they dlo in the~ir drinkX. Il"'t wa'er to rtheir romi rhle
w'ine. As I am: able to Fcee into thei;· doi.,:p, Ihey take it ont () rel3.
G ear'y to the heairt hiow the queen Dece(·, w\heher the Ive
or dwc, wheth:r I!.e be at jiberty or inr prison. TIhe mi.uk

thecy

they thoot at, is, to renew their old league; and can be as w~ll
contented to take it of' this little king, (howsoever his title be)
and the 1Bame by the order of there lords, as othierwife. LYne-
roll came but yellerday, and mre thinketh he will no t arry long;
you mayv guess how the French will f eek to dilpleale there lords,
whe~n they changed the coming of La Chappelle des Ourfins
for this mnan, betcaule: they doubted that de la Ch~appelle
thould not be grateiul to them, being a papilt. Sir, to Ipeak
more plainly to you, than I will do otherwise, me thinketh the
earl of' Mlurray wrill run the courfec that thd~e men do, and be
partnke~r of the~ir rortone. I hear no man speak mnore bitterly
againit thec tragezdy, and the play~ers thereini, than he, so little
like hie hiath to honrible fins. I hear an inkling that Lidington
is to~ go into f~ranice, whlich I do as much millike, as any thing,
for our papler)~r. I can off:Je you the w~hole proidlants of
France will live andt die in these· mens quarrels; and, where
Ith~re is biruii amon ~iLt you, Ihat jid Ih ,nd be tent to the ad velli
prtry, nd/f 1 it Ia Abutigues thSajlLUkIIC coine her with Lfome trcet;

Alas. lhder athafilud e uiAs onour, that iniktad of

JvIiat~ig.;'S canlin~.g Isg ltt theml,;~ he wil comei wi~h as good a
force. to I;uccorLI Ithem : An.: It ith be~ ;;:rt unider meanier con-
duct, RateLc:: Sma~irt thia conse vith ma 11ny 0to lonily them1I.
But ber c:nltab: e hath aj(~:ed in; losrs, rlhat the king mreane:h
no wayV to of~fere thi me. 5... i play' )ou tind my revocation
conv.enient, an p·-'d !·ou' Ito an

ur r ii, for I aa:; Leret now to no

purpo~l't, nLeCSs it be 1o kinllle these 10:Js more aglainlt us. Thus
I do humbly take: my leave of you, f emi EJenbuigh the trh of
Augutt, 1567.

Yours to ude and command.

The Queen to Nicholas Throckmorton.

TRUSTY and well-beloved we greet you well. We

have, within theli- two days, received three sundry let-

ters of yours, of the 20thi, 22d, and 23d, of` this mouth, having
not before those received any leven days before; and do find,
by there your letters, rhat you have rery dicigently and largely
advertiled us of~ all the balty and peremptory proceedings there;
which as we nothing like, lo we trult in timie to fee them wax
colder, and to receive famne reformation. F~or we cannot per-
ceive, that they with whom you have dealt can answer the
doubts mo~ed b~y the f lamniltons, who howioevert thety may be
carried for their private relpe~th, yet those things which they
move, will be allowed by all reaionable perious. For if' thry
may not, being nobleme~n of the realmn, be Ifulfered to hear the·
queen their lovereign &lclule her mind concerning: the reports
which are made of herl, by foch as keep her in captivity, how
thould they believe the reports, or obcey them, whichl do seport it ?~

andr

and therefore our meaning is, you thall let the Hamiltons plain-
ly underltand, that we do we!I allow of !thil proceedings, (as
far forth as the fame doth conrcern the quei ; thei: lovereign for
her relief ) and in futch things n1· th:; appear re.\ironable for us
th~erein to do, for th:· ,Ieen our tiltlrr, wer wMil be readc to per-
form the lame. A nd w~he~re i; i· 1> sequird, that upon your
collning the~nce, (h· nI Scroope thuid:;· dea·l withi the lord Hecr-
ris to imipast there meanwgr, s r, 0r , nd~ ours to them, we are
well pleasecd thercewith~ n!o~ we requeie you~ co advertive the lord
Scroope herccl b i?; \1 r l·tter;, and to will him to thew hbulelf
favouirable to, therni rn their a~tions, that mayv appear pla.inly to
tend to the reic~t a~t the qlueen, andi naminteniance or her autho-
rity. Andc as w~e willed! olr teccreary to write uln!o yo.OU that
upon youlr eldf·"e +>·ne to the earl of M2/urray·, iou mightr re-
turn, lo our rmeaning i,; you thall. And if there our letrers th~ll
mneet y'ou on the way, yet w~e will hare you advertile both the
lord Scroop<, andl the H-amniltons, of our mneaning.

Indolled 29) Aug. I i67.

No. XXII. (Vol. I. p. 357·)

Sir Nicholas Thbrockcmorton to the archbishop of St. Audrew's

and the abbot of Arbrothe.

AFTER my good commendations to your good lordlhips,

a 3th Aug,

forereign having lent me hiiher her ambassador to rhe queen her per Othce,
filler your l'overeigqn, to communicate unto her foch matter as from a co-
the thoughlt meet, confadering the good amity and intelli- py which
gence berwixt them, who being detained in captivity (as y·our Sir Nicho,-
lordflhips know) contrary to the duty of all good fubje~ts, for the las sent to
enlargement of whole person, and the rettitutiol ofl her to her the queen.
dig~niry, her m ~jetly gave me in charge to treat with there lords
flnifemledl at Ed!inbuirgh, offering them all reasonable conditions
and mrans as mliglt he, for the Ifafeguard of the yourng prince,
the puinilhment ot thle late horrible murder, the dissolution of
the- ma~rriage betwixt the queen and the earl of' B.>dwell, and
lailly t:,r rtheir own lureties. In the negotiation of which mat-
ters I have (as your lordlhips well know) spent a long time to no
purpole, not being able to prevail in any thing with thole lords,
to the quecen my fovereign's fatisfatltion. Of which trange pro-
ceedings towards her majelly, and undutiful behaviour towards
their lovere gn, I have advercired the queen's majesty; (he (not
being minded to bear this indignity) hath given me io charge to
declare her further pleathure unto them, in such fort as they
may well perceive her majelly dorb disallow of their proceed-
ings, and thereupon hath revoked me. And further hath given
me in charge to commlunicate the fame uInto ycour lordlthips, re-
quiring you to let mle kniow, before my departure hence, (which

thasll

yon) w~hat you andl lour conlederates will alforedly do, to let
the queencr your Lovereigni at liberty, and to reitore hier to hecr
formerr dignity by force or otherwise; feeing Ihele lord.; have re-
fulied all other mecdiufan,~n to the end the queen's roajelly miy
lovereign may conciur with your lordlhips in this honourable: en-

\so, in care, through the dilperflon of your af~ociates, y·our

lordrhips can~ nteither commiiunicate this matrter amongit you, no~r
rece~ive re~olutioln of' rlhem all by that timez, it may pleate you to
fendl mre thec opnions 0;;l : to mainiy ol` you as m~ay confer together,
w~illhin two orI tiice d~ays, lb as I may have your antiver he~re· at
this tow~n by Mlonday or T'ue:dary next at the farth:At, beinig the
Icphl of thlis A~uguit; for I intend (God willing) to depart to-
c.,rds E~ngland, upon W~ednefdayy fllowing. TIhus 1 moll
h Iim:bly taker my keave of your Lordlhips at Edenburgh, the > 3th
of` Aug~. rjt7.

IndoubJc-, the r3:h of Aug. r567.

Sir NiCholas TIhrackmorton to the lord HeIrrys.

t ~th A~ug. O UR good lordihip's letter of' the '3th of Au.gust I have

rece~ived thle Ic9th of the farme. For anlv~er wherreunto it

1' Ct

c may like your lordlisip to undertl\nd, that I wiC figniiy un!:

Srom a co- 'yo plainly, how· ther forcth I am ahe~ady thoroughly inltimated

1 which of the queen's miajgett my I;overeign's pleaibre, concern~ing the
=,r Nichio- de'ention o~f he' queen y~our losereign,and concerning her relief.
1· as tent to so lthe thflt her majefly bath1 given1 inl charge, to dec all kinds

of perfiallon in h~er qname, to move Ihefc Iords aff·mbledi at

theretar Edelnburgh to defultfroml thlia violent and undaltiful beiaviouir,

bea.which they ule towardt their lovereign. And in this part, be~-

sides the thew~ oi m~any reasons, and tLndry perfualions of ambi
cabkz llreat with themn, her majelty hath willedl me to ule Ifame
p~la~in and! severe 1ppech unto thanri, te~nding so far for:h, as it
they wr\ould not be better advited, ands reformi there their ourtra-
rcenus proceedling· exerciledi agoin~ti th?,ir lovereigrn, that theni
"'h.y might be afferedi her majelly neither wedld nor couldl in-
dure lich an indigfiity to be done to thle queen, her good count!
anid ne-ighbour.

An' notwilhilanding there my pro~ceedli(gs with them, they

havec madec proof to be little mnovecd thereby, for as ye~t neither
vI the!· content to the eni~ugenrant, nciiber fUidfr me to Ipeark
w bbh her. be asit fi-emp:h to mec, it is thperluoms to treat any
more with themn nflly ibis manner. W'hereupon I haive adver-
tired th~e q~ueen'·: majefly my· foviluign, expeeing daily her ma-
.jelly's timb~ler orde;r , and as I ha\ll ber advertiled thereof, so will
not fili to fignitg y t e theI yo rur good lordship; and in the
mean rtium w~il sh artlile her marjefly aff~o, whrat your lordlhip
hath writteni un:u, me. '1hais with m~y due comme~ndations to

your good lordlhip, I commit the fame to almighty God, relling
always to do you the plealore and service that I can lawfully.
At Edecnburgh. Indorfed 24th of August, I 967-

No. XX~llr. ('l .p 6

Account of lord Herries's lIcthaviour in the Parliament held

Decemnber I5, I567·

T Elord Herrys made a notable harangue, in the name Paper Of-

of th-e duke· andl himnc~t fell thir fiends9 and adherents, (the fice.

duke himullfl, the earl of Callile:, and the abbot of Kilwinning
becing abb; prell.la t) t pe~rsuade the~ union of the whole realm in
o~ne mind. Whrcin he didt not spare to set forth solemnly the
g eat prailce th u part of this nobility did deserve, which in the
beginning took meanes for punilhment of the earl Bothwell, as
allo feeing the queen's inordinate affedAian for that wicked man,
and that the1 could not be indcuced by their perfuarson to leave
hI!m, that in feiqueltrating her p~erlon within Lochlevin, they did
thec duty of noblemern. Th'lat thieir honourable doings, which
had not rpared to hainld their lives and lands, to avenge their
nat;ve countryl froml the 11sodc~ous reports that were Ipoken ofi`t
among'other nationis, hiad well delerved that All their brethren
thould joill clwmn in to glood a caufei. Th'lat he and th~ey in whole
namecs he did Ipeak, would willingly, and w·ithout any compul-
lio~n, enter themfehesj inr the lamei yoke, and put their lives and
latnds in thle like hace J.l for maiintenance of our cause. And if
thle queeni herself were inl Scotland, accompnniedi with zo,000
mecn, the· w~ill be of the lame mind, an1d fighti in our quarrel.
I le hopedi the rem~ainder noblemen of their party. Hiuntley,
A~rguiic, andl o;;thrs, wh'lich hild not as yet ackniowledged the
king, w~ou!: c<mw:· tl, rhe· lme conlormlity, whel~rcunto be would
albc earnelt y moive thin. Andj if' they w~ill reminal obiltinate,
andl refute :o quailfy themse~lves, then wviil the duke, hie, and
their I'iendrs, join w~i:h uc to csrted them, that otherwise will
niot reform, themitiveR. So plautible an oration, and more ad-
vanta~geous for o~ur party, nione of ourlelves could havc· made.
He~ didl not forget to termn my lord regent, by the name of re-
gent. (thlere was no aiention at all of the earl of M/urray) and
to call him grace at every word, when his Ijpeeches were direa-
ed at him, accompanying all his words with low courtesies alter
lue mnanner.

No. XXI V.

No0. XXiVY . (V~ol I. p. 3'S+)

Part of a letter Inuml S;r Francis Knolly·s to Cecil, 8th Aulgult

I 568, trom Hohton.

An Osiii- -- UTf lurely this- queen doth leem, outwardly·, not on-

na.ly to favou!r the form, but aIrim thle chiet article of' the

;`.ict Of-religion of the· golpel, niamely, juffiticationl by faith only, and
fice. 11)e heareih the· laults at pnpeltry rewa~led, by preaching or 0-

the~rwife; , c.irih contented ear6, and with gentle· and weak rceplies,
and the doth not reem to hike the worlfe at rel~gion thirow mre.

Part of a letter tiom far Frnncis Kno~llvs to Cccil, 2I September,

----- TT? cnme to th!is queien's ears of late thut the was bruilted

Sr., !: be c ruate ·ly

t rne 1 the relig on of thie i7 ~pe~lJl.i tohe

g;rea ds;1 in~g o: Ithe paph~irs b·leibouts, whlcih ab ag Ihe he~r-
Itrit conikif 1

· un'( me, andl )ellerda~y openlY in therL great chJInt-

he=r, wh,·n the cf fembly ~as flil, andt tome p.<p~ith prefelcn:, h;e
took occation to Ipeak o~f religio~n, andl then openriy thie proillikd
hetrlidt to be es the papilt religion'an 3r1 ook upon hrr to pi-
tronize the fame,. more erJ~ neftly th-n the had done au great w bnle
atole, altho' her defences ::rd argumnlcns were I;, we~ tk, thit the
et~e o~f her (peech wa· only to nthew herr zeal ; andi after-wards to,
me alonei, when I muliked to Iee her beccome to contidelntl back-
wa·rd ini religion, w by, laid flu ~', wukII yu hnve mie to 100 e5
Franc-: and Epain, and all my f ienlds in othecr placrs, by feel--
ing ta, change m. re·lgSion, and yect I amn not nlfforll the\ queen~
my7) n·I.·J flter wAi I( be my as futed laiendic, to the 1atitf saio n at
niy honiour and exupear.!ion.

No7. XXV. (Voul. I. p. 3 C)

Qu' c E"Llizabethl to the earl of' Murray.

Pn'7r Of )10 IT rl n iht we!Il belovedl courln, we gree:
hE·. YrI1 you wel. W~Lhe.re we' hlea ) , th it certain reports are
Fu'~n m made! in I~nlsbyPII parts Scotland,(( th t w'had~oeve thoulld fall

rr.ct:<l 1vi~)ool' to con\;rnc- or to, nsquit the- Iaiidqueelrn c,:cernig the
fEc~retnry Iorrible murrder o~f her Ilrc hrolbanll ·or confan, we halve dete~r-
Ccatl mined~ to rellore hI- e, to her kin!··omn anld government, we do is

much m~illike· b roof,1 nn we c;anea indlure· the fame to rece e.c
any credit: andi Ithee~ore~ we Inv~e tholught good~ to affute yethrl
that the lame· is untro~l\· di·.tacl by thre aulthors to our diif: -
nour. F'or as we b )1 ve been a:way·nr s ce·r:itledc froml our rtaidl ril=,
both by her kttercrs and uselfagsc· that thle is by nlo me re'.

go: tIY

guilty or paraicipant of that murder, which we with to be true,
I;, iirely if the thould be found juilly to be guilty thereof as hath
been reported of her, whereof we would be very sorry, then,
indeed, it thould behoove us to confider otherwise of her cauie
than to IGrisfy her defrre in tellitution of her to the govern-
ment of that kingdom. And to we would have you and all
others think, that thould be dilpoled to conceive honourably of
us and our a~tions.

Indorfed 20 Sept. 1S 8.

No. XXVI. (Vol. I. p. 391 )

Sir Francis Knollys to Cecil the 9th of Odtobers ' 568, from

York.

-- Y lord's grace of Norfolk sending for me to Bolton, An Origi-

to attend upon him here Thursday Jaft, I made my nal.

tepair hither accordingly, meaungn to flay here until Munday Paper Of-
nerxt ; as touching the matters of he commill~ion, that his grace fice.
and the reft have from her highness, his grace hath imparted
unto me of all things thereunto appertaining, and what hath
hitherto passed, and altho' the matters be too weighty for my
weak capacity, to prelume to utter any opinion of mine own
thereof, yet I fee that my lord Herrds for,his parte laboureth a
reconciliation, to be had without the extremity of odious accu-
fations; my lord of Ledington also faith to me, that he could
with these matters to be ended in dulce maner, so that it maight
be done with safety ; of the rell you can conceive, by the ad·
veitilements and wsitings, lent up by our commillioners.

A letter from the Bithop of Ross to the queen of Scots, from

York, Odober a 568.

PLEIS your majelly I conferred at length with A. ancCott. Lib.

great part of a night, who affuiit me that he had reafon-Calig. C.

ed with B. this Saturday C. on the field, who dleterminate to 1. a copy.
him that it was the D. determinit purpole not to end your caule
at this time, but to hold the fame in fulpence, and did that was
in her power, to make the E. pursue extremity, to the effed F.
and his adherents might urser all they could to your dithonour,
to the effrea to caule you come in dildain with the hrail fubjeAs
of this realm, that y·e may be the mair unable to attempt any
thing to her difaJdvantage. And to thiis effc~t is all her intention,
and when they have produced all they can againit you, D), will
not appoint the matter initantly, but tranrport you up in the
country, and retain you there till the think tiime to thew you fa-
vour, which is not likely to be hallily, becaule of your uncles in
France, and the fe~ar Ihe has of yourklf to be her unisiend.

V o s. I I. X And

L). meaning that ye are informit that your fubjedts which has of-
fendir you --Tlhis in etffett that yo~ur majelly hearing the
e~thte of your affairs as they proceed in York, was informed that
her majeltt was informed of ou, that YOU could not gudely re-
mit your tub~jea's in Iuch fort as they might credit you hereafter,
which was a great cauie of the ilay of this controverly to be
ended. And therefore persuading her D). effeasually not to trul1
any who had made such narration. Blut like as ye had rendered
you in her hands, as moss tender to you of any living, 10 prayit
her to take na opinion of you, but that ye wald use her counfell
in all your affairs, and waldt prefer her friendtlhip to all others,'as
well uncies as others, and ll~iire her to keep that thinig ye wald
promile to your lobjeCas by her advice. And if D. dilcredit
you, ye wald be glad to farisfyr her in that poinit be removing
within her realm in secret and quiet manner, where her G.
plealed, until the time her G;. were fully latisfied, and all occa-
tion of dilcredit removed (10m her. So that in th~e mean time
your realm were holden in! quietnels, and your true fubjedts re-
flored and maintained in their own ellate, and sic other things
tending to this effeQ. And affirms that thiey believe that this
may be occallon to cause her credit you that ye offer Io far , and
it may come that within two or three months the may become
better-miinded to your grace, for now the is not well minded,
and will not thew you any plealare for the cauies toretaid.

N. B. The title of this paper is in Cecil's hand, the follow-

ing key is added in another hand.

A. The laird of Lethington.
U. The duke of Norfolk.
C. W~as the day he wrote to Cawood.
D). The Queen of England.
E. T'he queen of Scots commiioners.
F. Thbe earl of Mfurray.

N~o. XXVII. (Vol. I. p. 400.)

Deliberation of Secretary Cecil's concerning Scotland, Dec. as,

1568.

Paper Of. H -iE bell way for England, but not the earselt, that the
fice. queen of Scots might remain deprived of her crown, and

the (Late continue as it is.

Toe second way for England profitable, and not To hard.

--T-lhat the queen of Scotts might be induced, by some pe~r-
Iwafions, to agree that her lon might contonue king, becaule he
is crowned, and heiftif to remain affo qucen , sad that the go-

vernment

Fernment of the realm might be committed to foch persons as
the queen of' England thould name, 10 as for the nomination of
themi it might be ordered, that a convenient number of perfens
of Scotland thould be tirt named to the queen of England, in-
differently for the queen of Scotts, and for her ton, that is to
1ay, the one half by the queen of Scotts, and the other by the
earrle of Lennox and lady Le.rnnox, parents to the chikl; and
out of thole, the queen's majelly of E~ngland to matke choice for
all the offices of the realm.t that are, by the lawrs of Scotland,
diipoiable by the king or queen of the land.

TIHAT. unrill thiu may be done by the queen's majefly, the

government remrain in the hands of the earle of Murray as it is,
providing he Ihall not dilpole of any otlices or perpetuals to con-
tinue any longer but to there offered of the premiles.

TuarT a parliament be liammoned in Scotland by leveral com-

mandments, both of the queen of Scotts and of the young king.

- --HTua toaoages be delivered unto England on the young

king's behalf, to the number of twelve perdons or the earle of
Myrrayr's pay t, as the queen of Scotta thall name; and likewise
on the queen's behalf to the like number as rhe eart of M/urray
thall name; the Lame not to be any that have by inheritance or
oflice caul~e to be in this parliament, to remain from the begin-
ning of the summons of thiat parliament, untill three months as-
ter the parliament; which hollages thall be pkldges, that the
friends of either part thall keep the peace in all cates, till by this
parliament it be concluded, that the ordinance which the queen
of England thall devile for the government of the realm, (be~ing
not to the hurt of the crown of Scotland, nor contrary to the
laws of Scotland for any man's inheritance, as the famne was be-
fore the parliament at Edin'. the Decemb'. r <;67) thall be elta-
blithed to be kept and obeyed, under pain of high nrealon for
the breakers thereof.

----THAT by the Came parliament also be flablifhed all exe-

cutions and judgme~nts given againlt any pedlon to the death of
the late king.

-- T1H AT by the fame parliament, a remillion be miade uni-

vetrfally from the qu~een of Scotts to any her contrarys, and alb
from every one lirbjea to another, saving, that renll~iuion be
miade of landis and houles, and all other things heritabl,l· that
have bern, by either side, taken from themi which were the
ownerrs theredf at the comcarinting of the queen of Scots to
Lochievin.

''TuA- by the lame parliamenit it be declared who thall be

luccelfors to the: crown next after the Q1 of Scots and her irfue;
or cell, thiat 1Lch right as thle D). ofrhartr~herault had, at the
massiagerof the Reof Scots w·ithl thle lord Darnley, may be conl-
terved and not p~rrjudized.

I HATr the Q of Scots may have leave of the q~ueeni's majflty

of Enrgland, twelve monthg after the laidt parliarent, and that

X 2 th1e

the queen's majeltt.

? HAT the VOung king tha'I be nourished and brought up in

England, till be be years of age.

It is to be co~nsidered, that in this caule the compolition be-

tween the queen and her l~ubjedsi mny be made with certain arti-
cles, outwardly to be seen to the watld for her honour, as
though all the parts thould come of her, and yet for the burety
of contrarys, that certain betwixt h~er and the queen's majefly
are to be conlcluded.

No. XXVIll. (Vol. I. p. 402.)

TIhe queen to Sir Francis lnolleys, zz jan. I ;68-9.

Pae.per Of. i E greet you well, we mean no~t, at this point, be any

tice writing, to renew that which it hath pleated God to

make grevious to us and forryfull to yow : but forbearing the
lame as unmeet at this point, having occallon to command yow
in our service, and yaw also whileft you are to serve us. We
requiire yow to confider of this that f~ilowerh with like confide-
ranocn and diligence, as hitherto yow have accuffomate in our
servile; at the time of our last letters written to yow the four-
teenth of this month for removing of the queen of Scots, we
had underflanding out of Scotland of certain writtings lent by
her from thence into Scotland, amongst the which one is found
to contain great and manife(E untruihs touching us and others
also, as thall and may plainly appear unto yow by the copy of
the lame, which likewise we fend yow, and becaule at the fame
time we were advertised, that it thould be thortly proclaimed in
Scotland, though then it was not, we thought good sirs to re-
move IIe queen, before we would Jlikid~e the lame, and then
exped the itfue thercol'; and now, this day by letters from our
coufan of' Hunldon we ale alcertained, that since that time the
fame matters contained in the writing, are publithed in diverte
parts of Scotland, whereupon we have thought it very meet.
for the diccharge of our honor, and to co~nfound the falihood
contained in that writing,, not onily to have the came reproved
by open proclamanion upon our frontiers, the copy whereof wre
do herewith lend yow, but alio in convenient fort to charge that
queen therewith, so as the may be moved to declare the authors
thereof, and persuaders of her to write in such slanderous fort
tinch untruths of us; and in the mean season, we have here
fla\yed her commillioners, knowing no other whom we may more
probably preliame to be parties hereunto, than they, untill the
queen thall name some other, and acquit them; who being ge-
neraliv charged, witbout exprdlling to them any particularity, do
dle all manner of rpeecher to dilchiarge thermfelves; wherefoie
our pleature is, that ye thall, aftcr ye have well peruled the coppy
of this writtinig feat to yow, speedily declare unto her, that we

have

bave good underflanding given us of diverse letters and writtings,
sent by her into Scotland, rrgned by her own hand, amongil
which, one fiuch writing is sent with her commandment exprels-
ly as now it is already publithed, asr we are much troubled in
mind that a princess as the is having a cadle in our hands 10 imn-
plicated with difficulties and calamitys, thould either conceave
in her own mind, or allow of them that thould devile foch falle,
untrue, and improbable matters againit up, and ouir honor, and
specially to have the aventure to have the tame being known
10 untrue to be publithed ; and you (hall allo lay, becaule we
will not think 10 ill of her, as that it thould proceed of her flft,
but rather the hath been counselled thereunto, or by abul~e made
to think some part thereof to be true, we require her, even as
the may look for any favour at our hands, that the will dilburden
herself as much as truly the may herein, and name them which
have been the authors and perfwaders thereof, and 10 the thatl
make as great amends to us as the cafe may require; after you
have thus far proceeded, and had rome adrwer of her, w~hether
the thall deny the writing ablolutely, or name any that have been
the adviiers thereof, you thall fay unto her that we have (layed
her commniioners here, until we have Iome answer hereof, be-
caule we cannot but impute to them fame part of this evil deal-
ing, untill by her answer the authors may be known; and as
foon-as you can have direst answers from her, we pray you to
return us the lame; for as the cafe flandeth, we cannot but be
much difquiered with it, having our honour so deeply touched
contrary to any intention in us, and for any thing we know in
our judgment, the earrl of Murray and others named in the lame
writting void of thought for the matters, to them therein impu-
ted; you may impart to the queen of Scots either the conten~ts
of the slanderous letter, or thew her the copy to rea\d it, and
you may also impart this matter to the lord Scroop, to join wrihh
you there as you thall think meet.

Sir Francis Knolleys to queen Elizabeth, from Wetheiby the

z8th January, 1568.

--WarLx Cupprefs my own griteff , and pass them over An Origi-

withfilecefor the p·refe~r learning of your majelly nal in h

-and for this queen s ani~wer to the coppic of her luppoled let- Paper O!-
ter sent into Scotland, I mult add this unto my brothler's letter, tice.
sent unto Mr. Secretary yeff ernight late ; inl process of timre, the
did not deny but that the firl1 lines contained in the Isame coppic,
was agreeable to a letter that the had sent unto Scotland, which
touched m~y lord of Mvurray's promile to decliver hier l;,n into
y'our majetlty's harnds, and to avoid that thle lame thoIuIl not1 be
done without her codrent, m~ade her, nie faith, to wrirte in rhart
be~half ; the faith also that the wrote tha1 Ithey thould caule a

X 3 P'o-

Murray's intent and purpole, for deliverinhge of er fad lon, andih
impuinge his rebellious government, as tetre t u h
urtterly denryeth to have written any of the oihei (landerous part
of' the said le~tter ouching your majelly; the said as so, that the=
infrpededn that a F,enchman, now in Scotland, might be the au-
thoi oft fame Scotch letters deviled in her name, but the would
not allow me to write this for any part of her ad~wer.

No. XXIX. (Vol. I p. 4c9.)

Sir Nicholas 'Throgmnorton to the righ~t honourable the lord of

Liddinigton.

20th of~q. O LJ R letter of the 3d of July, I have received the a p

july 569- of the fame. For sanwer whereunto you th ~Il underfland,

From the that fiiends here to my lord regent and you do with luch a con-
Original. cur rence in all doings, as in miatter and circumilances there ari e

no diffecntion, or at the lealt, no more nor other than the dil-
,ference of countrries doth neceiff~rily require. We here do think
convenient that as few delays be uled as may be, for the confum-
mation of the matter in hand, which principally to advance,
your allowance, prosecution, and speedy promotion in Scotland,
is moit requisite, for you are To wife, and well acquainted whith
the (late of the world, and with all our humiours, as you know
that some do allow and disallow for reason, some for relped of
multitude, romne for relpeAA of' perlons, and Co the caule is to go
forward as men do like to let it forward. You are not to ferk
that some will ule cautions, Come neutrality, some delays, and
tome will plainly impunge it. And yet all and every of` there
forts will alter their doings, when they thall fee the regent and
his favourers accord with the be~l and greatelt palt there, and
agree with the wilPet and firhngett party here. 'Tho' the mat-
ter has taken its beginning hose, upon deep and weighty con-
fiderations, for the well of both the princes and their realms, as
well prefrently, as in time to come, yet it is thought most expe-
dient, that the regent and realm of Scotland, by you, thould
propole the matter to the queen our lovereign, if you like to
use convenience, good order, or be disposed to leave but a fear,
and no wound of the hurts pall. I would be glad that this my
letter thould come to your hands before the convention, whereat
it seems your queen's relloration and marriage to the Ovke of
Norfolk thall be propounded, either to wynne in them both a!-
lo·wance or rejeation. To which proceedings, because you pray
me to waiL e Isankly, I Isy and reason thus, me thickerb you use

a propo~terous order, to demand the consent of luch persons, in
1uch matters, as their minds to a good end hath rather been fekt
or prepared, and therefore there muff needs follow either a uni-
versal refusal, or a fadious division amonglk you, whereby a blou-
fiering intelligence muff needs come to queen Elizabeth of the
intended marriage from thence, which ought to have been le-
cretely and ad viredly propounded unto her highnels,; hereby you
fee then the meaning is, by this dealing, her majefly thall be
made inexorable and to bring the matter to loch paire, is abia
which thould have wrought lurety, quietnel~s, and a flay to both
queens and their realms, thall augment - our calamity, and throw
us your best friends into divorfe with you, and into unhappy
divilion amonglt ourselves; for you may not conjeaure that the
matter is now in deliberation, but expedterb good occalson for
executing; sure I am you do not judge so slenderly of the ma*
naging of this matter, as to think we have not calt the wosrtt,
or to enter therein To far without the a~llidnce of` the nobility,
the ablest, the wileft, and the mightiest of this realm except
queen Elizabeth; from whom it hath been concealed until you,
as the fitrelt minister, might propound it to her, on the behalf
of the regent, and the nobility of Scotland. How far matter
Woddes defamations do carry them of queen Elizabeth's affec-
tions, and matter fecretary's, to aift the regent and to f~upprels
the queen of Scots, I know not, nor it is not material; but I
do afruredly think, that her majelty will prefer her forety, the
tranquillity of her reign, and the conservation of her people,
before any device, which may proceed from vain ditcourfe, or
imperfe~ions of pations, and inconfadtrate arffedions. And as
for Mr. Secretary, you are not to learn, abat as be liketh not to
go too fall afore, so he coveterh not to tarry roo far behind, and
Ipecially when the reliques be of no great value or power. If
I could as well assure you of his magnanimity, and conflancy,
as of his prelent conformnity, I would lay contidently, you may
repose as well of him in this miatter, as of the duke of Norfolk,
the earls of Arundel, Pembroke, Leicelter, Bedford, Shrewi;
bury, and the reft of the nobility ; all which do embrace and
protelle the accomplihment of this cafe. I have, according to
your advice, written presently to my lord Regent, with the lame
zeal and care of his well-doing that l owe to him, whom i love
and honour. Mr. Secretary hath assured unto him the queen
of Scotland's favour and good opinion, wherewith he fe'emeth
to be well fatisfy'd. If your credit be, as I truit, hasten your
coming hither, for it is very necelf'ar y that you were herd, pre-
fently. Q Elizabeth both doth write to my lord Regent in such
fort, as he may perceive Mr. W~ood's dilcourfes of her rnajelly's
streasion to be vain, and Mr. Secretary otherwilth tnt then he
conjed8ureth of himn, the effe of which her ma~jelly' lea~r you

X 4ihaif ;

dirpatch. At the court, zoth Jull * 569.

No. XXX. (Vol. I. p. 4to)

Part of a letter from the earl of Mlurray to L. B probably Lord

BUreish.

Hal Lib;6p, -- Q ECAUSE I fee that great advantage is taken on

Harl. . 1 I all occasions, and that the mention of the marriage,

j7. B. 9. betwixt the queen my lovereign's mother, and the D. of Nor-

|ofolk, hath this while pall been very frequent in both the realms,

so43* and then I m~ylelf. to be Ipoken of as a motioner, which I per-

ceive is at the laGk come to her majelly's ears. I will, for fathl-
faition of her higbners, and the dil~charge of my duty towards
her majelly, maniteft unto you my interett, and medling in that
matter, from the very beginning, knowing whatsoever is preju-
dicial to her highnels, cannot but be hurtful to the king my
lovereig~n, this his realm, and me. What crnferrences was be-
twixt the duke of Norfolk, and any of them that were with me
within the realm of England. I am not able so declare; but I
am no wife forgetful of any thing that paifre betwixt~ him and
me, either at that time, or since. And to the end her majefly
may underfland how I have been dealt with, in this marrer,
am compelled to rouch Come circumltances, before there was
any mention of her marriage. In York, at the meeting of all the
commillioners, I found very-and neutral dealing with the duke,
and othei s her highnels's commillioners, in the beginning of the
caule, as in the making of the others to proceed sincerely, and
so further. During which time, I entered into general (ppech,
flicking at our jult defence in the matters that were obje~ttd a-
gainft us, by the laid queen's commillioners, looking certainly
for no other thing, but lummary cognition in the caufi- of con-
troverly, with a rmall declaration to have followed. Upo~n a
certain day the lord Lithington's recretary rode with the dukte to
Howard, what purpole they had I cannot layr, but that night
Lithington returning, and entering in conferrence with me upon
the (tate of our attion, I was adviled by him to pass to the
duke, and require timiliar conferrence, by the which I might
have Iome feeling to what illise our matters would tend. Ac-
cording to which advice, having gotten time and place conre-
nient in the gallery of the houle where the duke was lodged,
after renewing of our irit acquaintance made at Berwick, the
time before the allize of' Leith, and Iome Cpeeches passed be-
twixt us; he began to lay to me, how he in England hard th-
vour and credit, anrd I in Scotland had will andi friendlhip or

pmay, it was to be tho't there could~ be none more fat infirumlents,
to travel for the continuance of the amnity betwixt the realms,
than we two. And lo that dilcourfe upon the prelent Itate of
both, and how I was entered in that a~tion sending so far to the
ueen's dit'honour, I was willed by hiar to confider how matters
flood in this, what honour I bad received of the queen. and what
inconveniences her defimation in the matters laid to her charge
might breed to her potterity. Her refped~ was not little to the
crown of England, there was but one heir. The Hamiiltons mny
unfriends had the next relpeQ, and that I thould efleeml the iflue
of her body would be the more affeaionate to mue and mline, than
any other that could attain to that crown. And so it thould be meet,
eft that the affirmed her dimii~on made in Lochievin, and we to
abitratt the letters of her hand write, that the thlould not be de-
famed in England. My reply to that was, how the matter had
passed in pararllnent, and the letters seen to mlany, so that the
abitrading of the lame could not then recure her to any purpole,
and yet thould we, in that doing. bring the ignominy upon us.
Affirming it would not be fair for us that way to proceed, fee~ing
the queen's majefly of England was not made privy to the mat-
ter as the ought to be, to be in refpedt we were purpolely come in
England for that end, and for the -- of the grants of our
cadle. The duke's adrwer was, he would takte idband to handle
matters well enough at the court. After this, on the occallon of
certain articles, that were required to be resolved on, before we
earered on the very declaration of the very ground of our adion,
we came up to the court ; where some new commnilioners were
adjoined to the Former, and the hearing of the matter ordained
to be in the parliament houle at Weftmaniter, in prelecnce of which
commillioners of the taid queen, and -- through the -------
rebuking of the queen of England's own commifloners, we: ut-
tered the whole of the ar~ion, and produced luch evidences,
letters, and probations, as we had.which might move the queen's
maidlty to think well of our caure. Whereupon expeAing her
highness declaration, and feeing no great likelihood of the Lame
to be suddenly gtven, but daily motions then made to come to so
accord with the laid queen, our mlatters in hand in Scotland, in
the mean leafon. standing in hazard and danger, we were put to
the uttermost point off our wit, to unagmne whereun o the matt-
terss would tend, tho' albeit we had left nothing undone for jufti-
fication of our caules, yet appeared no end, but continuol moti-
ons made to come to (ome accord with the queen, and retore
her to whole or half reign I had no other an(wer to give theml,
but that I thould neither do against conscience nor honour in that
matter. Norwithilanding feeing this my plain answer wrought
no end, nor dirpatch to us, and that I was informied that the

duke

duke began to mnillike of me. and to ipeak of me, as that I had

Probably reportd of the said qureenn ir reverently, calling her -- and
Afdahrrcr. murderer, I wa~s adviled1 to pars to himn, and give himl good words

and to purge myr)·elf of the things objefted to mie, that I thouldf
not open' thle fuddei(n entry of his evil grace, nor to have him our
enemy· --- cons~idering his grearnef~s. It being therewithal
whirpered, andi thewed to mei, that if I departed, he flanding
dilcontented~ and not farisfied, J might peradventuire find luch
tro~uble in miy w~ay, as my1) throat allight be cut before I camne to
CAr rick. And therefore five it 11Ight w· I enough appear to her
ma~rriage, I thouldf not yut hbol inl I)er ·(elpair, that mny good
w~ill could not be had thetcin So few dadyS before mny departing
I carnie to the park in Hamnpton court, where the dluke and I miet
together, and there I declared unto himi that it was conse to mry
ears, how som~e rinifreport thould be made of mne to himn, as that
I thould Ipeak irrevere·nt y and rathly of the laid que'en my fove-
tregn a mlother. such w~ordfs as before expressed, !Ihat he mI brh

P'robablyi L-- therrby mly ath; t1;on to be so alienate f!0om her, as tat

7"/<- culd not love her, nor her content of ier prefermlenlt, howbeir

he mnight perruade himllC~if of the contrary, for as thle once was
the pedovn in the world that I loved bert, having that honour to
be 10, near unto her, and having received luch advancemient and
honour by her, I was not 10 ungrate or so unnatural ever to wilh
her body harm, or to Speak of' her as was untruly reported or
me, (hows~oever the truth were in the self ) anrd as to the prefer-
varion of hecr son, now miy lovereign, had mioved mne to enter
into thiis caure, and tha: her own prelling w~as the occalson of

Probably that wras uttered to her -- whensoever God Ihould move
d~:dNcUr.. her heart to repent of her bypall behaviour and life, and arfter

her known repenrance, that the thould be separate fromi that un-
godly and unlawfill mnarriage that th~e was entred in, and then
afrer we·re joine-d witb 113ch a godly and honourable a personage,
as w~ere ztetumec~~cd to the true religion, and whomr we miight
trust. I could rEnd in mry hc·ur t to love: her, and thew to her as great
pleatrelc, fainor, and goodwill, as ever Idid in miy life; and in
calr, hc tho~uhl b·e that personage, there w~as none whomn I could
benertr i'ke of·: thc q~ueen --- in -- of England being
madeti~ p:ivy to the m~atter, aind the allowingf throfl, wohic h bein
<!Lone, I Iooki labour in cll rhings that Icud ohrhnu
and yleature, that were not plejudicial io the king my lovereign's
eilate, and prayed himn not to think atherwife of me, f or miy
streftioni was rather buried and hidden within me, awaitink until
G;od thould dirc£1 her to know herself, than utterly ahienated
alnd abltraftedi fromi her , which he feemned to accept in very
good part. say~ing. Earl of Murray thou thinks of mue that thing,
~c·; cunto I will Inuke nione ini England at Scotland privy, and thou

ha dl

hall Norfolk's wife in the handfs. So departing, I camie to my
lodging,! and by the way, and all night, i wras in continual thought
:and agitation of minid, how to behave mlyell in that weigbry
matter, firl1, imagining whereu nto this thouki tend. if it were at-
tem~pted without the queen's miajefly of E_'ngland's knoLw le~ge and
good will, this realmi and I naylelf in particular having received
iuch favo~ur and comftort at her highnels's hands, and~ this whiole
ille such peace: and quietners, since G~od poffedecd her ma~je~ty
with her crown. And on the other part, feeing the duke had~
difldoled himi to mne, protelling, none other were or thould be
p~riry to our f'peech, I tho't I could not find in my heart to utter
any thing that mig~ht endanger himl; m~oved to the uttermnoft
whith thefs cogitations, and all desire of sleep then remnoved, I
prayed God to lend mre forne good relief and ourgate, to mly dif-
charge, and fatisfadtian of' my troubled miind, which I found in-
deed i for upon the mtorn, or within a day or two thereafter, I
entered in converlfation with my lord of L~eiceffer, in his chamn-
ber at the court, where be began to find ftirnge with mie, that
mn the matter I miade lo difficult to hitn, flanding so precisely on
conference, and how when I had in nl~y comamunication with the
duke, comlle To f'ar and there he mnade iomle dilcour fe with
mie, about that which was talk betwixt us, I perceiving that thle Probably
duke- had -- the matter to my~ lord of Leiceiter, and think-<!clfd
ing mie thcerey dikchargedi at the duke's hands, therefore I re-
peated the famie conniounication in every point to my lord of Lel-
celler, who desired me to t~hew the ifame to the queen's mnajdlty,
which I reiuled to do, willing him if' he tho't it might imnport her
highnels any thing, that he as one -- by her maijefly, and
for manry benefits received at her highnels's hands is obliged to
with her well, thould mlake declaration of the lameit to her mna-
jdlty, as I underltand by cbome Epeech of her highuefs to mne, he
diid. T'his m~y dechanrtion to the duke was the only caure, that
flaid the violence and trouble prepared for mre unexecuted, as I
have divers ways underltand. TIhe famie declaration I was
obliged to renew lince in writings of --- sent to my servant
John Wood. The lumn whereof,; I tru~t, he thewed the duke,
and lomrething alro I wrote to himlelf, for it was tho'r this thould
redueem romne time, that thi* duke thould not suddenly declare
himn our enemiy. for his grearners was oft laidj before me, andl
what friendihip he had of the chief of the nobility in England,
To that it mnight appear to the qlueens a majetty of England--lo
cold towards us, and doing nothing publickly that miight feemi fa-
vourable for us, we had som~e caule to lizlped thiat her highneis
thould not be contratious to the m~arriage wheni it thould be pio-

oFled to her. TIhe Iharp melfag-Ie lent by her miajefly with thle
]ad Haoyd. who had the like colnlniion n lionn1 thc diuke tenintiig r;,

htr o th

Skiquee

'

prtena utas i we~ pro utin onenun

had been foreseen in the duke's design, and that the might be in-
duced to allow thereof. Hut howbeir it was devised in England,
that the lord of Lethington (hould come as froml me, and break
the matter to her highnels, as her mnajelty in a letter declared that
the looked for his comning, yet that devile proceeded never of me,

Pobl nor the noblem~en at the convention could no wife accord to his

7 sending, nor allow of the miatter motioned, but sitogether mif-

dioce iked it, as bringing w'ith the famne great inconveniencies, to the

fu Iety and quietrnls of this whole isle ; for our proceedinps ha ve
declared our milliking and disallowance of the purpole firom the
beginning, and if we had pleased, he was ready for the journey.
Andt in like wife it was deviledi to give cod~ent, that the ---·
between the said queen and Barbwell, thould be Cfufered to pro-
ceed in this reahln, as it was deC~red by the laid lord B~oyd, by
reason we could not underfland what was the queen's majefly's
plealure, and allowance in that behalf-----And whereas ye
miean, that her highnels was not made privy of any such inten-
tion, the fault was not in mie. The first motion being declared,
as9 I have written, to mny lord of Leiceiter, and by him im~parted
to her majefly, lo far as I could perceive by Ibome Cpeech of her
highners's to me, before my departin. Thus I hrave, panly de-
dared how I have been dealt withat o hsmrae n o
3uR necessity moved me not to require direftly, that which the
duke appeared So - unto. And for my threarnings, to
assent to the fame, I have expressed the manner; the perions,
that laid the m~atter before me were of miy own company. But
the duke since hath ipoken, that it was his writing which saved
mly life at that time. In conclusion 1 pray you persuade her ma-
jefly, that the let no ipeeches nor any other thing passed and ob-
jetted to any prejudice, move her majefly to alter her favour--
towards me, or any ways to doubt of my affwued conflancy to-
wards her highnels; for in any thing which may tend to her ho-
nour and surety, I will, while I live, bertow myself, and all1 that
will do for mle, notwithstanding myV hazard or danger, as proof
shall declare, when her majesty finds time to emnploy mie.

c4PP~E N-

# APPENDIX TO THE SECOND VOLUME.

333

A PP ENDI X

TO THE SECOND VOLUMIE.

No. I. ( Vol. I I. p. 4 )

W'illiam Maitland of Ledington, to my lord of Leiceller, March

20th1, 1570, from Ledington.

T HE great desolation threarned to this whole realm, be the An Origi'-

divilnon thereof in dangerous f a~ions doth press mie to frame nal.

my letters to your lordihip, in other fort, than were behovefull
for me, if I had no other rerpeR, but only to maintain my pri-
vate credit ; therefore I amt driven to furnith them with matter,
which I know not to be plausible, whereupon by milconfiruing
mly meaning, fomne there may take occalson of offence, thinking
that I rather utter mry own pallions, than go about to informn
your lordlhip truly of the fLarte ; but I truit my plain dealing
thall bear record to the fancerity of my meaning ; to make the
famue fendble, I will lay before your lordlhip's eyes, the plat of
this country ; which first is divided into two f'adions, the one
pretending the malintenance of the king's reign, the other alledg-
mgR rhe queen to have been cruelly dealt withall, and unjultly
deprived of her sLate s the former is comlpoled of a good num-

berofnobliygentlemen, and principal burroughs of the

rea~clme, whoof thaill~ have, as Mr. Randolph beareth us in hand,
the queen's majelly your lovereign's allowance and protedtion;
the other hath in it Louie molt principall of the nobility, and
therewithall, good numibers of the infesior lorr, throughout the
whole realm, which also look aiffredly that all kings do allow
their quarrel and will aid them accordingly. What consequence
thiu divilion will draw after it, i leave it to your lordlhip's con-
fierac~tion a there is fallen out another divilson, accedentally, by
mly lord regent's death, which is like to change the Itate of the
other two fadtions, to increase the one, and diminish the other,
which is grounded upon the regimient of the realmi. Some numn-
Ser of noblemen alpire to the g~overnmlent, pretending right there-
to by reason of the queen's demillion of the croun, and her comn-
sull~ion granted at that timre for the regimlent during the kring's Llni-
nority ; another fPation doth altogether repine againal that divilson,
thinking is neither sic nor tolerable, that three or four of the

meaneil

Live~s a rule over the wvho e realme~, the ncet of :he blood, thec
firlt in, rank, the greareed alway both for thre anticatiry of their
houses, de; ce, and forces, bei::g negleckttre; this order they
thi~nk prep:oiter(u·, that the mene~ir I;,~t thal be p~laced in pub-
lick fun:c~ion to woImanlrd, and~ the' greater Ih JIl c~ontinule as pri-
vuer me~n to obey ; belidecs tha.t. they· think if r!he conunrilion hadl
inl the beg~Inning) been1 valewa·ble. (wvhich thie otlll part will no:
grandir yet canr it not be extenrded to the~ prelent. for that the
conitliion· thererunto aInnexed~ are ceded~, andt i, the( eticft of the
whol· voids; the latter pa~rt of` thi3 Jivfican b:!th mny~l pretences,
for becllides thc clueeni's fahontil, whichi i wholly cin tha.t fidte, a
great nullber of` there thait havec hcere'ofbre proreifed the king' sobe
d~ience. do favour the famre, andl w ill not yield to the· goveminentn of
the other, w~hole prefermenrrt lor rdcai~s ~;thy m~iike, when the
queen's~faction shall be inicreanled~uwit a part of the king's, and thelc
not of leatt (ubbiance, and yow many judge what is like to infuc ;
an other incident iS like to mnove men to enter in further difourfes,
it is given out here in Scotland thiat the q~ueen s ma~,jety is setting;
forth fam~e forces towards the bordecr, which th~all enter thiis
realm,, to countenance these, that alpire to the regimaent, and
lispprels the contrary fadlion, and bruts are prerad, that the fame
flhall be here out of~ hand; there that think themselves of equal
force with their contrary fthtion at homie, or rather an over-
match to themn, yet not able to encounter with the f~orces of an-
other prince, rather than yidtd to their inferiors, will, I fear,
take advile of neceity, and evill councillors, andi seek also the
mnaintenanice of fomie foreign prince, whereby her mnajefly (alth~o
no further inconvenient were to be feared) muffl be driven to ex-
cellve charges, and it would appear there were a conspiracy of`
all the elemecnts at one time to etUs together by the ears, for
now when the rumiour of your forces comning towards the border
is spread abroad, even at the famre timne is arrived at D~umbarton,
a galceon with a messenger sent exprefly fromr the king of France,
to that part of the nobihtty, that favours the queen, to learn the
state of the country, and what fudiport they lack or derire, ei-
ther for furtherance of her afa3irs, or for their own safety; aL-
~irecdly this message will be well received, and fuffered according-
ly, this is the prelent itale of Scotland. Now if your lordship
would also know miy opinion, how to choice the belt, as the cafe
flundeth ; I will in that afl fofaisfie your lordship. I am requiredl
froml them to deal plainly, and your lordihip thall judge wither
I do Io or not; for Ithink it plain dealing, when I finply utter
saly judtgemernc, and go not about to dilguile my intents. I truf1
the queen's mai~jelly hath a desire to retain at her devorion the
reaboi of' Scoltlnd, which the hath gone about to purchare, withr
bellowing great chargRes, and the loss of fomei of- her people i
this: delite is honourable for her highncly, piofitable for both the

counlrys,

countrys, and of none to be dilallowed; , pecialy iif it be (as I
take it) to have the antity of' the whole reahui, for it is not a por-
rion of Scotland can serve her turn, nor will it prove coinunodiious
for her to luit the friendlhip of a findion of Scotland, for in 10 doing,
in gaining the bell, the mnay lole the miore, and the famie would
bring all her acdions with us in ruipicion, it the lthouki go about
to nourilh ta~tions amnongit us, which meaning I ami stare never
entered into her miajelty's heart; then if it be the f icndnhip of
the whole the doth demiand, let her not, for pleafture of one
part, go about to overthrow the reminant. which will not be to
sailable, as Ibome muay give her to underfland ; but rather, byv
way of treaty, let her go about to pacify the whole slate, bring
the parties to an accord, reduce us all by good mneans to ain uni-
formiity, so thall the give us all occarlon to think well ofi her do-
ings, that the tendeth our wealth, and provoks us uniiverlily to
with unto her m~ajdly a molt prolpelous contiolu:weet: by the
cont~8rary if for the pleasure ?of a tew, thle will lend forces to

fppesthere whomi they mid~ike, and so consequently offend mia-

ny ; men be not To faint-hearred, but they have courage to pro-
vide for their own salty, and not only will emnbiace the mieans
partly offered, but will also procure flrther, at the hand of o-
ther princes. This for mine own part, I do abhor, and protell I
desire never to fee forces of (\rangers to let foot within this land,
yet I know not what point necellity miay drive men into, as if mien
in the m~iddle of the sea were in a ihip, which suddenly thould be
ser on fire, the fear of burning would miake them to leap into the
sea, and loon after the fear of' the watter would drive them to
cleive again to the fired thip, so for avoiding present evil, mien will
mnany times be inforced to have recourse tI, anoth~er no less dange-
rous. Trfuff me forces will not bring forth any good linkt to her
miajefty's behove, it nrult be fomie way of treaty thatl lerve the
turn, wherein by anly form~er letters your lordship doth know al-
ready what is my judgemoent; you fee how plainly I do write,
without consideration in what part riny Letters miay be taken, yet
my hope is that such as will favourably interpret themi, thall
think that I mleanl as well to her majefly, and that realme, as
thele that will utter other language. I with the continuance of
the amnity betwixt the two contrys, without other refped, and
will not conceal from her maejflty any thing to my knowicdge,
reading to the prejudice thereof; if I thall perceave her majesty
taking frank dealings in evil part. I thall from thence~orth forticar s
in the mtean leafon I will not cease to trowble your lordibip, as I
thall have occalon to write, and to I take say leave of your
lordlhip.

No. II.

A letter of queen Elisabeth to the earle of Suff ~ks, July zd, r goc.

C21 . der' w. IGHIT trulty and well beloved confin we greer you well,

&1 S His 11this day w~e have received your letters of 28 the lailt month,
ro V ith· sil other letters, Cent fi0m~ Scotland, and mientioned in your

letSg k~ters, whereunto answer is desired to be given before the reachi
of' this mlonth; which is a very thort timer, the weightinerS of
the miatters, andi the diitance of the places confidtered ; never-
thelefs we have, as the Shortnels could iuAfer it, reolbved to give·
thisof Iadwrllowing, twhich we will, that yow, by warran

herofshal auf tobegiven in our name to the earl of Lennoox

and the re 11 of thle noblemien con vecne~d witb himn. Where it is
by them,. in their letters, and writings alled~g'd, that for lack of
our resolute a~lliver, concerning the eflablithing of the regiment or
thre realik under their young king, great inconveniences have
happned, and therefore they have deferred now at their last con-
vention to determine of the famine, who thall have the place of
governour, until the 2 a f this month, before which timie they
require to have our advile, in what person or perions the govern-
mlentt of that realmn thall be eiablilhed, we accept very thankfull
the genoodwill and reputario~n they have of us, in yielding To

raky to require and follow our advile in a mnatter, that touch-

eth the slate of their king, their selves, and realm io near,
wherein as we per ceive, that by our formier for bearing to inter-
m~eddle therein, they have taken some dilcomfort, as though that
we would not have regard to their n(lae and fuerty, lo on the
other part, they of their wiisdomsi ought to think, that it
m~ight be by the whole world evil interpreted in us to appoint
themi a formi of governmlent, or a governour by name, for
that howl ever we th~ould miean well if we thould do so, yet
it could not be without lamie jealoury in the heads of the e(h~te,
nobility, and comm~unity of that reahun, that the government
thereof thouldf be by mie rpecially namied, and ordasn'd; so as
finding dilliculty on both parts, andi yet milliking moit that they
thould take any· d~leomfort by our forbearing to thow our mind
therein, we have thought in this fort for to proceed, confadering
with ourle!ves how now that realmn had been a good rpace of
timue ruled in the namle of their king, and by reason of his balc
age, governed heretofobre by a1 very careful and honourable per-
100, the earle of Murray i untill that by a milchievous pedon.
(an evill ejlamiple) he was miurdered, whereby great dilorder and
conifurton of neceiity had, and will mlore follow, if determinarson
be not mladee of lomie other rpec;ial ped~on, or persons to take the
charge of governor, otnfuperior ruler Cpeciall, f~or adatinifkrationof1

law

law and juflice, we cannot but very well allow th~e dlefire of thee
Jores to ha:ve rbome rpeciall governor to be chlolen ; and :hieresuse
being wel alfliarcd that their own1 undferltandinR or aillothers is
best to contideir the cthle of that realmuan torl thb ll;_rn iihe abiri·(L
atnd qualities of evecry perlon m~eet and capable f~or Iluch a caug et,
we (hall better lauistie outlelves, whomi they by Ihidr unun)ioi;n
conent thdl Brit choose, andi appoint to th:t purpc,.e, lihou; of
any to be by us atorcehan~d uancrtainly named~, andi thati bkicse
they (ball percea ve that wer have care of the perion of` rlher k~ing,
who by niearnels or bl:ood, and in refped at hir so y·oung y·ears,
ought to be very tender an~d dea~r to uls, we thall not~ bide~ ouir
oponion iirom thcor, but if they thall all acc·,rd to mna:e h:. grandi-
athber, our cousin, the earl of I nnox. to be KovernoF :r Mone
or Iointly with others, (whoml: wer hear to be in~ the meian timre
by their counnon content appointed lieute~nant-g eneral) red~on
m~ovtrb us to think that noine can ber chol;·n in thatt whole
reakn, that thall miore defzre the prefe~trvation as; the king, and
be nmore mceet to have the governmnent for his ilrtey, beinig next
to himi in blood of` any noblemuan of that realho, or elsewhere ;
and yet, hereby, we: do not me~ran to prefetiive to th~em this choice,
except they thatl of Iheniceives tully and ficely allow thereof·;
filothermlore we would hace theml well assured, that wrhatfoever
reports of de~viles, are. or thall be 'pread or invented~, tha3t we
have alicady yielded our mlind to alter the state of the king or
g~overnuant of that reali, the Cune are wi~hout carule or ground
by us given, for as we have already advertised th~em, that al-
though wue hlave yielded to hear, which in honiour we ciould not
refuse, what the queen of' Scots or her part tha~ll fay acnd offer·,
not only for her own afforance, but for the weat~h of that reshnl,
yet not knrowing what the lame will be, that thall be· offeredt, we
mean not to break the order of law and juitce, by advancing~j
her cause, or prcejudrging her contrary, before we (hall deiliberate-
ly and affuledlyy fee, upon the hearing of the whole. toosec pheecr
necelfary, and juit caule to do; andc theref~or e fnding thAt
realmi ruled by a king, andl the Ifune adifriid by lawS aof thatt
realml, and thereof in~vetied by coronation~an~d other lale~lwxities
used and requilite and generally to received be the whole: el.l~ne,
we mnean not, by yielding to hear the complaints or in~formatJions
of the queen againQ her lon, to do any ad whereby to iinakJe
conclution of goverments, but as we have found it, so to sus-
ser the famle to continue, yea not to fuffer it to be altered by
any mueans that we mlay imlpelhe, as to our honor it doth belong,
as by your late adious hath mlanifettly appeared, untill by fouie
jurlike, Pad clear caule, we Ihall be direaly induced other wife to
declare our opinion ; and this we would have themi to know
to be our detenulinatrion and course that we mlean to hold,
whercon we trutt they Ior their king ma)y lee? how~ plainly and
ho~nourably we mesan to proceedj, andt how lIttle caule they have

hear ; andi on the other part, we pr:ay themi of their wiroldots to
think how unhanourable, and contrary to all humian order it
were for us, when the qlueen of Scotland do'h Io miany waysJ
require to hear her cauie, and doth offir to be· ordered be us in
the Ibame, as well for miatters betwixt ouirfelves and her, as be-
twiXt herr elt and~ her son aind his party of th~at realkn, againf1 which
offers no reason could movne us to refiLle to give ear, that we
ihould atorchand openly and dire~tly, before thle caules be heart
andr confi~ered, as ;c were, give a judgmlent or Le~ntence either for
ourselves or folr themi, whomi the malketh to be her contraries.
F·inally ye thaill admonlcnth themi, that they do not, by mificon-
ceivin-, our goodl meacning toward themr, or by indirted alla~tioncs
of the~ir ac:erfolry g~ro.unded on untruths, hindetr or we~aken their
owvn c.:u e, in citch iort, that our .good meaning tow~ards them~
thrall no!t take Iloch effetCt towards theml as they thall desire, or
thesllkllvr s havIe needi o'. All this our anfwver ve thall caure be
g~iveni themii, and~ lt themI~ 1.now, that for the thortnel· of timle,
Llhis being~ theL end~ of theC Iocondl of` this mlonth, we neither could
mlake anyv longecr de·clraraion of our mlind, nor yet· write any fe-
vera! len rs, as it timec mlight have served wes would have done.

The· bishop of' Rois to facretary Lidfington fromt Chattilworth.

:50 sth Jne ( 1E Ieceivedc your letters dated] the 2r6th of M~ay, here

Igo Iat Clat~ilworlh, th~e Ieth or Janualry, but oni the rece~ipt

thereof hadl written ro you at length, hke as the queen didi
w!'hl my~ lout I exingllon, by the w'hich you will be resolved of

manypois cntanedin yur lidleter.I writ to you that I

received~ yourl !fore~l~C~rli adc I: roml TIioo Caw\y at l~ondon, and
intl Io la~ icatesc~ to know I~L (0theqen ofi El~.ngbod a mind whether
ii' you tho(uld1 c~omrc here- (· not 11<e 1 art usc w~ord, thart thie will
no) way~!s have·c ;·lu ct·me: ::0 onle of~ the conunfilnct ers, becamer
Ihe is yetl Off'L.n&L~ Jl \1bb )

vo ; and th-lfore it appecars goodl the i

ye come~ niot hiitha~, but Toini~ir whereI Yo~u arC, to ufeI YOur
witoom .nd~t dil;Sigat. as maIY belt ad!van~ce fthe queen's aff~irs,
f6:r i percei\ ·e your we·lll!~ ~ I;nd! lifty depnds thereoin. in ref~ped of
the great1;' teidnd ennianiii ! bolrn againth you by your Sots peoylr,
and the g~rat bihc~clip I~take of1 \OU our W e'j bodi~is, both were lure
dem~cnltharions of thecir Ioalice·. Yet I ami encouraged by lour
ftlout andt delIberatre n ~ind. AdTisre yocur Cell no dilIgence Ihall be·
Oinujticd to prorcure· tylpons~ 11th olT all panrrs vherer it may be~

ha .' ce wrill not re·tu~c thet aidj ncither of I'plill, Jew, noti

;ll thingils b~e we~ll prepl~ucJ.AdIkiga E: eto

Iluous

firous to go into Slanders, the queen thinlks it very necefllryy that
he io do, for the dfuke D'Alva·1 ha~s Igonecn ex~p:ress co;:lmodl~ of
the king of Spa~in to give 1'upport,' and I amn toe thu It here hie

ciive thie tliime. H utnestn hs na p:L
thereof, d~uring ::his treaty, whIIchI wl; beagw:)ui set
the line~t besEc ~ lThe que·· hc: ·:;< ul\ · waii; i r.,

to He : :

tain fuln:; of mioney coirnin fr th liippor of'! i I:F ngil!h:il.i. : I~
wrote to you befo:e, t a:m the Ipo; e- \L hreupl~· ni wourld bec
had a genrra~l conunll~rifte to ~i 1U0fr ib ~I.:, and weeiivT 1;1Cb
fumis as th.id! he /un··: . e m n h 1 t .J to al

w~ouldi you prepared and (tar. Orders fk:11 be tak'ln fo~r thec
m~etals as you writ of. We have proponit your avy·ce~r in or do
to treat withi the queen of E~ng and. ior retiring; of he
forces puntyodlly for Iack of aidl Vour onnivers to Ihe En:rg-
)lhithien are tho't very good, but above a'! keep you weti; caut
of their ha~nds, in that care, ei0tet prucdenres fIcut terpenres.
Y~ou mray take experience with the hardl ~lachig v ith mle,, how ye
w~ould be ofed if ye where here, and yet l ans not fbrrh of d.n-
ger, bting in nied a nationis pravzc; alway no fear. with .God's
grace, thall unike usie thirink ~1orn her mriajely's ervricC. Suncee
the queen ors E gh~nd has refu:Tld that yo~u comie here;' it appear s
to m1e quad nondlumr eit ledaita us,:11:ia an ~orrecrumI, 9~

A nc a

therefore if` Athtlo or Cathenres muight by aniy me~ans bez proculcs
to comne, they wree the m~ost tht for the purpole, R~orhc: werre a:lo
miiee, it Ibe andc I were not both of one tir.unel~ Ij t t/)C:I.a:Y
w.ould get the less credit either in Scot~land or herer. ' eu
:rvys, and lend the bell ma1y lea ve· the lui n, and~ 'ail !no '· (obt : t
A~lebil comeK with thelll, whoever c~oiiselu to: 10 the quunr s
pleasure; in my last packe~t wviih Jame\s F~ogo, to yo~u, iir the
beginning of M~ay, [ lent a letter of the Queen.; o ar han:1 writ--
ing to himi, which I tout )e received. I ami iluiry ye comei not:
for the great relief I hoped toh.have had by youir pri·nce,(c tari
you could ~ell have harndled the queen of E~ngland,, nrver he~r
humour, as you were wont to dio. TChe iert 1 refer to youcr
good wi';jomr, prayingCdolndouh t. omL -
tilworth the 1ith o f January. )OUhel~l

No. IV. (Vol. II. p. sy.)

The Declaration of John Cais to the lords of Grange and Le.

thington zoungate upon the 8th day of Oct. i 57'.

`WHereas you desire to know the queen's majelly's pleafirre,

and therewith has offered yourlcives to be at her commirandment,
touching the commnon tranquillity of the whole ille, anJc the amii-
ty of both reabwl; her pleasure is in this befh Afr, that ye thnuld
leave off the maintenance of this civil dilcord, andi give your
obedience to the king, whomi the will miaintain to the uniolt of
her power

Awo in thiis doing, the will deal with the regent andi the

king's parry, to ecrive you into f~avour, upon realonlable cond ti-
ons for le~curity of life ,nd livings.

A o th~( ~

e tays Ihat the queen of Scotts, for ·har th\: has p-ac-

tire~d w~ith the pope andl other princes, arvi albo wih her, own
fubje~ts in E~ngland, great and dangerous creatons ugainlt the
slate of her own countr y, and also to the deltution of her o~wn
p~Cerfon, tht he mhad never bear authority, nor have liberry while

Iv ye refule there gentle offers,, now offered unto you, the will

prerently aid the king's party, with menC, ammnunition, and all
neccfllAry things to be had agarinlt you.

Wuuseuponv her ma;jesty requires your solwor with rpeed,

without any delay.

No. V. (Vol. If. p. 3j )

Articles sent by Knox to the general AffemblyJ, Auguth 5th,

Calderw.M

Hi IRST, delrsing a new sat to be made resifying sil things con-
MS. il..concerrnog the king and his obedience that \were enar~ed of

tory, Vol. before withour any change, and that the mindlessr who have con-
z. 356. traveend the formner a~s bet co~rreAcd as accordeth.

TnAr fute be m~ade to the Regent's grace gods nobility main-

tainin~g the king's caute, that whadToever proceedeth in this treaty
of peace they be mlindful the kis k be: not prejudg'd threre~by, io
any fort, and they specially of the minilters, that have been
robbed of their poffll~ions within the kirk during the time of the
troubles, or other wife dung: and injured, m~ay be reffored.

T'o fine at the regent, that no gift of an~y bi~loprlckk or other

benefice be given to any perlon, contrary to the tenor of the
ams madeL in the timre of the firsh regent of good mnemory, andl
they that are given contrar Ihe Iaid afts, or to any unquaii
hecl perlon, miay be evo~ked Lad miade null b~e an act of tec~et

council,

touncil, and that all bilhoprickrs so vacand may be presented,
and qualified perfonsr nominar thereunto, within a year after the
taking thereof, according to the order taken in Leith be the
commillioners of the nobility and of the kirk in the mionth of
Janualy latf. sad in cpecial to complain upon the giving of
bilhopric k of Ross to the lord M/ethve~n.

THA t no penrions of benefices, great or finall, be given be

lrimple donation of any lord regent, without contentr of hth pof-
lessor at thre lalid benetices having tirtle thret~ro, and/ fth.- minalllri-
on of rhe fluperintenrdent of Conimirilioners o~f the province wheree
this bencfice lyeth, or of the bilhopb lawthuliv eleaccd accordting to
the laid ordecr take.n aIt leith ; and dethie an ad o: council reo be
li~ce thereuipon, untril the next pailiam~ent, wherein the l Iiiine
maly be spe~cially il;a~ted, wi~h inhibition to~he lords of fellion to
g ve' any let ona or d~ecreets, upon fIsch sim~ple gifts of benefices
or pentions not be~ing given in mianner above reherfed,. and that
the kirk prefe~n~ly~ nfebledd declare ali tiach gifts null so far as
lyerb in llher1 power.

T, Ar the sirs1 form of prelentation to benefices, which were

in the thf\ and se-cond regent's time be not changed as now it is
commonly; but that this claule he contained in the prelentation,
thagif the persons prefenred make not residence, or be l ·ndrous
or found unworthy ci her in life or do~tline be the judgmlent of
the kirk, (to which alw:1e he thaI be fubje·A) or mneet to be
traniporred to another room at Ith right of' the kirk. the laid
presentation and all that (hall fall thereon thatl be null and of no
force nor effeat; and this to have place also in the nomlination of
the hithops.

TH arr an sA be made in this assembly that sit things done in

prejudice of` the ki k~s ass~umption of the third, either be papifts
or others, by- giving of' kws, lierernts, or raks, or any other-
wife dilponing the laid assume~d thirds, be declared null with a
folemrn protellation the whole kirk diraitee b thereto.

TIhat an ad\ he miade dccerning and ordaining all bilhops, ad-

mitted to the order of the kirk now received, to give account of
their whole uents, and intcrom~ilflons Iherewirh conce in the year,
as the kirk thall appoint. tor tisch caules ap the kirk mray calily
confider the fame to be nolth expelienr and necedift.

Augur the juril~difion or the kirk, that the rame be deter-

mined in this affemlbly, brcaule this article hath been Jong polt-
poned to mrakt tute to the: regent and council for remledy again~t
metrelnger and excolnununicate perfonj.

Low? thei orders be taken ynent the procurers of the kirk,

who procure: against ruinifters and niinithry, and for iutting of
jultice of the kirk's a~tions in the fellion.

Y 3 No.

No. 1 1. ('l 1 .4

Dcelarmiani of Hlenry K~illgrow, F~lq; upon th~e peace con-

cludedl the 23d Fe'b. s 972.

1): EIt knowrn to all mein. hy· there prelents, that I Henry Killi-
13 grew·. J·:y, amlbaffedor ther the queen's mnajely of f'ngland,

Foranrnoch ac~s, at the eairnedt miotion and solicitation being miade
to m~e, oni he~r rightlin('s behalf, there is accord and~ pac~fication
of the p'ublic troubles andj ci\ il war within this realki of Scotlandi
agreed HlJ concluded, and the famie favourably exte~nded to-
w~ards the right honourable Ge~orge erol of H~untly, lordl Gordon
Rrnd Un~idzenoch1, and :he lord John Hamilton, son to the dfuke's
( race' of Cha~ttelarault, and colnuendfatourr of the abby of
Abictb·othock, for the iurety of the lives, livings, honours, and
goodis of themii, thetir kiofolks, friendsi., fervantj, ands p:r:akers,
now proper~ly depending oni themir ; in treating of the whiich said
pac'it c Ition, thes m1ulakrs ol the late earl of Mlultay uncle, and the
earl of Leve.nax granrd:;iuber, late regent to the king's rinajefy of
Scotlandl his realr :in an liege~s, as ;rlo an article touching the dif~
charge tor ihe lrudtis or mioveable~ good<,. which the laidi persons
haive talkenl Ira perlonis profelliing the kingE's obedience, orior
thec d!amage~s done or commii~itted byv themi, Iince the I Sth day of
Jun j, 1 - ~7, andi befrme the penu!t da~y of July fall by palledt,
by. realm:· o) the collnunonl cnuie or any thing' depending~ there-
up. ni, being thoaught by· the kcing a conurnlulriess ou~t cris of luch
\uscht andJ imp~crt.ance. r!s thc k~ing'ls prci~nt regenit cuuld not

Is.pect a' the nc~cdlity o~f th~e (,re entr pac~c.lionr, aInd for the

it is accorded~, that the· ma;tters of t' ho 1~1;rof OtheI ta(iJ muilrder-

!,s, rn i

o tje dch-age~c ol' the thiJ, Iructls, mrOve ble· goodls,

to, the y:lcl Ilc;fsnoelt be~l bn nL;~~ ;;od~ Ind b atlon io the kinig

forl the, wed·; ct ther ki;nS ndl univedl~l qulietls( of' the reabnr of

busheic~ i. b(·;1g u:rged t., hav\e ceiivered~ p~ledge Lnd hollages
)gr cob~tavatilon ofth e1 cmedi an~;,: ot` the Ithid ::ccurJ andl pacific~a-

11h:I1 iruly andJ tatithfuly~ chficvec anc: kclIp the (hId pacification,
an;N cl aIrtick~s andl cond~itionsu thrceof, for their pairts, andi
that it woukic p~~leas her maqje1y to ini~erpoler heridfl, as iurety
andr cautione~r for thcal to that ithect, to the king's ma;je~ly of

Sotland

Sotland their sovereign and his said regent, which I have done,
and pronutle to do, by virtue Ot' his maljeiy's commillion, as by
the honourable and plain dealing of the thid earl and lord, their
intention to peace well appears, the lamie being moll agreeable
to the miind of the queen's ninajefy Ily feerleign, w.hich i0 long
by her miiniiders hath travelled for the laid pacification, and in
the end, at her motion and solicitation, the famle is accorded,
knowing her mnajelly's defere, that the lame miay continue un-
violate, and that the noblemien and others now returniing to the
king's obedience thall have listlicient thlrely for their lives, livings,
honours and goods. T`herefore in hier miajefly's name, and by
virtue of mly commrlillion, I proanlile to thle aforesaid earl H-untly
and commrendator of Abirbrothock, that by~ her majelty's good
mleans, the laid rem~illion and diicharge thall be purchaled and
obtained to them, their kinfolks, fliends, servants, and par-
takers, now properly depending upon them~, (the perions ippci-
thdJ in the fullt abltinance alw·ays excepted) as as so that the iaid
pacification tharll be truly oblerved to them, and that her ma~jefly
thall inter pole herself as confervatrix thereof, and endeavour her-
felt to caule the lfame to be truly and sincerely kept in all points
and articles thereof accordlingly. In w·itcels whereof, I have to
this prelent tlbfcribed~ with mly hand, and fealedi the lamle
with miine own feal the '3th day of Feb'r, Anno Domini 1 i72.
And this to be perform~ed b~y mne, betwsixt the date hereof, and
the parliamient which thall be appointed for their rellitutioni,
or at thle furthest before the end at the said parliament. Sic
fubfcribitur.

The bilhop of Glalgow's note concerning thle queen of Scot-

land's'Dow ry.

T H~E queen of Scorband, Dowager of France, had for her

dowry, befades other poffettions, the dukedomi of` Tlurene, r~S

which w~as Iolenmnly contrated and given to her by the king and Ct.Lb
citate~s ~f. palliamenlt ; which dukelomn Ihe oI~ael~fed ptdeaceably Calig. U.4-
till I 976, and then, upon the picificationi betwixt the king and
Mloni' his broithr, to augmeint whole appenage this dutchy
w~as given, to which the queen of Scotland yic~ided~ upon account
at princes who were her near relations, provided the eqluivale~nt
whIICh was promliled her thouldl be faithfully performedc~. So
that y/ear, as ter a great miany follicitations, in lieu of that d~utchy,
thee had granted her the country of \'crrsuaudtile with the lanis
and bailiw~icks of' Seuklcy and V'erry ; tho' 'isJ known that co~unty,
and thle other lanids were not of eqcual va~lue with TIurene, but
was promriled to hrave ain addfirion of lands in thle neighbourhoodt
to an equal value. Upoin thris lettrrs parent were granted, which
weie conranedilr in thle courts of parliamelnlt, chamllber of accomnpt,
court of` aids, chamnber of the treat~ury, an~d othecrs necef-
(ary ; upon whrich thie entered- into pcuffllion al that county. &e.
AZ,ter was wards, b~y a valuation atl the conuniii~l; lour of the chamu-

Y 4 ber

&rc. did not amiount to thort of T'urene by 3ooo livres. B)ut
iflteadi of making up tbi.; deficiency according to juffice, Comie of
the privycouncil, viz. M1. (1e Cheverny. the preridents of Bellec-
vre, N~icocholay, andi St. Honetr. in the nramei of the king, not-
w~ithllanding of her Raorethid losses, did fell and alienate the lands
of' Senlis, and the duchy of E~tanipes, to Madami die Monpen-
fier, tiomn whomi the king received money ; of which Sale the
counciors albrefaid obligedl themflvlles to be guarantees, which
brub h~ind~red the aiore:aid qlueen to have juffice done her. So
thei Rl.:Jami de Mloo~pedter hath been put in poffediron of there
landcs of Serlis, contrary to all the declaration. protestation, and
r~iforances of the king of' France to queen Mlary's am~ba~ssadors.
So tha~t the queen o' Sc~otland isdifpoffeifed of her dowry, con·
trar y to all equity, without any regard to hier quality.

No i.(Vol. 11. P 44-)

A letter friom thle lord ojf Lochlevin to the regent Mortoun.

3J March' T [ will please· your grace, I receive your grace's letter, and

q...has considered the lamle. TI he parfoni of Camnley was here

E:, of or- at me before the receir thereof, dircmed fra my lord of Mar,
tonl's Ar- and the m~aller anent mny la~twritten, whiich was the answer of
chives. the writing that tle mia~ter feat to mne, which I tend to your
H~und. 3. gR ace, deliting melr to comeI to Sred~ing to confer with thear. 1
No 19. had give~n my~ answer before the receit of your grace's letter,

thats I bhuiit to beC befyd Sanct Andfrois, at aon friends tryst,
w~hich I miight not oniiit ; I undemrand by miy said cousin, that
the· king's manJelly is ro write to divers of the nobility, to comne
thecre. :Inent your lortllhipr's trial, and~ that be had written before
his deparrting to mly lord Mo1nthtois. I undatalind, likewifer, he
wljl wii~te to your grace to comie th~ere for the laime e~ffed, which
J thort good to mlkee your grace lorefrc~n of the famre, praying
,our grace~ for the love of` God abuigiyhty, to look upoin the belt,
and~ nlot to thep in IrCcmity, but to twoI you with unteigned~
hea t~ to Godn, and to confider wvith youudit, that when the king's
ma~jil y was very young, G;od maldeC himl the ilntrumlent to divetft
hRi I:other fromii her authority, whio was natural princeG., for of'-
lflnc;ing ol` hii divine mar~jely, and that there ran no vice in her,
but thiat the tIme11 is as IlargelY inl YOU, excrpt to that your grace
cooki~ccncikJ n~ot to the acibiucaion of yourS wife. F·or as to
ha Julyr, l .al ambition, I think your grace~ has9 as· Dr offended
Godt, andl far mo0re inl Rvalitioninels, w~hich vycis G;od ne-
ve'r lfti unlplagued, exucjpt Ijedi r;·petainrce, whrich 1 pray
Co(d grant to yo~ur gra"Ce, ibr otheCr w;IL your grace can never
ha~ve the love' of God) notr nowI I)T1 pray yr gra~ce flaltter
not yourself , Ior it )our gr::ce behacves that yez have the good
will of themr that are they) k~ing a good willcets ye: deceive yourlellsi for

for fisrely I fee perfeaty that yo~ur no n particubtsr are not con-
rencced. lar by the re!} an ~d but 1Ioott pr;i::,lpany for y~our hard
dealing. I pray youi, gu ec, he ;r cwhhl me thr at Ram ther hamlie,
for certainly it pwl~-cJub nose no i'"l:-up h" buton. .Ihe very at-

ketionof~.;.c
myirt ud yu gne ch h!9 clntiniued

since we were acqu 'l'e!. Adn>lv aaetemt
rer ~thons in your ig(·de' \ knnolino Lsubl lil kIng:'· ma~riry, for

certainly,~~~ ~~~~ it·
yorgr i

h ab60 o ot how

look on the be', anid c3!t tro~m yocul g* !(`c bothi y·our Lice;, to
Wit, ambition ands avtitirioutree. I amHni r;I:17 his J~V ti, Sana
A~ndrois. ands twit to rcoomr Cn Le c·!i~~nev ai ilhe !7r theft. If
your grace will command mer in any offices that no: honett, that
I mnay do your grace pledu~re in at sterling, advertise: of your
grace's mind, and thall do to my power and knowledge, and this
with my heartlie, &rc. &c.

To our trufly coufan the lord Lochieven.

T R U STY confin, after our molt hearty commendations, From the

we received your letter of th- 3d of Mvarch, and as we Original,

take your pliinnels therein in good part, as proceeding from a E.os Mor-
friend and kinfrua~n, in whole good affe~ion toward us we never ran's Ar-
doubted, 10 ye may not thinik it firange that we purge ourfeit chieves,
to far of your accusation, as in conrcienice we find not our fell to Bund. B.
have offendled in. As touching our offence to God, we intend No. 31-
not to excule it, but to submit us to his mercy , for ambition
sorely we think none can juttly accule us; for in our private
clate we couldl, and can live as well contented, as any of our
degree in Scotlanrd, w~iihout furtber aspiring. TIhe hearing to
the charge of the government of the realm, indeed, mon lead
us, or any other that thall occupy that place, no T (mply to re-
sped~ ourself, but hir majefly's row·me wrhic~h we flipply, and
riherein not transcend~ing th:e bounds of` mearure, as, we truit,
it thall not be fburnd we have done, it ought not to be at-
tributed to any an ~tition in us. For as roon as ever his majelly
filll thiink himi;lif ready and able for his own government, none
(h1ul more willingly agr~ee andi advance the lame nor I, since I
think never to let my face againit him. whole honour, s~afety
and preservation has been 10 dear unto me, nor I will never be-
lieve to find otherwise at his hardt than favour, abrhough all the
unriernds Ihave in the earth were about him, to persuade him
to the contrary. As we write unto1 you1, our fiendl)y dealing
and conifidence in the hlolle of Mlar is· not thankfully acquit;
as we trull youtlelt confadters, but.becadne the ambafldors of'
1 ngland, miy lord of Angus, the chancellor, trealurrr, and som~e
nioblemen rides well this day to Ltke the king, w~e pray y·ou
hertrily addrdsy youdelII to be there as soon asi )ou can, andi as
,*e (hall find the likelihood of arll things, let· us be advertizedl

thereof,

thereof, with your own advice, by Alexr Ha~y, whom we hrave
tho't good to Ifnd well, feeing my lord of Anguu from Sterling:
rides to D~ouglas. Anld 10 we commit you in the proieedian
of God. At Houleroodhoofe, th~e 4th of M~arch, 1 577.

FoxR the avaricioulbers laid to our charge, indeed it lies no· in

us 10 liberally to deal the k~ing's genre, as to, lati ty all cra\vers, nor
never thall any covereign and native born ri~nce, let be aniy othier,
eschew the diildains· of' luch, as thinks thecm judges to their ow~n
reward; il n many cauIeS, I doubt notI to filnd the alljrlance of
my friend·, buti w2here m~y 31;~ion IhJ1 app~ear un~onclt, I will
not crave 1heir ali:ance', but ket me. bear anIy own burthen.

TIhe coppy of the· 1'ng of France his directi3ns sent to Scotland

with Scineur de la M~otte Fcenelcs. TIranfarted out of the
French.

Cadew 1R

Sii To hhmail ch :Illion part, he Ihall make

tory, Vol. rene kinig ofi Scoland,~ thI~·r goodii ltoother and iible- lOn,) that in
3- P. 208.· hrni 13 dfl3M~e.

TIo give him their letters thait are clorfed, fisch and luch like

as they hiave wriren to him, u·hI :hI~r haind , and to show ex-
prdly the pericat tidndillp andii ilogula/r ffali~iion, that their
mnaje-llys bear to hMrr, ands to bring back thle anlvwer.

TIo take beed to [Ihe thbr:gs wh)iich ranchl near the moll serene

kinig, to the <tfedC~ that hiis perl;un m~ay· be· l no danger, but that
it may be mioii furIy prefeLrred.

Ann that hie b~e not hindreid in the honett liberty that he

ought to halve, and! that no greates, or firaiter guards be about
him, thatn he h~adl before.

Aiuo 1Lch I ke, that h!e be not imp~elchedt in the authoriry,

that God hiarh gi~en to him~ as k.il;ng an prince lose:eign above
his lubjea~s, to Ilth efcti;C Jie m3y aS II uely ordain and command~
inr his affairs, and' in the assa~i el bbt i;country, wlith his ordinary
co;uncil, at: he Lw as uctl ed a Jo of` be:~re.

J'ITur h;s :.obijit\.. baronsI and cilommonaliy of h~is country

may have thcir frre liberiy to, resort to h~is terene majefly, with-
out fupiciain of' greatecr guards or m~ore armed men about his
perlon thani the Ite w~as, that tle: be· not afiraid and hindered to
retort; and ful thler that rthe Iegnleur d'e la M~otte f~enelon fail li-
herarlly anid beiir- Ipeak to the Ilaid serene king and council, re-
quiring th~e ri-edablhinilr g of that that may or hath been charged
or al rcJe.

AND~ thatr he may know if th~e prir.cipails of' thle nobility, and

other mein of gyood behallour rs` the towlns and comm~onality of

the

the contry conveens, and are content with the form of go-
vernment prelenrly with the laid serene king, to the end that if
their be any mticontent he may travaile to agree them together,
and that he return not without the certainty of the 1amine.

ANo it' he may underfiand that there be any who have not

used them 10 reverently towards the said serene king their love-
reign lord, as the duty of their obedience required, that he may
pray on this behalf cf' his majeity most chrillian the said serene
king his goodi brother, giving him council wholly to forget the
fame, andi exoriing them to do their duty towards his Inajefly,
in :ime comin~g, in all reipeats with the obedience and tuse IAb-
je~tion they ough~t him.

AND it the laid Iegnieur De la Mlotte, perceives the Taid fe-

rene king to be in any manner conitrained of his person, autho-
Ijhy, liberty, and ditpolvtion of his eff~airs, than he uled to be,
rnd not convenient for his royal dignity, or as the for·ereignty of
a prince does requiire, that he d~e all may·en 1.:wful and honest
to place him in the famine, and that he imiploy as much as the
credit of his moll chrittian majefly may do toward the nobility,
and fisbjeas of that contry, and as muchi as may his namne,
with the namei of his crown towards the Scottilh nation, the
which he loves and confides in as much as they were proper
F'renchmen.

AND that he wittnefs to the Taid serene king, and his eflates,

of his codrent, and to all the nobility anld principall personages
of the contry, that his mott Christian majettie will continure
on his part the moll ancient alliance and confedracy, which he
hath had with the laid serene king his good brother, praying
his nobility and contry, with his principall thbjea's, to perse-
vere in the fam~ine, in all good undcrflanding anid friendflhip w~ith
him, the whlich, on his part, he (hall do, observing the famine
ma(lt inviolablel

FU w Tus a his molt chrillian majefly underflanding that the

serene king his good~ brother was co~ntented with the Duke of
Lecnox, and his Icrvile, the TClid ligneur De la Motte hid chiarged
to pray his serene majedly thiat he mniht remaine beside himn to
hiis contentment, believing that he thould more w~illinig intertain
the points of love and confederace, betwixt their majeflls and
their contrys, becaule he was a good rubjed to thecm both;
and if hie might not remain, without some alteration of the tran-
cquility of his cllare, that hie might retire him ro his own houle
in the latid contry, in futenes, or it' he plea!cd to retuirn to
France that he might liacly--a-ndc it' it pleales his serene ma-
ljefly, to caule ceace and lIay thle imnpeachmients, that are made
or new upo~n thle fTontierc, to the e~ffed tha3t the natural French-
rnen may enrter as freely into thle contry, as they were w'ont to
do of` before.

ANI)

spe·c hi but honourable of the molt Christian king, in that
c~oncry, but such like as is spoken molt honourably of the serene
king of Sotland in France.

Hle had another head to propone, which he concealed till a

litde before his departure, to wit, that the queen, the king'y
mothe~r, was content to receive her son in association of the
kcingdom.

N~o. IX. (Vol II· p. 96.)

LorJl Hunfdane to fir Francis Wallargham, the i4th of A2ugul\,

a 984, from Ber wick.

C'alderw.1I w.

Ii C`CO R DI NG to my former laettes, touching! my

meet-K

At S I1ing wvith the e~arl of Arran upon Wedne!Jay) latt, there

tory, L'ol. came hithecr to me from the earjce, the juffice Cclrk, and far W5il-
3- P· 374- liam Stuart, catptain of D~umbirtorn, both of the king's privie

counrcil, to, treat with mue about thec ordler of our mnecrng, re-
ferrin~g wholV!y to me to ap-point the houlr, and the number we
thould meet w:ithal; Io as w~e concludfed the place to be Fou'-
den, the hlour to be ten o'clock, and ther numrber with olr selv·es
to be a 3 ot' a fade , and thle t(ell of our troo~ps to Rand each of
themT a mile from the town , the one on the one fide. the· othe~r
on the other fide, 10 as our troops we~ire tw~o iiles 3!undcr , I
was not many hortemen, but I supplied it whth f;our men, w~here
I had ioo that on bodeh, but they wee'r very' ner j',> horlc· well
appointed. According to which appocincment, we~ mtc \.clicr i.r v,
and after some congratulations, the ear)e f~il i: 1 the U~ke
protellations of his good w~ill and readtiness ( lerse thle
queen's m~ajelty, before hny prinice in, the w~oln. ni·te h:s ';,e·-
reign, as he hadi done herefore by his laer·s, :tnd r~ti;,r n,.re;
with foch earnedl vows, as unlels he be wsolle thanr a1 dev\i', herr
maiefly maY Jilpo~le of him at her pleasure; this being cended~, I
enitere~d with himi rouchinv, the caur e I b .J Ito delc3 w~iith Il) Ind
1;b nrar as I could, left nothing unlchrarl edt , rh:i 1 bI.rl :I, ch~ r.;
thle king or him withl any unikind dealing towediit I..: I IIneh,
according to my infiructions, which ~irhlout aur! ch: ·\ )L· .o-
fwered~c prefeotly, as y·e thall perceive by Ihe thiJ~ ant.. :, ir.it
herewi:h; but I reply~ing unto him, he ampl,;;ied <b:m··i \**h

him, touching· the point of` her maj. It')s la~i'~ti.1. n, ii'r Ijhe Ir-
teinrg I'uchi p~ratices a.' has beeni Ilrci let oni Ifoot ft the ljl-
ct-ie:hilg ofr her ma~jelly ands her Cij.[o ner, who thr ·1of madell )un-

byv fumlelI Irincces, :rndt by· whait Iluc:! s thc cabrl b.:x i(nya i to
d~ivert then1, andbr t;) ..ha CIUI' s ; theone)I1, to,i thil he1 Ir.l·'' .e

he~ b luie ~the kinrg will never due, I;0 will heL newv~ julfe' t~r hu to,

hec:tiken

h~earken unto it, To long as he has any credit with him i he de-
nys not but the king has been dealt withal be praftices to deal
againit her majefly, which he has lo far denird anid refulid to
en~er in~o, as they have left dealing therein, but whatsoeve~r
the king or he knoweth therein there Ihall be nothing hidde~n
from her maljefty, as her majelty (ball know very thorrly i surely
it seems by his Ipeeches, that it the king woubtl hate yieldedi
thereunto there had been no rImall comipany of` French in Sco,-
land ere now to dilquiet he~r majelty.---T-'lhis being endedt,
I dealt with birn earnettly for the fLay ors this parliamntrn, w~is h
now approacheth; or at the lealt ihat there may be nothing
done therrein, to the prejudice of thete noble~men and olthess
now in England, for the fortaul~ing or (heir lihings and goods,
hereupon be made a long dilcourle: to me, firlt of the earl of
Angus dealing about the eart of Mor ton, then of his going out,
hnotwithitndng o',r:Z]"of foodrie gracious offers the king hadt miade
they h~ad the $inig's maje~ky in their hands, they impriloned hi~u-
felt, dealt with the king for putting of the duke out of the
realm, the kin~g refuled so to do, they told him plainly that it
be w~ould not he thould have the earl of Arran's head in a dith;
the king alked w~hat otffence the earl had made ? and they an-
[wereed It mlut tc so, and thould be so; hereupon for the tsar-
guaid of Al ran's life, the king was coatent to lend away the dluke,
and yet Arran afterwards fun~dre times in danger ofi hisr life·, I
al!cdge d unto him the king's letter to rhe queen's majed;·, and
his adts in council, that they had dope nothing but f or his ser-
vile, and whth his good liking and contentmen:, who anlweredl
me he dedlr do no otherwilC, nor could not do any thing burt
that which pleated them, with such a numiber as oiher thez~r
dealings with the king whikit he was in their hands as are too
long to be written, and too bad if they were true; Ifi h
king mlight have let the queen's majelty's amniballa~dor h a te known I
his mind lecretly, and her majely would have retlicsedl binm
he anlwvered, that the king w'as not ignorant thnt the· aipprchen-
fsons in that manner, proceeded trom Mr. H;,·.'s ;!:.:6trc\, aiil
thereby durlt not impart to miuch to him, ant )·i ye h< k;In we.
content, and did give reminllion to as manyn, as won1.t :ckbnow-
ledge their f'Julis, and alk remillion, an~d ILch iis would! not,. Hie
thought fit to banith, to try their funther le:.i bi, in \which
time they conutpired the king's Claund appciben(G. n, ;i:ud th1 kIll-
ing of the earle, and olhers, andt l;euiced theL m nl~tten` 1o itheir
fallion, and yet not latisfied with, Ihcei cooll~llphatie a1Ini Iratonl-
able dealings, (as he termsy llem,) arTe enru!o inlo a Ihbd.Lein
in Englandt under her nrunjoly's p~rote~ctio.n, rlo enth mou~ii her mia-
jelly as far as in thiemr Iboth, or aIt least I(o c ure (th k; i con-
caive tome un~kilindneth in he noT Illy~, Ior bI lbouiriing (,1 them;1
Iwrote to yow w~hat the· ownpha;!cy nov th akg o h
kingi. thre killinig of ilhe cniei~ oful ,,u oaewes h
takiirg of the cailiic or Ed:iin'. J1nd b~limbi't JIII horne the cade , o

aa\L

take the cha~rge of~ the king; all which (says he) is by Drum-
mnondI confe~fed, and by· the provoll of Glencudden not greatly
denie~d, and thle conrtablle of the caflile the~reupion tkd , he
ealrl bro~ught D~rummundv with him as far as L~angton, where he:
bry to have co~ntfef fe the c:·nfpiracy before mer, but havinlg at
hiis lig~hting, received a b~low on his leg w~ith a rolfe, Io as he~
couldf b~irng himn no lur hecr, I replied lhat Ithought verily they
wouldi not work arl\ liah prablIces, in refpe61 0f the queen 's
miajefiv\, ab·ic:ing~ w~i.hin ner realme, and it there be any foch
prad~ice l, they-· hav\e procteedced from others, and~ they not pridec
unto them l: and th.:t if it be not ap~parently proved again(1 themr,
that it v;il b~e thlougoht to b,- rome practice to aggravate the·
fault, andi to, ma~ke thiil m te miore 0Jious to the king. He' an-
fwe·redJ a e, thiat it thou!d be proved so furriciently, thiat th:y
thould not be ab~le w~ith trul~h to deny it, for their ow'n hands b
to be (hlowed to part of it, anrd th~erefore concludecd, that it'
her majeflyv houldl t0 prels t!:e king for thiem at this timne, thatr
would rathecr hinder thi~s matrter of thle amity, nor furthe~r it,
and that lince they fe~k chiefly his life, he could not, in anyi
reason, Iceek to dio thecm any g;·od , and besides he affered me,
that if he w~ould, he dare niot, this fall mattcer being tallen cut
as it is, and furley it thi; ma~tecr had not fallen out, I would notr
have doubted the Ielloring of thie earl of M~ian very thortly, li
her majefly would have employed m~e therein, but for the earl
of Angus, I perceive the king i· perfuadled that both he, andl
the rett of the Do~ughlk;S, hrl:e concei\·ed to mnortall an hatr-·d
aga~in1 him and the earl of A~rran, about the death of the earl
of Morton, as if thiey wjre at home, to mollOw next, they
would not lease to pradice and conrpire the Jecarb of thiem barb,
and therefore a hald ma~tter, to, do any thing for himl: finally,
he concludecd ands req~ulbd me to assure her majcelly from the
king, tha.t there r113l nothingi b~e hid from hier, not any thing~
leftr undone~ thait may; ilabehe her mnajetty withl reason, and thatr

thec.~
kn h evri do :ny 11h eg. nor can'en~t to haive any thingS

dlonel bi ber preljdice, io jon~ a· he ha.d any' medcit withi him,, or
authourity un~der h~im~ i l·ing ·h~s fa: punceded~~~, her Juc~r d to
[howd mec bl. ca~ln::i~ l

n Mica,;s whkh is .

unde the get ledI, to himl-

Iclt` on~l·, wlich i; a,~ Iar ge as m;ay be·, andJ y t thedrie of the
p,:iic counlli~ (l.r thee I

whh im, bult notr one in commiiflion, nor

perc I' :-, I Iln~ \1ear usJ hi, timell havin~g rpent aTmoff five hours
ini t!ec:i I:: e

'; he p ~cil·:c owd to e thr ma:!er of Gra3y, who

abomlr~ pcrca;Le L1h ! ngli:l'e~ls to tend to) her majelty, andt
th;ewflr use uqubes a~ 1.:1· \·:u' et tor his pailfagc, which I pray
?owv I·;ocu e. an~d to Iod~ ;1 I;, thcn as you may. I let himr un-

He tri ee·(' ito me, l1..0 Sc·nu,! we.I buti a knnve 91nd that1 it wa:S

yiddodi

yellded the sooner; and if Seaton hns gone bey·ond his intruc-
(ino, wh1Ich Arran drew himlelf, he will ma~ke Seaton finart fjr
it. T'ouching Williiam Newgate, and Maik Goulgan,, he pro-
teltedi he never heard of any luch, he lays rthere was a little
poor foul, wit'h a black. beard, come ;hi~her a begging, who laid
he was an ·n -my to D~eimond, to w~hom he gave a croun, but
never hra~d or himi linlce, and for any Scots man going into
Ireland, he lays thc:- is no such matter ; it there be, theie miay
be Iome few ialkai; that he know's not of, andi touch-ing thre
coming of any jcthiics into Sco:lnnd, he lays it is but the (lan.
derous devite or the king's enemys, andi such as would have the
world believe the king w~ere ready to revolt in religion, whio
the world thlall wve~ll ee will continue as conflant therein, as
what prince soever profeffed it molt; and the earle him~lil dos
protell to me, that, to his knowledge, he never saw a jesuit in
his life, and did all-ine me if' there was any in Scotland, they
thould not do 10 much harm in Scotland,as their miniffers would
do, if they preach such do~trine as they did in Scotland; and
touching one BaJllanden, of whom I wrote to yow, I heard from
Mr. Colvil, the earle avows conflantly that he know~s not, nor
hath not heard of' any such m~an, but he would inquire at the
jullice clerk, and would inrorm mie what he could learn of that;
thus I have made yow as thrort a discourse as I can of so many
matters, 10, long dilcourfed upon, but there are the pir icipal
p~oints of all our talk, so near as I can remember, and for this
time I commir yow to the Almighty. At Herwick, thle sqth of
Auguit, a <84-

The king is very delirous to have

my lon Robert Carrie to comne to him.
I pray yow know her majelty's pledulre.

Arran's Answers to the grieffs or articles proponedl to the: lord

Hunidane, let down ini anothe~r tormn.

A S to the (trait and se~vere perfetcurtion of all farch, a~s have
jelly, it cannot appear they were eithe~r for that cauie punii~hed,
or hardly dealt with, fance his ma~jclly of late has been to, catre-
ful and diligent to choice our good inlthumenlts to deal be~twixt
her majelly and himn, as his mn ajelly has done in eledting of your
lordship andt me; belides that in all their accusation.:, their good
will and affeation born to her m ejelly was, at no time, fatid to
their charge, but capital a~tions of treason many way tried now
be the w.hole three e~ates, and more than manif;ti to the
wcaid.

As for hli3 mn:jety inhibiti·ng, public p·,r. roclamation_. f·Isc

aS were biirdlitd, no: tJ reptir( in E~ngland,~ the~ bruits and

w hiilprings

whilperings that came to his ma~jelty':: cars, of their conspiracies
and trLeafons, which s~ince in they accomplilithe, so f~ar as in
themn lay, moved his ma~jetty to inhibit themi r, repair to any
place, fa! near his maje(ly a realm, Ilet they thould have attemp -
ed th~re things, which thortly they did atruemt, being tarthe~r
off, and more dfiltant boih by lea and land.

As for reception of jelhits, and others, hecr majefly's firgi-

tives, an~d not delivering them according to his promile, as \our
lordship propones, h~is majrfly would be m311 glad that to it
might f ll out by your lordihip's traviles, that no top~irive of cl-
ther realme thould be received of either, and wheni 10 thall be,
it thall not fail on hisj majeity's part, albeir in very; diee thiJ
time by·gone his ma~jelly) has been conitrained to receip't her mar-
jeity's miean rebeclls and fugi:ives, contrar his good natulrall, lilnce
her mlajelly hath ieceipt, ini effed, the who~le and greatelt rebdb:
and traitors his majenty in his own bl!ood ever had , as for Ae
agreement with hhi majefly's mother anent their ailbciation, hiis
m:!jety1 has commandid me, in prefalce of y'our lord~hip~'s er:-
vant, to affere her majdly and y·our iordihip, in his manjctly's
name, that it is altogether f~alle, and an untruth, not any Ic~h
like alatter done yet.

HIs majerly has also commandedr me to an'ire your lordil;

that it is aile, falle and untrue, that his majetl I1:.,
means dbirit or ind~ited, lent any meffIge to~t. i:h ; -·: -
ccilted anty Ihm himn , or thait hir unjei:1y has I1ealt w. h · ;·n.
or anY thre;!rnerrs, to hami~ her maityc~! or hac reabon, whi~c~h he
unjqelly coLo~: l h:e rno ho.n')ur to do, this g~Ood intaiigecnce ta-

fler, :emil un;, bb maj ·!R. hej I;,jobv uled nocne or In-m Lo,

thewedJ y.our lordiiibi :t Fo`ulclde Jt OUr ice'i n:ceSIng.

No. X. (V.ot. II. p. 1eg.)

L~etter of Q~ Mary to ( Elinktbch.

M\,adam ma b~onne & uir,

Cott. I b~. 'AlfeaT.cntt que voJ avez en communication d' une Icate~
C~ol. H. d~e C;;ax que vchor hiommne Scme~r mie liV13 hier (Lrbz ;e
fl1Il. Fol. com de man rbiz v· r·congnoiffant quall de mior les melines
'49; raiions, ,iue le· dir Gra~y m'chr!ivit en chifre Whatil dernierement

AnO yi res de vous dieiinantrant la !Lt.iljace & bonac initenrion du per-

na!.e joaee vous priclay fe~ulcm:cut lub~ant ce qlue ii dlevanr t· voys

av: vrrnt ;uita~niment im~panrune quer vous mne permetcrie-z ieldaui-
cic ilbremecnt & oulVenroct~rl cer ipubit de I'1Iall~l eia i'on ~

abou n

cF mo)n jSW ic mue def~er les rinaum: pourr prcedelcr av·c· lai counwnr

e~r

juIa

tr o i Ir!nLE

eme.E 'nern

cr c llicn. ~f c quay~l

quoy que I'on vous die & putffe en rapporter de faire mentic ce
perit brouillon qui perf~uadC par arucuns de vos uliniffres a entre-
prls cette separation entre moy et mnon enfant, &E pour y comnmencer
Je vous fiuppliet ml'offroyer que je puilre parler a ce juffice clerk
q1ui vous a efle nouvellemoent envoyb pour mnander par lay a mlon
filz l1non intenuion fur cela, ce que je me prom~is que ne me refille-
rez, quant ce ne feroit que pour demlontrerr en etfea la bonne
intention que vous Iin aues affeurbe avoir a f'accord &r entretica
d~e natural devoir entre le miere & I'enfant qui dit en bonnes
termies elthe emipefche pour vous me tenant captive en un delert ce
que vous ne pourrez miieux dlefanenrir & fadire paroirre voltre bort
defir a notre union que me donnant Its iuoyenis d y proceder, &e
non mi'en recenir &r empercher conunrle aucune de vas miniltres
pretendent a fin de Iliffer toujours lies a leur mnauvais & finiffres
pra~tiques entre nous. La lettre porte que f~affociation n'ell pas
paffee, audi~ n luy aitje jamlais dit, bictique mlon fily evoit ac-
cept6 ; &r que nous .en av ions convenu enleuable, C~onte l'a £te
sIgn6 de fa mlain, & c~es lettres tant a suoy, que en France en font
soy, syant donne ce mleone reinoignage de 11* bou'chs:.ropre a
plufieurs amnbaffedeurs & perfoune dsecredi, s'exculrett de ne
f'orer faire publier par craint de vous feuleruent, demnandant
forces pour vous refiller d'avant de fe de~clarer sI ouverrtenient
ellant journellemlent perluade alr'tontraire par vos n pititres squi
luy promleroyent avocque use entreirc e,Yorck: le faire deciater
votre hereder.· Au surplus Madraare iluand mon enfane theroiF fe
malhemrens quesde s'apiniather eo cotte earseme impleth &~ ingra-
titude verslmoy,.je ne puis pederr que vous non phays:rqu'appan
aultre paice de la Cthretienab· le vouglfies en cela sppblauir on
meintenir pour Juy fayre acquerir~luit natididion ains que plutos
introeienfdres; pour. Juy faire recoquaoita~e la railon traop jofic &
evridant dev~ant Dieu &r les honlures. Helas &r encores ac tuy
vouloierJ jen afrer, sw~ays don not aue' dloit ce qu if tiese par ulIn-
pation. Je mie fuis du tout conunliee a vous, &r Fidelaunent faites
si ii vous pltott que je ne en love pis qu'aupravant. &S que~le thul-
fete des uns ne· preve~e delvant la verite vers vous, pour hiea re-
cevant Inal, &.la plus grande adliitica qii mie kcaurroic arriver
a scavoir la perte de enon fils. Je vous th~pplic de ure masnder ers
cas qu'il perlillae o.ceste us'elcoonoillance de ion dlevoir, que de
luy on de n~oy il vous plailt advoter ·pour legirthuce roy ou
royne d'E~coffe, & li Vous avCe agreable de pourliaivre avec mloy a
par te la traite commenpd entre nous de qu.oy je vous reqluiers tins
plus acttndre: de relponte de ce. mal gouverne entirat vous en re-
querrant avec auiant d affe~tion qre. je I~os anlon coeur oppref4
d'ennuy. PIour Diendouvenes rous deo la promeffec que sn'av·ez
Ihanes de mei pre~ndre en vorre protctsron Iie reportant du tout a
vous, &r tur ce prao i; Dien clu'd vous vinville prefkrver de routs
vas canentuya &r dilliianulez amlyY, commtre je· le <kt lire de usee confo-
let & de mie venger ce ccalmr qui pourchaffecnt un tel ainalbur entre
la meire & Jeunfnt,. Je coffesayy dev~~ouu troubler, miais non a

1 of. 1. s ca

Dieu encore un coup je le fupplie de vous garder de tout peril.
F;uthbery xri Mars.

Vofire fidelement voueb laeur

& obeiffance coutine,

A la reyne d'Angleterre M ARI E Q

madam~e mao bonne faeur
& coufine.

No. M. (Vol. 11. p. lo9*)

A Tellament by Qe Mary.

Cott. lib, N. B. The following paper was trankcribed by the revd. r
Velpaf. Crawtord late regius profeffor of church history in the uni-
L. 16. verfityI of Edinburgh. Veart of this paper, according to
P. 4' 5. him, is written by Naub, Mary's fecretalry, the reft with

the queen's own hand What is marked *' is in the
queen's hand.

COnfiderant par ma condition prereate f'ellar de vie humaine,

si incertain, que perfonne ne s'en peuff, ou doibr affeurer,

finnon foubs la grande et infinie mberticorde de Dieu. Er me
voulant preveloir d'icelle contre tous les dangers et accidens, qui
me pourroient in opinemlent furrenir en cente catptivir6, melmecs a
caule des grandes et langues maladies, ou j'ay ete detenue jufques
a present ,- j sy advisC tandis que j'ay la commoditb, on raison en
jugemnent, de pourvoir aprea ma la falur de mon ame, enterre-
ment de mton corps, et diipotscion de mon bien, eitat, &r affaires,
par ce prelent mlon teittnwns et ordonnance de mon dernier vo-
lonre, qui s'enlfuyr.

Au nom du Pere, du Fils, et du benoife S'. Elprit. Pre-

mlierecmnt, me recongnoiffant indigne pechereffe avec plus d'of-
fences envers mlon Dieu, que de rarisfsaion par toutes les adver-
frtes que j'ay fouffert ; dont je la loue fa bombe. Et m'appuyant
fur la croix de mnon Sauveur et redempteur Jesus Chrilte. Je
recommlende mon ame a la benoifle er individue Trinitb, et aux
pneres de la gloriedre Vierge Marie, et de tous les anges fainAs
er faindes de paradis, efperant par leur merites et intrcellon,
efire sydeC a obtenir de dire fiaie participante avec euix de fe-
licite eternelle. Et pour an'y alchemliner de cueur plus net et
entier, delpouillant des a prelent tour reffentimecnt des injures,
calomnnies, rebellions, et aultres offenfes, qui me pourroient
avoir ri16 fa~es durant ma vie. par nees fubjets rebelles et aultres
ennemis; J en retrice la vengeance a Dieu, &r le fupplie leur par-
donner, de merme affedion,, que je luy requiers pardon a mes
faultes, et a rous cculs ct colles que je pois avoir offcaf6 de fai8s
on de parolles.

Je venix et ordonne, &c. [The tUO following paragraphJs con-

tain diredlions concerninq the place andc circum/fance of her burial ]

Poilr ne contrevenir a la gloire. honneur, et conrervation de

f Eglife catholique, apolloliqlue et Romnaine, en lan quelle je veuix
viyse et mnourir, si le prince d'Efcoff mion tilz y pue(1 etre re-
duiet contre la mauvaile nourriture, qu'il a prise a mnon tres grand
regret en t'herefie de Calvin entre mnes rebelles, je le laiffe feul et
unique heritier de mion royaume d'Etcoffe, de droift que je pre-
tende juilement en la couronne d'rhngleterr-e et pays~ qu~e en de-
pendent, et generallemrent de tous et chacun mes mieubles et
iirnmeubles qui refleronts apres mia Ir~ort, e~t execution de ce pre-
tent refalaent.

Si non, et que mon dit filz continue a vivre en la dite herefie,

Je cede, tranfporte, et faitte don '· de touts et chacuns mies
" droidts, que je pretende et puis pretendre a la couronne d'Ang-
" leterre, et aultres droifts, feigneuries, on royaulmes en depen-
"' dants, au roy catholique. on aultre de rsens qu'il lay plairs,
" avefq~ues advis, codn~cnement de fa faintete; tant pour la voyr
" aujourdhuy le feel feurs appui de la religion catholique, quie
" pour reconoifi~nce: de gratuires feveurs que wa~y, et les m~iens
"' recommandez par mnoy, ont avons receu de lay en m~a plus
" grande necellite; et refguard audit an droiAt que luy mefunle
" peut pretendre a ces dits royaulmies et pays, je he fupplie qu'en
" recompence il preign alliance, de la tunifon de Lorraine, et fill
" ce pleut de celle de Guile, pour memoire de la race de laquelle
·" je iuis sortie au coRe de Mere, n's avant de celuy de mlon pere.
" que mon feul enfaent, lequel efia~nt Catholique j'ay tousjours
" von& pour une de les falles, ft ii lay plailoit de I'accepter, on
" faillant une de fes neipces mnarieb commne la fille.

"~ Je layffe mon filz a la protcdion du roy, de prince, et dues

" de Lorrayne et de Guile, et du Mayne, aux quela je recom-
" mende et lon ellar en Efcoffe, et mon droidt en Angleterre, ti
" it eft catholique, et quelle le pallic· de celle royne."

Je fautz don au '' comptC de Lenox" de: comte de Lenolt

tenu par feu son pere, et comnmande mlon filtz, comlme mnon he-
retier et fucceffeur, d' obeyr en celt en droit a mlon volonte.

Je veulx et ordonne toutes les fomnines et deniers, qui le tro-

verent par moy deues, tica mis caule de doia elthe fairs "( a
"( Lohliven" ctre promptement paybe et acquitabs, et tout tort et
griefs tepares per lefdits executeurs deliluela J'en charge la
conscience. Oultre, &c. [ Follow mew or hreec paracgrarphs con-
cernring particular legacyi, arnd thenr is added] F~aif au mlanoir de
Sheffield en Angleterle le jour de -- Mil cing cens oIxjntI1
&I dix sept.

Zt I A/h r

After a blankh page follozs in the qupeen's band :

"( Si mon filz meurt, au comnte de Lenox, on Claude Hamil-

" ton lequel fe~ mionrrera le plus fidelle vers mioy, et plus conitant
" en religion, au jugemnent de --- Ducs de Lorraine et de
" G~uyle, ou je le rapport fur ce de ceuix a que j'auray donnay
" la charge de trayter avefque eux de par mnoy et ceulx, a con-
" dition de fe marrier on allier en La dite m~aylon on par leur
'L advis."

F~bollo near twro pages of partic-ular legacys.

" Et le remets mar conte de Lenox au droid quelle peut pre-

" tendre a la conte d'Angous avant I'acort fait par mlon com-
" mandemlent entre mla dire tamte de Lenox et le comte de Mor-
" ton, vein quil a eitC fait & par le feu roy mon Mary et moy,
'( fur lar promlefe de la fidelle adfifance, ft lay & moy encourions
'· dangler et beloing d'ayde, ce qu'il rompit, s'entendant lecrete-
" ment au les nos ennemis rebelles, qu' attemtprient contre la
'· vie, et pour ceft effEQQ pris les armes, et out port6 les bannieres
''delploices, contre nous, je revoque audi toute autre do qu
,' je lay ay fait de come~ de Morton fur promnefies de leso bons fr
'' vices a advenir, et eatends que la dite ContC foit reunie a la
'' couronne, 12 ell fe trouve y partenir, comnme les trabifons rant
" en la mIore de mon feu Maryr, que en mon baniffenient, et
"I pourfuit de la mien no I'ont meriti. Et defends a mon filz de
'' je jamays fervire de luy pour de lay pour la bayne qu'il aye a
*' fes parents, la quelle je crains ne s'eftende jufques a lay, le
'· connoiffant du tout affedionnb aux ennemis de mon droite en
" ce royaume, de quel if eft penconnaire.

"' Je recomnunnde ulon nepven Frarncois Stuart a mon filz, et

" luy commande detenir pres de lay et s'enfervic, et je lay layffe
" le bien du conce de Boducl fCoo oncle, en refpedt qu'il elt de
" umnn fang, mon filletal, et ma eith laiife en latelle par lon pere.

" Je declare que mlon hrere ballard Robert Abbe de S'. Croix

" na en que par circonvention Orkenay, et que le ne fut jamays
" mon intention, comme il apret par la revocanion que j'ay fayte
"' depuis, et et6 aulli faire de avant la alge de x xv. alns, ce que
"' j'aimois deliberer ft it ne m'eniffnt prerlner par prison de fe de
" defayre suix eitats je veulz done que Orkenay foit reune a la
"~ couronne conlunc use de plus neceffaires pour mon fial, ct lans
'1 la mlaylon ne pourra etre bien tenue.

"( Les filles de Morra ne parvient acceffi heriter, ains revient

" la conth a la Couronne, si il luy pleft luy donner la on
" fille en marrialge, ct if nomle Ien fienne ligne." N o.

No. XII. (Vol. II. p. I ag.)

A letter from Mr. Archibald Douglas to the queen of Scotts.

PLEASE your majeftPy, I received your letter of the date the April -

contents of one other of the famie date, direded to Monl'. de .7 B. 9·
Movilir, ambassador for his maje~ty the most Chridtian king, both f.16
which are agreeable to your princely dignity, as by the one your
highnels deb~res to know the true cause of my banithment, and of-
fers unto mne all favour if I (hall be innocent of the beinous faats
commiitted in the pedobn of your huth~and of good miemrory' f
by the other the laid ambassador is willet to declare unto mue, if
your hufbandi's murder could be laid jultly againlt me, that you
could not follicit in my caure, neither yet f or any person that was
partsclpant of that execrable fadt, but would seek the revenge
thereof, when you` thould have any mieans to do it; your mia-
jelly's offer, if I be innocent of that cr ime, is mlol favourable,
and your de(Tre to know the truth of the fame is molt equitable ;
and therefore that I thould with all mny (implicity, sincerity and
truth answer thereunto is most reasonable, to the end that your
princely dignity may be my help, if mly innocence (hall fufficiently
appear, and procure mly condemnation, if I be culpable in any
matter, except in the knowledge of the evil dilpofed mninds of the
whlol part of your nobility againlt your laid bufband, and not re-
vealing of it, which I am as~sured was fufficiently known to himl-
self, and to all that had judgme~nt never so little in that realm;
which also I was constrained to underfland, as he, that was
(pecially employed betwixt the earl M~orton, and a good number
of your nobility, that they miight with all humiility intercede at
your majelly's hand for his relief, in such marters as are miore
(pecially contained in the declaration following, which I am con-
Itrained for mly own jultification, by this letter to call to your
m~ajelly's remembrance. Notwithflanding that I amn assured
to my grief, the reading thereof will not finlally otfe~nd your
princely mind. It mlay please your majelly to remnember, that
in the year of God a $66, the said earl of' Morton, with divers
other nobility and gent. were declared rebels to your mla-
jefly, and banithed your realm for idlolent mlurder committed in*
your majefty's own chamber, which they alledged was done by
commnand of your husband, who notwithflanding afrlred that
he was comipelled by them to rublcribe the warrant given for that
effea~, howsoever the truth of that miatter remiains amnong~t
them; it appertains not to me at thic timie to 6,- curio~us; true
it is that I was one of that numiber, that heavi'y oiffndled
againct your mlajety, and palfed in F·rance the tiiei Ol our
banilhmient, at the: defue of the rett, to humblly pray· yoUr
WPtct~s the Molult LC'r;! ian king:, to interecedt that our otffenccs

of the opinion, that the said fa~t mierited neither to be requilv e for,
not yet pardoned. Always luch was the careful mnind of his ma-
jelly towards the quiernels of that realmi, that the dealing in that
caule was conu~nitted to M/onfr. de M/ovifir, who was direfied
at that timle to go into Scotlrnd, to congratulate the happy birth
of` your son, whomi Abuiighty God of his goodnels may long
preserve in happy eflare and perpetual felicity ; the careful travel
of' the thid~ de Mlovilar was so efffraual, and your majelly's mind
so inclined to n1:ercy, that within thort (pace thereafter, I was per-
mritted to repair in Scotland. to deal with earls Murray, Athol,
Hodvel, A4rguile, and Cecre~tary Ledington, io the name and be-
halif o the laid earl Mlorton, lords Reven, Linfay, and remnanent
complelis, that they mlight mnake offer in the nam~es of the laid
earl, of any m~atter that miiight ftisfy your majefly's wrath, and
procure your clem~enc\e to be extended in their f~avours; at mny
coiining to themi, after I had opened the effeft of my mneffage,
they declared that the miarriage betwixt you and your husband
had been the occalson already of great evil in that realm, and if'
your befb~and thould be furffered to follow the appetite: and mtind
of luch as was about himn, that kind of dealing miight prodfuce
with time worse effcAs a for helping of such inconvenience that
mright fall out by that kind of dealing, they had thought it con-
venient to join themfre~lves in league and band with fomne other
nobleen.rl resolved to obey your usajefty as their natural rove-
reign. and have nothing to do with your ubuibnd's comm~and
whatlover, if' the Iaid earl would for himlfelf enter into that band
and confederacy with themn, they could be content to humbly
requett and travel by all mieans with your mnajetty for his pardon.
but before they could any farther proceed, they desired to know
the laid earl's mindc herein; when 1 had adwvered, that he nor his
friends, at aniy de~pai rure, could nor know that any such like mat-
ter would be proponir, and therefore was not initruffed what to
to anf'wer therein, theyv delired rhat I thould return Lufficiently
inltruar~d in this matrter to Sterling, bethre the baprilas of your
lon, whoml God miight preserve ; this useffage was faithfully de·-
livered by mie at Netwcaldle in England, where the STaid earl then
cemiained, in presence of his friends and comipany, where they
all condercended to have no f'arther dealings with your husband,
and to enter intro the laid band. H ith this deliberation I returned
to Sterling, where at the request of the Molt Chritian king and
the queen s majedy of Englandt by their anabaffadors present, your
maj~eliy' a gac~ous Pan don was gr anted unto themi all, under con-
dition always that they Ihould remiain bonithecd forth of the realmi,
the rpace of two years and farther during your mlajelty's plea-
ture, w~hich limitat~ion was after uitigated at the bumbhle requelt
of )our own nobility, 10 that inune~diately after the [aid earl of

Morton

Morton repaired into Scotland to Quhittingaimec, where the earl
Bodvell and Cecretary Ledington comne to him; what speech
palfed there amongit them, as God thall be my judge, I knew
nothing at that dosle, but at their departure I was requefied by
the farid earl Morton to accompany the earl Rodvel and lecretary
to Edfenburgh, and to return with luch ans~wer as they thouldl
obtain of your masjelly, which being given to me by the laidl per-
sons. as God thall be my judge, was no other than there words,
"( Schaw to the earl Morton that the queen will hear no speech of
"~ that mlarter appointed unto bimn;" when I crafti rhat the anfwtrr
mlight be moade more fentible, lecretary Ledington said, that the earl
would lufficiently underItand it, albeit fe~w or none at that time
under Rand what passed amongit themi. It is known to all m~en,
als veill be railling letters palt betwixt the said earl and L~idingcon
when they becomle in divers fa~ions, as also ane buck sett furthtt
by the minilters wherein they affirm, that the earl of M~orton
has confeffd to the mr, before his death, that the earl Hodvedl
comle to Qubittingsimne to prepon the calling away off the king
your huiband, to the which propolition the firid earl of Morton
affirms that he could give no answer cno rouch timne he mnight
know your miajefty's miind therein. which he never received.
As to the abominable mmrder, it is known roo by the depositions
of miany peldons that were executed to the death for the comi-
minting thereof, that the famie was execured by them, and at
the commland of such of the nobility, as had lI'bf~crivit band for
that effed; by this unpleasant declarationl, the most part there-
of known to yourself, Pad the remlainder mlay be underltood by
the aforesaid witnesses that was examlined in torture, and that are
esrtant in the cultody of the ordinary ~judges in Scotland, my
innocency lo far as may concern any fiad oes appelsr ufficiently to
your majelly. As for my dealing aforesaid, I can be no orher wife
charged therein, but as what would accule the velt~el that preserves
the vine from harm, for the intemlperaincy of Coch as imlmoderately
afe the fame.As for the Ipecial calule of myv banithmlent, I think the
fame has prorcded upon ane opinion conceived, that I was able to
accule the earl of Morton of lo mluch matter as they alledge him-
self to have confeffed before he died, and would not be induced,
for loss of reputation, to performn any part thereof. If this be
the occallon of my trouble, as I fuppole it is, what punilthment
I thould deserve, I remit me to your mlajety's better judgment,
who well knows how careful ever ilk gentleman thould be of
his fame, reputation, and honour, and how f'ar ever ilk mars
thould abhor the name of a pultroun and how indecent it would
have been to mle to accule the earl of M/orton, being 10 near of
his kin, norwithltanding all the injuries I was conitrainedl to re-
ceive at his hand all the tim~e of hiA governmnent, anti for no
other caul~e, buCt for thewing of paiticuldr friendthip to plrticu-

Zq 4 i

lar friends in the timne of the lait cruel troubles in Scorland.
Sorry I be now to accule him in any matter being dead, and
mTore sorry that being on lyff, be iuch kind of dealing obtained
that namie of Ingrate. Always for miy own part I have been
banilhed my native country there three years and four months,
living in anxiety of mind, my holl guds in Scotland, which were
not linall, intermirtit and dil'ponit upon, and has continually
since the time I was relieved out of myv lafl troubles at the defrre
of Mvonfr. de Movifir, attended to know your majefly's pleasure,
and to await upon what service it thould pleale your maI;jelty for
to coiinuand. U'pon the 8th of April infl. your good friend
recretary Walfinghame has declared unto me, that her highness
tho't it expedient that I Ihould retire miylelf where I pleased, I
declared unto himn I had no mneans whereby I might perform that
desire, until such time as I thould receive it from your majelly.
Neither knew I where it would please your highness to direa mie,
until lIach timie as I hould have received liarther informiation from
you. Upon this occallon, and partly by permiion, I have taken the
hardreis to write this present letter, whereby your mlajefly ma~y
underil~and any part of my troubles palt, and itrait prelent. As
to miy intentioni future, I will never deny that I am~ fidly resolved
to 1pendl the selt of mry days in your m~ajefly's service, and the
king your Ilon'S, wherefover 1 thall be direfled by your majelly,
and for the better performning thereof, if so thall be her mrajelty's
pleafute, to recommeind the tryal of mny innocency, and examii-
nation of the verity of the precedfing narration, to the king your
Iron, w~i bI reqluelt that I miay be pardoned for such offences as
concerned your majefly's ser vice, anid var conunon to all mlen
the t~ime of his les nige and per Jonit to all, except to me,I
thouldi be the bearer thereor m~ylell, and be dire~ttd in what-
lover service it thould please your maj~ely for to comimand.
Aloft hiumible I bdcech y our ma jelly to confider hereof, and to
be to gracious as to give ordfer, that I may have means to serve
your maljelly according to the rincerity of mly mleaning, and
so expedting your mrajetly's antiver, after the kidling your hand
w~ith all humuirity, I take leave fromn London.

N~o. X(III. (o.I.p 3

Letter from, the kiing of Scots to Mvr. Archibald Douglas his

moiballador in England, Odober 1586.

Ot. Libn Efelrve up yourlelf na Innger in the~ earnelt dealing for

agg
a p. y anorher,, for ye have done it too long; and think
\nO g.not that any) y'our tran cilis can do goodfe if her lys~e be takin,

:i! in the for then adecu whih mry dealing with thaiiie that are the special
ag, ~ inlthumecntis theiiral': (nd thcirfore, gif` ye looke for the con-
andl. tincuarlce of myr lavourT iowardi s you, rpair na pains nor plainnes

in this cace, but reade my letter wrettin to Williame Keith, and
conform yourflt~i quhollie to the contendis thairof, and in this
requeift let me reap the fruidis of youte great credit there, ather
now or never. Fairwell. Ooqbera SE**

Letter to G~r William Keith, ambassador in England, probably

from secretary Maitland. Nov. z7, 1586.

BYyour letters sent by this bearer, (albeit concerning no A copy la

pleasant fubjeA) his majelty conceives well of` your earnelt- thecolledt.

neis an~d tidelity in your negociations, as affo of Mlr. Archibald's of fir A.
adtivity and diligence, w~hom you lo greatly praiie and recom- D~ick. Vol.
mend. I w ilhl the iflue correlpond to his majefty's opinion, your A. fol.
case and travell, andi his grear diligence as you write. His ma- zl g.
jety takes this rigorous proceeding against his mother deeply in
heart, as a matter greatly concerning him both in honour and
othes wile. His highnesses ad2ions and behaviour utter plainly
not only how far nature prevails, but allo how he apprehends of
the lequel of that process, a f what moment he efleems it.
There is an ambalrade ihortly to be dire~ed, wherein will be em-
played an earl and two counsellors, on whole anfwerr will de-
pend the continuance or dissolution of the amity and good intel-
ligence between the princes of this ille. In the mean season, if
farther extremity be uled, and his majefly's suit and requeli dif.
.dained, his highneis wvill think himleif dishonoured and con-
temned far berldes his expedtation and deserts. Ye may per-
ceive his majefty's dilpolition by- his letter to you, which you
thall impart to .Mr. Arch~ibald, anid both deal according thereto.
i need not to reco~mmend to you care, concerning your matter's
service both in weill and in honour. As you and your colleague
thall behave yourself in this behalf, so f~or my own part, will I
inter pret your affedtion to your matter. I am glad of that I
hear of yourself. and I do fully credit that you write of Mr.
Archibald, whole friends here make great account of his pro-
fetfed devotion to the queen, besides the duty he owes to the
king's majelly her lon. Farther I am confirained to remit to
next occalson, having (carce time to Ccribble there few lines
(which of themselves may bear wirners of my haste.) Withing
you a prolperous idisee of your negociation, I commit you, &c.
Halyrudhonfe, Nov'. 27th, a 586.

Tunlr people, and all eitates here are so far moved by the ri-

gorous proceedings againf1 the queen, that his majesty, and all
that have credit are importuned, and may not go abroad for ex-
clamations againit them, and imprecanions againit the qlueen of
gngland.

No. XIV.

_e

No. XIV. (Vol. II. p. Iqt*)

To the king's maje~y, from Mr. Archibald Douglas.

s 6 Oca. P LEAS E your majefly, I received your letter of the date
a <;6G the 28th of September, the Sch of OAober, which was
From the the famne day that I direaed Wm. Murray towards your high-
Original ner`S; by such letters as he carried, and others of leveral dates,
in the col. your mijeity may perceive that I had omitted nothing To far as
left, of Grt my travel might reach unto, anent the performing of the two
A. Dick. chief points contained the said letter befor the receipt, thereof,
Vol. 13. whichi by thete prelents I muff repeat for answering the faidis.
fol. 324. As to the firit, 10 far as may concern the interceeding for the

queen your majety's mother her life, I have divers times and in
in every audience travelled with this queen in that matter, Tpe-
cially to know what her fish de~termination must be in that point,
and could never bring her to any further anrwer, but that this
proceeding againit her by order of juffice was no less againit
her mind than against their will that loved her bell: As towards
her life the could give no anlwer thereunto, untill luch time as
the law hath declared whether the was innocent or guilty.
Herewithrall it was her pleas~ure thus far to inform me, that it
was a number of the as fociants that earnealty preaed her that
the law might proceed againlt her, giving reasons that so long as
ihe was rfufered to deal in matters. to long would never this realm
be in quier, neither her life, neither this (Late in assurance, and
in the end they uled this proteitation that if the not would in
this matter follow their advice, that they thould remain w~ithout
all blame whatdoever th~ould fall out; whereupon the had grant-
ed them liberry to proceed, ledt li'ch as had made the requelt,
might hereafter have charged herfeli with inconvenience it' any
thould happen.

Ano by myself I know this her rpeech to be true, becaule

both papi~t and protellant has behaved them, as it hath been
her pleasure to declare, but upon divers refpeAs, the one to a-
void fulpicion that otherwise was conceived agaihlt them, the
other upon real, and care that they will be known to have for
preservation of' their lovereign's life and slate in this perrilous
time. upon consideration whereof, I have been conir~ained to
enter into rome dealing with both, wherewith I made her ma-
jety acquainted ; the protcitants, and such as in other matters
will be known to bear no Tmall favour unto your ma~jefty's ser-
vice, hath prayed that they may be exceled front any dealing
in the contrary of that, which by their oath they have avowedr,
and by their I'peech to their sovereign requelted for, and that
before my coming in this country ; it they thould now orber-
wife do, it would produce no better eff~ett but to make themt
fubjeA to the acculation of their lorereign, whren it thould pleas~e her

her to do it, of their inconltancy, in giving councell whereby
they mnight incur the danger of ill coun~fell". and be consequent
worthy of punithment. Such of the papifts as I did deal with,
went immediately, and told her majefly what I had spoken to
them, who albeit the underflood the matter of before, sent for
me and declared to me my own rpeech that I had uttered to
them, willing me for the weil of my maider's service to abitain
from dealing with lisch, as were not yet 1Lfticiently moved to
think of my master as the did. I craved leave of her majefly,
that I might inform them of your majelly's late behaviour to-
wards her, and the slate of this realm, whereunto with some
difficulty the gave her cod~ent, At my late departure from
court, which was upon the prh of this initant, and the day al~-
ter that the lordis of this grand jury had taken their leaves of' her
miajelly to go northward to Fathringham, it was her pleasure to
promite t ,have further Cpeech in this matter at the returning of
the raid lords, and to give full anlfwer according to your majerty's
contentmient to the remainder matters, that Ihad proponit in
name of your majefly. As to the 2d part concerning the affoci-
ation, and defare that the promise made to the maller of Gray
concerning your majefly's title may be fullilled; it appears by
the said letter, that the very point, whereupon the quellion that
miay bring your majelly's tidle in do~ubt hath not been rightly at
the writing of the said letter considered, which I take to have
proceeded for lack of reading of the aA of parliament, wherein
is fulfilled all the promile made by the queen to the said matter,
and nothing may now caume any doubt to arise againlt your said
ridle, except that an opinion thould be conceived by these lords
of this parliament that are to vehement at this time againlt the
queen your majelty's mother, that your majelly is, or may be
proved hereafter alrentinp to her proceedings, and Iome that
love your majefty's service were of that olpinion that too
earneR requett might move a ground, whereupon fulpicions
might grow in men so ill affe~ted in that matter, which I tho't
might be helped by obtaining of a declaration in parlia-
ment of your majefty's innocence at this time, and by rea-
Ion that good nature and public honesty would confirain you to
intercede for the queen your mother, which would carry with
illelf, without any further, 10me fulpicion that might move ill
affeAed men to doubt. In my former letters I humbly craved
Sos your majelly that tome learned men in the laws, might be

moved to advile with the words of the ath;ciation, and the mi-
tigation contained in rhe adt of parliament, and withall to ad-
vile what liulpicious effeats your majflty's requett might work in
there cholerick men at this time, and how their minds might be
bell moved to receive reason , and upon all there conflderations
they might have formed the words of a declarator of your ma-
jrtly's innocen<;e to be obtained in this parliament, and failing

thereof,

might best serve for your majellys service, and for my bet,
rer information. Albeit this way was my sample opinion, I thall
be contented to follow any. direttion it thall pleale your majelly
to give , I have already opened the fubltance hereof to the
queen of this realm, who seems not to be offended herewith,
and hath granted liberty to deal therein with such of the parlia-
ment as masy Iemain in any doubt of mind. This being the
fum of my proceedings in this matter, befades the remainder,
contained in other letters of several dates. I am confirained to
lay the whole open before your majefly, and to humbly pray that
full information may be sent unto me what further to do herein,
in thiis midntdle time, while I hall receive more ample diireation I
thall proc~eed and be doin~g according to Lich direttion as I have
already received. And (o, moil gracious lovereign, withing un-
to your mlajefly all happy fuccels in your affairs, I humbly take
miy leave from London, 16th of 08' this a 586. Your ma-
~jcity's moit humble 1Ltbbje and obed' Iervant.

A memorial from his maje~ty by the M~ailer of' Gray.

I 2 Jan. T wi \ill please your majelly, I have tho't meeter to let down

a 4
b. n 1all things as they occur, and all advertilements as they came

O)riginal to my ears, then jointly ina lettre.
in hiis o~wn I came to Vare the zqth of Dec'. and lent to I·Vm. Keith, andl
han1d inl Mr. Archibald Douglas to advenriz the queen of it, like as
thecolled.. they did at th~eir audience. She promiled the qtizen your r12.
oft fir A. je~ty's mother's life thiould be Ipared till we w~eie hieard. TIhe
DIc;k. Vol.~ 27th, they came to 'vare to me, the which day Sir Rob'. came

A o. to Vare, where they thewed us how far they had already gone

z z z. inl their negaciation, but for that the dilcourle of it is let downi

in our general Jerter, I remit me to it, only this far I will telliFy
unto your matelty that Wm. Keith hath used himlelf right ho-
niltly and julily till our cominig, relpedingK all circumltances,
and chirfly his colleague his dealing, which indeed is not better
than your majelly knows already.

l'HE 2Oth day of Dec'. w~e camne to L~ondon, where we were

no ways f iendly recei\ ed, nor alter the honedt fort it had pleased
your majet~y ure her ambatlldors, never man lent to welcome
or convey· us. The fame day w~e underitood of MLr. de Be-llievre
his leave taking, and for that the cuffom permiitted not we Cent
our excules by Mur. Gecorge Yo~ung.

THE lit day of Janev, \2·m. Keib and his colleague accor-~d

ding to the cuitom lent to crave our audienice. Wercvd
the anfwher contained in the general letter, and could not have
adwiher till the 6th day, what w~as done that day your ma!jrlly

hadS

has it in the general, yet we was not out of expedation at that
time albeit we received hard salwers.

TH E 8th day we Cpake with the earl of Leiceller, where our

conferrence v as, as is ser down in the general. I remarked this,
that he that day said plainrly the detaining of the queen 6~f Scot-
land prisoner was for that the pretended a luccelion to this
crown. Judge then by this, what is tho't of your majefly as
ye (hall hear a little after.

TH E 9th day we rpake with the French ambassador, whom

we find very plain in making to us a wife dilcourfe of all his pro-
ceedings, and Mr. de Bellievre we thanked him in your ma.
jelly's name and opened lisch things as we had to treat with this
queen, save the latt point, as more largely set down by our ge-
r~eral.

Ir is tho't here, and some friends of your majelly's adviled

me, that Bellievre his negotiation was not effeatual, antd that
the resident was not privy to it, as indeed I think is true, for
since Bellievre his perting, there is a talk of this Chafteasneuf
his servants taken with his whole pApers and pacquets,· which he
was sending in France, for that they charge him with a comfpi-
racy of late against the queen here her life. It is alledged his
servant has confelfed the matter, but whom I thall ntuit I know
not, but till I fee proof I thall account him an honedk man, for
indeed so he appears, and one (without doubt) who· hath :been
very inltant in this matter. I thew him that the queen land earl
of Leicester had desired to speak with me in priv~ate, and craved
his opinion ; he gave it freely that he tho't it meereft,:I thecw
him the reason why I communicate that: to him, for that Il had
been fulpeded by fomne of her majelly's friends ;in Fcrane to
have done evil offices in her service, that he thould be ·my. wit-
ness that my earnest dealing in this thould be a (14licicat telli-
mony that all was lyes, and that this knard Naue: who now bad
betrayed her, had in that done evil otlices; he d~ef'red me, fIne-
ing the law only with other folks eyes, that I thiould .no ways
impute it to her, for the like the had done to himlelf by Naue:
his perfuation. I answered he (hould be my witness inl that.

THt E 9h day we fear to cou~rt to crave audience, which, wte

g~ot the ioth day ; at the firi, the said a thing long looked for
thould be welcome when it comes, I would now fee. your ma-
fier's offers. I adiwered, no man makes offers but..for Iome
cause; we would, and like ydur majesty, firRt know. the cause
to be extant for which we offer, and liktewife that is be extant
till your majefly has heard us. I think it be extant veri.6bur I will
not promise for an hour, but you think to thifi in that fort. I
answered we inind nor to thift, but to offer tiom our lovereign
all things that with reason may be; and in special, we offered
as is ser down in our general, all was refused and tho'r nothing
She called on the three that were in the houler, the earl of Iel-

celker,

tolly repeated, all our offers in presence of them all. i opened
the fall part and said. Madam for what refped is it that men
deal againit your person orT enate for her caule Z She ad~wered,
becaule they think the shall rucceed to me, and for that the is a
papilt , appearin~gly laid I both the caules may be removed, the
laid the would be glad to under~and it. If Madam, said i, all
that thle has of light of' fuccelion were in the king our fove-
reign's person, were not all hope of papilts removed ? She anl-
(wtered I hope so. Then Madam I think the queen his mothe~r
thall willingly demit all her rights in his person. She answered
the hath no right, for the is declared unable. Then I said, it
she have no sight, appearingly the hope ceases already. so that
it is not to be feared that any man attempt for her. 'The queen
answered, but the papitts allow not our declaration; then let it
fall, lays I, in the king's perlon by her adlignation. TZhe earl
of Leiceffer aufwered, She la a priioner, how can the demit ?
I adw;ered the demillion is to her lon, by the advice of all the
filends the has in Europe, and in cate, as God los bid, that any
attempt conttri the queen here away, who thall party with her to
prove the demillion or aiffgnation to be: ineffetrual her ion being
opposite party and having all the princes her filends for him,
having bonded for the efticacy of it with his majefly of~ before?
'The queen made as the could not comprehend an~y meaning, and
fir Rob' opened the matter again, the yet made as tho' the under-
itood not. So the earl of Leicester adwliered that our meaning was,
that the king thould be put in his mother's place. Is it so, the queen
anlwered, then 1 put myself in a worse cafe: than of before; by
God's pairon, that were to cut my own throar, and for a dutchy,
or Lln earldom to yourself, you or luch as you would cadle some
of yon;' delperate knaves kill me. No, by God, he thall never
be mn that place. I answered he craves nothing of your majesty
but only of hiL° moaher. The earl of Leicefker answered that
were to make hin; party to the queen my mistrers. I said, he
will( be, far more· pan y, if he be in her place thro' her death,
bhe would thay no longer, but said the would not have a worse
in his mothes's place. And said, tell your king what goodI
have done for him in holding the crown on his head since he
was born, and that I mind to keep the league that now Rands
between us, and if he break it thall be a double fault, and with
this minded to have bidden us a farewel; but we efchenit. And
I (pakre crarvingof her that her Irfe may be spared for iy days;
the refuled. Sr Rob'. craved for only eight days, the larid not
f or an hour ; and so geid her away. Your majelty ees we have
delivered all we had lor offers, but all is for nothing, for the
and her councel has laid a determination that they mind to fol-
low forth, and I fee it comes rather of heir council than her-
telf, which I likce the wore s for without doubt, far, is thall cut

off all friendlhip ye had here. Aktho' it were that once they had
meaned well to your majesty, yet remembring! themselves, that
they have medled with your mother's blood, good faith they
cannot hope great good of yourself, a thing in truth I am sorry
for; further your majesty may perceive by this last dilcourfe bs
that I proponit, if they had meaned well to your majefly, they
had used it otherwise than they have done, for reason has bound
them. But I dare not write all. I mind something to speak in
this matter, becaule we look thurly our.lectter thall be troucit by
the way.

Fox that I fee private credit nor no means can alter their de-

rermination, altho' the queen agamn and the earl of Leicester
has defared to 1peak with me io particular; I mind not to Cpeak,
nor thall not a but afinerdly thall let all1 men fee that I in parti-
cular was no ways tyed to England, but for the rerpedt of your
majelty's service. So albeit, at this time, I could not effed~uatee
that I desired, yet my upright dealing in it thall be manifelled
to the world. We are, God willing, then to crave audience,
where we mind to dei tarply our infirudions, which hitherto
we have uled very calmly, for we can, for your honour's caule,
fay no less for your majeity, than the French ambassador has
said for his matter.

So I pray your majelly confader my upright dealing in your

service, and not the effed~, for had it been double by anly I might
have here had credit, but being I came only for that caule I
Swill not my credit thall serve here to any further purpole. I
pray God preserve your majetty and fend you a true and disrcere
friendlhip. From London this I arh of Jan. * 586.

I underitand the queen is to fend one of her own to your

maljefy.

To the right hon. my lord vice chancellor and recretary to his

majetly, From the malter of Gray.

MYlord, I fend you there lines with this inclosed to his a 2th Jan.

mat;,whereby your lordlhip thall underitand how mat- ' 586, so

ters goes here. And before all things I pray your lordship move Original
has majetty to rerpf my diligence, and not the effedt in this ne in the Col.
gotiation, for I swear if it had been for the crown of England ledt. of fir
to myself I could do no more, and let not unfriends have ad- A. Dick.
vantage of me, for the world thall fee that I loved England for Vol. A.
his majeity's service only. I look hortly to find your lordihip fol. 179.
fniend as ye made promise, and by God I thall be to you it IL
can. Wm. Keith and I desired, if matters had gone well, to
have run a course that your lordship might have here been in
credit Pad others dilappointed, but now I will do for you as
for myelFll which is to care for no credit here, tar in confcince

they

*

they mean not honestly to the king our sovereign, and if they
may, he will go the get his mothier is gone or thlortly to go,
therefore my lord without all kind of Icrople Ipray you to ad-
vise him the bell is not this way. ~I hey lay here, that it has
been laidl by one who heard it from you, that ye delired not the
king and England to agree, becaule it would rack the noblemen,
and gave an example of it by king James the fourt, I anliwered
in your name that I was affuied you never had spokenl it.M.
Archibald is the fpeakes of it, w~ho I affate your lord~hip has
been a poison in this matter, for they leani very miickle to his opi-
mion. He cares not, he lays, for at length the kinig will be flin
to deal this way, either by fair means or necellity, to that when
he deals this course he is affuiedl to be welcomec; to let down
all that is past of the like purpufes, it would corliame more
paper than I have here, to I dieter it to meeting. There is a
new conspiracy alledged against the queen to have been intend-
ed, for the French amnbaiffdor re6Jeint three of his men taken,
but I think in the end it thall prove nothing. Mlr. Stafford, who
is ambassador for this queen in F~rance, is touchied with it, his
brother is taken here, always it has done this harm in our nego-
riation, that all this council would not move this queen to medle
with the queen of Scotland's bloo~d, till this invention was found
forth. I remic all other things to the incidled. We minded to
have feet to his majelly a dilcourfe, which we have let down of
all our proceedings fance our hither coming, but we are surely
aduertized that the bearer is to be truffant by the way for our
pacquets, 10, that we defer it till our own coming; this I have
put in a privy part befsde the packet. We (hall I think take
leave on Fryday the roth day, where we mind exaatly to fol-
low the rigour of our inltimaions, for it cannot fland with the
king's honour that we lay lers then the French ambassador,
which was, le roy mon mai~tre ne peult moins~fair que fe refen-
tir. So that about .the 24th I think we thall, God willing, be at
home, except that some itay com~e which we look not for. The
queen and the eart of Leiceller has dalired to speak with me.
I refuled fare in prelence of my colleagues, by reason I fee a
determination which particular credit cannot help, and I crave
no credit but for that cadre. It will please your lordlhip retire
the inclol~ed from his maijelly and keep it. So after my service
commended to yourself and bedfellow, I commit you to God.
From London the 1 ash of Jan. r 586.

20th Jan.
sq 86. An To the king's majelly, from Grt Robert Melvill.
Original in
his ow n T may please your majesty, since the direAion of our former

handin 1 etters, we had audience, and her majelly appeared to take

the colledt. Our overtures in good part in prelence of her council,; albeit no
of thr A. offe~nce would take place with themn, having taken resolution to
Dick. Vol. proceed
A. fol.
18t.

proceed with extremity, not the less it pleaed he r dajclty to-defire
us to lIay for two' days on taking bfur leave, until the had advised
upon our propolitions; since whidh' time, her majeift iC behcome
more hard by some letters (asdre ·are informed) has comre fro~m
Scotland, making some hope to believe that your majelty takes
not this mattter to heart, as we krnow the contrary in effedt, and
had of before removed the ·likie opirdon out of her majeity's
mind, whk-h b~y 1illier Information viras credited, their reports
has hindred our commillion, and abured this queen, fiating in
like manner we thall be liayed until ahfwer come from Scotland
by such perf~ort asthey hiavr' iitelligente ;of: And Albeit that it
will be well enoulgh knownd to 411 men how heavily. ytbur majesty
takes there proceedings to hear, ·the trnth is, that they have by
this occallon to p~rfunded the~ queen, that it is like to' hinder our
negotiation. As also AllynoutStewa~r~r is to be direAed in their
prty, by our kncowledge, who haJ· awantyt more of his: credit,
han I believe he kney perform, and we evilled him to desist from
this dealing, saying it does hat@m,' and he' is not meet for that
purpole, remitting to your majeft's gtbod dire~tioh to take order
herein as we thall be anfwierable to~ your majflty not to orinit any
point we have in charge, as the starth is, the matter of Grhave
has behaved himlelf very rightly an'd dith~eetly in this charge,
and evil tayne with be divers in their parties who iviere of ta-
fore his friends. We have been behalding to the mnenfkrals who
has born us belt company, but has not been troubled with o-
thers. Wylzeme Kethe hath left nothing undone that he had
in charge. As for malter Archibkld he has promiredi at all times
to do his dewoyr, wherein he thall find true report assde' to your
majesty, craving pardon of your mnajely that I have been To
tedious, after I have ktifed your majeity's hand I humbly take
my leave. Praying God to grlat your majelly many good days
and happy, so whole proteAson I commic your majesty at Lon-·
don, the 20th of Jan. a 586.

SI R,

ALBEIT Malter George has not been in com million, he

is not inferior in his service to any of us, as well by his good ad-
vice and diligent care he takes for the advancement of your
service, wherein we have not been a little furthered.

To the king's majesty, from the maltter of Gray and fir Robert

Melvill.

LEASE it your majelty in the lalt audience we had,1 6. An

fine ur ai aderizement, by WI. Murray, we find hergriginalia

majelty at the refining our offels something mitigated, and the col-
inchined to confider more deeply of them, becauf* we got ourle8. of Gr

V o l. II. As leave, A. Dick.

Vol. A.
fol. 5 So.

of ci~ckya,,0pri,C /Iisyg Bgriggpiernto my lord Hupd~on, and my
lord )-pw~ar! bging prefeat iq~ttip chausber, gave little share of
any grelt contenmmyqc to have for from beS forame reolbution,
reow cageip~~ pe~rple xity wbat-Ibe~ thould do, al~way~swe left her
in des Wa~tg, snd since have Fdaijy preffeC conferreqce with the
wttole~counsil, which to this J1;pur we· havy. not, yet obtained.
'This, day we have feps down~ toctryav our leave. ·-The greatelt
-hifer ah qA our negopayoiq 64p found~hi betqty j4 A erloalson
they have h0Ce that either. your anajetty deals,flrperfically in this
mnarer..er that with timae ye may be,rgov~ed· to, Qige~R it, which
whos willy.great diff Sirkt wet had expugait, we find inew that
cettoaist legy wit~ten. wsq .shua,9 late ·ioft):SFqlanto has foundi
fopw :plage~o pledit with then s'is ourl cositarae. So that refolv-
sug agw~: to~clear thems;of datdoubt by a fpecdial nyWff~e, they
have,ssade chicrq of· ser Alelsaoler Stewast to tsy your hilgbner's
mcoviag is jt, 4PSi 1o potlCadc your majegty t-o like of their pro-
ceedings, whosee from. no ferrorwe can, fisy out unto him is able
to divers hire, bhe, has,givyln eq~t thart he has CTrdit with your
smajecly., 4nd dws~!·hy rdgwhes, not to help ·dais opatter, as your
highrp'sP~ #4441, (f he eoup 4bere that estand, wo. think your
. spjety will Aot. QueJfer the greas dilgrace that his ltempts thall
give us here, it he lapotlaer~rder with64(~9reth'at he be fur-
shler heerFgl,4egt i· so~ be. !bsr! a~y other be direitedl (es our in-
wipclt ige~nse gives as there (Will our humbic suit is to your ma-

jefy, hatitmay, please you hig~hness to hear of us what we

lia4 here, and art what pointr we leave thi4·naglesC with her ma-
je(ty, before that they find accidence, As. q~cstk ~Whrteof' re-
minting to otri private Ipstems. W~e commit your .etjolly for the
prelync to Q~od's otoeroal prettition. Froosal~ooade this asit of
Jan..s r86,

ADDI

# ADDITIONAL APPENDIX.

APPENDIX.

I had no oppotrtnity o fc freingfveral of the folowuing papers,

till tho/e /hrets of the bidjory, ro which they relate, wuere print-
ed of. For this rea/on no repbrences Rar mnAd to them thdre ;
but i have/4irplied that defed by markine the particular pas-
Jags in rbe billoryv which theny serve to illujirate.

No. XXXI. (Vol. I.p. 36r. line .)

Account of the sentence of diirorc~e between the earl of Both-

well and Lady Jean Gordon his wife.' From a inanuleript
beloniging to Mr. David Falconar, advocate. Fol. 455-

Mr. Robert Maitland dean of Aberdene. Mr. Edward
Henr\ son: do~tor in the laws, two of the senators of

the college of Jlutice, Mr. Clement Little, and Mr. Alexander
Syme advocardis, commilrfers of Edn' s compeered Mr. Henry
IKinroffe, procurator for Jean G;ourdoune countes of Bothwell,
conflitute be her for purfewing of ante proces of divorcement,
intendit by ~her contra James earle Bothwel her husband for a-
dultry, committed be him with Beffle Craufurde, the puiruers
servant forr the time i and (kk~lyke, for the said earle, compear-
ed Mr. Edmondl Hay, who ~e~r r e had pursued and craved

heporther s proc~urator's osth de calumnia, if he had jut)

can91 topuiew the said altion, and obtained it, denyd die libell,
and the laid Mi. Harrie took the morne, the lail day of Aptyle,
to prove the I'ame pro prima. The qishilk day, having pro-
ducedt sone witnesses, he rook the next day, beingi ta, he i of
Miay, to do Farther diligence. Upon the qubilk a fMah
produ'ced some moe witnesses, and renounced falrtther proba-
tioUne. After quhilk, he defaredl a term to be alligned to pro-
nounce feritence~. To whom the [aid commi~f~rs alligned Sat-
terday' nexf;l the 3 of Mary, to pronounce: lentence therein, fe-
condum alli ;a re probata, quilk accordingly was gived that day
its fvour of the purfewar.

Ar· Ith fame time there was another proces intendit be the

atr at Boihwell contra his lady, f >r to hive their marriagje de-
claredl nul, as being contrasted againt the canons, without a
dispensartion, and he and his lady being withia degreesdefendand,

12A a vidferdis

vizlerdis a kin, and that wyfe for expeding of this proces, there
was a commilione grantit to the archbilhop of St. Androis to
cognoce and determine it, and Ro'. bithop of Dunkreld, William
bilhop of Dunblane, Mr. Andro Crauford chanon in Glalgow,
and pation oi Egelihame, Mr. Alexander Creightoun, and Mr.
George Cook chancellor of Dunkeld, and to M/r. Johne Man-
deriloune chinon in Dunbar and prehendar of Peltoune, or any
ane of them. This commillione is darit 27 Aprile a 967, was
prelented to two of the laids comnmillioners, viz. Mr. Andl.
C'rawfurd and M/r. John M~ander~toune on Satterday 3 May, by
Mr. Thomas Hepburne padobn of Auldhamitocks, procurator
for the erle of Bothwell, who accepted the delegatioune, and gave
out their citation by precept, dire~ed, Decano Chrillianstates de
1-adingtone, nec non vicano 1eu curato eccle. parrochia: de
Creichrtoune, feu cuicunq; alteri cappellano debite requilitis, ser
summoning at the iaid erles in(tance, both of the lady person-
ally if the could be had, or other ways at the parofche kerk of
Crecibroune the time of rervice, or as her dwelling place before
witnesses, primo, lecundo, tertio et peremptorie, unico tamen
contextu promuplice ediao. And likeways to be witnesses in the
said matter, Alex. bilhop of Galloway, who did marry the laid
erle and his lady, in Halereud-houl~e kirk, in Feb. r565, ir John
flannatyne of Auchnoule jultice clerk, Mr. Robert Chreichtoun
of Elliot the queen's advocate, Mr. David Chalmers provoit of
Creichtoun and chancellor of Ross, Michael - abbot of Mel-
rols, and to compear before the laid judges, or any one of them
in St. Geils kirk in Ed'. on Monday the 5 of May, be tham-
selves, or their procurators. Upon the Caid 9 day, Mr. John
Manderfloun, one of the juges delegar only being preent com-
peated the Came procurators for both the parties that were in

Two the former proces, Mr. Edmond Hiay ( articulatlie
words in ) and some of the witnesses summoned produced,
the paren- and received for proving of the fame. The laid procurator re-
thesis ille- nounced farder probatioune, and the judge alligned the morne,
gible. the 6th of May, ad publicandum produ~ta, nempe depofstiones

iplorum reftium,. The qubilk day, poll publicatas depo~idones
prePdidas, Mr. Hen. Kinroffe, procurator for the lady initanter
objecit objedtiones juris generaiter, contra pro duaa, infuper
renunciarit ulteriori defeationi a proinde conclula de confedu
procuratorum hinc inde caula, judex pr;Ediaus ItatUit crallinum
diem pro termaina, ad pronunciandam~iur fuam faternti definitu-
ram, ex deduais coram co, in prdeenti cadla et proceffa. Con-
form hereunto, on Wednesday the 7th of May, the Caid judge
gave out, his featence in favour of the erle, declaring the mar-
Isage to be, and to have been null from the beginning, in refped
of their contingence in blood, which hindered their lawfal mar-
riage without a difpeafation obtained of befoir.

No. XXXII.

No. XXXII. (Vol. 1. p. 384. line 5·)

Queen Mary to Queen Elizabeth.

MADAM,

ALthough the necellity of my cause (which maketh me to Cott. L~ib.

of the way; yet such as have not my pafflon, nor the refpeatscopy, and
whereof you are persuaded, will think that I do as my caule probably
doth require. Madam, I have not acculed you, neither in 'a taflati-
w~ords, nor in thought, to have dred yourself evil towards me.on.
And I believe, that you have no want of good under~tanding, to
keep you from perfwafion against your natural good inclination.
But in the mean tinielI can't chure (having my Ienfres) but per-
ceive very evil furtherance in my matters, fance my coming hi-
ther. I thought that I had fufficiently dil'courfed unto you the
diicommodities, which this delay bringeth unto me. And erpe-
clally that they think in this next month of Auguff, to hold a
parliament against re and all my servants. And in the miean
time, I am flayed here, and yet will you, that lI hould put may-
self f~urther into your country, (without feeing you) and remove
me further from mine; and there do mie this dilhonour, at the
requeit of my rebels, as to fend commiioners to hear them a-
gain(1 me, as you wold do to a mere rubjea, and not hear me
by mouth. Now, madam, I have promiled you to come to
you, and having there made my moan and complaint of there
rebels, and, they coming thither, not as poffeffers, but as Tub-
jeAs, to answer. I would have besought you to hear my julti-
fication of that which they have falflely Let furth againlt me,
and if I could not purge myfel thereof, you might then dil-
charge your hands of my caules, and let me go for iuch as I am.
But to do as you fay, if I were culpable I would be better ad-
vis'd; but being not so, I can't accept this dithonour at their
hands, that being in poffeh~on they will comie and accule ine
before your commillioners, whereof I can's like : And feeing you
think it to be againlt your honour and confignage to do other-
wife, I bereech you rhat you will not be mine enemy, untill you
may fee how I can discharge myself every way. And to fuffer
me to go into France, where I have a dowrry to maintain me;
or at the lealt to go into Scotland, with afIsurance that if there
come any firangers thither, I will bind m,·felf for their return
withour any prejudice to you, or if it pleis you not to do thus,
I protest that I will not impute it to faithood, if I receival than-
gers in m ycountry, without making you any other dilchargre for
It. Do wsth my body as you will, the honour or blame tha;ll be
yours. For I had rather die here, and that my faithful servants
may be luccoured (tho,' you wou'd not 10) by firangers, than to

Aa 3 Cfufer

to come, particular conimodity. Thelire be many things to
move me to fear that I thall have to do,, in th~is councr<, whh~
others, than with y·ou. Buirt ora(;much as no~thing hath f;,low-
ed upon my 13(1 mecan, I hioldl my peace, harppen whtat may
happ. I have as feel to ~ 1 my fortunc, as to, (eck it, and
not find i:. Fur ither, it ple~ased yo~u to giveC licencie to m~y Iibb-
I1·:ts to go and comie. Th~lis hath been re~fu!led by my ford
Scroop and M~r. K~nolls (as they fay) by your comm:I;andmouri, be-
caule I would niot depal t he-nce to your charge, untill I had an-
si;:c of th~is letter, thio' I thew·ed them that you requirced my ari
tiver, upon the tw·o poin:s, contained in y·our letter.

T1H E one is to let y'ou briefly undedi and, I am come to y·ou

to make mny moan to you, the which being heard, I wYould de~-
clare unto you mine innocency, and then requiie your aid, andt
for; lack thereof, I can't but m~ake my mioan and complainr to
God6, that I ami not heard in my juff qluarrel, and to ap~pe·Il to
other prince~s to have refrpeft thereunto, as my cafe· rcequired ,;
afnd to you. madam, first of all when you (10111 have examined
·rour codefe~nce before himl, and have him for witne(1.-
A~nd the other, which is to come further into your country, and
not to come to y'our prelence, I will esteem that as no favour,
but will take it for the contrary, obey·ing it as a thing forced.
In the mean timre, I beh;ech ,·ou, to return to me my lotd
Hecrries, for I can't be without him, having none of my coun-
01 here, and as so to fuffer me, if it please you, w~ithout further
delay, to depart hence whithersoever it be cut of this counnyp.
I am lure you will not deny m~e this sImple reqjuell for your hio-
nour's fake, fieeing it doth not please you to ule your natur3l
goodness towards me otherwise, and f eeing that of mine own
accord. I am come hithe~r, let mne depart again, with !·ours.
And if God permit my caules to lucceed well, I thall bet bound
to you for it, and happenin= other wi <, yet I can't blame
you. As for my lord Fleeminrg, th-ir.g that upon my credit
you have luffered him to go homne to his houle, I warrant you
he thall pals no further, but thall return when it thall please you.
In that you truss me, I will not (to die for it) deceive you. But

Perhaps from Dumbarton I anfwser not, when miy L. FSleeming thall be in
for. the Tower. For they which are within it, will not forbear to

receive foccour, if I don't affere them of yours; no, tho' you
would charge me withal, for I have left them in charge, to have
rnore refpeft to my servants and to my eitate, than to my life.
Good sifter be of another mind, win the heart, and all thall be
yours, and at your commandment. I thought to satisfy you
wholly, if I might have seen you. Alas I do not as the serpent,
that floppeth his hearing, for I am no enchanter, but your
fi'ler, and natural codlin. 11 Caelar had not Ordai~ined io hear

or read the complaint of an adetitirer, he had not to died ;
why thould princes ears be flopped feeing that they the paint-
ed so long ? Meaning that they thould hear all and be wvell ad-
vised, before they answer. I am not' of the nature of the bal1-
lifk, and less of the chamelion, to tarn you to my likeners, and
tho' I thould be so dangerous and curs'dl as men fayou ari
fufficiently arazed with confkancy and with justice, hich I re-
quiire of God, who give you grace to use it well wi;h long and
hiappy life. From Carlile, the 5~th of July, a 968.

No. XXXIII. (Vol. I. p. 3b'5 line 34-7

A lenter from my lord Herries to my lord Scroop, and fir P".

K~nollis, September 3d, a 468.

MdY lords, pleafit your lionoutable lordfhips, I am informit Cott. I ;b.

by James Borthwick, lately come from the queen's ma- Cal. C.

~jelty your loverane, that it is f'chawin to her highners, I thuld An Orig;-
h~ave ridden in Crawvfurdmure, Fen my left cuming into this nal in h~is
realm, upon the eari of Murray a dependatus. And that I fuld own hand.
have caufit, or been of counfal to Scottifmen to have ridden in
Ingland, to flay or fputrie her majefty's fubjeats.

My lords, I thought it right nesidful becaule your lordfhips

is, he your loverane, commanded to attend upon thle queen's
maljefty my miltreis, so having daily access in thir matters, to
declare upon the truth; humbly desiring that your lard~hip's
will, for God's caule, certificate the queen your loverane the
fame.

As God lives, I have neither consented, nor any wife had

knowtledg~e of ony Scottifman's ryding in England, to do the
fisbjeats thereof hurt in bodies or goods, fene the siege of Leith ;
and as I underfland it thall be fund true, that gif ouyr ic open
hurt be done, it is by the queen my fovereign's difobedients, and
that I have not ridden nor hurt no Scorrithlman, nor command-
ed any hurt to be done to them, fen my· coming from the
quieen's majeily of England, it is well kenld, for that never line
will complain of me.

i Hnve done more good to Crawfurdmure nor ever'the

earl of Murray has done, and will be loatheft to do themi· bny
harm than he will. Except the queen's majefly you) fore-
reign, command frc falle reports to be tryit, qureredf ihis b al1-
togidder inventit c aihng, her grace fall be trublit, aisd spiid the
hearts of true men here, quhom of sic report fall be made, th it
baith would serve hir, and may, better than they unworthy
liars.

MY lords, I underltand the queen's majefly your lovereign

iS not contented of this bruit, that there thould ony Frenchman
come in this realm, with the duke of C~hattlerrult. Truth it

Aa 4 is,

has no sic certainty thereof, as I hear by Borthwick's report
from the queen's majesty your lovereign. And gif I might as
well lay it, as it is true indeed, her gracerelf is all the wyitt,
and the counfall that will never let her take order with my
snaifrefs caul'e. For that our forereign havand her majefty's
jromile, be writing, of luff, friendthip, and allittance gif need
had so requinit, enterit that realm, upon the 16 day of May,
fen that time the queen's majelty has commanrded me diverle
times to declare the would accept her cadre, and do for her, and
to put her in peaceable poieleion of this realme, and when I re-
quired of her majedty, in my malitrefa name, that her highness
wold either do for her, (at her Cpecial tuni was the wold) ac-
cording to her former promiles, or otherwise give her counfal
wold not conlent, (as I thow her grace I sand diverle repugnant)
then that the would permit her to pals in France, or to some
other prince to seek support, or failing hereof, (qubilkr was a-
gamns all reason) that the would permit her to returp in her
awin countrie, in sic fempil manner as the came out of it, and
said to her majelly ane of thir, of her honour, would not be
refu~t, fecand that fbe was comed in her realm upon her writ-
ings and promis~es of friendlhip Ad ckiIfadohe

highrs,

if m matrel hadthelike promise of her nobility

and ellares, as the had of herself, I thould have reprovic them
highly, gif thay had not condefcendit to one of thir three, and
to I fay, and so I write, that in the warld it thall be mai(1 repre-

henabl, gs this promile takreth not other good effea, nor yet

hedbeit does.Nowithilanding, I ger god answer of thir pronsiles
of friendlhip made to my lovereign, and to put her grace in this
her swin countric peaceably, we have fund the contrary work-
ing by Mr. Middlemore, diredit from her highnels to flay the
army that cuilt down our houles. And alfua, in the preceding
of this late pretended parliament, promiled twenty days before
the time to myself to have cadled it been dilchargit. And yet
contrary to this promire, have they made their pretendit manner
of forfaulture of 3r men of guid reputation, bilhops, abbotis,
and barronies, obedient fubjea~s to our forereign, only for her
caule.

Teuv have a~lo difponit, fen ou r orereign's caule was takren

upon hand be the queen's majeity of that realm, an hundred
thousand pounds Scots worth of her awin true Cubjeats gier, un-
der the color of their law, groundit upon their farlie, treason-
able, flowin, authority.

Tus murders, the oppreffions, the burnings, the ravilhing

of women, the dearettion of policy, both ecclefi~tical and
temporal, in this mean time, as in rry firmer writings I raid it
was lamentable to ony chsiian man to hear of except God gif
grace, the profeffion of the evangile of Jesus Christ profeflit
be your prince, cournfail and realme, be mair mnyndit, nor the

auld

auld inalmity that has fland betwixt the realms, many of my
countrymen will doubt in this article, and their proceedings puttis
my self in landt Thomlsa belief.

N ow, my lords, gif the queen's majesty of that realm, upon

quhais promire and honour my mailriefs camie there, as I have
laid, will leave all the French writings, and French phrases of
writings, qubilks amongis them is over maikle on baith the sides
unfit, and plainly, according to the auld true cutomn of Ingland
and Scotland, quherein be a word promillt truth was observed,
promile, in the namne of the eternal God, and upon the high
honour of that nobill and princely blude of the kings of Ingland,
qubereof the is delcend it, and presently wears the diadem, that
ibe will put mry mnaltrels in her awin country, and caule her as
queen thereof In her authority and firength to be obeyit, and to
do the famie will appoint an certain day within two mionths, at
the farthelt, as we underltand this to be our weill, fua will we,
or the mailt part of us all, follow upon it, leaving the F;rench-
men, and their evil French phrales togidder. And therefore,
and for the on~e perpetual friendlhip of that realm, will condi-
tion, and for our part, with the grace of Almighty God, keep
sic heads and conditions of agreement, as noble and wife men
can condercend upon, for the weill of this haill island. As I
have been partlings declaring to the queen your L~overeign, qubilk
I thew to your lordlhips fellis both in religion, in the punithment
of. the earl Bothwile, for the queen's aplt hufband' a (aughter,
and for a mutual band of amity perpetually to remain amangis us.

Dos ra~tess, my lords, without that, we may find sic time

and friendful working, as may gif us occalion baith to forgette,
Middlemore and this late preryndit pariament, we will turn the
leaf, leaving our rorereign agsnan our will to relt where the is.
under t he promlife of friendlhip As I have baith said, and will
ever a~irm, made be your sovereign, quhilk was only caule of
her graces coming in that realme, and seek the help and mioyen
of French, or Spanith, till expull~e this credlonable and takec pre*
tendit authority, qubilk means to reign above us.

My lords, I desire your lordlhips confider, that it is he, that

maill desires the amity betwixt Ingland and Scotland re continue,
and ofa poor man best carule has, that writs this.

MY brother, the laird of Skirling, Cchaws me, that in your

lordlhips communing with him, it appearit to him, your snind
was we thold l'uffer the earl of MIurray to work, altho' it were
agains reason to us, and complain thereof to the queen's maje~ty,
and her highness walld fee at reformit. My lords, her moajetll
will be over meiktle troublit to reform the wranges we have
fullainit arlready For I amt sure, r if reason and ju theIe may have
Place. our malahrels, and we her ubjeAs, have received exprels
wrang. far above two hundired thousand pounds Itering, in the
time of this unhappy governarecnt, feeing the Irfounartion of fa

great

great coures, comes, now a days, 10 flowlie, and the ungodly
law of oblivion in lic mnatters so meikle praftis'd, I think, now-
ther for the queen'= honour, nor our weill, your lordfhips would
102 mnean, nor that it i:; good to us to follow it. And that ye
will gi\-e your lovereign sac advertisem~ent thereof as your
good~ wifolas (lrall find in this caulfe mieet. It will be
true and f ie~ndful wor king for us, indeed, and nowther
French phrases~, rlor boafling, and finding little other effeft,
that will can e us to hold away the Frenchmien. 'This is plainly
written, ands I desire your lordfhips plain answer, for in truth
and plainnels langeft continues gud~ fiiend(hip, qubilk in this
mrattetr I prniy G~odl may lang conitinue, and have your lordlhips
in hris keeping. Off- Drumrisiii, the 3d day of September a 363.

Your lordlhips at mry power

to coiinunnd leitully HERR IS.

Queen Mary to Q Elizabeth.

27 Aug.

I 0b. DA ME ma bonne focur. J'ay refceu de vos leltres,
( ot. ib.d'une m~efine date ; f~une, on vous faires mention de I'eX-

CO,; r . An cure de Monl'. de Murra pour teniir son pretendu parlement,

riia.qui me Icemble bien froid, pour obtenir plus de tolecrance que je I

m'Ctaois perfund~e n'avoir par vothre promeiffe, quant a n'oler
donner cornmifiron de venic 1,ans. un parlemient pour le~ur peu de
nomibre de nobicife alors, je v·ous relpons, qu'ils n ont qlue trois
cu quarre d'avantage, quii euffewt audi bien dit leur opinion hors
de parlemient, qui n's elib tenu tent pour cerre effe~t, mais pour
faire cer qu'expreffement neas avions requis ellre emtpeichds. qu,
eft la fortaituire de m~es fublje~tt pour mi'avoir efles fidelles, ce
que je m,'aiffrois, juliues a I-ier, avoir cu en promeffe de you ,
par la letire eirite a mii icord Scrup e Mai~tre Knioleis vous induire
a ire contre erix, voire, a les enlayre rele~ntir ; toutefois je vois
ciue je I sy manl pris, j'col lilis plus miarrie, pours ce qure fur votre
lectrre qu it me mlontrerent, et leur parole, ~je l ay si divulguemlent `
aefforay que pour vengeance que j'en defitaffe, si non miettre di'-
terence entre lear taux deportemnscn, et les miecns finceres.
DaRns vod~re letrre audti datee du tome d'Aouff, vous mierttes ces
mors. "( I think your adverle party, upon my~ (1midry formler
** advices, will hold no parliamecnt, at all; and if they do, it
** thall be only in formi of' an affembhly, to accord whomn to fend
" in:o this realmi, and in what fort ; for other wife, if they thall
"' proceed in manner of' a parliament, w~ith any aft~ of judgem~ent
" aganrnt any perlooa, I hall not, in any wife, allow thereof ;
" alnd if they shall be to overseen, then you ma~y think the IfameI
*' ro b~e of no other Iaonomnt, than the form~er procedures :

·~:nid by fuchi their rathi manner of` proceeding, they thall m~ol
"~ prejudice themflelves ; and be afibred to condemin them, in their

'·doiings. ' Sur cquoy. j ay conn~emland6c menc fes vitcurs, les fa3iffant reuirer,

retirer, fouffrant felon vo~the commandement d'erre fauffemlent
nommelss traitres, par ceulx, qui le foot de vray ; ct encore
d'etre provoques par efcarmlons dies, et par prideus de mnes gens
et lectres, et au contratre vous eres informiee que mes fubjeats
ont evahis les vofires, Madamie qui a f~ait ce rsupprt n'eft pas
homme de bien, car laird Serford et lon fils font et ont efles mres
rebelles depuis le comimencement ; enquilds vous, s'ils n'effoient a
D~onfris oveques euix, j'avois offri reipondre de la frontiere, ce
clui mle fut refusb, ce qui mn'endevroit asss dJelcharger, neanm~oins,
pour vous faire preuve de mia fidelitb, et de leur fdlfrte~, s'il
yous mie fayre donner le nom des coulpables, et mie forti~ier, je
commanderay mies rubjedts les pour fuivre, ou si vous voules
que ce loit les voffres, les m~iens leur aydcront; je vous prie mi'ca
mnander vofire volombC, au refic mles fub~jeas idet~es feront re-
Iponfables a tout ce que leur sera mis fu les contre vous, ni les
vothres, ni les rebelles, delpuis qlue me confeil!ates les faire retirer.
Quoant aux Franlois, j'elcrivis que I'on mi'en fit nulle pourfuite,
car j efperois tant en vous, qlue je n en aur ois befoign,--je ne 19eu
li le diA aura en mes lectres ma~is, je vous jure devant Dieu que
je ne 19ay chole du monide de leur venue, que ce que sn'en aves
usianday, ni n'en ai oui de F;rance miot du mnonde, et ne Je pois
croire pour celt occasion, et si ils si font, c eft lans mlon Oceu ni
conf~entement, Pourquoy je vous fupphie ne mie conddanine~r fans
m ouire, car je IluiS prest de tenit tout ce que j ay otffre a M~leller
KIholeis, et vous affu ce que volthe amitC. qu'il vous pleft mi'offrir,
sera rescue avant toutes les choles du mionde, quant France
fervit la pour presser leur retour a celle condition, que prenies
mnes affairca en mein, en focur, et bonne aoni, conurne mra Franc6
eit cn vous; mlais une chole fetule me rende confuse, j ay tant
d'enemuis qu ont votre oreille, IEquelle ne pouvant a7voir par pa-
rolle, toutes mies a~tions vous font delguities. et falternent ra-
pOr ees, par quoi it mi'eft impedlible de Ii'ifathrer de vous. pour
les taanteries qu on vous a fait. pou de~truise vo~the bonne vo-
lombC de mioy; par quoy je dethrerois bien avoir ce bien vous
fa re entendie usa fancere et bonne atCtetton, laquelle je ne puis
Ci bien dekcrire. que mes enemiis a tort ne· la decolore. Ma bonne
foeur, gagnes auoy; envoyds nloy querir, n'e~nteds en jealourle
pour tauix rnports de celle qui mec drlire que votre bonne grace ;
je ulee remeicrrray fur Melter Knrolteis a qui je are luis libremnent
de~fcouver te, et spres vous avoir balssee les mrains, je pricray D~icn
vous donner en iantC, longue cr herutcue vie. D~e Boton, ou je
vous proanets, je n'elpere partir, q~u'a~veques voltre bonne grace,
quoy·que les alnaccurs mentenr. Le 26 d Aouit.

N'o. X V:.

No. X V. (Vol. II. p. 67. line 2i.)

Letter of W'allangham's to Randolph, Feb. 3, r580-r.

8 I R.

1ot H~b AV E~ received from my lord lieutenant the copy of your

CottLibletter of the zith of the Ilat direaecd unto his lordihip. con-

Ca C aining a report of yo~ur negotiation wvith the king and his coun-
Cal.., cil, in your recondJ audince, where~sitb having made her

Iianalety acquale~:ed, Ihe reieme somewhat to ms/1ske, that you
thould so long ,!efer I Ito hl[ for the enlareeTment of Emnpedocles.
B-ut I miade ,Inwer in your b~ehalf, that I thought you were di-
reAed by the advice: of the iaid Emnpedocles firinds, in the folli-
citmg of thiat caule, who kne~w what timne was 6tteft for you to
take to deJl there in, with molt effed,. and be(1 fuccels, with
which aniwer, her miajflty did in the end rett very well satisfied,
touching thia! point.

YouK putinlg of us in hope that D'Aubigny might easily be

w~on at her mialelly's devotion, was at firlt interrpreted to have
been ironic Ipoke by you. But since it ieemeth you inCift upon
it, I couldf with you were otherwise perlwaded of the man, or
at left kept that opinion to yourtelt, for confadering the end and
purpole of' his coming into Scotland, as may be many ways rfuli-
clently proved, was only to advance the queen's liberty, and re-
ception mnto that governmient, to overthrow religion, and to pro-
cure a foreign match with Villenarius, wherein the incloled copy,
which you may ule to good purpole there, thall partly give
you lome light; there is no man here can be perliwaded that
he will change his purpole, for so finall advantage, as he
is likely to find by it, and therefore you thall do well to for-
bear to harp any more upon that ithing, as I have already wast-
ten to you. T'he prince of Orange l'ending I fear will not b~e
in time that it mlay do any good; for be ides that thele peo-
ple are in themselves flow in their relolutions, their own affairs
are, at prelent·, so great, their state lo confuled, and the prince's
authority so (mall, that he cannot so soon take order in it; and
yet for mine own part, I have not been neglig3ent or careless in
the matter, having, more than three weeks patt, lent one about
it, from whom neverthelels I do yet bear nothing. The letters,
you desire thould be written thither by the French ministers, I
have given order to Mr. Killingrew to procure, who, I doubt
not, will carefully perform it, so that, I hope, I thall have them
to fend you by the next. And so I comlmic you to God. Ar
Whitehall the third of February r 580.

Your very loving coutin and servant,

FRKA. WA LS IN GHAM.

ihrr letter is asI origina, andt in Alme parru of it ·wr~ote ie cyvpbers

and exp~lained by umther band.~ By Empedlodes ir unde~r/ood
IMorton, by V'ilknaurrr~a theu kru of Sctot, D'/Aubigny is makrked
thwl o---'- e .

3 Feb.

3 Feb. IrS80.

Sundry notes gathered upon good diligence given, and in tim~e

to be better manifelled, being now thought meet to be in con-
venient fort used, and laid against D'Aubiguy, to prove him
abulang the king, the nobility, and that state.

FRS T, it hath been informed, by credible means, that C ot. I ib.

D'Aubigny was privy and acquainted with la Nav6 the Calig.C.6.

king's mother's secretary, comling into Scotland, and of his er- An IOrigi-
rand there, tending chiefly to persuade the king, to think and adl.
elteenl it an evil president for princes, that lubjeAs might have
power to deprive their lawful forereigns, as they did his mother,
who was not minded, by any mean, to defeat him, either of the
prelent government of that realm, or yet of the polfeflon of
the crown and inheritance thereof, but rather to ass~ure the fame
to him; and that for the acconiplimhment of that assurance, the
king thould have been adviled and drawn to have governed,
for some thort time, as prince, calling D'Aubigny to rule as
governor of the prince, by commission from the queen his
morber, untill the king's enemies were suppressed ; fter
which time, D'Aubigny thould have power given to eftablith
and resign that kingdom to the king, by his mother's voluntary
'cod~ent, whereby all such, as had before been in saion againtl the
queen or her authority, might be bmought to fland in the king's
mercy. And for that the king might live in mrore lurety. D'Au-
bigny thould be declared both second person in Alcceion of that
crown, and also lieutenant-general of Scotland, and that D'Au-
bigny, before his departure out of France, received conunilion
fromn the king's mother to the effeats rememtbred, or near the
hame. T'hat in this behalf he had conference with the bilhops L
of Glalgow, and Kols, and with fir Jures B~aford, with which *,
perrons, and with the duke of GuiLe. he had and hath frequent
intelligence, and by Gtr Jam~es Bafotd he was advil`ed to confer
with the lord John H-andrlon before his repair into Scotland,
whereunto he agreed, and yet afterwards he tent one John Ha-
milton, to the Laid lord John to excule him in this part, alledging,
that he did forbear to comne to him, left thereby he thould marr
or hinder greater etfeas to be execured by him in Scotland.

TuA r before his conuing into that reshn,, the nobility and

country were well quieted and united in good concord, with
great love betwixt the king and nobility, and amnongit the no-
bleffe, but he hath both drawn the king against sundry of the
chie~felt of his nobility, that have been mrol ready, and have ex-
pended their blood and polTellions to preer ve leligion, and de-
fend the king's petron, his government and eitate, anid allo hath
givcor occaiions of great fullpisions andl offe~nce to be engen-

deird

dered betwixt the king and his nobility, and especially with iuch
as have been in aftion againlt the king's mother, and her autho-
rity, who by force and m~eans of the laid commillion and prac-
tice, thrould have been brought intou molt dangerous condition ,
and who also may find themselves in no Tmall perril, whiles hu
potfeffs thle king's ear, abuleth his pretence, and holdeth fach
of` the principal keys and ports of his realme, as he prelently
enjoyeth.

THA~r he hath d-rawn the king, not only to forget the great

benefits done to himi andt his realm, by the queen's majesty of
Englandl, but allo to requite the fame with sundry rlgns of great
unthankfulnels, and wounding therewith the honour of her ma-
jefly, and thereby hath adventured to thake the happy ami~y
long time continued betwixt those princes.

A\no whereas there griefs were to be repaired by gentle letters

anid good orfers, to have passed, and been done betwixt them:
In which reiped, the king and council having relolved to write
to her majelty. ror her highnefs' better iatistadion in the late
negotiation of M/r. Alexanider Hume of Northberwick, had
given order to the kiug's le~cretary to frame that letter: He
miinding to break the bond of amity in liander, willed the fecre-
tary to be lure that nothing thould be inferred in that letter,

wherby he kng hould crave any thing at her hands, seeking

thereby toe cu t all loving courtifies betwixt them, as by the
declaration of the laid secretary may be better learned, and
thercupon further approved.

TuarA under the hope and encouragement of D'Aubigny's

proreation, Alexander King presumed with that boldnels to
ma~ke his lewd harangue, and by his means hath hirherto elca-
ped chastisement and correaion, due for his offence..

cHTea Gr James Baford, condemned of the slaughter of the

King's father, hath been called into the realm by Letnnox, with-
out the privity of the king. And whereas the laid fir James
found in a green velvet delk, late the earl of Bothwell's and saw,
and had in his hands the principal band of the conspirators in
that murder, and can beit declase and witness who were au-
thors and executors of the lame; he is drawn by Lennox to
fu~ppref the truth, and to accure ruch as be himlelf knoweth to
be innocent; and as by order of law, will be to found, if they
may have due vrial, which, contrary to all jultice, is by Len-
nox means denied.

This is the chalrge again/1 D'Aubigay, mnuritioned in th foregoing

learr by W~a//ingham i but by Baford they meanlb fr Jam Balfear.

No. XV I.

[NLo. XV I. (Vo!. II. p. a oo. line a 7.)

Th'e Scottiith queen's otfers upon the effe61 of her liberty pro-

pounded by her t'cretary Ndaw, Novermber IS584.

TH E queen my miltrers being once well assured of your Cott. Lib.

mnajefty's amity, Calig. C.

I. WIrLL declare openly that the will (·as it is fancerely her 8. A copy.

meaning) firaidly to join unto your majdlty, and to thle fame to
yield and bear the chief honour and relpect, befbre all other
kings and princes in Christendom.

2. SHE will tw~ear, and protd~t solemnly, a sincere forgetfull!-~

tS~; b~GIL~l~Y n ~I~

nels of all wrongs which hmapetdtohvbenoeun
to her in this realm, and will never, in any fort or manner what.
soever, thew offence for the fame.

3. Sun will avow and acknowledge, as well in her own pafrd-

cularr name, as also for her heirs and others des~cending of her
for ever, your majefly for just, true, and lawful queen of Eng-
land.

4. ANo consequently, will renounce, as well for herfell, as

for her said heirs, all rights and pretences which the may claim
to the crown of England, during your majelly's life, and other
prejudice.

e,. SnE awill revoke all ass and thews, by her heretofore

made, of pretence to this laid crown to the prejudice of your
majetty, as may be the taking of the arms and (tile of queen qf'
England, by the commandment of king Francis her late lord
and hu(band.

6. Sun will renounce the pope's bull, for 10 much as may be

expounded to turn in her favour, and for her behool, touching
the deprivation of your majesty, and will declare that the will
never help and serve herflt~l with it.

7. Sna will not prosecute, during your majeity's life, by open

force or other ways, any publick declaration of her right in the
luccellion of this realm, so as lecret afferance be given unto
her, or at the lealt publick promile, that no deciding thercot
thall be made in the prejudice of hier, or of the king her lon,
during your majelly's life, nor after your decease, untill facts
time as they have been heard thereupon, in publick, free, and
general affmbly of the parliament of the aid realm.

8 Su s will not prlAice, dircatly or indireetly, with any of

your majelty's liabjeats, neither within nor out of your realm,
any thing Iending to war, civil or foreign, aigainlt your majetty
and your estate, -be it under pretext of religion, or for civil and
politick government.

9. SoE will not maintain or support any of your lubjeds de-

clared rebelsr, and conviacd of treafros again~t you.

to. Sunr

at Wingtield for the surety of your majefty's life, to as there be
mended or right explicated Iome cladles, which I will thewN to
your majelly, when I thall have the copy thereof, as I have be.
tore timne required.

a s. Sun will not treit with foreign kings and princes, for any

war or trouble against this (tate, and will renounce, from this
rime, all enterpriies made or to be mnade in her favour for that
refpe8t.

a 2. FrRT HER MORE, this realm being assailed by any civil or

foreign war, thle will take part with your majelly, and af~lt you
in your defence with all her forces and means, depending of her-
serf, and with all her friends of Chrillendom.

1 3. AN~D to that effeea, for the mutu:-l defence and mainte-

nanCe of your majelly and the two realms of this ille, the will
rnter with your majelly in a league defensive, as thall be more
pairticularly advised, andc will perfwade as much as in her, the
king her lon to do the like.

TIhe leagues with all parts abroad remaining firm, and efpe-

cially the ancient league betwreen France and Scotland, in that
which thall not be againlt this prele~nt.

t4. SHE will enter into a league offenfzve, having good al-

furanice, or le~cret declaration and acknowledgment of her right
in the luccetlion of this crow~n, and promile, that happening
any breach betwixt France and this realm, (which the prayeth
G~od never to happen) the just value of her dowry (hall be placed
for her in lands of the revenue of the crown.

I5 E. oft afisrance of her promiles and covenants, the doth

offer to abide herself in this realm for a certain time, (better
hollage can the not give than her own person) which, 10 as the
he kept in the liberty here before propounded, is not in cafe to
es~cape lecretly out of thss country, in the sickly slate the is in,
and with the good order which your majesty can take therein.

16. ANo in cafe your msjelly do agree to her full and whole

deliverance, to retire herself at her will our of this realm, the
said queen of Scots the will give fufficient hollage for luch time
as will be adviled.

s7 y. le he abide in this realm. the will promile not to depart

out of it, without your licence, so as it be promised unto her
that her Ilate, in such liberty aJ thall be accorded unto her,
thall not be in any fort altered, untill after tryall to have at-
tempted against your life, or other trouble of your estate.

a 8. le the go into Scoda~nd, the will promise to alter nothing

there in the religion which is now ofed there, the being f uffered
to have free exercise of hers, for her and her houlhold, as it
was at her return out of France; and further, to pull out every
root of new divirlon between the libjeats, that none of the Cub-
jeas of Scotland thall be sifted sos his conscience, nor conitrain-
ed to go to the service of the contrary religion. i9. Sus

lg. Sun will grant a general abolition of all offences done a-

gamint her in Scotland, and things thall remain there as they are
at this prelent, for tha~t refpeat, faiving that which hath been
done againlt her honour, whici the mneaneth to have revoked
antd aunulled.

20. SHE will tf3VCI 10 iettle a fute and genera2 ftCOnCillation

between the nobility or the co~untr y, and to caule to be appoint-
ed about the king her Ioni, and in hi:; council, tLch as thall
b~e fit for the entertainment of the peace andJ quiet of the coun-
tiy, and the amity of the realm.

as. Sun will do ber belt to content your majedy, in favour of

the Scots lords banithed and iefuge~d hither, upon their due sub-
mil~ion to their princes, and your ma~jelly's promiile to ar~ift the
laid queen and king of Scotland againit then, if they happen to
fall into their former faults.

22. Sun w ill proceed to the marriage of the king her lon,

with the advice and good council of your majelly.

23. As the will pals nothing without the king her lon, so doth

the desire that he intervenre conjointly with her in this treaty,
for the greater anrd pertedter assurance thereof ; for otherwise
any thin~g can hardly be eitablithed to be found and continue.

z4. THE said Scorch queen truffeth, that the French king

her good brother, according to the good affection which he hada
always thewed her, and hath been afreth refitifed unto me by
Monil de Mannilliere for this said treaty, will very willingly in-
tervene, and will aflil her for the surety of her promiles.

II. Avo so will the princesof the houle of Lorrain, follow-

ing he will of the taid King, will bind themselves thereunto.

26. For other kings and princes of Chrittendom, the will

assay to obtain the like of them, if f'or greater solemnity and ap-
probation of the treaty it be found to be nececfaryr.

27. Sun doth delire a Ipeedy adrwer, and final conclulon of

the premiffes, to the end to meet in time with all inconvenien-
CICs.

28. AND in the mean time, the more to firengthen the said

treaty, as made by her of a pure and frank will, the deliveth
that demon~trtion be made of some relealement of' her capti-
viry.

Objettions againth the Scottith queen, under crecbretr Wallng-

hame's hand, November r 584.

T Equeen of Scots is ambitions, and (tandeth ill a ied-

ed to her marjefty, and therefore it cannot be but that her

liberty thould bring peril unto her majeity.

Vol. II. Bb Tu wr

ther ill aff'ec~~ed liabjeats, and greatly adivance the opinion had of:
her title as fucceifor.

TuAT as long as the thall be continued in her majelly's pof-

fell~ion, the may terve as it were a gage of her miajelly's fourety,
tor that her friends, for f~ear of the danger the may be thrown
into, in cafe any thing thould be done in her favour, dare not ar-
tempt any thing in the offence of her majelty.

N~ovember What courie w~ere fit to be taken with the queen

* 584. of. Scots, either to be enlarged or nor.

Cott. TIS ib I-I E course to be taken with the laid queen may be con-

Cal.
8 idered of in three degrees; either.

SI. T'o continue her under cultody in that slate Ihe now is.

2. To reltrain her of the prdecnt liberty the now hath.
3. OK to ler her at liberty upon caution.
I. TOUcHING the tiri, to COntinfue her under cultody under

thiat slate the now is; it is to be considered, that the princes that
favour that queen, upon the complaint the maketh of hard
ulage, are greatly moved with commiseration towards her, and
promile to do their endeavouir for her liberty, for which pur-
pole, her minillers follicit them daily.

AN a to move them the more to pity her cafe, the acquainteth

them with her offers made to her mnajefly, which appeared to be
no lels profitable than reasonable for her majesty, so as the re-
fufal and rejeating giveth her friends and favourers cause to think
her hardly dealt withal, and therefore may, with the better
ground and reason, attempt somewhat for the letting of her at
liberty.

IT is also likely that the faidl queen, upon this refusal, find-

ing her cafe der)perate, will continue her prad~ice under hand,
both at home and abroad, not only for her delivery, but to,
attain to the prelent poal~lion of this crown upon her pretend-
ed title, as the hath hitherto done, as appeareth, and is molt
maniteft by letters and plots intercepted, and chiefly by that late
alteration of Scorland, which hath proceeded altogether by her
direation, whereby a gap is laid open for the mabice of all her
majesty's enemies, so as it appeareth that this manner of kreep-
ing her, with fucIh number of persons as the now hath, and
with liberty to write and receive letters, (being duly considered)
is off~enfive to the princes, the said queen's friends ; rather charge-
able, than probrable to her majelly; and fubjedt to all such
pre(Itices as may peril her majefty's perlon or itate, without any
provilion for her majety's safety, and therefore no way to be
liked of.

2. ToucumNO the recond, to reltrain her in a more Rraighter

degree of` the liberty the hath hitherto enjoyed.

1r may, at sirs fight, be thought a remedy very apt to flop

the courii- of the dangerous pradtices foilered heretofore by
her : For, true it is, that this remedy might prove very profitable,
it the realm of Scotland Ltood in that (ort devoted to her ma-
iefty, as, lew years patt it did ; and if the king of that realm
were not likely, as well for the releale of his mother, as for the
advancement of both their pretended title, to attempt some-
what against this realm and her majelly, whrerein he thould nei-
ther lack foreign affiltance, nor a party here within this realm:
But the king and that realm flanding affei~ed as they do, this
reltraint, inltead of remedying, is like to breed there inconve-
niencies following :

FIast, It will increare the offence both in him, and in the

reft of the princes her friends that milliked of her reflraint.

SacGNDLY, It will give them junit casafe to take (ome way of

redrers.

Lasrty, It is to be doubted, thi't it may provoke fomne de-

iperate ill dilpofed pedion, all hope of her liberty removed, to
attempt somewhat againlt her majefty's own pedlon. (a matter
above all others to be weighed) which inconveniency being duly
considered, it will appear manifeflly, that the reitraint, in a
firaighter degree, is likely to prove a remedy fubjeft to very
hard events.

'TN E latter degree, whether 'twrere fit to set the raid queen at

liberry, mini(treth lome caule of doubt,· touching the manner
of the liberty, in what fort the fame is to be performed, whe.
ther to be continued here within the realm, or to be reffored ini
to her own country.

But firit, this propoitrion, before the particularities be weigh-

ed, is to be considered in generality.

Foxt it is very hard for a well affeited fubje61, that tendereth

her majelty's surety, and weigheth either the nature of the Scot-
tilh queen, being inclined to ambition and revenge, or her tor-
mer altions, what praftices the hath for on foot moll dangerous
for her majesty and this realm, to allow of her liberty, being
not made acquainted with such caules, as time hath wrought, to
make it leCs perilous than it hath. been, nor with such cautsons
as may, in rame fort, be deviled to prevent both her ambition
and malice; and therefore to make this apparent,

IT is to be considered, abat. the danger that was in the

mother, is now grown to be in the son. He pretendeth the fame
title the doth : Such as1 do affei~t her, both at home and abroad,
do affeft him; (and he is the more dangerous for that he is
unmarried, which may greatly advance his fortune, and that
he is a man, whereby he may enter into allion in his own per-
son) where the is reltrained, he is at liberry i his own realm is
now sitogether at his devotion, and the party aletted to this
crown abaled, C

1 as the matter duly considered, neither her li-

Bb 4 berry

berty nor ref~raint doth greatly alter the cafe for perils towards
her majeity, unless by such promiles as may be made by way of
treaty with her, the danger likely to grow from the king her son
be provided for.

BuJt in this behalf it may b~e objeated, that so long as the

mother remains in her majefty's hands, the king will attempt
nothing for tear of his mother's peril.

To this obje~tion it may be answered, fitit, That they hope

that her majefly, being a prince of jutlice, and inclined to
mercy, w'ill not punlifh the mother for the lon's offence, unlerJ
the thall be found, by good proof, culpable. Secondarily, That
men will not be over-hafty, considering in what predicament the
king flandeth touching his expe~fasion of this crown, to advile
any thing that in time future may be dangerous to the giver of
such council as may reach to his mother's peril.

AND lattly, the takting away of his mother, he being (trong

in the field abrough both' foreign afilliane, and ai party here
within the realm, will appear to weak a remedy, (which miay
rather exalperate both him, and her party, to proceed with
more courage and heat to revenge, if any such hard measure
thould be offered unto her) as they will fuppole for the reason
aboyc speci~fied, that no fisch extremity will be ured.

IT may also be objea2ed, that the letting of her at liberty

wvill greatly encourage the papifts both at h~ome rad abroad;
but herein, if the provilion be duly considered, that may be
made by parliament both here and there, they thall rather find
cade of dilcomfort than otherwise.

THIE~s two doubts being resolved, and the perils that was in

the mother appearing molk manifeltly to be fecn in the son ac-
companied wsth more danger, with due confaderation had also
of such remedies as may be provided for the preventing of the
dangers, that her liberty may minilter jult caule to doubt of ;
there will be good caule: of hope found, that the fame will ra-
ther breed benefit than perils.

Now it re~tteth, in what fort the laid liberty tharll be perform-

ed; if it thall be thought meet the thall be continued within the
realm with iome limitation, especially in that place where the
now refiderb, the country round about being To infeaed in reli-
gion as it is, it is greatly to be doubted that will very much in-
create the corruption, and falling away in that behalf. Belideso
the thould have commodity, with much more cale, and speed,
to entertain prlAices within this realm, than by being in her own
country.

Ir abroad freely without limitation either in Scotland or

France, then thall her majefly lose the gages of her safety, then
thall the be at hand to give advice in furtherance of foch prac-
tices, as have been laid for to flir trouble in this realm, wher~e
in the hath been a principal pasty. For

For the firit, it is answered before, that the rerpedt of any

perils that may befal unto her, will in no fort retfrain her soo.
For the other, if it be considered what harm her advice will
work unto herself, in refpedt of the violation of the treaty, and
the provilion that may be made in parliament here, it is to be
thought, that the will then be well advised, before the attempt
any tuch matter, which now the may do without perill. Besides
such princes, as have interposed their faith and promise for her,
cannot with honour affilt her, wherein the French King will
not be found very forward, who, in molt friendly fort, hath
lately rejedted all such requells, propounded either by her, or
her ton's miniffers, that might any way offend her mnajety.
And lo to conclude, feeing the cause of her grief thall be taken
away; the Frenich king gratified, who is a mediator for her,
and will minllik, that, by any Spanilh prahtice, the (hould be
drawn to violate her faith; that the redk of the princes thall
have no just caule of offence, but rather to think honourably of
her maje~th considering the Scottith queen's carriage towards
her, which hath deserved no way any such favour ; the noble-
men of Scotland thall be reffored, who will be a good flay of
such counfells as may tend to the troubling of this realm, esp-
cially having to good a ground of warrant as the parliament to
fland unto; the charges and perrills which her pradtices might
have bred to this realm thall be avoided; and lasrtly, the hope
of the papifts thall be taken away, by foch good proviGons, as
in both the re Ims may be made, whereby the perils that might
fall into her majelfy's own person, (a matter of all others to be
weighed) tharll be avoided, when by the change that may grow
by any such wicked and ungodly pradice, they thall fee their
cafe no way relieved in point of religion.

Reasons to induce her majesty to proceed in the treaty under

Secretary Wallingham's hand.

TAT luch plots as have of late years been deviled Corr. Lib.

(tending to the railing of trouble within this realm,) have Calig. C.

grown from the Scots queen's minillers and favourers, not withr- 8.
out her allowance and fteeing : Or,

Turr the means used by the laid miniffers, to induce princes

to give ear to the said plots, is principally grounded upon some
commireration had of her reitraint.

Tlo r the flay, why the laid plots have not been put in

execution, hath proceeded, for that the laid princes baye, for
the mloRt part, been entertained with home and domeltick trou-
bles.

Turr it is greatly to be doubted, that now their realms be-

gin to be quier, that lomewhat will be attecmpted ini her Iswouurs
by the said princc.

Ub 3 T 't: .2r

tempted by some of her fautors in an extraordinary fort, to the
perrill of her majesty.

TriAT for the preservation thereof, it thlall be convenient for

her majelly to proceed to the finilhing of the treaty, not long
fithence begun between her and the laid queen.

No. XVII. (Vol. II. p. Is6. linie I.)

A letter from St. Amias Pawlet.

SI R,

Origi. C, gDid forbear, according to your disedlion signified in your

Cal.C. . Iletters of the 4th of this prelent, to proceed to the execu-

tion of the contents of Mr. Wandes letters unto you, for the
ditimiing of this Lady's unnecessary tervants, and for the feating
of her money, wherein I was bold to write unto you my limple
opinion, (although in vain as it now falleth out) by my letters
of the 7th of this ihfiant, which I doubt not are with you be-
fore this time; but upon the receipt of your letters of the 5 th,
which came not unto my hands until the: 8th in the evening,
by reason as did appear by indorfemient, that they had been
mnilaken, and were sent back to Windlor, after they were en-
rered into the way towards me, I codedered, that being accom-
panied only with miy own servants, it might be thought that they
would be intreated to fay as I would command them, and there-
fore I thought good, for my better dilcharge in there money
matters, to crave the adillance of Mr. Richard Bagott, who re-
pairing unto me the next morning, we had accels to this queen,
whom we found in her bed, troubled after the old manner with
a defluxion, which was fallen down into the fide of her neck,
and had hereft her of the use of one of her hands, unto whom
I declared, that upon occasion of her tormer pra~tires, douibt-
ing lelt the would perTitt therein by corrupting underhand fame
bad members of this slate, I was exprelly commanded to take
her money into my' hands, and to rest aniwerable for it, when
it thall be reqluired ; adviling her to deliver the Laid money un-
to me with quiernels. After many denials, many exclamations,
and many bitter words againit you, (I lay nothing of her railin~g
againlt mylelf ) with flat affirmation that her majedty mighit have
her body, but her heart the thlould never have, refutinlg to de-
liver the key of the cabiner, I called my servants, and Lent for
barrs to break open the door, w~hereupon the yielded and cauling
the door to be opened, I found th~ere in the coffers mentioned in
Mr. Waadle's rememibrance, five rolls of canvals, containing
five thodajnd French crowns, and two leather baga, 'whereor
the one had, in gold, one hiundied and four pounds tw~o thilling~s.

arrd

and the other had three pounds in silver, which bag of ·silver
was left with her, affirming that the had no more money
in this houle, and that the was indebted to her servants for
their wages. Mr. Waades note making mention of 3 rolls left Curie can
in Curle's chamber, wherein, no doubt, he was mifteckoned, tell you the
which is evident as well by the seftimnonies and oaths of truth of
diverse persons, as also by probable conje~tures; so as in this mat-
truth we found only two rolls, every of which conltaineth one ter.
thousand crowns, which was this queen's guifte to Curle's wife
at her marriage. There is found in Naw's chamber, in a ca-
binet, a chain worth by estimation one hundred pounds, and in
money, in one bag nine hundred pounds, in a lecond bag two
hundred fourscore and fix pounds eighteen thillings. All the
foresaid parcells of money are bestowed in bags, and sealed by
Mr. Richard Bagot, laying five hundred pounds of Naw's mo-
ney, which I reserve in my hands, for the are of this houfhold,
and may be repayed at London, where her majelly thall appoint
out of` the money, received lately by one of my servants, out
of the Exchequer. I feared left the people might have diiperfed
this money in all this time, or have hidden the fame in some fe-
cret corners, f~or doubt whereof, I had cauled all this queen's
family, from the highest to the lowest, to be guarded in the fe-
veral places where I found them, so as yff I had not found the
money, with quietnels, I had been forced to have searched fir(
all their lodgings, and then their own persons. I thank God
with all my heart, as for a flngular blessing, that that falleth
out to well, fearing left a contrary Aucceis might have moved
some hard conceits in her majenty.

Toucuswo the difperfang of this queen's servants, I truss I

have done so much, as may luffice to satisfy her majesty for
the timie, wherein I could not take aniy ablolute course, until I
heiid again from you, partly becaule her majelly, by Mr.
Waade's letter, doth refer to your coniideration to return such
as thall be dilcharged to their leveral dwellings and countries,
wherein, as it feemeth, you have forgotten to deliver your opi-
nion; partly, for that as yet, I have received no antiver from
you, of your resolution, upon the view of the Scotrithl family
fort unto you. what persons you will appoint to be dilmill ; on-
Iv this I hare done, I have bellowed all such, as are mentioned
in thiP bill inclosed, in three or four leveral rooms, as the fame
may lfuttce to contain them, and that their meat and drink thall
be brougehr unto them by my servants. It may please you, to
ads ertile m~e by your next letters, in what fort, and for what This lady
coulrts I thall make their palrpor ts, as also, if they thall thy that hath ~Ood
thry are unpaid of their wages, what I thall do therein. Yr is flore of
ILid that they have been accultomed to be paid of their wages mocney at
at Chrillmas, for the wrhole year. lier mnjelly's chorlle will be present in

ii b 4C Ilamewat rltheIu-chr C

Amnbalffa-
doer's
h ands

charge by this occallon, will be the more eaiy. But the per-
sons, all save Bafkian, are fach filly and Gimple fouls, as there
was no great caule to fear their pradices, and upon this ground,
i was of opinion, in my former letters, that all this dilmiffed
train thould have followed their mditrels, until the next remove,
and there to have been dilcharged upon the sudden. for doubt
that the laid remove might be delayed, yf the did fear, or ex-
ped? any hardl measure.

OTHERS thallexcule their foolish pity as thcy may ; but for

my part, I renunce my part of the joys of heaven, yl in any
thing that I hav~e siid. wsiiten, or done, I have had any other
yelpeA than the 'urthlerance of her majelty's service; and so I
thall moll earnellly pray you to affirm for me, as likewise for the
not feafing of' the money by Mr. Manners, the other commis-
froners and myfeli. I trull Mr. Waade hath answered, in all
humble duties, forf the· whole company, that no one of us did
so much as think that our: commillion reaching only to the pa-
pers, we might be bold to touch the money, to as there was no
speech of that all to my knowledge, and as you know I was no
commillioner in this learch, but had my hands tull at Tyxhall,
dilcreet servants are not haffily to deal in great matters, without
w~arrant, ano especially where the caule is luch as the delay of.
it carrieth no danger.

Yova advertirement of that happy remove hath been greatly

comfortarble unto me. I will not lay, in refped~ of myself, be-
caule my private ineredei hath no measure of comparison with
hier majelly's safety, and with the quiet of this realm. G~od
grant a happy and ipeedy yffue to thele good and 4odly coun-
rels; and To I commir you to his merciful prote~tion. From
Chartley the ioth of Septemnber (5 -·

No0. XVIII. (Vol. 11. p. 147. line 3z.·)

Copy of a letter from the earis of Shrewibury and Kecnt. &c.

touching their proceedings with regard to the death of the
Scottith queen, to her marjefly's council.

ITmay please your honbl good lordfhips to be advert~iled,
that, on Saturday the 4th of thiis prelent, I Kobert Beale

came to the house of the earl of Kent in the county of---
to whom your lordlhip's letter and melfage was delivered, and
her majelly's commillion thewni whereupon I the endl for th-
with feat precepts for the slaying of` such hues and cries as
had troubled the country, requiring the officers to make
Iayv of all such petrons, as thould bring any lisch warrants
with~ot names, as before had been done, and to bring them
to the next jut\ice of` peace, to the intent that upon th-tir 1'xa-

mination, the occallon and caules of such seditious bruires might
be bolted out and known. It was also resolved that I the raid
earl of K~ent thould on the Monday foillowlng, comle to Lyllord
to Mr. Eimnes, to be rlhe nearer and readier !o conter w~ith my
lord of Shrewsbury. Sonday at night, I Robert Beale came to
F'otherinlgay, where arter the comnmunicating the commillion, &c.
unto us fir Amnice Pawlet and Tir Drue Drury, by rea~lem that fir
A. Pawlet was but late recovered and not able to repair to the
earl of shrcwfbury, being then at Orton fix miles of ; it was
thought grood rhat we far Drue Drury and Robetrt Beale thould
go unto him, which we did on -- morning ; andc together
with the delivery of her majeliy's commidfion, and your lordihip's
letter, iimparted unto himn what both the earl of Kent and w:
thought meet to be done in the caule, prayinge his lordlhip hither
the day following, to confer with me the laid earl, concerning
the fame; which his lordibip promiled. And for the better co-
louring of the matter, I the said earl of Shrewsbury sent to M·'r.
&ale, a juffice of peace of the county of Huntington next ad-
joining, to whom I commiunicarted that warrant, which Robert
&Iale had under your lordfhips hands, for the slaying of the
hues and cries, requiring him to give notice thereof to the town
of Peterborough, and especially unto the jultices of peace of
Huntingdonshire, and to caule the pursuers and bringers o` litch
warrants to be aayed, and brought to the next jufkice of peace t
and to bring us word to Focheringay catitle on W~edneldary morn-
ing what he had done, and what he thould in the mean rtime un-
derfland of the authors of such bruires. Which like order I
a~lo fir Amiss Pawlet had taken on Monday mlorning in this
town, and other places adjoining The lame night, the theriff
of the county of Northamnpton upon the receit of your lord-
thip's letter came to Arundel, and letters were sent to mle the
earl of Kent of the earl of Shrewfbury's intention and meeting
here on Tuelday by noon; and other letters were also sent
with their lordlhips assents to Gtr Edward Montague, fir Ri-
chard Knightly. Mr. Tho. Brudenell, &c. to be here on
W~ednesday by eight of the clock in the morning, at which timne
at was thought mneet that the execunion thould be. So upon
Tuelday, we the earls came hither, where the theriff mlet us,
and upon conference between us it was resolved, that the care
for the Cending for the frgreons, and other necelfary provilion
thould be commaitted unto himt agpaint the time. And we forth-
with repaired unto her, and sulk in the presence of her felt and
her folks, to the intent that they might fee and report hereafter
that the was not other wife proceeded with than according to la w,
and the form of the flature made in the 27th year of her mia-
jedy's reign, it was thought convenient that her miajedy's
commlniion thould be read unto her, and after wards the was

by sundry rpeeches willed to prepare herself againlt the next morn-
ing. She was also put in remembrance of her fault, the honour-
able manner of proceeding with her, and the neceility that was
imipoled upon her mnajefly to proceed to execution, tor that other-
whife it was found that they could not both fland togetber ; and
however, frlhence the lord Buckhurit's his being here new con-
Ipiracys were attemipted, and so would be itill; wherefore since
the had now a good while since warning, by the said lord and
Robert Beale, to think upon and prepare hers~elf to die, we
doubted not but that the was, before this, lettled, and therefore
would accept this uselfage in good part. And to the effed that
no christian duty might be said to be omiitted, that miight be for
her comfort, and tend to the salvation both of her body and foul
in the world to comie, we offered unto her that if it would pleale
her to confer w ith the biihop and dean of Peterborough, the
m~ighrt; which dean, we had, for that purpole, appointed to be
lodged within one m~ile of that place. Hereto the replied, cross-
ing herself in the name of the Father, the Son, and the Holy
G~ho~t, laying that (he was ready to die in the catholic Romnan faith,
which her anceitors had profeffed, from which the would not
be removed. And albeit we used many perfuallons to the con-
trary, yet we prevailed nothing; and therefore, when the de-
muanded the adm~ittnce of her priest, we utterly denied that unto
her. Hereupon, the demnanded to undefltand what anlwer we
had touching her former petition to her majelly, concerning her
papers of accounts, and the beftowing of her body. Tlo the ~
Birlt we had none other adwt~er to make, but that we thought if
they were not kent before, the Camle mnight be in Mr. Yvaade's
cullody, who was now in France, and feeing her papers could
not anywise pleasure her m~ajeity, we doubted not but that the
fame would be delivered unto fluch as the thould appoint. For,
lor our own parts, we undoubtedly thought that her majediy
would not maoke any profit of her things, and therefore (in our
opinions) the m~ight let down w~hat the would have done, and the
liame thould be imparted unto her majelcty, of whomi both the
and others miight expeLd all courtely. Ilouching her body, w~e
knew not her muajeflyb pleasure, and therefore could neither Lay
that her petition thould be de~ny d, or granted. For the pradtice
of Blabington, the utterly deniedf it, and would have inrerred it,
that her death wra for her religion a whereunto it was eftfboons
by us replied, that for many years the was not touched for re-
Jigion, nor thould have been now, but that this proceeding a-
gaint her was for treason, in that the was culpable of that hor-
rible conspiracy for delbroying her majety's person ; which hth
again denied, adding further, that albeir the for herself otrgave
them that were the procurers of her death, yer the doubtedf not
but that God would take vengeance thereof. And being charged
ui:h the depor~tions of Naue and (urie to prove it againlt her,

the2

the replied, thnt the acculed none, but that hereafter when the
thall be dead, and they remain alive, it (hall be seen how indiffe-
rently the had been dealt with, and what measure had been uled
unto her; and asked wherber it had been heard before this, abat
servants had been preatifed to accule their mithers, and hereupon
also required what was becomne of them, and where they re-
snained.

UroN our deplarture from her, for that it seemed by the com-

million, that the charge of her was in the disposition of us the
earls, we required S. Amias Paulet and S. Drue Drurie to re-
ceive, for that night, the charge, which they had before, and
to caule the whole number of soldiers to watch that night, and
that her folks thould be put up, and take order that only four of
them thould be at the execution, remaining aloof of and guarded
with certain persons, To as they thould not come near untq
her, which were Melvil her fleward, the phylrcian, surgeon,
and apothecary.

WEDNESDAY morning, after that we the earls were repaired

unto the cattle, and the theriff had prepared all things in the
hall for the execution, he was commanded to go into her cham-
ber, and to bring her down to the place where were prelear, we
which have ilgned this letter, Mr. Henry Talbot, ely; fir Edward
Mpntague, kmt. his son and heir apparent, and Williami Monta-

gehis brother, fir Richard Knichtly, Mr. Thomas Brudenel,
r.Benill, Mr.-Robert and John Wingefield, Mr. Forest, and Ray-

ner, Benjamlin Piggot, Mr. Dean of Peterborough, and others.

Ar the flairfold, the pawled to fpeakt to Mvelvil in our hearing,

which was to this effeA,, ** Melvil, as thou had been an honelt
servant to me, so I pray thee continue to my lon, and commend
me unto him. I have not impugned his religion, nor the religion
of others, but with him well. And as I forgive all that have
offended mre in Scotland, so I would that he thould also; and
beseech God, that he would fend himn his holy (pirit, and
illuminate him." Melvil's snlwer was, that he woukil so do,
and at that initant he would befleech G;od to assist himn with his
spirit. Then the demandied to speak with hter priest, which was
denied unto her, the rather for that the camei with a fuperflitious
pair of beads and a crucifix. She thien desired to have her wo-
men to help her, and upon her earnleit requelt, and laying that
when other gentlewomen were executed, the had read in chro-
nicles that they had women allowed unto them, it was permritted
that the thould have two namied by herself, which were Mrs.
Curle and Kennedy. After the cam~e to the leaffold, firit, in
presence of them all her mnajeithe's comlmillion was openly read;
and afterwaids Mr. IDean of Pe'terborough, according to a di--
rethon, which he had receivedf the nright before from us the carls,
wou'd have mlade a godtly admnonition to her to repent andl dye well

entry, the utterly refuled it, laying that the was I would that he
thould affo; and beseech God, that he catholique, and that it
were a folly to mrovei her, being so resolutely minded, and that
our prayers would little avail her. Whereupon, to the intent
it might appear that we, and the whoic asse~mbly, had a chrittian
defrer to have her die well, a godly p aver, conceiv'd by Mvr.
D~ean, was lead and pronlouncedi by us all i ·· TIhat it would
pleaie ~lmiighlty God to lend her his holy Cpirit and grace, and
rio, if it were his wvill, to pardon all her offences, and of his
mrercy to recrive her into his heavenly and everlatting kingdomi,
and finally to blels her majieity, and confound all her enemlies;"
whereot M\/r. D~ean, mlindiing to repair up thordly, can thew your
lordlhips a copy.

'I uts done, the pronounced a prayer upon her knees to this

eff~e~t ; " T`o beleech G~od to lend her his holy (pirit, and that
the truited to receive her salvation in his blood, and of his grace
to be reccive~d into his kingdomn, besought G~od to forgive her
enemirits, as the forgave them; and to cu~n his wrath troln this
land, to blls( the queen's manjellie, that the mtiiht rerve himi.
Likewise to be mierciful to her lon, to have comnpallion of his
church, and altho' the was not worthy to be hearJ, yet the had a
contidence in his mercy, and prayed all the iaints, to pray unto
her saviour to receive her." After this (turning towards her
servants) the dfelired themi to pray for her, that her Saviour would

receve hr. 1hen, upon perttion mlade by the executioners,

ihe pardoned themi ; and Laid, the was glad that the end of` all
hecr sorrows·: was so near. T~hen the milliked the whinning and
and weeping of her womnen, laying, that they rather ought to
rbiank G~od for her relolution, and killing themi, willed themr to
dlepar t fomi the teaffold, and tarewell. And to relolutely kneeld~
down, and having a kercheff banded about her eyes. Iaid down
her neck, wvhereupon the executioner proceedecd. Her Icrvants
were incontinenrtly remroved, anid order taken that none thould
app~roach uriio her corps, but that it thould bte embah~ned by the
surgeon anppoinlted. And further her crosse, apparell, and other
things are retained here, and not yielded un~to the executioner f~or
inconveniences that mright follow, but he is remitt~ed to be reward-
ed by luch as feat him\ hither.

Tuers hath been the manner of our dealings irl this service,

whereof we have thought good to advertile your lordfhips, as
particularly as we could, for the timle,, and further have thought
good to ilgnify unto your lordfhips besides, that for the avoiding
of all sinister and slanderous reports that may be railed to the
contrary, we have caused a note thereof to be conceiv d to the
Ifame effed in writing, which we the faids lords have Ilbleribedl,
with the hands of luch other there the knights and genltemllen
above named that were prelent at the adi~on. And l0 befec~chi-
ing Almighity G~od long to blels he~r manjety w~ith a inoit pro pe`-
YSLY Ireigni, a~nd to contound all hiis, andJ her enemisc. w'e take

out:

our leaves. From Fotheringay-Caffle, the Sth of Feblluary
a 586, in hall.

Your lordlihips at commiandment.

N. B. This, as well as leveral other papers in this Appendix,

is taken from a colleftion mlade by Mr. Crawlurd of Druml-
so Iy. billoriographer to Q Anne, now in the libraiy of the
; faculty of Advocates. Mr. Crawliard's traulcribter has omitted
to mention the book in the Cott. Lib. where it is to be found.

No. XIX. (Vol.II. p. i52. line I7.)

T'he oblje£ions againf1 Mr. Davison, inl the caiule of the late

SScottirh queen, rinuit concern things done either, I. Before
her trial at Forheringay. 2. During that fellion. 3. After

*Ithe same.

s. EFORE her trial, he neither is, nor can be charged to Cott. Lib.

have had any hand at all in the caule oi the said queen, Calig. C. I

Sor done any thing whatsoever, concerning the fame dirc~tly, or

'"indir ecly.

S2. D)Ualso that rfelion, he remained at court, where the

rec'eive the letters from the commiiiioners, impart them to her
highnels, and return them her ad~w: rs.

3 c~. A\n na the return thence, ofh~laidcommilliners, itis

I. Tn ·rr he never was at any deliberation or meeting what-

soever, in parliament, or council, concerning the caule of the
laid queen, till the lending down of her majefly's warrant unto
the comimillioners, by the lords and others of her council.

a. THnAT he WRS no party in signing the sentence passed a-

gainik her.

3- TH^*r he never penned either the proclamiation publithing

the lame, the warrant after her death, nor any other letter, or
thing whatsoever concerning the lame. And

Tu Ar the only thing, which can be rpecially and truly imputed

to him, is the carrying up the laid warrant unto her majesty to
be signed. She lendmng a great counlellor unto himr, with her
pleasure to that end, and carrying it to the great leal of England,
by her own special direftion and commandmrent.

So a the better clearing of which truth, it is evident,
I. Tu ATr the letter, being penned by the lord treathrer, was

delivered by him unto Mr. Davison, with her majelly's own
privlty, to be ready for to sign, when the thould be plealed to
call for it.

2. Tu Ar

2. Trc 17 being in his hands., he retained it at the leafs fIve o,

fix weetkS unprelented, nior once offering to carry it up, till the
Ient a great counsellor unto him for the fame, anid was thorply
reproived thierefore by a great peer, in he rr najefty's own pretence.

3- T'H^ T having sIgned it, the gave himi an exprels com-

minclinent to carry it to the feal, and being lealed to fend it imn-
mediately away unto the com~millionerf;, according to the direak-
on. Herself appointing the hall of Fatheringay for the place
of` execution, mitiking the courr-yard, in divers relpe~ts, and
in conclufson ablolutely forbad himl to trouble her any furrther.
or let her hear any m~ore hereof till it was done bhe for her
part, having (as the faidt) periformred all that, in law or reason,
could be required of her.

4. W~hich direaions notwithflanding, he kept the warratnt

feal'd all that night, and the greatedt part of the next day in his
hands, brought it back with himi to the court, acquainted her
mnajelty withal, and finding her majeily resolved to proceed
therein, according to her former directions, and yet deferous to
carry the mratter to, as the miight throw the burden from herself,
he ablolutely rerolved to quit his hands thereof.

5. A un hereupon, went over unto the lord treafurer's cham-

her, together with Mr. vice-chamberlain Hatton, and in his
presence rellored the fame into the hands of the laid lord trea-
turer, of whoml he had before received it, who from thenceforth
kerpt it, till himlfelf and the reit of the council feat it away.

Wusca, in fubltance and truth, is all the part and interest

the Taid D~aviion had in this caule, whatsoever is, or may be pre-
tended to the contrary.

I'OUCH1No the sending down tlereof unto the commillion-

era, that it was the general aft of her mlajefly's council (as is be-
fore m~entioned) and not any private adt of his, may appear by

1. Tust soR own conlfeion. 2. TZheir own letters lent down

therewith to the commiilioners. 3. The tellimonies of the lords
and others to whomi they were dire~ted. As also 4. of Mr.
lIcale. by whom they were sent I;. T~he tenor of her majefly's
Edir commilion for their calling to the flar-chamber for the
same, and private appearance and fubmil~ion afterward inflead
thereof, before the lord chancellor Broomoley. 6. T'he con-
tellion of Mr. Attorney-general, in open court confarmed.
7. By the sentence itrelf upon record. 8. Belides a common
aMt of council, conceining an anlwer to be verbally delivered
to the Scottilh amibaffador then remaining here, avowing and
jolif tying the famle.

Now where Tonie fuppole him to have given some extra-

ordinary furtherance thereunto, the contrary asay evidently arp-
pear by,

s. His

I. Hts former ablolute refusal to lign the band of association,

being earneltly pressed thereunto by her majefly's fell.

2. His excuting of himlelf from being uled as a commillion-

er, in the examination of Babington and his accomplices, and
avoiding the fame by a journey to the B~ath.

3. His being a mean to (tay the commillioners from pro-

nounanog of the rentence at Fotheringay, and deferring it till
they (oould return to her maje~ty's prelence.

4. His keeping the warrant in his hands fix weeks unprelent-

ed, without once offering to carry it up, till her majesty lent ex-
prefly for the fame to sign.

9. His deterring to lend it away after it was Cealed unto the

commiflloners, as he was rpecially commanded, fbnying it all
that night, and the greatel part of the next day in his hands.

6. AN n finally, his reff oring thereof into the hands of the

lord treasurer, of whom he had before received the fame.

Walesr are clear and evident proofs, that the laid Daviron

did nothing in this caule whatsoever, contrary to the duty of
the place he then held in her majefly's service.

Cal. C. 9.

TH Is seems to be an original. On the back is this title,
'THE inflOCency of Mr. Daviron in the caule of the late Scot-

tith queen.

No. XX. (Vol. II. p. z39. line a r.)

Letter from e, Sir Robert Cecil, to His Majelty King James.

MOST worthy prince, the depending dangers upon your From the

affetioate hav ben lchas hath inforced silence in Original

him, who is faithfully devoted to your pedion, and in due time Bibl. Sac.
of trial, will undergo all hazards of fortune, for the mainte- Jur. Edin.
nance of the jull regal rights, that, by the laws divine, of na- A. I. 34.
ture, and of nations, is invefked in your royal person. Fall not No. 4.
then, molt noble and renowned prince, from him, whole provi-
dence hath in many dangers preserved you, no doubt to be an
in~trument of his glory, and the good of his peo~ple. Some
lecrets, I sand have been revealed to your prejudice, which mnuft
proceed from lome ambitious violent rpirited person near your
majelty in council and favour a no man in particular will I ac-
cule, but I am sure it hath no foundation from any, with whom,
for your service, I have held correspondence, otherwise, I had,
long fance, been dilabled from performance of rhole duties, that
the thoughts of' my heart endeavoureth; being only known to
this worthy nobleman bearer hereot, one noted in all parts of
Chriltendom oto his fidelity to your perlon and bRte, and to Mr.
David Fowlis your mal\ loyal (ervant, my firit and faiths ul cor-
relpondent i and unto James Hudfone, whom I have found in
all things that concern you, most Gcrcr and affLued, It may,

the re fore,

therefore, pleare your majelty, at the humble motion of o,
which jargon I delire to be the indorf~ement of your commands
unto mne, that by some token of your favour, he may uinderltand
ir, what terms you regird his fidelity, iecrecy, and service. My
pallionate affe~tion to your pedron, (not as you are a king, but
ac you are a good king, and have jut title, after my lovereigr.,
to be a great king) doth transport me to prefumpoion. Condemn
not, mott noble prince, the motives of care and love, altho'
mixied with defe~tt in judgment.

,. i, therefore, tirit bereech your majeily, that for the good

of thole, whom G~od, by divine Providence, hath deltined to
your charge, that you will be pleased to have an extraor-
dinary care of all pradi~cers, or praai~ces, againlt your per-
len; , or it is not to be doubted, but that in both kingdoms,
either out of ambition, f~acion, or fear, there are many that
detire to have their lovereign in minority, whereby the love-
reignty and Ltate might be ifwayed by partiality of subalternate
perfonn, rather than by true rule of power and judice. Preserve
your person, and f~ear not the pradtices of man upon the point
of your right, which will be pres~erved and maintained againit
all assaults of competition whatever. Thus I leave the protec-
tedtion of your perlon, and royal pollerity, to the Almighty
G~od of Heaven, who bidrs and preserve you and all yours, in
all regal happiners to his glory.

2. NExT to the prelervation of your person, is the confer-

vation and tecret keeping of your councells, which, as I have
(3id, are often betrayed and discovered, either out of pretend-
ed zeal in religion, turbulent fadtion, or bale conception, the
which your majellty is to regard with all circumfpedtion, as a
matter mos1 dangerous to your person and slate, and the only
mneans to ruin and deltroy all thole, that (tand faithfurlly devoted
to your majeily's service. Somie particulars, and persons of this
nature, I make no doubt have been dilcovered by the endea-
vours of this nobleman, the bearer hereof, of whom your ma-

Icty may be further informed.
3- THY j d point confaderable is that your majelty, by all

nleans pollible, r'ecure yourlelf of the good affedtion of the
French king and States, by the negotiation of lome faithful fe-
cret co~ntident; the French naturally didafting the union of the
Bri;tiih laznds under one monarch. In Germany, I doubt not,
but you have many allies and filends, but by reason of their re-
more slate, they do not 10 much import this atfair, which met
be guided by a quick and findden motion.

4. WasE God, by whole Providence, the period of all

pes fns and times is determined, thall call to his kingdom of
glory her majelly, (although I do alliredly hope that there will
not be any quedtion in comnpetition, yet for lhat I hold it not fir-
ting~ to give any minute entrance into a caule of 1L high a nature,)

1do

1 do humbly bereech your mlajeflyy to d~esign a secret, faithfut,
and experienced confident servant of yours, being of an a~p-
proved fidefity and judgment, continually to be here reident,
whole negonianon, it were convenient your majesty thrould forti-
fie, with liach lecret traft and powers, ais there may not need a 4
days respite, to post for authority, in a caule, that cannot en-
dure so hours respire, without varieties of danger. In the
which it is to be considered, that all such as pretend lealt good
to your eflablifhment, will not in publick oppung your title, but
out of their cunrung ambition, will seek to gain time, by al-
ledging their pretence of common good to the slate, in pro-
pounding of good conditions for difburthenipg the common
weale, of divers hard laws, heavy impolitions, corruptions, op-
preilions, &c. which is a main point to lead the popular, who
are miuch diiguffed with mnany particulars of this nature. It
were therefore convenient, that thele motives, out of your ma-
jefly's providence, thculd be prevented, by your free offer in
thele points following, viz.

I. Tu wr your majelly would be pleased to aboliih purvaiors

and purvaiance, being a matter infinitely offenfive to the conunmon
people, and the whole kingdom, and not profitable to the prince.

2. TH AT your majelly would be plealed to dissolve the court

of wards, being the ruin of all the noble and ancient families of
this realm, by bale miatches, and evil education of their children,
by which no revenue of the crown will be defrayed.

3. clH E abrogating the multiplicity of penal laws, generally

repined againlt by the fubjeA, in regard of their uncertainty, be-
ing marny timies altered from their true meaning by variety of
interpretation.

4- TH^ rT your majefly will be pleased to admiic free outport

of the native commodities of this kingdom, now often reltrain-
ed by tubalternate perlons for private profut, being niiott preju-
dicial to the commierce of all mierchants, and a plarin de~tr udica
to the tiue indulbry and mlanufadture of all kingdomis, and agair;:t
the profit of the crow~n.

'THESE, be~ing by your miajefly's confidents in the point of

timie propounded, will assuredly confirmn unto your maljt-ni* the
hearts and a~ffe~ions of the whiole kingdoml, and ablolutely pre-
vent all insinuations and devices of designed patriots, that, out
of pretext of coniuon good, would seek to patronize theadellves
in popular opinion and power, and theleby to derogate from your
majefly's bounty and free favour, by princely mierit of your ano--
deration, judgment, and jultice.

YoUR I1njelly's favour, thus granted to th~e rubje,-t will no

way imipeach the profits of the crown but advance themi. TIhe
diTf'pr'oporltioal gain of fomie chequer oflicers, with the base
and miercenary profits of the idle unnecessary clerks and attend-
ants, will only fulfer Ilame detainseint i but idiinite will be the

Vu 0 . Il. Cc gcood

good unto the kingdom, which will confirm unto your majel~y
the universal love and affedbton of the people, and e~tablilh your
renown in the highest efleemi to all pofferity.

TNE Lord preserve your m~ajellie, and make you triumphant

over all your enemies.

My care over his pedlon, whole letters pals in this pacquet,

and will die before he leave to be yours, thall be no less then of
wine own life, and in like efleem will I hold all your faithfiul con-
fidents, nerwithltanding I will hold m~y self reserved fromt being
known unto nyof them, in my particular devoted affeftion,

unt yor mjelyonly this extraordinary worthy man, whole

effociate I am in his misfortune, doth know my heart, and
we both will pray for you, and if we live you thall fuxd us
together.

I BESEECH yOur majflty burn this letter, and the others; foi

slhbo' it be in an unusual hand, yet it us~ay be dilcovered.

Your majefly's molt devoted

and humble servant,

A CR 1-

# A CRITICAL DISSERTATION CONCERNING The murder of King HENRY, and the Genuinoness of the Queen's Letters to Bothwell.

i: 403 3

CRITICAL

DISSE RTATION

CONCELtRNING

The m~uder of King WHaway, and the Genuime-

ness of the Qgeen's Le~tters to Bothwell.

ITis not mry intention to engage in all the controveriles, to

to Bothwrell, have given rife a far Ilef to appear as an adversary
to any particulart auhor, who hath treated of them. To repeat,
and to expole all the ill founded rAfftioot with regard to there
points, which have Bowed from inattention, frose prejudice,
from par tiality, from malevolence, and from dithoaeltty, would
be no lefa irktfome to myself, than unacceptable to most of my,
readers. All I propore, Is so assist others in forming some ledg-
ment concerning the ha~s in difputr, by Bating shy proofs pro-
duced on each fide, with as much brevity as the cafe will admit,
and with the fame attention Pad impartiality, which I have en-e
deavoured to exercise in examuining other controverted points is
the Scotish hiffory.

In order to account for the king's murder, two diff~erent iyl-

tems have been formed. The one supposes Borhwell to have
contrived and execdrted this crime. The other imputes it to the
Earls of Murray, Morton, rad their parry.

TusO decifon of many controverted fias in hiftery, is a mat-

Itr rather of curio~ly than of ofe. Theyr Iland detached; and
whatever we determmne with regard to thenr, the tabric: of the
flory remrains untouched. But the 108t under diipure in this
place is a fundamnental and effe~cntial one, and accordings to the
bpinion which an Hiltosiun adocprs with regard Io it, he ~~uni
vary and dilpole the whole or his inblequenit narrnation. Anr
hiltloical fylteus Iray be tried in two ditfterent ways, whethecr it
he confidtent with probabiliry, andl whet'her it Le I'u;Pportedi by
proper ev~dence.

Cc z TInoss

THOSE Who charge the King's murder upon Bothwell argue

in the following manner ; and though their rea Unings have been
mlen ioned already in different places of the narrative, it is ne-
celfaiy to repeat them here. Mary's love for Darnly, lay they,
w·as a sud:den and youthful pallion. The beauty of his per-
son was his chiet mnerit. His capricious temper soon railed in the
Queen a dilgull, which broke out on diffe~rent occalsons His
engagmng in the conspiracy against Rizin, converted this difgutt
mrto an indtignation, whichr the was at no pains to conceal. '( his
breach was perhaps, in rts own nature irreparable; the King
certainly wanted that art and condefcedfion which alone could
have repaired it. It widened every day, and a deep an~d lettled
batred effaced all remiains of affetian. Bothwell oblervted this,
and was prompted by amibition, and perhips by love, to found
on it a Lichemie, which proved fatal both to the Queen, and to
himllelf. He had served~ Mary at different timles with fidelity
and ruccels. Il e infan~uated himflllf into her favour, by addrels
and by flattery. By degrees he gained her heart. In order to
gratify his love, at Iea~t his amnbition, it was necelfary to get
tri of the King. Mary had rejedted the proposal miade to her
for obtaining a divorce. The King was equally hared by the
p7;tizans of the Houle of Hamilton, a considerable: party in the
kingdom,; by Murray, one of the aloft power il rand popular
pedlons in his country ; by Morton and his associates, whoml be
had deceived ; and whomi Bothwell had bound to his intere(l
by a recent favour. Among the people Dataly was fallen under
extremne contempyt. He expecdc~, for sh1 thete reasons, that the
miurde~r of the King would pals without any enquir~y. And to
Mary's love, and to his own addrels and good fortune, he trull-
ed for the accomplihment of the rail of' his withes. What
))othw~ell expeded really came to pals. Mary, if not privy herfeli
to the delign, connised at an a~tion which rid her of a mian
whom~ the had (inch good reason to detell. A tew months after,
the miarried the pellon who was bo:h furpetted and acculed of
conuniiitting the miurder.

'Tnose who charge the guilt upon Murray and his party rea-

son in this mnanner. Mlurray, lay they, was a wan of bound-
less amnbition. Notwithilandinp the illegitimascy of his birth, he
hiad early formned a derign of utiuping the Crown. On the
QZueen a return into Scotland, he insinuated biolrelf into her
favour, and engrolle~d the whole power into his own hands. He
lct himfrelf againdt every propolal of mlarriage which was made
to her, left his own chance of lucceeding to the Crown thould
be dchlroyed He hated Darnly, and was no 1915 hated by hint.
Ini order to be revenged on himi, he entered into a ludden
friendthlip with Bothwell, his ancient and mrortal enemy. He
erncoulagedc hbur to perpetrate the crimre, by giving himr hopes

of marryring the queen. All this was done with a design to
throw upon the Queen herself the imputation of being accessory
to the mnurder, and under that pretext to deltroy Bothwell, to
depole arnd imlprilon her, and to seize the (ceptre which he had
wrested out of' her hands.

TH E form~er of there iyftems has an air of probability, is con-

fillent with itrelf, and solves appearances. In the latter, fomne
affertionsrre falle, some links. are wanting in thechain, and es-
feets appear, of wh~ich no fuifcient caule is produced. Murray,
on the Qiueen a· return into Scodland, ferred her with great fide-
hity, and by his prudent adminitration rendered her to popular,
and so powerful, as enabled her with eale to quath a formidable
infurreation railed by himllellin the year 5 969. WYhat motive
could induce Murray to murder a Prince without capacity, with-
our followers, without inituepce over the nobles, whomn the
Queen, by her negled, had reduced to the lowet flatle ·of con-
temlpt, and who, after a long dilgrace, had regtained (according
to the mroft favourable fuppolicien) the precarious po~ellion of
her favour only a few days before his death ? It is difticult to
conceive what Murray had to fear froml the Kint's life. It isno
eary matter to guels what he could gain by his death. If we
hauppole that the Queen had no previous attachmecnt to Bothwelli
nothing can appear more chimlerical than a ichesue to perhuade
her to marry a man, whofs wife was Rill alive, and who was not
only fulpedecd, but acculed, of murdering her formler huiband.
But that fuchs a chemre tould really succeed is flill more extra-
ordinary.- If Murray had initigated Bothwell to commrit the
crime, or had himlelf been accetfory to the commillion of it,
what hopes were there that Bothwell would fliletly bear from a
fellow crimlinal all the perfecutions which he fulfered, without
ever retorting upon him the accufartion, of revealing the whoic
scene of iniquity ? An antient and deadly feud had rublifted be-
tween Murray and Bothwell a the Queen with ditliculty had
brought them to fomne termrs of agreemlent. But is it probable
that 1Mutrra would chol~e an enemuy, to whomr he had been 10
lately reconciled, for his confident in the conunllalion of L'uch an
strocious crime ? Or, on she other hand, would it ever enter
into the imagination of a wife mlan, irlth to r~eife his rival to fu-
preme power, in hopes that after wards he thould find i'ome op-
portuniy of depriving him of that power ?' The mlol adventurous
politicaen never hazardred; (uch a: dangerous experiment. The
nolt credulous folly never trurted fach an uncertain chance.

B3u' however (trong theregeneral reasonings maoy be, we must

decide according to the particular evidence produced. This we
now proceed to examine.

Co 3 THAr

Turr~ Bothwell was galky of the King's maurder sppears,

1. Fromn the concurring telhmonya of all time cotemporary hilto-
rians. 2. Fromt the confelfion of thos~e perlons who fulfered for
affiding at the comnmiion of the crime, and who carer into
a miniute detail of all its circumritances. Anderl. v. z. r65-
3. From the acknowledgement of M~ary's own conmaiffloners,
who allow BotCIwell to have been one of thole who were guilty
of this crimne. Giood. v. zes13- 4.9 Fromt the exprele-teltimnony
of Lelley B~ilhop of Role to the fame efFedA with the former.
Def. of Q iMary's H-on. And. t. 76. Id. v. 3- P· 3'· 5. Mor-
ton, at his death, declared that B~othwell had ~bicited hun,
at different timtes, to concur in the conspiracy ·forrsed against
the life of the King, and that he was informecd by Archibald
Douglas, one of the congprators, that Bothwell was prelent at
t-he murder. Crawf. Mem· App. 4. The letter from Douglas
to the Queen, publithed in abe Appendix to vol. II. No. i2.
confirms Morton's edfinslony. 6. Lord Helrreis promniles, in his
own namte, and in the namze of the nobles who adhered to the
Queen, that they would concur in punithing Bothwell as the
muerderer of the King; Append. vol. I No. 23-

rH E IDOitl diea charge ever brought againik Murray is in

there words of' Bilbop Le~ky, ", is it unknown," addreging himl-
se~lf to the Earl of Merrway, "' what the Lord Herreis laid to
" your face openly, even at your own table, a few days after
" the murder was committed ? Did he not charge ~you with the
" forehnowleedge of the fame murder ) Did notc be rrlls circui-
" rone su~s, 8arly and plainly borden you, that riding in File,
" and coming with one of your moth s~iurd and trafty servants
" the fame day whereon you departed from Edinburgh, said
" to himR, smong other salk, This night ere morning Lord
"' Darnleyr tal~l lose his life?~" Defnce of Q Mary, Anderal v.
2. 73. list the assertion of a mar to heated wilh fattion as
Lefley, unless it were supported by proper evidence, ~is of litdle

wght. T`he servant to whomn Murray is said to have Cpoken

rW1ther words, is not named i rsor the mlanner is which this
recret conversation was broughte to light mentioned. Lord Her-
reis was one of the snolt zealone advocates for Mary, and it is
remarkable that in all his negociation at the court of England,
he never once repeared this alccalation of Morrsy. In solwer-
ing the challenge given himt by LordLindfay, Herreis had a fair
opportunity of mentioning Murray~s; knowledge of the murder ;
but though he openly accuilissa aththat conne lome.of thoG? who
adhered to him, he indtulteloe0~y :voids any Inlinuation against
Murray hitnfelf. Keith Prel ML, Mary, herlelf, is a con-
verfation with Sir F~rancis Knolles, acculed Morton and Mait-
Jand of being privy to the miurder, but does not mention Mur-
ray. And. 4- 55. When the Bitrop of Rols and lord Herreis

that-

themselves appeared before the English council, January II
a 969, they declared themselves ready, in obedience to the

n~eed's command, to accure Murray and his associates of .being

accessory to the murder, but " they being allo required, whether
(( they or any of them, as of themselves, would accule the
"t said Earl in special, or anyr of his adherents, or thought thern
"' guibty thereof," they adiwared, " that they took God to
Switnels that none of themn did ever know any thing of the
(( conspiracy of that miurder, or were in council and fioreknow.
'" ledge thereof , neither who were devifers, inventcsi, and exr-
"' ecutors of the fame, sill it was publickly dilcovered long
" thereafter by fomle of' the affallins who fuffered death on that
"( account." Good. v. 2. 308. TherCe words are taken out of
a regliter kept by Ross and Herreis themsel~ves, and Teent to be a
dirett confutation of the bilhop's affrtion. The bilhobp him-
self repeats the Came thing in dill fironge; terms. And. 3. 3 x.

The Earls of Huntly and Argyll, mr thest Plrotefation toch~ing

the murder of the King of Scots, after mentianing the conference
at Craigmiliar concermnig a divorce, of whiph we have given an
account vol. I 3 I6. add, "~ So after therE preynifes, the n~urder
"~ of the King following, we judge in our coolrciences, and h~old
"( for certain and truth, that the Earl of Murray and recretary
'' Lethington were authors, inventors, counsellors and cauiers
" of the fame murder, in what manner, or by whatfompece
" persons the fame was Cxccuted.' Anders* Vs 4. 188. B~ut, r,
This is nothing more thap the private ppinion or personal allir-
mation of thelc two noblemen. 2h c onclirion which thieunfY

mak hs o onetio wththe ptei'reptlso hc they od

it. Becadle Murray ~prqOPp~d to obtain for~ (14 Qgeen 1 divorce
from her husband with tier own confear, it ar not follow that
sharefore he committed the murder with~opt her knowledge.
3. Hluntly and Argyll were at that time tb'e lsPfrs of that party
oppofste to Murray, and animated with.all the rage of fa~tion.
4. Bothl of themII were Mvurray s personal mnenu~es. Hn ,o
account of the treatm~ent which his family and clan had received
from that noblem~an. Argyll was dethrous of being divorced
from his wif~e, with~whlom be lived on no good termns. Know
328. and by whomr he no children. Crawf. Pier. s9. She was
Murray's r(ster, and by his intere(1 he had ob~trF~ted that design.
Keith 55= . T~here circum~ances would glo Wr ltowards invail-
dating a porltive reltimlony i they neore than counterbalance art
indetermiinate fulpicion. 5. It is altogether uncertain whether
Huntly and Argyll ever lbraibed this protellation. A copy
of luch a prooeltation as the Qlueen thought would be of ad-
vantage to her caule, was transmitted to th~em by hecr. An-
derl: v. 4'" s86. Tbc proteltation itfcll publilbed by An-

O~c derto n

derron is taken from an unfublcribed copy with blanks for the
date and place of fubfcribingi. On the back of this copy is
patted a paper, which Ceci has marked " Answer of the
** Earl of Murray to a wrsting of the Ezrls of Huntly and
(' Arg3yll." Anders. 194, '9;. But' it can (carce be elteemed
a reply to the above-mentiosted proteitation.. Murray's adwier
bears date at London, January i 9, S:968. T'he Qu~een's letter,
in which the incidetd the copy of the protelaotion, bears date at
Bowton, Jan. C. r568. Now it is fearce to be supposed that
the copy could be sent into Scotland, be iubleribed by the two
E~arls, and be seen and answered by Murray within t'o thout a
time. Murray's reply se~ems intended only to prevent the im-
prellion which the vague and uncertain accusations of his ene-
Inies might make in his able~nce. Cecil had got the original of:
the Queen's letter into hiis cuffody. Anders vol. 4. 185. This
naturally leads us to conjeature that the letter itself, together
with the inclored prote~tarion, were intercepted before they
came to the hands of Huntly and Argyll. Nor is this mere
conjea~ure alone. The letter to Huntly, in which the protefta-
tion was inclosed, is to be found , Cour. Lib. Cal. C. r. fol. 280,
and is an original fubrcribed by Mary, though nor written with
her own hand, because the leldom chole to write in the Englith
language. T`he ptrotatation is in the fame Volume, fol. z82,
and as manifeltly writters by the fame person who wrote the
Qgeecn's letter. This is a clear proof that both were intercept-
ed. So thatfmuch has been founded on a paper not fubkcribed
by the two Earls, and probably never seen by them. Besides,
this method which the Queen took of leading a copy to the
two Earls, ot' what was proper for them to declare with regard
to a conference held in their own prerence, appears lomewhat
furpicious. It would have been more natural, and not To liable
to any mifanterpretation, to have delired them to write the mo~t
exaft account, which they could recollecT of what had parsed in
the converlation at Craigmiliar.

THs QuLeen's commillioners at the Conferences in England

accused Mulrray and his alfociates of having murdered the
King. Good. 2. 28 s. But these aIccufations are nothing
more than loose and general affirmations, without descend-
ing to such particular circumitances, as either ascertain their
truth, or dilcover their falrcehood. The fame acculation is
repeated by the nobles assembled at Dumbarton Sept. r568.
G~ood. 2. 359. And the fame oblervation may be made con-
cermong st.

Az.I the Queen's advocates have endeavoured to account

for Murray's murdering of the Kipg, by fuppefing that it
waOS done on pierpole, that he might have a pretence of
dillurbing the Queen's adminiffration, and thereby rendering,

ine~ffedual

ineffectual her general Revocation of Crown lands, which
would have deprived him and his associates of the best part of
their estates. Lefley Def. of Mary's Hon. p. 7 4. But whoever
considers the liasiied powers of a Scottish Monaich, will fee
that such a revocation could not be very formiidable to the nobles.
Every King of Scotland began his reign with such a revocarson i
and as often as it was renewed, the power of the noble~s ren-
dered it inethfaual. The bell vindication of Murray and his
party fromi this acculation, is that which they prelented to the
Queen of England, add which hath never hitherto been pub-
lilhed.

AnI/w'r~S to the obljedions and alledgance of the (seenr, alledginge th Poper Of-

Earl of Murra~y Lord Regent, the Earl of Mo~rt~on, Marr, GIlen- fice.
cair, Hume, Ruibvenr, Mc. to baser been moved to arrmour, for
that they abber red aind mrigbs no abide her relvocation of' the alien-
ation made of her property.

Ir is adrwered, that is arlledged but all appearance, and it ap-

pears God has bereft. the alledgance of all wit and good remem-
brance, for thir reasons following.

Juratussll, as to mly Lord Regent, he never had occarion

to grudge thereat, in rerpedt the Queen mlade him privy to the
fame, and took resolution with him for the execution thereof,
letting his Lordship know the would raffredly in the famine ex-
cept all things the had given to him, apd ratefyp them in the ouxt
parlirament, as the did indeed; and for that caule withed my
Lord to leave behind him Master John Wood, to attend upon
the fam~e, to whom the declared, that als well in that as in all
others her grants it thould be provided, yes of free will did proc
mite and offe~r before ever he demanded, as it came to pala with-
out any let or impedimlent, for all was ratified by hrer command,
and hand write, at the Parliament, but any difficulty.

1-r a as to myl Lord of Morton, he could not grudge therest

quha never had of her property worth twenty dollars that ever
I knew of.

Item the fame, may I fay of my Lord Glencairn.
Item the lamec, I may lay of myv Lord Hume.
Irem the fame, I may lay of my Lord Ruthven.
Item the fanse, I may fay of my Lord Lindsay.

ON Lr my Lord of Marr, had ane little thing of the property

quilk alksa was gladly and liberally confirmed to him, in the raid
·parbarpent preceeding a year i was never ane had any cause of
ollcontent of that revocation, far lefa to have put their lives and
heritage to so open and moniteft ano danger as they did for (ic ane
frivole cadre.

contenanlent of the raid revocation, it was my Lord of Argyll
in Ipeciall, quha TFak largely in the time of Parliament their-
snents to thle uueen herself, and did complain of the manifest
co~rurupin of anle aG~ of Parliament past upon her IVajefly's re-
Irurn, and~ Ea did Ien any revucu~ion at that time , but the armor
for Ic-ven)e of~ llhe King's dcid wais not till twka mionths af~er, art
civ:;: th~e !here wa~s no occallon given thereof. nor never a mian
h~ad miind: the~rcol.

l-i tVING thus examined t le evidenCe Which haS b''C prO-

ciucedi nrainft the: Eulls of Murray and Bothwell; we thall neu~
procec·.. i o e~quire whroher the Queen hierfelf was accessory to
the miurder of her bufb~ndl.

N~o looner wans the violent death of Darnly known, than firong~

forp~icons molie, amiong fomec of her rubjedts, that M~ary had
given her codelnt :o the comm~iiflon of that crim~e. And. 2. I if
Wec nre informned, byJ her ow·n ambassador in France, thie Arch-
bithop of G~l gow,. that thle' featimenCts Of foreigners, on thi:
headc, we c~e no lefls unfavourable to her. Ke~irh. Prcf. isu M·any
or' her rnoble~s loudly ncculred her of thut crime, andt a great part
of th~e nation, by tupporting them, l-cus~ to have alllowed the ac-
cul-itioni to be wEIell tounded.

So.ME crim~es. however, are of' luch a nature, that they scarce

admilt of a politive or. direst proof: Deeds of darknd~s can iel-
docm~ be brought perfed~ly to light. Whiere persons are acculed
no~t of being Principabr, but only of being A'zcefrTies to a crime,
not of havi'ng commnitte~d it themfrelves, but only of giving conl-
tent to the commission of it by others; the proof becomes Itill
mro'e difiealt , and unless when fames accomlplice betrays the fe-
cret, a proof by circumfltances, or pretumnp;ive evidence, is all
that can be attained. Even in judIcial trials, such evidence is
fo~rnetimies held to be fufficient for condem~ning crimiinals. 'The
decgree of convi~tion which such evidence carries along with it,
is ot rr n not inferior to that whic-h arises forom positive reffimony
and a! concurring fecies of circumilances fatistics the undertand·
ingf no h-fs Ihan the express declaration of witnesse~s.

Ev:\ I i NcE of bot h there kiinds has been producel again~t Mary

We' sh:!l filli~ confider that which is foundedl upon ciicumiilances

80.10r of thele fisfpicious cir-cumlftances preceded the Kiinlg`

death; oth~ers were loblequent ra it. With rega~rd to th~e soir-
m1er, we miay oblerve that the Q~ueen's violent love of Darnl!·
was soon converted into an averfson to himl no kId violent, and
that his own ill conduat, and xcffess of` every kinld were Lischl
thkt if (hey did not juftit)*, at least they account for this fudt-
<te·n chrange of her dirpdT:tion towards himi. 7 be rile and pro-
grtte Of this domerclic rulpture, Ihave traced with great clre
.0r theC hiltoz y, and to rihe proofs of it whiich maiy be foundJ

to papers publithed by other authors, I have added those con-
tained in App. No. XVI. aInd XVLI. Thle Earls of Murray,
M/orton, Cothwell, Argyll, and Huntly conside~red the rcheme of
procuring for the Qgeen a divorce Icoml her huthnrd. as one of
the !Iued flatering propoti~is they could make her, and emnployed
it as the m~ott powerful induceentcn to prevail on her to content
to a miealisre, which they had much at heart, but from which
they knew her to be extremely averse. And. 4. p. 2. 188.
Du Croc the French ambassador, who was an eye witnels of
what he delcribes, not only represents her dirgult at Darnly to
be extremle, but declares that there could be no hopes of a re-
concilement between them. "' The Queen is in the hands of D~ecembher
physicians, and I do all~ure you is not at all well , and do be- I 2, I 66.
lieve the prinrcipal part of her dileafe to confll in deep grief and
sorrow; nor does it leem pofible to mlake her forget the fame.
Still the repeats thele words, I courld zuit to be deadrJ You know
very well that the injury the has received is exceeding great, and
her majety will never forget it.---To rpeak my mind Freely to
you, I do not expeQ, upon l~everal accounts, Pay good underfiand-
ing between them [i. e. the King and Queen] unlers G~od es-
effecdually put to his hand.- -His bad department is incurable. Dec. 2 3
nor can there ever be any good expelted from him for several
reafobns, which I alight tell you was I pres~ent with you. I can-
not pretend to forecei how all mlay tulrn, ~but I will fay, that
matters cannot fubClt long as they are, without being acompa
nied with sundry bad contequences." Keith, Pref. vis. d
Hoory died a natural death, at this junaturs, it mull have been
considered as a very fortunate event to the Queen, and as a
leaonoable deliverance from a husband who had become altoge-
ther odious to her. Now as Henry was murdered a few weekts
afterwards, and as nothing had happened to render the Queen's
averflon to him lets~ violent, the opsnion of those who confider
Mary as the author of an event, which was mranifeltly lo agree-
able to her, will appear perhaps to lome of our readers to be
neitber unnatural nor over refined. If we add to this, what has
been oblerved in the bitory, that in proportion to the increase
of' M/ary's hatred of her hulband, Bothwell mlade prog~rers in.
her favour s and that be became the o~bjedt not only of her con-
fidence but of her aIttachment, that opimion acquires new firength.
It is erfy to obs~erve many advantages which might redound to
Mary as well as to Bothwell fromr the kring's death ; but except-
ing them, no perion, and no party in the ktingdoml could derive
the leaR benefar fromt that: event. Bothwell, accordingly, mur-
dered the King, and it was, in that age, thoug~ht no violent insl-
pmarttoo on Mary's charafter, to liuppole that the had codrentedl
to the dead.

THi E feps which the Queen took after her hulband's death

add ttrength to that (uppolition. I. Melili, who was in Edin-
burgh, at the time of the king's death, airerts that "( every
body fulpeetedi the Earl of Bothwell; and those who durit
tpeak freely to orbers, said plainly that it was He."' p. 1 p.
2. MaIry having iflled a proclamation, on the 1sth of February,
offering a reward to any person who (hould dilcover those who
had murdered her husband; And. r. 36. a paper in anfwher to
this was affixed to the gates of the T'olbooth. February 16, in
which Bothwell was named as the chief perron guilty of tha!
crime, and the queen herself was accule~d of having given her
consent to it. And. z. I 46. 3. Soon afier, Fe`bruary 20, the
Earl of Lenox. the King's father, wrote to Mlary, conjurnog
her, by every miotive, to prosecute the murderers with the ut-
enoil rigour. He plainly declared his own thfpiciains of Both·
well, and pointed out a method of proceeding againfl himi, ;rnd
for dilcovering the other authors of the crime, no leds obviouj
thian equitable. He adviltd her to leize, and ro commit to lure
codtody Bothwell himclf, and those who were already named
as his accomplices ; to ca'I an atfrembly of the nobles; to Iflue
a proclamiation, inviting Bothwell's acculers to appear ; and ii,
on that encouragement, so person appeared to accule them. to
hold them as innocent, and to diimils them without (de ther
trial. And. I. 40. 4) Archbi~lhop Beatoun, her amb~assador
in France, in a letter to Mary, March 9th, employs arguments
of the utmoit we~ight to persuade her to profecure the murder-
ers with the greareft~ severity. "~ I can conclude nathing, (iays
he) by quhat zour Majelly writes to me zourlel, that Ien it has
plefit God to conse~rve zow to take a rigorous vengeance thereof,
abat rather than it be not allually taine, it appears to me benter
in this warld that ze had 1011 life and all. I alkr your Majellie
pardon that I writ fa far, fir I can heir nathing to zour pre/u-

met dile, but I mann conltraindly writ the farmin, that all may come

to zour knawledge; for the better remede may be put thereto.
Heir it is needtull that ze forth thaw now rath;er· than ever of
before, the greite ventue, magnianimitie, and conflance that
God has grantit zow, be qubaiu grace, I hope ze fall overcome:
this moil heavy envie and difplefit of the committing thereof,
andt conserve that repuration in all godliness, ze have conquiit
of laog, quhich can appear na wayss mair clearlie, thanr that

loch, urhole zow do /Ik jultice that the haill world may declare zowr inno-

cence, and give tellimony forever of rhair treason that has com-

wLithout mirted (but lear of God or man) Io cruel and ungodlie a mur-
much ther, qubairof there is fa mickle ill rpoken, that I am confirainit

to ask zow wiercy, that neithcer can I or will I make the rehear-

'd) fal thereof, which is osce odious. But alas ! Mitdame, all over

IEurope thisr dy there is na purpole in heac d fa requent as of
zourll MaJj 'th, andc of thle prelent Ilatet of wacr realm, quhilk is
an the mllcl p (r: in tel r pm it ti nii~ca ly." Keith, Pref. ix. 9 Eliza-

besh,

be~th, as sppears from Append. Vol. I. No. XIX. urged the

(:,;.::g in firong terms. 6. cThe circumflances of the cale

it.:, no le· thran there folicitations end remonlthances, called
t : :~ u:moll vigour in herS proceedings. He~r husband had

.,. ;iielred in a cruel manner, almolt in her own presence.

hi· '~iectu were filled with the utmott horror at that crime.

130l.. b . O:! m,: her principal favourites, had been publickly
·iL' ded nP the author of it. Refle~ions,,extremely dithonour-
atli io ledlelf, had oeen thrown out. If' indignation, and the
love ·.· justicec, d;J nor prompt her to pursue the murderers with
arl~Uur. decen~cy, 7v ;"l, and concern for vindicating her own
chatster, thookc hav\e induced her :0 avoid any appearance of
remi' els or want ,,; ·sl~.

By r :.dtead u' tU .': Mary contined.·r to dircover, in all her

astionsi, the utmolk parcidlity towards Bothwel), r. On the a ath
of FEb~ruary, five day·s after the murder, the bellowed on L~im
the reverr~on of the tisperio~rit ot the town of Leirb, which in
the year I 56; Ler had mor:gaged to the citizens of Edinburgh.
This grant wau of much importance, as it gave him not only
the comm~nd·n of the principal port in the kingdom, but a great
alcendent over the citha.:s of Edinlburgh. who were extremely
delirous o Evi3·,ng p~ofefelion of it *. 2. Bolthwell being ex-
cremely dei~rous to obtain the command of the cattle of Edin-

burgh,

SCopy from the original in the Chartepr-boute of rbe city of Edin-

burgh of an* Afignation to the rever/ion of the Juperrior sty of Leith
by guren MRIY to theC Earl of BotbWe./
Maria Dei gratia Regina Scotorum, omnibus probis homini-

bus fuis ad quos prloleares liters pervenerint lalutcm. Sciaris,
quod nos ad me~oriamm reducentes miuliplex bonum verum et
fidele ferv tium, non tantum quonldam nolthz charilfin~e marri
ML/aria Reginz regni nothii pro rempore in nottra minroritate
faaum et impenium, verum etiam nobitinet iplib, tam intra
parres Gallio quam intra hoc rrollrum regnum,, adt extentionemn
nothi honoris et audtoricatis in punntione furum. maletad~orum.
et tranlgrefforum infra idem, per nothum, confifum coniangui-
neum et coatliiarium Jacoburni comnitem 80thuile, dorninum
Hails, Creighton et Liddildale, magnum admirallum regmi
noths, commillionem et onerationem ad hiunc effEaum habentum,
per quas iple fuum corpus et vitam in magno periculo polcit
ac etiam, in performatione et extenrione no~thi di~i fervridi
fuam hareditatem, lispra fLimmaml viginii milliuml mercarum
hujus nothii regni, alienanit ac lIeft. Er nos cogirances quad,
ex no(tra principali honore et devoria, diiamur i nothum con~ium
conianguincum & conciliariumn cumi cuotiam accndecelt et grati-
radloce recompenlare et gratilcare in~cumbiit qluz nos comlmode
fibi concedere poterimnus, unide iple magis habliJ omnnibus

affuturis

burgh, the Queen, in order to prevail on the earl of Mar to
lurrendesr the goverlnmentt of it, othrred to commit to young
pirince to his cut~ody. MaIr contented; and the inflantly ap-
pointed Bothwerll governocr of the catlle. And. I. Pref. 64.
Keith, 3;9- 3. The inquiry into the murder, previous to
Hatrhw eil's trial, fecems to have been condu~ed with the utmost
remirniers. Buchanan exclaims Icudly againlt this And. 2. t4.
Nor was it without traion that he :iid so, as is evident from a
circumilance in the affidavit of ThIomas Nelson, one of the
King's servants, who was in the houle w·henl his master was
murdered, and wa~s dug up alive out of' the rubbilh. Being
examined on the !Llonday after thle King's death, "( This depo
nar (chew that Biook:e had thle key of the fellare, and the
Queenis fervandis the keyis of her thalmir. Qubilk the Laird
of Trillibardin hiearing, said, Hald thair, here is ane ground.
Ester quhilk words fpokin, thai left of, and procedit na farther
in the inquifition." And. 4. p. 2. 167. Had there been any
intention to learch into the bottom of tbe matter, a circumstance
of so much importance merited the moll careful enquiry.
4. Netwithfkanding Lenox's repeated follicitations, notwith-
flanding the reafonableners of his demiands, and the necellity
of complying with them, in order to encourage any acculer to
appear againflt othwell, the not only refused to commit him to
callody, or even to remove him from her presence and councils;

affuturis remporibus effe poterit, et ad hujufmodi performandunt
in omnibui caulls feu eventibus: In recompedlationem quorum
pla;n';flinum, ac pro' diverfis llits noffris rarionabilibus cautis
cet confiderationlibu~s nos movenribus, Fecimus, &c. didtum Jaco-
bum comiterm iBothuilc, &cC. ac foos haeredes marculos qualcun-
que nollios lgImesc~:~ &c. allignatos ini et ad literas revetrfonis
fadas. &6c~. per Symcmem~r Prelton de codem militem, pr~epotitum,
ba~livo., confutes, e~t conno:unitatemm hujus nolthi burgi de Edin-
burgh, pro k~ripth ac Iluis liocc~fforibus, &c. nobis, nottrifque
Exredlibus, fuccriforibue, et allignat~is pro redemptione, &tc.
f~uperiorirtaris torius vil'0 e Li Ieith, etc. impignorate per nos
dic~tis piaportro, &c. liub revedi~one alienatz contirnentis lummam
decem ruillium mnercuruml rinarnta pr~Et~iPtre numerandam et
calculandvm in parachi~ii ecclelia de Edinburgh, disper pre-
monitione quathrigima Jkirumn, ut mniris litI, veluri in diais re-
veirilois lIteri , &c. de data Yvoi Odolb. I569. &e. (T'he reft is
formr, and comins a3:I cl;:ure of a\,o(lutc' warranidice.) IN cUJUS
.us TLESTIIMosrvau p detntibus magnum- Egillumn not~rum
spponi f~c~iiou-. Apuii it Einburgh, decinio quinto die menlis
Februarli, annoc D~omini miillellino quingentefimno fexagelimo
lexto, et regoi nun~i vicetimo qumnto. The great feal entire.

A4nd. s. 42, ·I8 but by the an:.;s wh~ich) we hn~e men:ioned,
Jnd by other circum~lannces, dirco~vered aln inircrs& of arcuch-
ment to himi. :;. She could not avoid bringin~g 130~:5wull to a
publick trial , but the permitted him to lit as a member in that
meenorg of the Privy Counicil, which direde~d his owni trial ,
and the nrial itself was carriedi on withi Iuch uninccei~rac preci-
pitancy, and with 10 mlanyy other uL~p~icous circu~lncr~es, as
render his acquiittal rather ani argumnent of his gurit than a prouf
of his innocence. T'hele circumiftances have all been mention-
ed at length, Vol 1. p. 329, &c. and therefore are not repeat-
ed in this place. 6. T'wo days after the trial, Ma~ry g;ave a
public proof of her regard for Bothwell, by appointing himn to
carry the Iceptre before her at the meeting of Pariiamlent..
Keith, 37S- 7. In that parliamenit, the gramed~c himn a ratific.a-
tion of all the vail poffellions and honours, whichi the hadl con;-
[erred upon him, in which was contained an ample enumler-ation
of all the services he had performedl. And. r. ''7 8 ho
Melvil, who foresaw that her attachment to Bothelwuir
length induce her to marry him, warned her of the infamy and
danger which would attend that adion, the not only dilregarded
this salutary admionition, but dilcovered what had passed be-
tween them to Bothwell, which expoled Meltlvil to his indigna-
tion. Mely. r56. 9. Bothwell seized M~ary as the returne=d
from Stirling, April 24. Ii he had done this without hetr
knowledge and codlent, fach an insult could not have fik Jr~ to
have filled her with the mott violent indignation. But accord-
ing to the account of an old M~. S " The friendly love was to
highly contraded between thiis great princers, and her enormor m
fubjeft, that there was no end thereof (Ear it was c~nltiantiiv
efleem~ed by all men that either of thecm loved other carnally)
so that the futfered patiently to be led w here the lo~ver lift, andi
all the way neither maide obitacle, impedimnlct, clamnour or
refiltance, as in iuch accidents ute· to be, or that the might hav·e
done by her princely authiority, bcing accompanied whiti the
noble Earl of Huntly,. and recretarv Miai:larva of` iLehington.".'
Keith, 383. Melvil, who was probsn, contirmns this accoun .
and tells us that the officer, by whomr be w as seized, infirnmed

himtht nthngwas done without rthe queen's combat~ci.

hiMely. 158.ta no. iOn the sath of Majy, a fe~w days before her
marriage, Mary declared that the was then at fuill lib~erty, and
that though Bothwell had offended her by .seizing her perlon,
the was so much satisfied with hip duriful behaviour since th.\t
time, and so indebted to him for past services, that the not only
forgave that offence, but rethlved to promotre hiim to -higher
honours. And. r. : 87. 1. Even after the conteder ate nobles
had driven Bothwell from the Qu~een's p~retence, and though
the law that he was considered as thle murdierer of hier formriu
hu~hand by fb great a part of her 1Lubjea~s, her affetAion d~id not
in the lealt abate, and thle cont~inued to exuprels the molt unall-

terable

Throgmorton) that the rigour with which the Queen is kept,
proceedeth by order from there men, becaule that the Queen
will not, by any mneans, be induced to lend her authority to pro-
fe~cute the murder; nor will not codlent by any perfization to
abandon the Lord Bjothwell for her husband, but avowerb con-
flantly that ile w~ill live and die with him and faith, abat if it
were put to her choice to relinquid b. crown and kingdom,
or the Lord Bot~hwell, the would lease bI: kingdomn and dignity
to go a simple damsel with him, and to t~ he wvill nev·er codient
that he thall fare worse, or have more harm than beefelf. App.
P. 4z. See also p. 44. From this long enumeration of circum-
stances. we may, withiout violence, draw the rjllowing conclu-
sion. Had Mary really been accessory to the murder of her
husband; had Bothwell perpetrated the crime wiib her codtent,
or at her command; and had the intended to fifl~e the evidence
againit him, and to prevent the discovery of his guilt, the could
fearce have taken any other steps than those the took, nor could
her conduat have been more repugnant to all the maxims of pru-
dence and of decency.

THE politive evidence produced against Mary may be diafed

under two heads.

I. TH E depof itions of some persons who were employed in

committing the murder, particularly of Nicholas Hubert, who
in the writings of that age is called French Parric. TLhis person,
who was Hoihwell's servant, and truch truated by himi, was
twice examined, and the original gs o~ne of his depothrions, and
a copy of the oth~er, are (till extant. It is pretended that both
thele are notorious forgeries. But they are remiarkable for a
simplicity and ,nakedi which it is almolt impollible to imitate;
threy abound w·irh a number of minute faAs and particularitie:,
which the moit dextrous forger could not have calily airembled,
and concE~ted together with any appearance of probability,
and they are failed with circumitances, which can fearce be sup a
posed to have entered the imiagination of any man, but one of
Paris's proidlion and charafiter. But, at the fame time, it mult
be acknowledged that his depofitionfs contain some improbable
circumilances. He seems to have been a foolith talkative fel-
low; the fear of death; the violence of torture; and the de-
fire of pleasing rhofe in whole power he was, temnpted him,
perhaps, to feirgn lomoe circumitances, and to exaggerate others.

'To lay that some circumflances in an affidavit are improbable

or false, is very different from laying that the whole is forged.
I fulpeft the former to be the cafe here ; but I fee no appearance
of the latter. He that as it will, some of the 0 malt entrial fa~ts
in Paris's affidavirs relt upon his single tellimony ; and for that
reason, I have not in the hiilory, nor thall I in this place, lay
any theis upon them.

2. TH E letters said to be written by Mary to Bothwell.

There have been freqluently published. T~he accident, by which
the Queen's enemies got them into their pofifelion, is related
Vol. I. 354. When the authenticity of any ancient paper is
dubious or contefied, it may be alcertained either by external or
internal evidence. Both these have been produced in the pre-
sent care.

I. EXTERNAL prOOfs of the genuineners of Mary's letters.

r. Murray and the nobles who adhered to him affirm, upon
their word and honour, that the letters were written with the
Queen's own hand, with which they were well acquainted.
Good. 2. 64, 92. 2. The letters were publickly produced its
the parliament of Scotland, December ' 56-7, Good. 2. 360; and
were so far considered as genuine, that they are mentioned, its
the aft againlt Mary, as one chief argument of her git
Good. 2. 66- 3. T`hey were thewn privately to the Duk of
Norfolk, the Earg of Sussex, and Sir Ralph Sadler, Elizabeth's
commillioners at ~York. In the account which they give of
this matter to their miltrers, they seem to confider the letters
as genuine, and exprels no fulpicion of any forgery; they par-
ticularly oblerve, '' that the matter contained in them is l`uch
that it could hardly be invented and deviled by any other than
herse~lf ; for that they dilcourfe of some things, which were un-
known to any other than to herself and Bothwell; and as it is
hard to counterfeit to many, so the matter of them, and the
manner how there mesn came by themn is such, as it feemeth
that God, in whole fight murder and bloodlhed of the innocent
is abominable, would not permit the fame to be hid or conceal-
ed." Good. 2. I 4z. They seem to have made luch an impref-
Cion on the Duke of Norfolk, that in a fublequent letter to
Pemlbroke, Leicester and Cecil, he has thele words. " If the
miatter thall be thought as detefiable and manifest to you, as for
ought we canl perceive it feemeth here to us." Good. 2 ' 54-
4. After the conferences at York and W~eftmiinter were finithl-
ed, Elizabetb relolved to call together the Earls who were then
at court, and to lay before therni the whole proceedings against~
the Scottish Queen, particularly that '' the letters and writings
exhiibited by the Regent, as the Queen of Scots letters and
writings, thou;J ullo be thewed, and conference [i. e. compa-
rilon] thereof mIade in their fight, with the letters of the laid
Quee~n's being extant, and heretolore wiit:e~n with her own
halnd, andl Irot to the CQeen's MjdltY; where~by miay be
f~lached and examuin d what di~ffrenice is b~etwixt themi."
C~ood. 2. 242. Th'ley affemlbled, accordingly, at Hamipto~n
C'ourt, Dccrl'embr a 4 and , F, r 5/'S ; anid " the or;rigin as a~t
the~ laters lupp olr·d to be wr it ten i b;) thet QZue n of ScotsP own'l
hand . were then also pretently prod!uced andi ruled ; and be-
ing read, were duly conferredl andl comp Iredl, l or the mannerilC oF
wlilinlg, nndl tf~\hin of orthogl~aphy, with lunfr y other le trsr

\us.. II d long~

long ine heretofore written, and sent by the said Queen of
bcots to the Queen's Marjelty --- In collation whereof no
difference was f~ound "' Good. 2. 296. F. Mary having written
an apologetical letter for her condu61 to the Countels of Le-
nox, July a 0. r 57 /o , the tradmiitted it to her husband then in
Scotland, and he returned to the Countels the following answer :
** Seing you have renuittst to mec to aniwer the Queen the King's
mother's letters sent to you, what can I fay but that I do not
mnarvell to fee hir writ the belt the can for hirlelf, to feame to*
purge hir of that, quhairof mnany befyde me are certainly per-
ruadit of the contrary, and I not only aff~urit by my awin knaw-
ledge, bru by her handwrit, the confetrionis oi men gone to the

*Mary's letter has never been purblilhed` and ought to have a

place here, where evidence on all sides is fairly produced.
** Madamn, if the wrang and falle reporris of rebellis, enemeis
weill knawin for traitouris to zow, and alace to miuche truffed of
rne by zoure advice, had not To far Lturred you· againis my inno-
cency, (and I must lay againis all kyndnefs, that zow have not
onelie as it were condempnit me wranlgfullie, bot so hated are,
as fomne wordis and open· deideis bes reffireir to all the waride,
a maanyfeft milliking in zow argainis zowr awn blude) I would not
have omittic thus lang my dewrie in wryting to zbew excursng: me
of those untrew reporties made of me. But hoping with Godis
grace and tyme to have my innocency ktnawin to aow, as I tunit
it is already to the maid paint of all indifferent perfonis, I
thocht it belt not to trouble zow for a· tyme till that such a mat-
ter is moved that tuichis us bayth, qubilk is the transporting
route littil Ton, and my only child in this countrcy. To the
qubilk albecit I be never la willing, I wald be glaid to have zoute
advyle therein, as in all uther thingis ruiching him,. I have born
him, and God Itnawis with quhat danger to him and me boith ;
and of zow he is defcendfit. So I meane not to folzer mny dewric
to zow, in fchewing herein any unkyndnefs to tow, how unkvndtlie
that ever ·re have deskt with me, bot wiil love zow as my awnt,
and refpedt zow as "ay moder in law. And gii ye ples to know
fairther of mly miynd in that and· all wther thingis bjetwixt us, sa~y
amlbaffador the Bishop of Rols Call be ready to confer with zow.
And lo after miy hairtlie comlmendationia, remitrting me to any
faide ambaffaldor, ands zour better confiderraioun. I commiit now
to the proteCtioun of Almnyghty God, quhomr I pray to prelieve
row and mny brother Charles, and caus zowN to knaw Iiny patin bet-
ter nor mJe do. Fromn Chatilworth this x of July I 570.

To miy Ladie Lennox Y'oure natural gude Nice

my moer inlaw.and lovynge docheer.

death,

death, and 6ther infallibil experience. It wull be lang tyme that
is hable to put a mattir To notorious in oblivioun, to maki black
qubyte, or mnnocency to appeat· quhair the contraty is fa weill
hilawin. The maift indifferent, I trust, doubtis not of the equi.
tie of zoure and my cauie, and of the jus f occalloun of our
snifliking. Her richt dewrie to zow and me, being: the pantels
interest, wbre hir trew confeifrotmn and unfeyned repentance of
that lamentable faQ, odious for hir to be reportit, and forrowfull
fdr us to think of. God is juff , and will not in the end be abu-
fed ; but as he has mnanifeflted the trewth, io will he puneife the
iniquity." Linno~vs Orig. Regis. of rLeers. In their public pa-
pers, the Queen's enemies may be fulpeded~ of advaricing what
would be molt rublervient to their caule ; not what was agreeable
to truth, or what flowed from their own inward conviiion. But
in a private letter to his own wife, Lenox had n~o occallon to
dissemble; and it is plain, that he not only thought the qjueen
guilty, but believed the authenticity of her letters to Bbthwell.

II. WI rn regard to the internal proofs of the genuineners of

the Queen's letrtrs to Bothwell, we ritay oblerve, i. That
whenever a paper is forged with a particular intention, the ea-
gernefs of the forger to ettablith the point in view, his solicitude
to cut off all doisbts and Cavils, and to avoid any appearatice of
uncertainty, always promp him to are exprefions the most ex-
plicit and full to his purpole The parfages foisted into ancient
authors by Heretics in different a~gs; rhe legendary miracles
of the Rbmith faints; the fuppoftititous deCeds in their own farvour
produced byr modafterits; the false charters of homage teration-
ed Vol. I. p. I . Qre To many prtoof bs this aitertion. No; max-
im seems to be more certain than this, that a forger is tiften apt
to prove too much, but seldom falls into the error of proving
too little. The point which the Queen's enemiles had to ettablith,
was "~ that as the Earl of Bothwell vias chief executi~r of the
horrible and unworthy murder perpetrated. &c. so iras the of
the foreknowledge, counsel, devite, perruader, and commandiG
of the Caid murder to be done." Good. 2. 20f. But of this there
are only impededb hines, obscure intimations, and dark exprelli-
ons in the letters, which however cdovincing evidence they mnight
f ilmith if foutid iri real letters, bear no resemblance rd that glare
and fiuperfluiry of eviderite which forgeries commonlyi contamn.
All the advocates for Mary's innocence in her own age, contend
that there ;s nothing in the letters which can serve as a proof of
her guilt. Lefley, Blackwood, Tdirtnr, &tC. abound with passages
to thisl purpole; nor are the sentiments of those· in the prelente
age different. "I Yet itill it miight have been expeeled (lays her
Sateft defender) that fomne one or other of the points or articles
o f the accufaion (hould be madep out clearly by the proof. buc
nothing of that is to be lee~n in the prefenit cafe. TIhere is no-
shing Is the letter that could plainly (kew the writer to have

1Dd a been

been in the fareknowledge, counsel, or device of any murder,
far less to have persuaded or commanded it; and as little is there
about maintaining or juffifying any murders." Good. I. 76.
Hlow il adviled were /ary's adversaries to contra&t Co much

uaand to pro~tife so m~any artifices in order to forge letters,

which~ are 10 ill contrived for eftablithing the conclusion they had
in view ? H-ad they been 10 bale as to have recourse to forgery,
is it not naturarl to think that they would have produced some-
th-ing mocre expiicit and decirive ? 2. As it is almolt impollible to
invent a long narration conf~iting of mnany circumfkances, and to
conned it la such a manner with real faats, that no mark of
iraudl thall appear ; for this reason (kilfill forgers avoid any long
dietail of circum~itances, especially of foreign and superfluous
ones. well knowing that the more there are m~ultiplied the more
are the chances of deteaion increased. Now Mary's letters, es-
pecially the firlt, are filled with a miultiplicity of circum~ances,
extremely natural in a real correipondence, but altogether foreign
to the purpole of the Queen's enemies, and which it would have
been extrenic folly to haveinferted if they had been altogether ima-
gtnary, and without foundation. 3. T`he truth and reality of several
carcumuftances in the letters, and there too of no very publick na-
ture, are confirmed by undoubted collateral evidence. LeRtt. I.
Good 2. p. r. T~he Queen is said to have met one of Lenox's gen-
11emen, and to have som~e conversation with him. Thomas Craw-
ford, who was the person, appeared before Elizabeth's commniflion-
ers, and confirmed, upon oath, the truth of this circumitance. He
likewise declared, that during the Queen's 11ay at Glasgow, the
King repeated to him, every night, whatever had pallfed, through
the day. between her Majesty and him, and that the accoun:
given of thele converlations in the sirs letter, is nearly the fame
with what the King communicated to him. Good. 2. 245.A-
cording to the famie letter there was mnuch diicourfe between
the Kng and Queen concerning Mynto, Hiegait, and Walcar.
Good. a. 8, to, a I. What this m~ighrt be, was altogether un-
known, till a letter of Mary's prrefervted in the Scorttih college at
Paris, and publilhed, Keith. Pre. vii. <ii(covered it to be an
affadir of lo mIuch imiportance as mnerited all the attention the
paid to it at that timie. it appears by a letter fromn the French
amibaffador, that Mary was lubjeQ to a violent pain in her fade.
Keith, ibid. TIhis circumittance is mientioned, Let t. I. p. 30. in
a mianner so natural as can Icarce belong to any but a genuine
produ~tion. 4. If we shall Itill think it probable to lisppore that
to many reall circumiltances were artfully introduced into the
letters by the forgers, in order to give an air of authenticy to
their produ~tion ; it w~ill fearce be pollible to holdl the IGenei
opinion concernin~g the following particular. UCcore the Queen

began

began her fir(1 letter to Bothwell, the, as is urual a~mong those
who write long letters containing a variety of Cubjeds, miade
nteslP or memAoraldumi of the particulars the withed to remlemlber;
but as the fat up writing during a great part of the night, and
after her attendants were alleep, her paper failed her, and the
continued her letter upon the lamle theet, on which the had for-
merly made her memorandums. Thbis the herself takes notice
of, and makes an apology for it: " It is late; I derire never to
cease from writing unto you, yet now after the killing of your
hands, I will end my letter. Excul~e my evil writing, and read
it twice over. Excule that thing that is f~criblit, for I had na
paper zetterday, quhen I wrait that of the mnemorial " G~ood.
2. 28. T'here m~emorandumns Ltill appear in the middle of the
letter; and what we have ladid feemis naturally to account for the
mianner how they miight find their way into a real letter. It is
fearce to be fuppoled, however, that any forger would think of
placing memrorandurns in the miiddle of a letter, where, at tirit
fight, they mnake so ablurd and so unnatural an appearance. But
if any, Ihall flill carry their refinement so far, as to lilppole that
the forgers were Co artful as to throw in this circumiltance, in
order to preserve the appearance of genuineneis, they mutut at
least allow that the Queen's enemices, who emiployed there forgers,
could not be ignorant of the delsgn and mleaning of there thlort
notes and memorandums; but we find thei mnittaking themi to
far as to imoagine that they were the credit of` the bea~rr, i e.
points concerning which the Queen had given him verbal in-
firu~ions. Good. 2. I52. This they cannot pollibly be; for
the Queen herself writes with so much exa~ncels concerning the
differernt points in the memorandums, that there was no need of
giving any credit or initmrAions to the bearer concerning theml.
TIhe memnorandums are indeed the contents of the letter. r.
Mary, mlentioning her convetraions with the K~ing about thet
affair of Mynto, Hiegait, &c. says, " 'The miorne [i. e.
to-morrow] I will fpeik to hicri upon that point ;" and
then adds, " As to theu reft of Willie Hiegait's, he confefit it ;
but it was the morne [i. e. the miorning) after miy cumiming or
he did it." Good. 2. . This addition, which coul not have
been made till after the converl'Jtion happened, seems~ either to
have been inferred by the Q~ueen into the body of the letter, or,
perhaps, the having writren at on the margin, ic was taken thence
into the text. If we ruppole the letter to be a real one, and
written at ditfferent times, as it plainly bears, this circumitance ap-
pears to be very natural ; but no reaion could have induced a for-
ger to have veniured upon luch an anachronlifn, for which there
was no necellity. An addition, perfedly familar to this, made
to a genuine paper, mnay be found, Good. 2. 283.

D)d 3 B T-,

BuT, on the other hand, Mary herself, and the advocates for

her innocence have contended that these letters were forged by
hrer enemlies, on purpole to blast her reputation, and to juffify
their own rebellion, it is not necessary to take notice of the
arguments which were produced, in her own agte, in support
of this opinion ; the oblervations which we have already made,
contain a full reply to them. An author, who has enquired into
the affairs of that period with great induffry, and who has ac-
quired m~uch knowledge of them, has lately publithed (as he
affirms) a dearonitration of the forgery of Mary's letters. This
demonfiration he founds upon evidence both internal and exter-
nal. With regard to the former he oblerves, that the French
copy of the Queen's letters is plainly a tranllation of Buchanan a
Latin copy; which Latin copy is only a translation of the Scot-
tith copy; and by cons~equence, the assertion of the Q~ueen's
enemies, that (he wrote them originally in French, is altogether
groundless, and the whole Letters are gross forgeries. H~e ac-
counts for this (trange fucceion of translations, by fuppoling
that when the forgery was proje~ted, no pedion could be found
capable of writing originally in the French language letters which
would pals for the Queen's; for that reason they were first com-
posed in Scottith; but unluckily the French interpreter, it would
seem, did not undeditand that language; and therefore Buchanan
translated them into Latin, and from his Latin they wcke readered
into French. Good. r. 79,· So.

Ir is fearce necessary to oblerve that no proof whatever is
poduced of any of thele suppositions. The manners of the

Sctin that age, when almost every man of rank rpent a part

of his youth in France, and the intercourse between the two
nations was great, render it altogether improbable that To many
comnplicated operations thould be neceffery, in order to procure
a few letters to be written in the French language.

Bu r without insisting farther on this, we nass oblerve that

arll this author's prenulres may be granted, and yet his con-
clufion will not follow, unlers he likewise prove that the Fr~ench
letters, as we now have themn, are a true copy of' those which
were produced by Murray and his party in the SCottith parlia-
ment, and at York and Welimin~ter. But tbia he has not at-
tempted; and if we attend to the hiltory of the letters, such
an attempt it is obvious, mnul have been unfuiccefsful. The
letters were firlt publiflied at the end of Buchanan's deted~ia.
TIhe firit edition of rhij treadl~e was in Latin, ini which language
three of the Queen's letters were labjoined to it s this Latin edti-
tion was printed A. D. I 971 $0. Soonafr a Sportith tranniltion
of it was publithed, and at the end of it were printed, likewise
in Scottith, the three letters which had formerly appeared iq
Latiq, and five other letters in Scgetifh, which were not mn the~

Latin

Latin edition. Next appeared a French tranilation of the De-
te~tion, and of seven of the letters; this ·bears to have been
printed at Edinburgh by Thomias Waltem, a 97z. The namie
~of the place, as wed as of the printer, is allowed by all parties
to be a mlanifelt impoflure. Our author, from oblerving the
day of the month, on which the prlnting is ·said to have been
finithed, has ~Fferted that this edition was printed at L~ondon;
but no ithefs can be laid upon a date found in a book, where
every other circumilance with regard to the printing is allowed
to be faire. Blackwood, who (next to Lefley) w'as the bell in-
formed of all Mary's advocates in that age, affirms that thle
French edition of the Deettion was pubithed in France : '' 11
(Buchanan] a depuis adjoul16 a celt~e declamnation on petit Jibelle
'du pretendu mariage d~u Duc de Nhorfolk, et de Ja fapFon de son
~proces, et la tour envoyi aux freres a ·la Riochelle, lefquels
voyants qu'il pouvolt fervir a la cadre, T'om trorduit en Franqois,
et icefuy fut imprimeb a Edinbourg, c'eft a dire a la Rochelle,
par Thomas Walrem, nom apolid et fair a plairir. Martyree de
Marie. Jebb. z. 296."' The author of the Innorcrnce de Marie
goes farther, and names the French trantlator of the Detetion.
Et icelay premierement compold :comime it femble) par George
-Buchanan El'coiToys, et depuis traduit en langue Frangolfe par an

lugonot, Poitevin (advocat de vocation) Camluz, soy diront
gentilhome, et un de plus remar~ques fediteox de France. Jleb.
s. 4 5· 443.' The concurring rettimony of two cotemporary
authors, whole residence in France afforded rheth Cfuicint -means
of information, muA outweigh a fight conje~ture. 'This French
translator does not pretend to publilh the original French iletrrrs
as wnitren by the ·Queen herself: he exprefly declares that he
·translated them froin the Latin Good. 1. a 03. Had our au-
thor attended to all there circumffances, he mnight have Saved
himlelf the labour of so many criticifmis to prove that the pre-
Cent French copy of the letters is a tranllation from the Latin.
T'he French editor hims~elf acknowledges it, and Io far as I know
no person ever denied it.

Wa may oblerve that the French translator was so ignorant,

as to affirm that Mary had written ihele letters, partly in Frencl!,
partly in Scottish. Good. 1to3. Had this translation been
'publited at London by Cecil, or had it been made by his dl-
redlion, so grols an error would not have been admiitred into it.
This error,. however, was owing to an odd circumirtance. , In
the Scottith trandlation of the D~eteCtion two or three sentences
of the original French were prefixe~d to eache tI~er, which break-
ing off with an &sc. rhe Scottilh traniation of the whole iollow-
ed. T~his mlelhod d prrating translations was not uncomnmon in
that age. TIhe French editor oblerving this, foolithly concluded

tric ~e letersr had been wntlren partly in French, partly in

DdS 4 y

letter which still remain, and apply to them that species of cri-
ticilm, by which our author has examined the whole, a clear
proof will arite, that there was a French copy not trantated
from the Latin, but which was iteled the original from which
both the Latin and Scottith have been tranilated. This minute
criticilm must necessarily be dil~agrecable to many readers; but
luckily a few featences only are to be examined, which will ren-
der it extremely thort.

IN the first letter, the French sentence prefixed to it ends with

these words, y faifoit bon. It is plain this exprellion, ·ven ce quce
peat un cors fnn carur, is by no means a trantation of crm plane
perinde efem arque corpus/ine corde. The whole sentence has a
[pirit and elegance in the French, which neither the Latin nor
Scottith have retained. 'fIfqcues a la dinie is not a translation of
toro prandii tempore ; the Scottith translation, qurbile denner-time,
expretfes the fedle of the French miore properly ; for anciently
qubile signified urntil as well as durring. Je n'aY pas tenu grand
propes is not juitly rendered neque centurlerim fermane~m cutm quo-
quam ; the phrale ufedJ in the French copy, is one peculiar to
that language, and gives a more probable account ot her beha-
viour than the other. Jugearnt bien quc'il n'y farfoit bon, is not a
translation of ut qui jrudicaIren id non1 eje eX Y/u. The French
featence prefixed to Letc. z. ends with aIpprenrdre. It is evident
that both the Latin and Scorrih translations have omitted arlto-
gether thele words, et toutefoisje ne puis apprendre. The French
featenced prefixed to Lett. 3. ends with prefnter. ~ moaa'aye will:
plus tard la baut is plainly no translation of dsisilcmrt
{um ; the fed~e of the French is better expressed by the Scottith
I have *walkit later there-up. Again, Pour excuser (vof re afaire
is very ditlerent froml ad exccu;raarnd sopra negotia. The five
remlaining letters never appeared in Latin ; nor is there any
proof of their being ever trantlated into that language. Four of
theml, however, are publithed in French. 'Thls imtirely over-
turns our author's hypothesis concerning the necellity of a tradf-
lation into Latin.

IN the Scottith edition of the Dete~tion the whole FeWet

is printed in French as well as in Scottith. It is noi pollible to
believe that this Scottith copy could be the original from which
the French was translated. T'he French conith of' verses which
have both mediure and rhym~e, and which, in many places, are
far from being inelegant. '1 be Scot:ilh consists of an equal num-
ber of lines, but without measure or rhyme. Now no mian
could ever think of a thing so a'olurd and im~prdi~tiable, aj to
require one to tranllate a certain given numiber of lines in
prole into an equal number of verles, wheie both mera-
fore and rhyale were to be oblerved. 'Z'he Scorrith, on
Ithe contrary apgears to be manifettly a trandlation of` the

French ;

French i the phrases, the idioms, and many of the words are
French, and not Scottilh. Belides, the Scottilh tranQaror has, in
several initances, mnittaken the fenle of` the French, and in ma-
ny more expresses the fed~e impertedtly. Had the founer been
forged, this could not have happened. The ditedors of the
fraud would have understood their own work. I thall facisfy my-
self with one example, in which there is a proof of both my
assertions. Stanza viii. ver. 9.

Pour lay j'attendz toute bonne fortune,
Pour lay je veux garder lanii: et vic
Pour lay tout vertu de fuivre j'ay envie.

For him I attend all gude fortune,
For him I will conserve helthe and lyse,
For him I desire to enl~ue courage.

Attend in the first line is not a Scottilh but a French phrare;

the two other lines do not exprel~s the fed~e of the F~rench, and
the last is ablolute nonfedre.

TnE· eighth letter was never translated into French. It con-

tains much retined myflicilm about devuices, a folly of that age,
of which Mary was very fond, as appears from several other
circumitances, particularly from a letter concerning i'mprefusr by
Drummond of Hawthornden. If Mary's adversaries forged her
kiters, they were certainly employed very idly when they pro-
duced this.

FaoM there oblervations it seems to be evident that there was

a French copy of Mary's lterers, of which the Latin and Scoi-
tith were only trantations. Nothing now remains of this copy
but thoie few featences which are prefixed to the Scottith
translation The French editor laid hold of there featences,
and tacked his own translation to them, which, to far as it is
his work, is a servile and a very wretched translation of BuchJ-
nan's Latin; whereas in those introdudtory lentences, we have
dilcovered Qrong mm ks of their being or iginals, and certain
proofs that they are not translated fromu the Latia.

Ir is apparent, too, from comparing the Latin and Scottith

trandations with there sentences, that the Scouthi trantator has
more perleatly attained the fedfe and spirit of the French
than the Latia. And as it appears that the letters were very
early translated into Scorrith, Good. 2. 76 ; it is probable that
Buchanan made his traandation not from the French but
fiom this Scottithl copy. Were it neceffery, several critical
proofs of this might be produced. One that has been al-
ready mentioned seems decilsve. Diwius illic m~orata jumn bears
pot the 14-alt t clmblance to j'ay ccril/l·3 plus tard lar best i but

·if, inflead of I walkit [i. e. watched) laiter there-up, we thppole
~that duchanan read I ·uakiti, &c. this mnittake, into whick
he m ght to caTliy have fallen, accounts for the error in his
tranflition.

ITh H Es criticilms, however minute, appear to be well founded.

But whatever opinion may be formed concerning them, the
~other eg~uments with regard to the internal evidence remain in
in full force.

TH E cX'etnal pTOOF Of the forgery of the Qu~een's letters,

which our author, has produced, is extrernely ipecious, but not
anore solid than thlat which we have already examined. Ac-
cordi~ng to Murra)'s diary. Mary ser out from Edinburgh to
Gi gave~ Jtnu~ary 21, 1 h7 ; the arrived there on the z3d; left
that place onl Ite 27th; the, together with the King, reached
Uni; thgow on the 28th, slaved in that town only one night,
and; returned to E~linburghi before the end of the month. B~ut
accord'ing to our author, the Qu~een did not leave Edinburgh
till Friday January zqth; as the flayed a night at Callen-
dar, the could not reach Glas~gow sooner than the evening of Sa-
turdayv the z~th, and the returned to Linlithgow on T'ueldayi
the 28~th. B~y consequence, the first letter which fuppoles the
Qceen to have been at least four daysin Glasgow, as well as the
second letter, which bears date at Glasgow Saturdry rmorning,
whe eas thre did not arrive there till the evening, must be forge-
ries. That the Quieen did not let out from Edinburgh sooner
than the 4tqh of JanuarV, ic evident (zs he contends) from the
public records, which :- it Jn a Precerpt of cotirmatlionr ofa lisy-
*ren by James Boy!d to Me gret~c C'halmers granted by the
Queen on the 4)th of Jlanuiary at LJ;nburgh; and likewvife a
letter of the Queen's dated at Edinburgh on the fame day, ap-

ponted James Ingris ray lor to the Prince her son That the
Kig and queen had returned to Linthhgow on the z~th, ap-
pears from a deed in which they appoint Andrew ·Ferries keeper
of their palace there, dated at Limiithgow January z8. Good.
1. a 18.

TISs has been reprefenred to be not only a convincing, but

a legal proof of the forgery of the letters laid to be written by
Mary ; but how far it falls thort of this, will appear from
the following considerations.

r. Ir is evident trom a declaration or confemlon made by

the Bishop of Rofc, that before the conferences at York, which
were opened in the beginning of Oatober a r68, Mary had, by
an artifice of Maitland's, got into her hands a copy of thole let-
ters which her fubjeats acculed her of having written to
Bothwell. Brown's trial of the Duke of Norfolk, 31, 36.
It is highly probable that the Bilhop of' Ross had seen the let-
ters before he wrote the decfetnce of Queen Mary's honour, mn
the year '570. They were publithed to all the world toged ler

with

wkth Buchanan's Detedtion, A. D. li s. Now if they had
contained any error so grols, and 10 obvious, at that time, to
discovery, as the fuppoling the Queen to have passed leveral
days at Glasgow, while the was really at E5dinburgh , had they
contained a letter dated at Glalgow Saturday morning, tho' the
did not arrive there till the evening; is it pofiible that the
herself, who knew her own motions, or the able and zealous
advocates who appeared for her in that age, thould not have
publilhed and expol~ed this contradittion, and, by so doing,
have bladed, at once, the credit of such an imposture ? In dif-
quilitions which are naturally ab(trule and intricate, the in-
genuiry of the latest author may dilcover many things, which
have escaped the attention, or bas led the sagacity of those who
have formerly considered the fame lubjeAt. But when a mat-
rer of fadt lay so obvious to view, this circumitance of its being
unoblerved by the Queen herself, or by any of her adherents,
is almost a despontiraion that there is fame mistake or fallacy in
our author's arguments. And so far are any either of our hillo-
rians, or of I~ary's defenders, from calling in queffion the com-
mon account concerning the time of the Queen's ierring out to
Glasgow and hier returning from it, that there is not the leait
appearance of any dirrerence among them with regard to this
point. But farther,

2. TII~OS E papers in the public records, on which our au-

thor rells the proof of his assertions, concerning the Queen's
shotions, are not the originals labreribed by the Queen, but
copies only, or trandations of copies of those originals. It is
not necessary, nor ~would it be very ealy to repder this intelligi-
ble to persons unacquainted with the forms of law in Scotland;
but every Scotsman converlant in bulinefs will underitand me.
when I fay that the precept of confirmation of the life-rent to
Boyd is only a Latin copy or note of a precept, which was feel-
ed with the Privy Seal, on a warrant from the figner-office,
proceeding on a signature which bore date at E~dinburgh the
24th of January; and that the deed in favour of James Inglis
is the copy of a letter, sealed with the Privy feat, proceeding
on a fagnature which bore date at Edinburgih January z4. Firom
all this we may argue with some degree of reason, that a proot
tounded on papers, which are so many removea ditant from duec
originals, cannot be but very lame and uncertain.

3. AT that time allpublic papers were ilfued in the nzme

both of the king and Quneen; by law, the King's lubfcripti-
on was no lels· requifire to any paper than the Queen's, and
therefore unlels the original ignatures be produced in order
to alcertainl the particular day when each of them signed, or
to prove that it was ligned only by one of them, thre legfAl
prool arising from thele papers would be, thiat both the Kwag:

and Queen signed them at Edinburgh, on the 24th of Ja.
auary.

4. THE dates of the warrants or precepts issued by the so-

vereign, in that age, f~eeml to have been in a great mealiste ar-
biirary, and affixed at the pleasure of the writer; and of con-
sequence, there dates were seldom accurate, are often false,
and can never be relied upon. This abuse became so frequent,
and was f~ound to be so pernicious, that an aB of parliament,
A. D. I 592, declared the affixing a falle date to a signature to
be High 'Treafon.

5. TusREas Hi remain, in the public records, a great numb-

berr of papers, whic~h prove the necellity of this law, as well as
the weaknels and fallacy of our author's arguments. And
though it be no ealy matter, at the difiance of two centuries, to
prove any particular date to be falle, yet liarprizing inflances of
this kind thall be produced. Nothing is more certain from
hiltory than that the King was at Glasgow 24th January a 967;
and ret the record of signatures from r 565 to 1582, Fol. r6th,
contains the copy of a lignature to Archibald Edmonflon said
to have been fubleribed by our So~vereigns, i. e. the King and
Queen at Edinburgh, January 24th 1567; lo that if we were
to truit implicitly the dates in the records of that age, or to hold
our author's argument to be good, it would prove that not on-
ly the Queen, but the King too, was at Edinburgh on the 24th
of January.

Ir appears from an original letter of the Bilhop of Ross, that

on the zgth of OAober 1566, Mary lay at the point of death ;
Keith, APP. '34 ; and yet a deed is to be found in the publick
records, which bears that it was signed by the Queen that day.
Privy-feal, Lib. 35. fol. 89. Ouchrerlont *

BoTrHWELL seized the Queen as th~e returned from Stirling,

April 24th a 567, and (according to her own account) carried
her to D~unbar with all diligence. And. s. 9. But our au-
thor, relying on the dates of some papers which he found in
the records, fuppoles that Bothwell allowed her to liop at Edin-
burgh, and to tranfaet butinefs there. Nothing can be more
improbable than this supposition. Wre may therefore rank the'

* N. B. In the former editions, another initance of the lCame

nature with thoie which go before and follow was mentioned;
but that, as has lince been dilcovered, was founded on a mil-
take of the person employed to Learch the records, and is
therefore omitted in this edition. The reasoning, however,
in the Dissertation stands fuill in full force, notwithftandinlg
this omillion.

doaf

date of the deed to Wright Privy feal, Lib. 36. fol. 43. and
which is mentioned by our author, Vol. 1. I24. among the in-
itances of the false dates of papers which were if sued in the or-
dinary course of business in that age. Our author has mitaken
the date of the other paper to Forbes, ibid. it is signed April
Iqth, not April z~th.

IF there be any point agreed upon in Mary's hiftery, it is,

that the remained at D~unbar from the time that Bothwell car-
ried her thither, till the returned to Edinburgh along with him
in the beginning of May. Our author himself allows that the
refaded twelve days there, Vol. r. 367. Now though there are
deeds in the records which bear that they were Ggned by the
Queen at Dunbar during that time, yet there are others which
bear that they were signed at Edinburgh, e. g. there is one at
Edinburgh, April 27th, Privy feal, Lib. 36. fol. 97. Thbere
are others laid to be fianed at Dunbar on that day. Lib. 3'-
Chart. No. j24* 526. Ib. lib. 32. No. I54, a 57. There are
some signed at Dunbar April z8th. Others at Edinburgh April
30th, Lib. 32. Chart. No. 492. Others at Dunrbar May a f.
Id. ibid. No. 158. There different charters fuppole the Queen
to have made Io many unknown, improbable, and inconfident
yourneys, that they afford the clearelt demonfitation that the
dates in there records ought not to be depended on.

Twls becomes more evident from the dare of the charrte

said to be Ingned April z7th, which happened that year to be a
Senday, which was not, at that time, a day of butinef in Scot-
land, as appears from the books of fedrset, then kept by the
Lords of fe~Flon.

Faou this thort review of our author's proof of the forgery

of the letters to Bothwell, it is evident that his arguments are
far from amounting to demonstration.

Ar oT us argument agarinit the genuineners of there letters

is founded on the fkile and compofstion, which are laid to be
altogether unworthy of the Queen, and unlike her real pro-
duftions. It is plain, both from the great accuracy of compo-
tition in mott of Mary's letters, and even from her solicitude
to withe them in a fair hand, that the valued herself on those
accomplithrnents, and was delirous of being efleemed an ele-
geant writer. But when the wrote at any time in a hurry,
then many marks of innacuracy appear. A remnarkable inflance
of this may be found in a paper publithled, Good. z. 30 s.
Mary a letters to Bothwell were written in the utmoll hulry -
and yet unde~r all the diiadvantages of a translation, they are
not delt;tute either of spimi or of energy. T`he manner in
which the exp'rlfesa her love to Bothwell hath been pronoun-
ced indecent and even thocking. But Mary's temper led herr
to warm exprefthous of her regard s those refu:em~ents oi dc-

Jicacy

licacy, which nlow appear in all the commerce between the
sexes, were, in that age, but little knowri, even among persons
of the highest rank. Among Lord Royflon's papers there is a
series of letters, from Mary to the Duke of Norfolk, copied
from the Harleian Library, P. 37- B- 9. fol. 8l8, in which Mary
declares her love to that nobleman in language, which would
now be rockoned extremely indelicate.

Tase fonners and some of Mary's letters to Bothwell were

written bef~ore the m~urder of her hulband; fobie of them after
that event, and before her marriage to Bothwell. Those which
are prior to the death of her bufband abound with the fondest
expreflions of her love to Bothwell, and plainly dilicover that
their familiarity had been extremely criminal. We ftnd in
them, too, some dark exprenions, which her enemies employed
to prove that the was no fIranger to the schemes which were
forming againit her hufband's life. Of this kind are the fol-
lowing passages, "~ Alace i I nevir diffavit ony body; bot I re-
mit me altogidder to zour will. Send me advertirement quhat
I fall do, and quhatlaever thing come therof, I fall obey zow,
Advile too with zourfelf, gif ze can find out ony mair iecret
inventioun by medicine, for he fuld tak medecine and the bath
at Craigmillar." Good. s. 2. * See not bir quhais fenzeit
teiris fuld not be la meikle prairth and eftemit, as the trew and
faithfull travellis quhilk 1 fullene for to merite hir place. For
obtaining of the quhilk, aganis my natural, I betrayis thame
that may imperche me. G~od forgive me," &c. ibid. 17. "( I
have walkit later thair-up, then I wald have done, gif it had
not been to draw fomiething out of him,~ qubilk this berer will
fcharw zow, qubilk is the fairest commodity that can be offerit
to exrcule zour affairis." Ibid- 3:. From the letters potterior
to the death of her husband, it is evident that the ftheme of
Bothwell's seizing Mary by force, and carrying her along with
him, was contrived in concert with herself, and with her appro-
bation *.

* Ta x - let ters of io much importance as those of Mary's

to Bothwell thould have been intirely loft, appears to many
altogether unaccountable. After being produced in England be-
fore Elizaberh's commillioners, they were delivered back by
them to the Eurl of Murray. Good. 2. z39. He seems to
have kept them in his poffllioan during his life. After his death,
they fell into the hands of Lenox his successor, who reltored
them to the Earl of Morton. Good. 2. 91. Though it be
not r.eceftarily connelctd with any of the queitions which gave
occallon to this D~iff~erration, it may perhaps satisfy the curiothry
of iame of my leaders to inform them, that after a very dib.-

gentE

HAVInG tilus fatred the proof on both rides; having exl-

mined at so great length the ditferent ly~ltems with regard to
the fads in controverrly; it may be expeded that I thould now

pronounce

gent search, which has lately been made, no copy of Mvary's
letters to Bothwell can be found in any of the publick libraries
in Great Britain. The only certain intelligence concerning them,
fance the time of their being deliveyed to Morton, was commu-
nicated by the accurate Dr. Birch.

Ex raAct of the letters of Robert Bowes, Erq; ambassador

from Queen Elizabeth to the king of Scotland, wrieren to Sir
Francis Walsingham, secretary of State, from the original re-
giller-book of Mr. Bowes's letters, from a jth of Augu~t a 582,
to 28th September 2 583, in the poikfiron of C3hrittopher Hun-
ter, M. D. of Durham.

I48z, 8th November, from Edinburgh.

ALBEIT I haVe been born in hand, T hat the coffr whereiss

were the originals of letters between the Scottilh Quceen and the
Earl of Bothwell, had been delivered to sundry hands, and
thereby was at prelent wanting, and unknown where it reited,
yet I have learned certainly by the Prior of Plulcardyne's means,
that both the coffer and as so the writings are come, and now re-
main with the Earl of Gowrie, who, I perceive, will be hardly
intreated to make delivery to her Majesty according to her Ms-
jelty's desire.

THISs time past I have expended in searching where the cos-

for and writings were, wherein without the help of the Prior I
thould have found great difficulty; now I will c~ay Gowrie, and
of my liuccels you thall be thortly advertiled.

1sch of November a 98z, from Edinburgh.

Bccav3Ea I had both learned, that the calker and letters men-

tioned in my latt, before there were come to the porrelion of
the Earl of Gowrie, and also found that no mean might pre-
vail to win the fame our of his hands without his own codent
and privity; in which behalf I had employed fit infiruments,
that neverlhelefs profited nothing i therefore I arrempted to
essay himself, letting him know that the raid calker and let-
ters thould hiave been brought to her Maljesty by the offer and
good means of good friends, promiling to have delivered them
to her Majefly before they came into his hands and culkody,
and knowing that he did bear the like affe~ion, and was ready
to pleatiate her Majeily in all things, and chiefly in this that
had been thus far tenderedl to her Majelty, and which there-
by thould be well accep:ed~, and with plincely thanks and gra-

pronounce sentence. In my opinion, there are are only two con-
cl~urions, which can be drawn from the faats which have been
enumerated .

ONE,

tuity be requited to his comfort and contentment; I moved
h~imt that they might be a preleint to be sent to her Majeily from
hiim, and that I might caule the fame to be conveyed to her
Majefly, adding hereunto foch words and arguments as mighit
both fiti up a hope of liberality, and allo bell effedQ the purpole.
At the firl1 he was loth to agree that they were in his poireetion;
b~ut I let h-im plainly know that I was certainly informed, that
th~ey were delivered to him by Sanders Jardin 1 whereupon he
pressed to know who did to inform me, enquiring whether the
ians of the Earl of Morton had done it or no. I did not other-
ways in plain terms deny or anlwer thereunto, but that he might
think that he had told me, as the prior is ready to avouch, and
well pleased that I thall give him to be the author thereof ;
afier he had said [thougbj all there letters were in his keeping
(which he would neither grant nor deny) yet he might not de-
liver them to any perion without the contents and privities, as
well of the king, that had interest therein, as affo of the reft
of the noblemen enterprifers of the adtion againfi the King's
mother, and that would have them kept as are evidence to war-
rant and make good that adtion. And albeit I replied, that
their aaion in that part touching the assignation of the crown
to the King by his mother, had received fisch eftarblilhment,
confurmation, and Ithength, by ads of parliament and other
pubiick authority and infiruments, as neither thould that cafe
be fulfered to come in debate or queion, nor roch ferolls and
papers ought to be thewed for the firengthening thereof, fboas
these might we I be left and be rendered to the hands of her
Majeily, to whom they were deltined before they fell in his
keeping; yet he would not be removed or fatisfed ; concluding,
after much reas~onings, that the Earl of Morton, nor any other
that had the charge and keeping thereof. durit at any time
make delivery ; and because it was the hrit timoe that I had
moved him therein, and that he would gladly both answer her
Majelly's good expedation in him, and also perform his duty
diue to his iovereign and associates in the a~tion aforeraid i there-
fore he would ferk out the 1aid caflket and letters, at his return
to his houte, which he thought thould be within a thort time;
and upon finding o~f the fame and better advice, and confidera-
tion had of the caurle, he would give turther adrwer. This re-
solution I have received as to the thing ; and for the prerent I
could not better. leaving him to give her Majelty fach telli-
mony of his goodl will towards her, by his frank dealing here-

ONE, that BOthwell, prompted by his ambition or love, en-

couraged by the Queen's known aver lion to her husband, and
preluming on her attachment to himill (biuck th·e blow with-

out

in, as (he may have cauie to confurm her highnesses good opi-
nion conceived already of him, and be thereby drawn to great-
er goodness towards him. I thall fuill labour him both by my-
self` and also by all other means, but I greatly diltruit the de-
sured fuccel~s berein.

24th of Novembe~r a s82, from Edinburgh.

FoR the recovery of the le~tcers in the coffer, come to the

hands of the Earl of Gowrie, I have lately moved him earnell-
ly therein, letting him know the purpole of the Scottilh Queen,
both giving out that the letters are counterfeited by hier rebels,
andi affo seeking thereon to have them delivered to her or de-
faced, and that the means which the w ill make in this behalf
thall be 1b great and effe·Qual, as these waiiings cannot be lase-
ly kept in that realm\ without dangerous offencre of himr that
hath the cuffody thereof, neither thall1 he that is once know.n to
have them be futfered to hold themi in his hannds. Herew ith [
have at large opened the perils likely to 1all to that a(5tion, an9
the parries therein, and particularly to hiimfeclf that is noHT
openly known to have the polk~iton of thete wrirings, and I
have lettin him lee what surety it (hall bring to the laid caule
and all the parties therein, and to himlelf, that there writngs
may be with Cecrecy and good order commniitedl to the keeping
of' her M/ajelty, that will have them ready· whensoever an de~
th~all be for them, and by her H ghnetTe~s cojuntenance defend
themi and the parties from such wrongfull obje~tiuos as thall be
laid again~t them, otlering at length to him, that it he be not ful-
ly fatiified herein, or doubt that the rceft of the affciates thiall
not like of the deli very of them to her maje~ty in this good man.
ner, and for the intercht rehearsed, that I hall readily·, upon
meeting and conference with them, procure their as sent in this
part ; (a mnatter more caly to offer than to performi) and, laltly,
moving him that (!or the lecrecy and benefit of <be cadre, and
that ber Majelly's good opinion towards bimlelf may be tirmnly
lettledt and confirmedl by his acceptable forwardnels herein) he
would, w~ithout needlers feruple, frankly comitni there writ-
inb to her Majety's goodi cultody for the goodi uses received.
As ter long de~bate he relolved, and raid, that he would unleign-
edly thew and do to her Maje~ty all the pleatiate that be miight
without offcnce to the King his Sovereign, and piejudice to Ihe
associates in the a~ftion, and therefore he would fitti make Iearch
an~d view the laid letters, and herein take ad\ice what hie might

Ve x. 11. Ee d o,

out having concerted with her the manner or circumstances of
perpetrating that crime. That M~ary, inflead of teltifying much
indianation at the deied, or discovering any relentment againit
Bodxwell, who was acculed of having committed it, conti-

nued

do, and how far he might satisfy and content her Majefly ;
promising thereon to give more refbolte answer; and he con-
cluded flatly, that after he had found and seen the writings,
that he might not make delivery of` them without the privity
of the King. Albeit I flood long with him againlt his refolu-
tion in this point, to acquaint the King with this matter before
the letters were in the hands of her Majelly, letting him fee
that his doings there thould admit great danger to the caule ;
yet I could not remove him from it. It may be that he mean-
eth to put over the matter from himself to the King, upon
fight wherof i thall travel effemtally to obtain the King's codrent,
that the letters may be commitred to her Majefly's keeping,
thinking it more easy to prevail herein with the King, in the
prelent love and affeaiocn that he beareth to her Highnels, than
to win any thing at thle hands of the associates in the a~tion,
whereof some principal of them now come and remain at the
devotion of the King's mother; in this I thall Itill call on
Gowrie to search out the coffer, according to his promile; and
as I thall find him mi~nded to do therein, to thall I do my bell
and whole endeavour to effeA the luccels to her Majefty's bell
contentment.

2d December a 98z, from Edinburgh.

BE cAUsE 1GW good opportunity offered to renew the mat-

ter to the EIarl of Gowrie for recovery of the letters in the cos-
ser in his hands, therefore I put him in mind thereof; where-
upon he told me, that the Duke of Lenor had fought earnelth
ly to have had those letter , and that the King did know where
they were, so as they couki niot be delivered to her Majelly
without the King's privity and codrent, and he pretended to
be flill willing to pleal~re her Majelly in the fame, so far as he
may with his duty to the King and to the reft of the associates
in that adion; but I greatly diltrull to effeet this to her Ma-
jefly's pleasure, wherein, nevertheless, I thall do my uttermolt
endeavour·.

W ii I II E R JaffeS V. who put the Earl of Gowrie to death,

A. D. a 584, and seized all his effeats, took care to deitroy his
mother's letters, for whole honour he was at that time extreme-
ly ze~alous;' wherber they have perithed by some unknown acci-
dent; or whether bhey may not flill remain unoblerved among
the archives of lfame of our great families, it is impossible to
determine.

nued to load him with marks of her regard, condu~ted his trial
in such a manner as rendered it impodi~ble to dilcover his guilt,
and soon after, in oppolition to all the maxims of decency or of
prudence, voluntarily agreed to a marriage with him, which
every consideration thould have induced her to detelt. By rthis
verdia, Mary is not pronounced guihty of having contrived the
murder of her husband, or even of having previonflly given her
confeat to his death ; but the is not acquitted of having disco-
vered her approbstion of the deed, by her behaviour towards
h~im who was the author of it.

TH E Other CODClurlon is that which MWurray and his adhe-

rents laboured to eftablith, " That as James, fumtyme Erle of
Bothewile, was the chiefe executor of the horribill and unworthy
murder, perpetrat in the person of umqubile King Henry of
gode memory, lader to our Soveraine Lord, and the Q~ueenis
lauchfull huiband; fa was the of the foreknowledge, counfall,
devise, perfwadar and commandar of the laid murder to be
done."' Good. 2. 20"?.

WatcuI of these conclusions is moll agreeable to the evi-

dence, that has been produced, I leave my readers to deter-
mmne.

Ee 2 INDE X.

# INDEX.

INDE X.

~N. B. The NJumerical L~etters refer to th~e Vol.

and the F;igurcs to the Pagers.

ADAMZS O N, archbilhop of St. Andrews, is excommuni-

cated by the lynod of File, II. a IG. He excommunicated

· his opponents, as y, is reflored by the genieral aiffembly upon
·~conditions, ibid. His mean fubmillion to the general al-

fembly - 13

Albalny, Alexander, Duke of, cabals with his nobles againfl his

brother K. James Ill. I. 48. is made prison~er but escapes to
France, ib~id. concludes a treaty with Ed. IV. of England,

j ~ibid. procures adirtance to savade Scotland on mean condi-

tions, 49. returns to Scotland, and is reltored to favour, ibid.
cabals again, but is forced to fly to France - 5

-Duke of, made Regent during the minority of K. James V'.

·~~ I. 3', 53. after several unfucceisaul ithuggic with the nobi-

lity, he is forced to retire to France, ibid.

A/nson, Duke of, Q Elizabeth long amnues the court of France,

by carrying on a treaty of marriage with him - I. 98

Allen, cardinal, published a book proving the lawfulnels of kill-

ing excommunicated Princes -- ---- II. I09

Alvar, D~uke of, his intrigues, in favour of Q M/ary, II. 25,

28, 37. iS recalled from his government of the Nether-
lands --- .. 4

Aimbafadrcors, their othee - - I· 7 3
Andlrewr St. the archbilhop of, remarkably.cured of a dangerousu

diltemper, I. eI 13. the miotives of hiis oppofstion to the (Q
Regent, r3I, his great influence on thle bench of BIlhops and
weight in Parliament, I 36. governed the chiurch with gRea·t
moderation, I 37. persecutes rhe reformer s, 1 38. perlor ins
great service to the congregation againlt the F`rtlch,, r84. is
impriloned for celebratinig Mars, 248, ruins (~ Mary s affaiirs
by his imprude~nt conduCt,· 37z, & Ireq. is taken priioner ini
D~umbJrron caltlc. and hanged - I.I

----he catlle of , demolnihed by thie French I . c)5
----the prior of , promotes a treaty betw~een the ((Regent

and the reformers, 1. r48. is provoked to leave the co~urt,

I go. is one of the chief promoters of the reformation, 16j.
fomre account and a chara~ter of him, ibid. artful endea-
vours used to undermine him, 164. prefomption of his inno-
cencet of the defrgas charged on him, ibid. is rent by the con-
venuion to invice the Queen to Scotland, 208. is received by
her with confidence and affeftion, zog. reltrains the turbu-
lent Cpirit of the people agaiolt popery. 220. is sent to re-
itrain the licentious pradtices of the borderers, zzfi. executes
his com~million with vigour and prudence, zz6. a conspiracy
against him dilcovered, 213. is create<' Earl of Mar, 235-
becomes obnoxious to the Earl of Huntly, ibid. fee Mar and
Murray.

Angur, Earl of, was the only man who asserted the independency

of his country, I 9, to. a~iames the Regency during the mi-
nority of K. James V. 53 is unable to gain his affeasons, 53-
is attainted and flies into England - 5
-L-Obtains leave to return into Scoriend, II. 78. surrenders
himilelf to K. James V I. 86. he with leveral others leize the
cattle of Stirling to oppole Arran, 9)0. they are forced to fly
into England on the approach of the King with so. army,
ibid. he is attainted and his ellate forfeited, 97. is concerned
in a plot in f~avour of Spain, a 77. is reized and committed
priloner to the ca~lli of Edinburgh, sy8. elcapes arid fies
to the mountains, ibid. offers to submit to a trial, 8 r.
featence is pronounced against him, a 83. he refuses to sub-
mit. - s 3

Anjou, Duke of, a marriage proposed between him and Q Eli-

zabeth II. 23

Anne, a Princels of Denmark, married to K. James VI. II. 169.

her arrival in Scotland and coronation, s p. heads a party
that oppoles the chancellor - - I2

Archbsybops, Bryops, Deans, and Chaptrs~ revived in Scotland

during the King's minority, II. 34. this gives great offence to
many of the clergy, ibid. an ad~ of assembly againlt there of`-
fices, 72. Bilhops made fubjeat to prefthteries and assemblies,
a:7. a great firoke given to their authority, r97. None of
them, parelnt at the Vleen's coronstron ----- 17a

Argyrl Earl of, is apposured to carry the crown matrimonial to

the Dauphin of F'rance, 1. I 46. ofes his interest with the
reformers to make a treaty with the Qtueen Regent, IS48.
leaves her court in refeatment of her treachery, I <;0. refutes
to accede to a treaty with Murray the Regent, 4zz. is loon
after forced to submit, 423. ads as lIeutenant to the
Queen after the Regent's miurder, II. 7. is prevailed on to
join the KingR's party, 19. quarrels with Athole, 48. con-
federates with htm againikt Morton, the Regent, for their
mutual defence, ibid. they remonfirate againlt him to the

King,

King, go, they raile forces against him, g g. negociates a
treaty with him by the mediation of QL Elizabeth, ibid. is
promoted to the odfice of chancellor, 57. the King's autho-
rity delegated to him and Lord Forbes against the popith
L~ords, r86. his forces are defeared in an engagement with
them - --- ibid,

Ari/locracy), predominant in Scotland --I. '95
Armada, Spanith, preparations for it, II. 160. it is defeated 16,-
Arran Eart, is appointed Regent during the minority of Q.

Mary, I. 82. his charafter, ibid. 8 3. codrents to the Cchemes
of England which difguits the public, ibid. becomes fulpici-
ous of the Earl of L~enox, 89. is forced to renounce the
friendibip with England and declare for France, 86. and to
persecute the ref~ormners, ibid. publickly abjures the doatrine
of the reformers, 87, is contemned by on<* half and little
trulted by the other part of the nation, 85. heads the part;-
znns of Fiance and defenders of popery, ibid. artempts in vamn
to leize the murderers of cardinal Beatoun, 94. is Forced to
make a truce with the conspirators, 99. his eldest lon is con-
ditionally excluded all right of' luccelion, 97. his mean cor;-
cellion to the court of France, '05. gets the title of Chatel-
herault, ibid. is undermined by the Q. Dowager, a so, at s.
proposals and arguments for his refagnation, as 2, he codrents
to it, ibid. retradts by the influence of the archbithop of St.
Andrews, as 4. is at last prevailed on and gets advantageous
terms, ibid. fee Chaurlberault.

Arran Eldest lon of the Duke of Chatelherault, joins in an al-

fociation with the reformers, I. 162, narrowly ercapes intend-
ed ruin at the court of France, a 63. is full of reSentment:
againlt the French on that account, ibid. the congregation fol-
licit Q Elizabeh to marry him, zoz. his great imprudence
with regard to Q. Mary, az7. dilcovers a conspiracy againlt
the Queen's favourites, 2J33 lores his reason, II. 57, as im-
priloned by Morton i-i 58
-late capt. Stewart, gets that rutle and ellate, II. 68. is ap-
pointed to conduat Morton from Dumbarton to Edinbu~rgh,
ab. tortures leveral of his servants cruelly, ibid. his infamous
quarriage with the coumters of March, 70, his variance writh
Lenox, 7:. is frultrated in an attempt to rescue the Kirig
at Ruthven. 77. is confined prisoner to the caltle of Stirling,
abid. regains his liberry and the King's regard, 84. re-
lumes has power and arrogance, 84. gets the Ruthven can
Ipirators declared guitlt of high tr eafon, 86. is detelled an
author of a per fecution againit the clergy. 91. is gained
over to Queen Elizabeth'k interelt* 95, 96. gets leveral rorfeic-
ed eflates, 97. his corruption and adrolence, ios. is made
chancellor and has unlimnited power, o3. his venality is
imitated by his wife, ibid. his monfirous tyranny and oil

Ee 4 preion ,

prefllon, I04. his power undermined by Worton the Englith
envoy, I'3. is continied in the cattle of St. Andrews but loon
recovers favouir, at 4. his interest sinks much, as q. is thip-
ped of his honours and Ipoils, and reduced to his original
flation --- -- I r16

Artickle Lords of, their origin and bur~ners, 1. 618. 7o. by whom

chosen, 70. the iubriquent variations and political dfe made of
tbis infitutction ---· --- 7r* 72

Airundel Earl of, is appointed a conmiioner to the conference

at Wefkminfler ~ --c- -- I. 395 & Ceq.

Afbby, ambassador from E :lizabeth to Scotland, 11. I62. his

great promilej to King Jnmes, ibid. his promil~es are soon
forgot, a 64. he is a~hamed andi withdraws privately from
Scoda~nd -- -ibid.

Afghjianon, the frequency of it in Scotland, how accounted

for, 1. 297, 299, several inflances of it its Franice, 299, 300.
a flop put to it there and in Scotland, ibid. several great men
approved of it, 30s, prevailed greatly afterwards II. 173

ABembly of the church of Scotland, the full but feeble and ir-

regular, I. zo8. another assembly. their demands from the
convention, 227, two other assemblies in vain follicit an aug-
mentartion of their revenues, 24t. they addrers Q; Mary in
high fthains of` comnplaints, 281. an fitembly proceeds at Glaf-
g~eow norwirhltanding the King's interdidlion, II. 72. two al-
emblies yield many of the privileges of the church to the
King, 201. declare it lawful for Miniffers to fit in Parliament,
203, zo4 fee Clergey.

Afociation, formed in defence of Q Elizabeth again(t Q Mary

f l. 99-

Atho/e Earl of, the occalon of his quarrel with the Earl of

Argyl, 11. 47. joins with him in opporing Morton the Regent,
ib. dies soon afrer an entertainment at Morton's, 57, fulpicions
of his being poiloned - ibidf.

Au~bigne L~ord de, lecond ion of the Earl of Lenox, arrives in

Scotland from F~rance, II. i60. becomes loon a great favourite
of' K. James, ibidl. high titles and poth bellowed on him, ibid.
nores against himn, appendixe 38r. fee Lenox.

Auffrianr family·, their origin and power -- I. 74

BABING TO N, Anthony, some account of him, II. 120.·
Sthe rife of his conspiracy againlt Q Elizabeth, ibid. th~e
names andi Lcheme of operations of his associates, ra a. they
are betrayed, Icized andl executed - I2a

Bacon, Sir Nicholas, appointed one of the commiironers to

the conference at Wltiminflter - - 396

Baliol john, his claim to the crown of Scotland, I. 8. is prefer-

aed by Ed. 1. so. soon forced by him to trefgn -ibid.

Ballaerd,

Ballard, a tradlicking priest, solicits an invallon of England frorts

Spain, II. I zo, joins in a conspiracy to murder Q Elizaberh,
ra 2, is dilcovered and taken into cultody, I 22, and executed

ibid.

Baross, their jurildialon very extensive, I. 18. the difference be-

tween the greater and lesser whence, 66. three hundred of
them re~monfirate againl1 the condnat of the Q Dowager,
a 26, the lesser admitted by their representatives into Parlia-
ment, 11. ISS. Petition of the leffeir Barons to Parliament,
app. a 69. fee Nobles.

Bajilicon Doron, a book publithed by King James VI. firengthens

his interest in England ---- ------- 11. zo6

Beaton cardinal, made are of by K. James V. to mortify the

nobles, 1- 57, his pretenfrons to the regency on the death
of that prince, 80, forges a tellament of the late King, ibid.
his views how dilappointed, ibid. his charadter, 83, oppoles
the Earl of Arran Regent. 83, excites most of the nation
against the Englith, 8F, seizes the young Queen and her
mother, ibid. cajoles the earl of Lenox, ibid. obliges the Re-
gent to renounce England and declare for France, 86, and
to perfecure the reformers, 87, engroffess the chief dire~ion
of affairs, 88, his double dealing with the Earl of Lenox
relented, ibid.· is murdered, 93, his death fatal to the Catho-
lics, 94, a vain attempt to revenge it, ibid. scandalous reports
concerning him - I--- 1z3

Bedford Earl of, comes as Ambassador from Q; Elizabeth to

witnels the baptifmn of James V). I. 3 s6, has initruations,
ibid. 3'7, his letters to Sir W. Cecil, appendix ago, 292*

298-

Bellenrdon Sir Lewis, judlice clerk, K. James's resident at Lon-

don, II. as 2. joins mn promoting Qe Elizabeth's interelt in
Scotland, ibid. is sent with her Envoy into that country

ibid.

Black Mr. David, miniffer at St. Andrews, his ridiculous and

seditious expreflions in the pulpit, II. r93* '94* '96. being
supported by the clergy, he declines the civil jurifdi~ion, ibid.
is condemned by the privy council, I95, is lentenced by the
King to reside beyond Spey '98

Blackeder captain, and three others executed for the mrurde; of

Darnly I- 354

Boerb/ivs, He~tor, his hillory of Scotland, fomle account of 1. 4
Bohocn Cafrl/e, Q: Mary confined a priforner there I. 384
Bonor, a foreigner, made governor of Ot kney, 1. a 25
Boderers~, an atrempt to red~rain their licentious predices, I. 224,

Q1 Mary vilits themi, 308, a (cutile there in which the Engl th
warden, &lc. are made priloners, 11. 16

Bu~rbrick Lord, affills the Queen Regent in defending Le~ilh

i. I "7

BoIthuell1

Bothwell Earl of, intercepts a ium of money from Edggland to

the congregation, I. 176, favours the Queen Regent, but
refedes at his own houle, a78, his relentment againlt the
prior of St. Andrews, 236, is by hini when Earl of Murray
and Regent fummlooned to a public trial, 268, prevents it by
leaving the kingdom, ibid. a featence of Outlawry againlt
him prevented by the Queen, ibid. is permitted to return,
t76, escapes with her after the murder of Rizio, 296,
some account of his former behaviour, 303, commences a
favourite of the Queen, ibid. 303, the reconciles him to
several Lords, with whom he was at variance, 3o4, he ina-
creases in favour with her, 305, circumitances concurrmng ia
this, 306, he is wounided in attempting to seize one of the
borderers. 309, the Queen's extraordinary regard for hint on
this occallon, ibid. to lecure adherents he obtains a pardon for
Morton and his associates,, 320, propoles the refforation of
the popith ecclefsaltical jurifdidion, 3 21, his views in this
ibid. is fulpedted to be the author of D~arnly's murder, 328,
is charged with it by Lenoxr, 330, but itill favoured by the
Q~ueen, ibid. appointed governor of Edinburgh Ca~lie, ibid.
his trial is burried on, ibid. remarkable partiality in his fa-
vour, 33', L~enol accules himt openly, 332, comts to his
trial with a great retinue, 333, is acquitted by a jury, 334,
the trial universally cedrured, 335, challenges any! that would
accule him, ibid. several ads of Parliament passed in his fa-
vour, 336, he procures an aQ in favour of the reformation,
337, prevails on leveral of the nobles to recommelnd him as
a hulband to the Q~ueen, 338, 339, seizes the Queen on a
journey from Stirling, and carries her to Dunbar, 34*, hisi
view in this, 34z, obtains a pardon under the great Ceal, ibid.
procures a divorce from his wife, 343, carries the CQueen to
the catic of .Edinburgh, ibid. is created Duke of Orkney, ibidi.
and married to the Queen, ibid. is not allowed the title of
K~ing, 344, he watches the Queen very closely, 345, endea-
vours to get the Prince into his cuffody, ibid. is alarmed with
an association of the nobles againlt the Queen and himn, 346,
carries the Queen to the caltle of Borthwickr, ibid. railes
forces against the confederate Lords, 348, he marches againlt
them., 349, propoles a single comibat, 350, this how pre-
vented, ibid. rakes his fall farewell of the Queen, and is
forced to fly, 35', lends for a calket of letters fromn Q:
Mary to him*, 355, they are intercepted by the Earl of
Morron, ibid. his miserable fate, 364* 365, refledion on his
conduA, ibid. copy of his divorce from Lady Jean Gordon,
appendix - --371

-late Francis Stewart, created Earl of Bothwell, II.
166, is im~prisoned for consulting witches, r74, echapes and

rad attempts to breakr into the King's prerence, ibid, retires
to the north, ibid. he and his adherents are attainted, s y6,
fails in an attempt to seize the King, ibid. is taken under pro-
tedion of QElizarbeth, who folicuts for himt, 178, seizes rhe
King's person, s y9, * So, forces him to dilmifs the chancellor
and his other favourites, ibid. and to grant himn a remillion,
ibid. his bold and idrolent behaviour after wards, I 8 , is en-
couraged by the English ambassador, a 83, makes another at-
tempt to come at the King, a 8 , is re pulled and obliged to
fly to the norrb of England, ibid. is abandoned by Quenn
Elizabeth, and forced to fly into Spain and Italy, I88, re-
mains in indigent obs~curity, and is never after reconciled to
the King ---- -- ibid.
- Adam, bilhop of Orkney, perfomals the ceremony of
marriage of Q MIary to the Earl of Bothwell I. 344

Bothwel/baugh, fee Hansilton.
Boulogne, wretted by the French out of the hands of the Englith,

1. r03, they codrent to reflore is and its dependencies to the
Frencch aog

Bcowes, Envoy from Queen Elizabeth, accules Lenox or diflurb-

ing the peace, II. 63, is refused an audience, ibid. is lent to
encourage the conspirators at Ruthven, 78, to enquire about
K. James's correrpondence with the pope 207

Boyd Lord, his amlbitious views in the timne of K. James III.

fruffrated -I.3

-- is prevailed on to join the King's party againit Q Mary,

II. 20, joias the Ruthven conspirators 76

Brienne, Count de, comes as ambassador from France to witners

the baptism of K.Ja. VI - I. 3'6

Brwce, Robert, his claim to the crown of Scotland, i. 8, his

grandson asserts his right and vindicates the honour of his
countr y, t0, he alttem~pts to reduce the power of the nobles

r 39

a priest, employed by the King of Spain to leduce the

Scots nobles II. t66

---- Mr. Robert, a prefbyterialn miniffer, performs the ce-

remlony of the coronation of K. Jam~es's Queen II. s ys

----- Edward, abbot of Kinlers, acquits himfrelf with ad-

drdls and reputation as ambassador at the court of England

- II. 204, 2og.

---- Mr. Robert, a mlinilter, his resolution in refusing to

publith the King's account of Gowrie's conspiracy, II. z z .
is deprived and barnithed on that account -ibid.

B rbanran George his hiltoryl of Scotland, some account of,

I. 4, rmkson his dialogue de jure Regni, as 2.
alone accules Q Mar y of a criminal correspondence with
Rizio, 29s, approved of affallination, 30 s, his partiality in
orcrlooking an adQ of Parliamlent io favour of the reformse

(100

tion, 33' , ttends the Regent into England when called on
to, acenfie Q Mary, 286, was one of~ the preceptors of K.
James VI. II. 48, comimended for his great genius 256, 257.

Bur~legh, fee Cecil
Burroughs, when thir~ repreiented in Pariiament -I. 197

CA IS John, a declaration of his in name of Q E~lizabeth

to the L~ords of G~rainge and Lethington, app. -' 3

Caithne/s Earl of, his protelt at the trial of 130thwell for the mur-

der of D~arnly'. -1

Cal~vin. the patron and refferer- of prelbyterian church govern-

ment ---- --- -- I. 20;

Camden, lome milbkes of his 1. 312, 339
CadnOngate, near Euinblulgh, a Parliament held there I.a
CardAn, lome account of him, I. r13, his remarkable cure of

the bithop of St. Andrews ---- ibid.

Cacrry Sir G~eorge, sent amballador from Q Elizabeth to en-

courage the conrpirators at Ruthven ------ II. 76

-- Robert, lent by CQ Elizabeth to sooth K. James after the

death at his mother, 11. I<;2, is not permitted to enter Scot-
land, ibid. was~ the 6rti that brought K. James intelligence of
the death of Q~ Elizabeih 243. 244

Caf·er of letters from Q; Mary to Bothwell seized b~y the Earl of

Morton, 1. 355j, her enemies avail themfetlves much of' them

- ibid.

Cafits Earl of, jo~ins the King's party 1 I. 20
Cycllenru, the: F·rench ambafAhdor, is employed to procure the

cons~ent of his court to her marriage with Darnly, I. 2h2, he
endeavours to make up the differences between the Queen
and him, 3or,, his interceifon in behalf of Queen M/ary

*wk----- - - - J 1. Ia 7o, IoS

Catharine, of Medicis, allurmes the government after the death

o! F·.ancis II. her lon, I. 204, her harth treatment of Q;
Ma~iy, ibid. her views in behavinig more friendly to her, ass,
hiemis her whole endeavours to dettroy the Protellants, 11.
2 i. her artful condua~ with that view ibid.

Crc.·/, hi:: great capacity asl a miniller, I. 'ge, za 2, is employ-

ed to ni·gat;iie a peace with France, ibid. over-reaches the
F'rench amrbal~lador in the treary of Edinburgh, ibid. is aS-
poin ted a comm ni·Iinner to the conference at W etimintler, 396
tent~ by Q Eizaibeth with propoials to Q ~Mary, II. r I, has
an inter\ tew w ith her which excites Q Elizabeth's jealoulv,
4 4, is 'rcated harthly by V; Elizabeth for conltntjing to QL
M~l rv's dc:lh - -sq

..------ Sir Ro~cbert, lon to the former, headls the party againt

httal, 11. 229), his charadter, ibid. his great alliduity, ibid.

CD(US~

enters into a private correspondence with K. James, 234, a
letter from him to his MAjettY, arp. ------- 399

Celibacy of the popith clergy·, a chief engine of their policy

- - 1. r 20, 4 3

ChaRles V. Emperor, his great power, --- 1. 73

and unlimrited ambition, 75, is checked by Francic 1. ibid.

~-- King of F~rance makes a league writh ~Eiza~elb, II. 28
C'hate/betault Duke of, that title confrerred on the Earl ofr Arran,

Regent or Scotland, I. s04, his right of fuccellion to the
crown of` Scot!and main~tained, 132, e~n'ers a protetalftion to
five his right, '34~, joins the reformers in endeavouring to
expel the F~rench army. 162, 163, joins in association with
them, . I, is looked on as the head of the congregation, 162,
his purillanimity, sy s, becomes obnoxious to QL Mary, z z7,
his jealousy of the prior of St. Anidrews, 20j, deprived of
his F~rench pension, as i, is alarmed at the Earl of Lenox's
returnb toe Scotland, z 57, an accomnmodation brought about

byteQeen's influence, zj8, adheres to Murray in oppo-

Sing the Queen's manriage, 278, is pardoned on his humble
application, but forced to reside in France, 280. his pardi-
zans grumble at Murray's being ad vanced; to the Regency,
367, returns from France and heads the Queen's adherents,
403, is made her lieutenant-general, ibidl. his reso~lution waver-
ing, the Regent commirs him prilbner to the ca(ale of Edin-
burgh, 404, is let at liberty by Kiikildy and joins the Queen's
party, II. 5. is proclaimed trairor by Lenort the new Regent,
9), is reconciled to Morton the Regent, 40, articles of a treaty
between them, ibid. his death -46

Church of Scotland, revolutions in it after the union of the

crowns, II.. z 50 , 2; , fee afe-mbly·, clerg.S'

Church Lands annexed to the crown by Pariiamient II. 15-7
C/ans, the in~itition and nature of 1. I. 2
Clergy popith, their great riches and powver, I. 96, a sy, were

made dle of by K. :Jm. V. to fopprefs the noble·, F7, j;8,
made a considerable body· in Parliamrent, as 8, their grene in-
fluence over the lairy, r i9, they engroled learning, r 20, and
held miany of the chief emlploymnents, ibid. their power en-
creased by Celibacy, ibid. they leized the ellateis of the in-
tefiate, a zr, and tried a!I matrimoni3l and tellamentary
causes, ibid. become obnoxious to the laity, i as, their ge~Fat
corrup~tion, wvhence, ib~id. there of Scotland particull~y diffo,-
late, a 23, their we s~k d~efence of theilr tenets, ibid. try in
vain to impole f-ilc mirac~les, ib!J. their impolitic condutt to
the ref ormers -------- --~-- a 39

---- reformned, try in vain to recover the revenues of thre

·-church, 1. 208, 203, 211I, caule all teli~ts of popery, to be
destroyed, ibidl. a new regulation concernin3 their revenues,

27, 231, they· are no gainers by it, ibid, their thpends

what

what in those days, ibid. are offended at the moderation
of their leaders, z49, occasion a tumult among the people,
ibid. more complaints of their poverty, 258, 3as, are Jea-
lous of QMary, ibid. the Cmall allowance appointed to sup-
port them all, 32s, their application for payment of their ai-
pends of little effelf, 367, trelh complaints of the deficiency
of their funds for their maintenance, 4 s4, 4 a , are put off
with fair words and promiles, 454, archbithops, &c. intro-
duced among them by Morton, II. 34. 35, their grievances
under his adminiffration, 49, they approve of the Ruthven
conspirators, 78, by favouring them they provokre the King,
87, ievere laws made against them, go, 91, they of Edia-
burgh fly into England, ibid. as do leveral others that were
molk eminent, ibid. more vigorous measures againit them,
97, they obtain no redress on the reitoration of the exiled
Lords a :6, reprelent their reances to Parliamaent, Sa
maintenance provided for thmby Parliament, a 57, they pre-
vail to get Presbyterian government eltablithed by law, 175.
their zeal againlt the Popith Lords, a 8 I, their rtqh proceed-
ings, s90, sg', they crea a standing Council of the Church,
192, vindicate one of their number who declined the civil
jurifdiaion, r94, r95, their faonding Council ordered to leave
Edinburgh, ibid. this occasions a violent tumult there, I96,
s98, they ofe their utmoit efforts to Cpirit the people, '99,
are deserted and fly to England, zoo, their power greatly re-
duced, ibid. are prevailed on to give up many of their privi-
leges, sos, zoz, are reltored to a leat in Parliament, zog,
this violently oppoled by many of them, 20s, but carried in
their ge(;neral Assembly, ibid. those entitled to this privilege

ar adunder many regulations and reltriaions, aso, they
are brought under great fubje~tion, ass, the revolutions aw
mong them since the Union of the crowns - ao, 25'

Clintoan Lord, appointed a commiironer at the conference at

Wefkminfler -- 1 . 396

Corkburn of Ormilton, receives a Cupply of money from the

Englilh to the congregation, I. 180, is intercepted and rob-
bed of it - - ibid.

Coin in Scotland, some account of -. 1.1 sy . II 4
Commsfa~lrie appointed to try caules in place of the Spiritual

Court, I. 248, they are deprived of all authority 32r

Confef~fonr of faith by the Reformers, consented to by Parlia-

ment - I- 199

Congregationr, the Protestants difkinguilhed by that name, 1.

* 44, their leaders enter into an association, a 45, are involv-
ed in difficulties, t74, apply to Q Elizabeth Tor alliltance,
r75, money feat them by her intercepted 166, make a rath
and delperate attempt on Leith and are repulled, syy, are

niO

no less unfortunate in a recond fkirmith, ibid. are quite diC-

irted and retreat to Stirling, ibid. are joined by the body of
tenobles, r78, their army dwindles away, r ?9, are ani-

znated by Knox, ibid. they apply again to Q Elizabeth, 179,
their parties harals the French, a 84, are stillted by a fleet
f~rom England, ibid. conclude a treaty at Berwick with the
D. of Norfolk,~ s85, the design and rubitance of this treaty,
186, negociate a peace with France, '92, articles of the
treaty, 193, they reap many advantages from it, '95, fee
Re for mation.

Cosrwrnan, National, framed in defence of the King and Go-

vernment, II. 163, the nature and reafonablenel's of it, r64.
the progrefa of it sInce ----- ---- ibid.

Courtepy of Scotland, what ---I. (32
Craigq, a minilter, boldly teffifies againlt Q Mary's marriage

with Bothwell - . 344

Cra~wford. Capt. of Jordan H-ill, furprizes Dumbarton Calile,

II. s 4. the difticulties of that enterprize '

a

L-~ Earl of, one of the heads of the Spanith faaion, II.

r6r, r69, offers his service to the K. of Spain, ibid. joins in
rebellion againit the King, r68), is forced to submit to him,
ibid. and imprisoned a thet time ' 69

Crichton. Regent during the minority of K. James 11. his barba-

rous policy - 1. 44. 45

---- a jeluit, a plot against Q Elizabeth dilcovered by his

means II. gg

Ctiminals, a remarkable inflance of the difficulty of bringing

them to juffice ---- r

-

Croc du, the French Ambassador, refules to countenance Q;

Mary's marriage with Bothwell, I. 3~44 atte~pts in vain a
reconciliation between the Queen and the confederate Lords,
349, mediates a truce between the K;ing's and Queen's party
in Scotland II g 7

Crowun matrimonial of Scotland grantedi by Parliament to the

Dauphin of` France, I. r32, deputies appointed to carry i:,
but are prevented ' 36

Cuningham Rob~ert, appears at the trial of Bothweil in nale of

the Earl of Lenoxr, I. 334, demands a delay, which is re-
fuled - .--~- ibid.

Crde, one of Q. Mary's recretaries, is leiz~ed and carried pri-

foner to London, II. * 2, s 26, is produced an evidence
againlt her '33

D3.

D rnly, H-enry Lord, propofedn as a husband to QL MaIry, I.

255, hrs right of fauccedlion confsdered, ibid. 296, is per-

' mitted to vilir the court of Scotland, z60, arrives there and

quickly

quickly gains the Queen's heart, 26r, his chara~er, 163(
difgults leveral of the nobles, particularly Murray, ibid. culw
tivates a familiarity with David Rizio, z64, is delpiled on
that account, 26;, grows intolerably idfolent and haughty,
zyo, Ichemes to as filinate Murray, 27 2, a plot to seize and
fend him to England prevented by the Qa~een, ibid. evi-
dences of this, z73* 275, his marriage with the Queen cele-
brated, E7l, is honoured with the title of King of Scotland,
ibid. is imiplacable with refpedt to the exiled nobles, t84,
los~es the Qu~een's affeation by his untoward behaviour, 289,
demands the Crown matrimonial, ibid. becomes fulpicious of
Rizio's ill offices with the Queen, 289, his resolution to be
aIvenged of him encouraged by the nobles, ago, articles a-
greedD on between them for that purpole, 292, Heads the
conspirators who perpetrate the murder, 294, confines the
Queen after it is committed, ibid. prohibits the meeting of
the Parliament, ibid. makes his escape with the Queen, agg,
295, her hatred to him increale~s, 30s, is negicaed by her
and treated with little refpedt by the nobles, 304, resolves to
leave Scotland, 307, his wayward and capricious behaviour,
ibid. he writes the reason of his condu8t to the Queen, 308,
his itrangde behaviour at the baptilmn of the Prince, 3'7, a
falle reafo alledged for this confuted, 3r9, retires to his fa-
ther at Glalgow, 320, falls sack there, 322, conjeaureS con-
cerning his distemper, ibid. is neglected by the Queen, 3z3.
the afterwards vilits and expresses aff~eaion for him, 324, he
is prevailed on by her to come to Edinburgh, 326, is lodged
in a separate houle, ibid. he is murdered there, 327, his cha-
radter, ibid. a proclamation iffied for dilcovering the mur-
derers, 318, a remiss enquiry made into it, 319, 335, Capt.
Blackadder, and three others executed on that account, 367,
the confetlion of Morton the Regent at his death concerning
the murder, II, 69, paper of obje~tions of the Court of Eng-
land againi2 his marriage with V;Mary, App. a differtaition
concernaing hiis murder, at the end of vol. 11.

David i. K. of Scotland, his profution to the church a:7
-- II. troubles during his minoriry ---· 1. 28
Dawsf~on, sent into Scotland by Q Elizabeth, as a spy on the

French Amnbaffador, II. 8 r, is tent to gain Arran's interelt
to Q Eizabeth, 96, this he soon accomplithes, ibid. brings
the warrant for QS Mary's death at Q Elizabeth's desire,
42, I 43, is charged by her with dilobeying her orders, 1S=>
is impriloned, tried and fined, and loses all favour, ibid. ob-
jea~ions againit him in the caule of the late Scottiah Queen,
App. 397

Befe, Monsieur, is feat with a lupply of forces to n(lilt the

French against the Ernglifh in Scotland, I. 103, his success
there ibid.

Diycipline,

Dsyciphar, in the Church, the firik bookr of composed, J. toS,

ishy objedked against in a convention of the States, ibid,
another attempt in favour of Church ditcipline frultrated,

- - II. 7s

Degathe power and property of that family, I. ag, they

afieto independency, 44, Will. Earl of, murdered by K.

James II. 45, his son endeavours to reseat it, ibid. is f'orced
to fly into England, -ibiid.
SWilliam, Q Mary committed a prisoner to his castle of
Lochievin --3.
- George, brother to the above, allifts the Queen mn
making her escape -368

le Archibald, one of Darnly's murderers, II. a 9, under*

goes a mock trial for that crime and is acquitred, ibid. is rent
Ambassador to England, ibid. letter from hign to the Q~of
Scots, 357, app. to the King -S 34

Dlrur, Sir Wnt. enters Scotland with all army to support the

Queen's party, II. 7, they join him and drive! off the Queen's
ibid. he procures a truce betweekr the King's and Queen's
parties, 29, comes with forces to alflt Morton in belieging
the battle of Edinburgh, 4s, which is forced to surrender

ibid.

CL Sir D~rUe, is appointed one of QL Mary's kreepers

Dwdley, Lord Robert, recommended by Q. Elizabeth as a hdu-

band to Q. Mary, I. a~a. why a favourite of Q~ EliZabeth's,
ibid. is highly promoted by her, eg53,hi blintuation extremely
delicate, a 54, becpmes fulpicious of Cecil ibid.

Dmearbron Caftic, furprized and taken in the King's name by

the regent -- I. , 6

Dary, a minister of Edinburgh, hanilhed fromn his charge by

K. James, for his free invelctives againit the courtiers, II. 74.
after being: reftered he is driven fr om It a lecond time for ap-
proving the Raid of Ruthven. -87

Dirbwrgb, is takten and burnt by the Englith, I. 90, a great
I~fray there between the French and Scots, 1oy, is seized
by the Reformers, a 54, its inhabitants are tertibly alarmed
by the French, 177, a treaty there with the French and Eng-
)lh, '93, a loan demanded of it by QMary, RS t, whic~h
is granted for the superiority of Leith, ibsd. the trea~ty of in-
filld on b~y Ci Elizabeth, 329. is poff'cifed by the QPec'sC'
party, II. 5, and fortifted by them, a 8, the City and
Ca~lti hold out against the King's forces, 27, is reduced
to great Rraits by famine, z8, is relieved by a truce, ibid.
the citizens take upon arms to promote !he King's marriage,
= 70, they rife again and intiilt the K~ing and h-is minister

VoF

x.

1. on

on the murder of the Earl of Msrray, t75 , edif the King
against Hutntly, a 8<, a violent tumult there on account of
the Clergy, t96, rg8, they are feverety punithed fbr it by thre
K~ihg, 2or, their minillers return to their charges, 2og, di-
vided into parithes and number of mnithiters increased, Whid.
they decline pubhlhing the account of G~ow'rit con piracy,
3say, alI, except onle who is banithed, are persuaded by the
Iting to do it -226

Edwarurd I of England, deit~royed the public archives of Scoi-

land, I. 4, is made umpire between Bruce and Baliol, 7, his
art to acquire the fisperiorityp of S'cotliand, ibid. his wars with
the Scoris under R. Bruce - a6, 39

Eglingtron, Earl of, is p~revailed on to join the K~ing's paorty

Elizarbet3, her peaceable accellion to the Crown of England,11

I. ' 36, supports the congregation in Scotland, s ys, is Ipar-
ing in h~er liapplies, I t6, ref~lves to support them on a second
applicatio~n, ISo, her good conduat in matters of i(fo~r-
tance, 18r, motives that determined her to alhllI then, ;bid.
t82, her deliberate an'd resolute condilaf, 185, sends a (trong
fleet to their aliftattee, ibid: concludes a treaty with them,
ibid. 186, her right to the Crown of England, alretted by
Francis and Marry fnI France. r94, obtasks advantageous
terms for the Scots, '95, is follicited by the parliament of
Scorland to marry the Ea2rl of Arran, zoz, this the declines,
so3, the feeds of her diftentent with 'Qtt n Mary, so I,
ass. her jealou'y of the faccelion, ibid. 21'6. her exce~ive
vanity and jealouff of Mary's beauty, 217, her dillimulation
to h'er, ibid. reinfers her a safe condue&, ibid. Ands to congra-
tolate her arrival in Worland, z z , refuses a confkflion made
by Queen Mary, sy,: her jealoidy of her rif t betrayed her
arrto mean ati'ons, ibrd. her cTeemblanite 't Hiet. VII( 2 4-
a pedfonal interview with Q MWary proposed, 242, thre ar'-
fully declines it, ibjid. her niews in regalrd tro Q. Mary's mar-
riage, 24i* 246, atfurmes a dilagreeable authority, ibld names
one for a hothand to Q: Mary, 25 z, the different qualifica-
tions of her minilttrs and favourites, ibid. diffembles with
Q ML~ary about her mantiage, 255. and likewise with regard
to Lord Darnly, Ibid. affr~onts Queen Mary, by 'her insinuation
concerning Lenor, 257, is perplexed about the marriage of
the Scottith Cueen, 26~0, permits Darnly to ·viTit the Court of
Scotland, ib~id. affels to declare againlt Q 'Mary's inarriarge
to him, 264. her reaforts for this condud, 266, her great dil-
fimalation In that affair, my n, her harth and deceitful beha-
uiour to Mlurray and his associates who had 6ed to her, 279,
is firuck at hearing of the birth of James VI. 304, cod~ents
to Itand godmothen to him, 30s, the Parliament addrels
her to fettle the fisccellon, 3t I, this greatly embarraffecs her,
ibid. the fooths and gains her Parliament, 3' 3, endeavoutr

to accommodate her differences with Mary, 3r9, waries to
her to delay the trial of Darnly's murderers, ~333 interpoles
in her behalf when a prisoner, 356, her ambassador is refuf'ed
accers to Queen Mary, ibid. Ihe o~ffer afllitaned to the other
nobles, 357, her deliberations concerning h ipflo
Mary on her arrival in E~ngland, 375* 376 t refolv es to> detain~loH fQ
her rhere, 377, her motives to this conduet, ibid. 378, lends
her letters of condolence and gives orders to watch her con-
dust, ibid. the gladly accepts the oftece of umpire between
her and her fubjeats, 379. 380, receiv~es a very prelfTng letter
from Q. Mary, 382, her precautions ngainf1 her, jS3, ap-
points commiioners to hear CtMary and her accuferc, 387,
ber important situation on that occarion, ibid. her views in
this affairs, 388* 389, receives the Regent's demands, 302,
removes the Conference to Wetmimater, 393, her mean arti .
fices to get the evidences of QMary's guilt from the Regent,
399, treatshry with greatr rigour, ibid. writes a harth let-

terto Mryibd. hedifmiffes the Regent without ap-

proving or condemning him, 40s, but secretly supports his
prty, ibid. makes prop~oC" s to the Regent in her favour, 404,
Nofolk's projeat concealed from her, 40· , 408, diicovers and

defears a rebellion in QL Marty's tavour, 4: a, 4' 3, resolves to
deliver her op to the Regent, 4' 5, her great concern at his
death, II. 3, continues to encourage faasions in Scotland, 4.
her political conduat with regard to Lenox, /, 8, is excom-
municated and deprived of her kingdom, &rc. by the Pope,
8, 9, sUPPOrts the King's Party in Scotland, and namles Lenor
to be Regent, ibid. propoles a treaty of accommodation be-
tween Qseen Mary and her fubjeas, a 0, procures a cessation
of hqftilties. 9, sends properals to Queen Mary, ibid. her ar-
tifices in the condua of this affair, a 2, appoints commiifon-
ers to trame a treaty, a 3, finds a pretence to render their
meeting fruitlers. r4, a marriage proposed between her and
the D. of Anjou, zz, 23, deciales openly againlt the Queen's
part3, 2!1, concludes a treaty with France, 28, hecr motives
for negaciating a peace between the two parties in Scotland,
37. 38, is jealous of Cecil's interview with QMary, 43, ne-
gotiates a treaty between Morton and his adverlhries, 56, her
adfwer to K. James's demand of a poifellion of an eillate in
England, ibid. a marriage between her and the D. of Alen-
90n propoled, 98, interpoles in behalf of Morton, 63, her
measures in ordecr to save him, 65, countenances the confpi-
rators at Ruthven, 78, is alarmed at a conspiracy againit her,
93, 94, the designs of Q; Mary's adherents against her, 95.
endeavours to recover her interell in Scotland and gains A~rran
to her interett, 95, amules Q;Mary with a fruitlers negaciast -
on, 98, a new conspiracy again(\ her. 10, anr association for-
med for her defence, 99, her fulpicious of Queen M~ary,

Ffa 100~,

roo, her life endangered by a conspiracy, rog, this how dif-
covered and prevented, ibid. occasions an extraordinary fla-
tute for her preservation, 106, is in a dangerous ficuation from
the progress of the holy league, a so, endeavours to form a
confederacy of the Proteitant Princes, ibid. and to proceed
with rigour again~t QL Mary, ibid, as 1 , advances her interest
in Scotland, and propoles a league with it, as 2, fertles a
penrion upon K. James, s 13, concludes a treaty with Scot-
land, as 8, account of Babington's conspiracy againlt her,
I z , I 23, her dillimulation after Q Mary's conviation, :35.
136, her answer to King James's intercellion for her, a38.
her farther dilirmulation and anxiety, Iqo, signs the warrant
for her execution, t42, her speech to Daviron on that occar-
sion, ibid. affeAs to lament Q. Mary's death, '50, several
m~arks of her artifice in that affair, ibid. as s, the endeavours
to sooth K. James, 'i 31 Provocations given by e oSan
r61, prepares to meet its relentment, ibid. 1~,edaor
to secure Scotland, ibid. tries to prevent K. James's marriage,
a 69, follicits him to treat coalpirators again8 him withr-
gour, 178, evades the decilson of K. James's right of fuccef-
sion to the Crown of England, zo7, is dilguited at leveral
of his procedings zo9, dilcovers his correlpondence with
the Pope, ibid. fret grounds of her fulpicion, 219, her con-
duaf with regard to the Earl of Essex, 23o, 233, her irrefo-
lution concerning his death, 233, and great concern after it,
ib. receives ambassadors from K. James with regard and in-
creases his fublady, a 34, her last illnels, 237, conjeatures
concerning the caules of her melancholy, 239, her death,
240, and charader, ibid. 14** 54:, declared rhe K, of Scots
her successor, ibid. some of her letters, app. 272, 291* Soo,
3@'. 30s. 3' 5. 3 s6, 320, 336.

£/phindon, fecretarry to K. James VI. deceives him into a cor-

refpondence with the Pope, II. 208l, is tried and found guilty
of high treason, 209, and pardoned on the Qlseen's Inter-
cellion -. - ibid.

England, the English seize and detain K. James I. of Scotland

long a prisoner, i. 29), the nobles there humbled, 32, had
early two houles of Parliament, by7, 68, they invade Scotland,
go, their depredations there, 9t, 92, a peace between Eng-

land Frnce an Sctlad, }3,invade Scotland again, 98,

gain a great vi ory.98, 99, atproves of little advan tage to
t~hem, s ot, they force the Scots into a cloler union with
France, soi, conclude a peace, so5, an Englilh fleet atrrwes
in Scotland to affilt the congregation, a 84, a peace concluded
between them, I8C, they enter Scotland and beliege the
French in Leith, a 86, are leveral times repulled, 188, caules
of their bad luccefa, ibid. a 89, articles of a trcaty of peace,

a 9z,

r92, they quit Scotland, '99, refleations on the right of iuc-
cedlion to their Crown, i 4, aa 5, the Parliament favours Q;
Mary's right of fucceion, asy, a league between England
and France, II. z8. between England and Scotland, r 18, the
narional covenant adopted in Englanrd -- 63

Entails with what view introduced --* . '9
Epircopal government in the Church, some account of, I. zo6,

an attempt to revive it, II. 34. 35, it is abolithed by the Al-
fembly, 73, JurifdiC~ion abolilbed, r73, fee Archbi/bys.

Elrrl, Earl of, one of the heads of the Spanith famton, II. 16z,

his offers of service to the K. of Spain, a 66, appears in rebel-
lion, 168, is forced to submit to the King, ibid. imprisoned
for a thort time, r69, joins in another conspiracy, I 77, as fum-
moned by the King to surrender, ibid. offers to submit to a
trial, x 8 , sentence pronounced against him - 83

Erjkine of Dun, is employed by the Queen-Regent to deceive

the Protefiants, I. I50, his resentment of this usage ibid.

---- Lord governor of Edinburgh Castle, aa~s a neutral part

between the Queen-Regent and the Congregation, I. 178, re-
ceives the Queen-Regent into the Caftie, I 87, is created Earl
of Mar, a 39, fee Mar.
- Alexander, has the chief direAions of the education of
K. James VI. II. 48, admits some of the nobles to make
complaints to him againit Morton the Regent, 50, is turned
out of Stirling Ca~le by his Nephew the Earl of Mar 53

Efnewal,~ the French Envoy, endeavours to obitrudt a treaty be-

tween England and Scotland- II. Is 8

Efex, Earl of, let up by the Englith Papills as a candidate for

the Crown, II. I87, heads a party in England, a29, his cha-
rader, ibid. is greatly dittin ilbed by the s~een, 230, fa-
vours the K. of Scots, ;ibsd". obtains the otlices of Lord
Lieutenant and Commander in Chief in Ireland, ibid. is une
fuccefsful in that expedition, ibid. receives a harth letter
from the Queen, ibid. returns to England and is confined,
231, is tried and cedfured, ibid. endeavours to spirit up King
james, ibid. his harth and frantic conduat, z32, is again taken
into cuffody, z43, his death, ibid. his son and associates are
rellored to therr honours after the accellion of King James

- - 234

Europe, the flarte of, at the beginning of the Sixteenth Century

I. 7 s

E~xcommunication, a terrible engine of the Popith Clergy I. rat

FEL TON, an Englilhman, fixes the Pope's excommuni-

caonof4Elibeh on the gates of' the Bilhop of` L~on-

don a palace - II. 9

F~indoan, M/. de la M/otte, Ieat by the French King to interpose

for King~ Jamnes when contined by the Ruthven confpiraton~,
II St, is forced to returnl without faccel's ibid.

F~l:wbd govearnme~nt, its rigin and arillocratical genius, L.I 2, I 3.

caules which limijted the power of feudal monarchs, a 4,
f u~dl vassals liable to few raxes, a 9. a remnarkable initancee
of' the feeblenel of1 lendall government, 1 7, the molk perfeQ
idea oi th·: fceudal ly~tem, how attained, 36, 37, slate of it in
Englilnd, 65, 6~6, and in Scortand 67, 68

I·;e, a populous and powerful county much devoted to the con-

gregation, Is 8 3, is dettroyed and plundered by the French,
ibid the ly~nod of, excommunicates the archbilhop of St.
Anrdrews for comtumacy, 11. It 6, they excommunicate the
p plilh, Lords -- ·- -- ....--- r8t

FolhbS Lord, wGith the Earl o~f A~rgyl, is reni againt the popith

L~ords, II. 185, are def~eated by them - i;6

Fordurn, John de, his hubtcry of Scotland whenl wrote 1 4
Forfer Sir John, warden of the Eniglish border, a Ccuffe betweeri

him and the Scots I. , :

Fartheringay Calile, Q Malry's imnprifoament, trial and death

there --- -- II. 1 26, r 47

France,~ the codcque-nces of r he Cubver sion of the feudal go.

vernment there, L. 72, a body of French arrive in Scotland
to support the Catholics, 95i, they reduce the cattle of St.
Andrews, ibid. another party of them arrive there, so3, their
tranfacdions there, ibid. 1o6, conclude a peace with England,
I09,) theirs politic conlduG, ibid. 103, they leave Scotland,
it~id., their artifices in a treaty of marriage between the Dan-
phin and the Q of Scots* I 3' t, 32, endeavours to expel the
Fri-nch army out of Scotland, a 98, another party of them
arrive there and fortity Leith, t62, they exalperate the peo-
ple by their idrolence, ibid. they are feat againlt the congre-
gTation, a 83, they deltoy and plunder F;ife, and are much
hairraffed by parties of the congregarton, t84, are greatly a-
larmed by the arrival of the Englilh fleet, ibid. they return
to Leith greatly harassed and exthaulted. :59, are berseged
there by the English and the clongregation, r88. they gain
thveral advanitages, ibid, a 89, the~ir motives for concluding
a peace, r9!, negotiations son thiat purpore, 192, articles of
the treaty, r93. '99, they leave Scotland, 209, the French
advile 4 Mary to m~oderate meaforecs, 2 I0, their proporals
by an ambassador rejeded, ibid. they agree to Qcueen Mary's
miarriage with Lord Darnly, 263, the licentioufnels of their
morals 329

Fsancer, King of, a copy of' his direaiions sent to Scotland, app.

346

Frri·;s~~ i. gives a check to the amabirious proje6t of Charles V.

1. ;4, 75, his fIdelity to the Scots, 9:. his death 96

F·rnacis

l1+ancis II. comes to the crown of France, I. a 60, his charader,

ibid. 2og, is guided by the Duke of Guile and cardinal of
Lorrain, ibid. 16s, he treats the Protellants with great ri-
gour, s p, hisr death so3

G.

G IPSO RD , DoAor and Gilbert, their notion concern-

ing the lawfulnels of killing heretical excommunicated

Princes, II. a so. they join in a coo pliracy to kill Q Eliza-
beth, ibid. Gilbert being gained by Wai~ngham betrays his
associates s a2, employed to carry on a foreign correlpondence
with Q Mary 123

Glamis, Lady, is condemed to be burnt for witchcraft .8

SLord, chancellor, intimates the King's order to BWIorton
to surrender the Regency, II. So, is killed in a rancounter at
Stirling - 3

..---the tutor of, joins the conspirators of Anthrben, II. 76,
his bold Speech to King James, 77, he with the other confpi-
rators leize the cattle of Stirling and ered their Itandard, 89,
he is attainted and his eflate forfeited 97

.Glago~w, bilhop of, a note of his concerning the Qlueen of Scot-

land's dowry, app. 343

Glecrair* Earl of, joins the Ruthven conspirators II. 75* 76
·Glenliews the battle of -11. 186
Gorctn Sir John, a fcuffe is the theets of Edinburgh betwecs

him and Lord Ogirvy, 1. a 36, being confined for it, he
snakes his ecacpe, ibid. when ordered by the Queen to fur-
render himlelf he takes up arms againlk her, t36, 237* 23 *
is defeated and together with his brorker made prisoners, 240,
he is beheaded and his brother pardoned -ibid.

Gordon, Lord, let at liberty 276

C~-Sir Adam, exer ts hidfelf for the Queen's interest in the
north, II. sy, his charadter and good condua as a soldier,

Gozurie Earl of, joins in a conspiracy to seize the King at Rurh-

ven, 11. /6, is vilated and pardoned by the King after his
eleape, 83, becomes fulpedecd and is ordered for France, 89,
delays his voyage, and is taken into cu~tody, ibid. he is nried
and executed -- o
Lporurie, John and Alexander, lons of the above, their charac-

ter and conspiracy, II. za 1, the furprrifina circumitances of
that remalrkable tranfa~ion, 20t, leveral d7fferent conjeatures
concerning it, 216. 225, their dead bodies brought into Par-
liament and condemnned. 226, their eflares and honours f(,(-
CWired, andi name abolithedl for ever, ibid. differtene acouI to
of I)his as fair publilhed but not fatisfardtory, 22,, 228, fee

lh f ven.c~

Graham. Sir David of F~intry, accused of a conspiracy with the

popith Lords in favour of Spaini, II. a77, a78, is convifted
and beheaded -ibid.

Gray matter of, fame account of him, II. tet, he becomes a

favourite of King James VI. ibid. is glained to Q. Elizabeth's
interest, i02, betrays QL Mary, ibid. pertisades K. James to
write: a halrth ands unduritial letter to her, rso, joins with othere
in promoting QLElizabeth's intere(1 in Scotland, Ias , his
treachery when sorn to intercede for QMary, Iqi, his bale-
nels dilcovered, he is dirgraced, a 94, his vain attempt against
secretary Maitiand, ibid. afts in Italy as a spy from the court
of England, 207, a memorial of his for his Majelly, app.
36i4, 3"7, to the recretary of Rtate -369

Guile D~uke of, his violent counsels with regard to the Scots, I.

161, is murdered at tbe siege of Orleans -245

-- his intrigues against Q Elizabeth, II. 95, 96, is a princi-

pal promoter of the holy league, I to, 160, drives the French
King out of his capiral -------- ibid.

H.

IJA DDInG'T UNr0Cr?, seized and fortified by the Eng-

Slilh, 1. ro·, is relieved by the French - 03

Handi~on, the rife of that family, I. 30, arbitrary proceedings

of Mlorton the R~egent against it, II. 57, fee Chatelberault.

---- of Bothrelhaugh, taken priloner at the battle of Lang-

iide, I. 383, is tried and condemned for rebellion, ibid. ob-
tains a pardon from Murray the Regent by the interceffron of
Knox, ibid. an acount of his murdering Murray, 4I6, 457,
makes his escape, 4 a7, iS received in triumph at Hamilton,

II. 3

Hamilton, Mr. Patrick, the fi:l1 w~ho ILaffred in Scotland for the

Protefiant religion ---- 1. a37

Harrtford Earl of, invades Scotland with an Englilh army, I. go,

burns Edinburgh an~d Leith, ibid., is made D~uke of` Somerset,
and prote~tor of Eng$!and, 98, fee Somerset.

Harton, vice-chamberlain of England, the argument by which

he prevailed on Q. Mary to pkajd at her trial II. 1 29

Henry~ if. of France. sends forces to allilt the Scots, I. 96, a

marriage propoledl between his 100 the Dauphin and the
young Queen of Scots, a oz, a 03, excites the Scots to invade
England, 5 27, his infamous impolition~on Queen Mary in
the treaty of marnag~e, 139. Persuades his son and Queen
M2/ary to assume the titles of- King and Queen of England,
a 4 . his death ' I9

----- 111. degenerates greatly oui his accelion to the Crown of

France, fl. ioY, enreis into, a private negaciationi with Q~
E'liz~beth, t4#, interCpute reebly ;n behialr of: (.11ary '3q

Henry VIII. of England, by his tyftem of reformation becomes

formidable both to Papifts and Protefiants, I. 98, propoles
an interview with K. James V. 99, is disappointed by him
and declares war again Scotland, 60, invades it but is forced
to retreat, 61, his importance as to the balance of power in
Europe, 75, his influence in Scotland how obtained, 77, his
schemes with regard to it on the death of James V. Hz, were
ill-conduded by himrelf and odious to the Scots, 83, at·
tempts to gain the Regency by great promiles, 86, invades
Scotland, 90, this being ill-conduaed turns to no account, ib.
receives and rewards the Earl of Lenox, 91, encourages the
murderers of cardinal Beatoun, 95, his death and chara~ter,
ibid. 96, his inconfitent condua, I 4o, excluded the Scots
line by his tellament 3'9

Helrrei, Lord, joins Chatelherault in opposing the Regnt, I. 402.

comes to a treaty with him, 403, he and the duk are com-
ruined prisoners to the cattle of Edinburgh, 4o4, intimates
the King's order to Morton to resign the Regency, II. 50, ac-
count of his behaviour in Parliament, app. 3 r9. a letter from
him to Lord Scroop and Sir F. Knollis app. 375

Hickford, recretary to the Duke of Norfolk, betrays him by dif-

covering his intrigues with Queen Mary II. 25, 26

Highlands and Isles, an attempt to civilize them by K. James VI.

II. p46, regulation for that purpole, 237, three towns endu-
ed with the privileges of royal boroughs ordered to be built
there -ibid.

Hodgson, a priest at Rheims, maintained the lawfulness of krilling

heretical excommunicated Princes -II. s 20

Hlome, Lord, sent by K. James VI. with a fecree embassy· to the

pope II. 209

Hozward, fee N~orfolk.
Hwnqdane, Lord, governor of Berwick, his interview with Ar-

ran - - (1 96

Huntly Earl, tho' a catholic, joins the reformers in oppoling the

French army, I. I 58, allifs them only with fastr promiles,
a 77, his further concurrence with them, a 89, some account
of that family, 234, his entrity against the young Queen's mi-
nilters, ibid. his relientment inflamed by an accident, 236, ap-
pears in open rebellion against the Queen, a)8, his plot againlt
her minitters dilappointed, ibid. breaks out into open rebel-
lion, 239, is trodden to death in a battle, 240, his family pro-
fecuted with the utmof t rigour, 24 s, several anecdores and
conjeAures concerning his plor, ibid. 241, is attainted by
Parliament, 248, the attainder repealed and the family re-
flored to the eliate and honours - 36
-- his attachment to Bothwell, 33z, 338, refurles to submit to
the KRgent, 4"3, is for ced to do it, 404, ads" as lieutenant up

the

th~e Queen after the Regent's murder, II. 7, is proclaimed a
traitor by Lenox rhe new Regen~t, 9, receives some money
and promiies of aliitance from Spain, to, agrees to a trea-
sy with Morton the Regent, 3j7, is one of the heads of the
Spani(h radion, s6z, engages to the Prince of Plrma to f'erve
the King of Spain, a 66, ,s imprisoned f or a thout rime, at 9>
erefts a Ilandard of rebellion. ibid. but forced to lubmit to
the King, 168, is again imprisoned, 168, is Coon let at li-
berry, ibid. receives a commillion from the King, :-73, nis
barbarous murder of the Earl of Murray, a 74, is rummoned
to su~rrender to juffice, a 78, flies to the mlountailns, a79, of-
fers to submit to a trial, a 82, femtence pron~ounced ag inlt:
htim, ibid. r-elufes to lubmit, 183, makes another delperare ·rt-
tempt but is forced to fly - a8

AMES 1. was detained long a prisoner in England, I. 29,
troubles in Scotland, during that time, ibid. was amuchi im-
proved by an Englilh education, 40, his policy on his return
to Scotland, 41, his charadter, 4:, luppreffes the power at the
nobles, ibid. they being exasperated conspire against and mur-
der him 43

- 3 44

LL- II. tr·oubles in Scotland during his minority. I. 3o. his

attempts against the nobles, 44, 45. murders the Earl of
Douglas, 45, procures leveral good laws to be passed, 46, re-
duces the power of the nobles, ibid. 47. his death ibid.

~- III. the slate of' Scotland during his minority, I. 3'.

his impolitic condua, 47, 48, kills one of his brothers, and
is invaded by another, 48, 49, is greatly insulted by his nobles,
5o, his derpicable minions, ibid. was the fieft that appointed
a (landing guard to his perlon, ibid. the nobles are provoked
to take arms againit him, 5 1, is killed in a battle againt them,
ibid. 5 s, his charaaer - ibid.

~e- I·V. his charad~r, I. 53, is krilled in a battle againlft

the Englith at Flouden - 53
CC V. his minority long and turbulent, I. 3s, tranfa~ions
during that time, 53> 54, Paffimes the government while very
young* 54, his chara~ct, 55. his Ccheme for humbling the
nobles, Z6, 58, 59, is diverted from it by the clergy, bo,
61, takes arms for th~e defefnce of his kingdom, 61, his
noblels refuting to follow him, throws him into a deep
melarncholy, 62, 63, which is increased by a furprelangC de-
feat of his forces, 64, his death, ibid. refledious on his
condua, ibid. be refured an alliance with Charles V. Em-
peror -- _ -- 77

Jrmes VI. his birth, I. 304* bis baptirm, 317, the care of him

colmmtrted to the Earl of Mar, 330. is by him preserved from
falling into the hands of Bothwell, 345, is crowned, 360,
the nobles oppressed ",by Morton the Regent, turn their eyes
to him for redrds I 48. his education and ditrpoltions.
49, he becomnes fulpicious of the Regent's power, abid. dil-
covers early a great attachment to favourites, 59, adopts two
of different dil'politions, ibid. enters Edinburgh with great
solemnity, 6 I, is by his favourites engaged in unpopular
meeafies, 7 4* 7 5, is leized by a par ty of nobles at Ruth~ven,
76, and forced to receive complaints again& his favon-
itres, ibid. diffenbles with themn and banriibes Lenox,
78, is brought to Stirling and Holyroodhodec, So, his con-
cern at Lenox's death, and regard for his memory, ibid.
receiv~es the French ambassador wttb great reipett, 81, makes
his escape from the conipirators, 82. resolves to treat them
with mloderation, 8 3, visits Gowrie and grants him a pardon,
84, renews his fondness for Arran, ibid. Is by him persuaded
to violemt measures againlt the conspirators, ibid. his anfwver to
a haughty letter from QElizabeth on their behalf, 85, is by
her interpol~rion rendered more violent againlt them, 86, is
provoked by th~e clei gy, 87, his Rteps to humble them, 90, his
profution to A. ran, 97, I'ends a new favourite to England
againl the balrithed Lords, tot, devolves the whole regal au-
thority on Ar ran, 1 ag, writes an undutiful letter to his mother,
tao8, is threatened to be dilinherited by her, I09, receives a
pediton from VL Elizanbeth, a * , as reconciled to the exiled
Lords, as 5. becomes popular by concluding a treary with
England, s 18,1si Ccandalous behaviour with regard to Archd.
Douglas, a ag, his endeavours to save his mother's life after
her condemnation, r 37, a 38. is gral incedied at her death,
a 53, argumlents used by the Elith ministers to pacify him,
a s4, is forced to itille his relentment, ibid. attempts to unite
the nobles, a 96, a 57, is courted both by Spain Pad England,
a 6 , a 6 , resolves vigorously to adhere to the latter, I6t,
takes several Reps with that vtew, 163, his skill inl the popith
controverly, a63, wrote a commrentary on the revelations, ibid.
his mlaximrs with regardr to popery, 167, his excellive lerairy
to conspirators against him, I68, resolves to marry the Prin-
cers of Denmark~, 169, arts qfed to prevent it, ibid. the
mar rsage as confumma'ed in Nor way, I yo, palfes several
mlonths in Denmark, ibid. refle61ions on his condp~t there, ib.
his arrival in Scotland with the Queen, a 72, indulges the PrdT-
byterians, '73, the ill codiequences of his lenity, 174, his
zeal againtt witchcraft, ibid. is follicited by Q. Elizabeth to
trea~t the coalpirators aIgainft himr with rigour, s y6, 177, is

Ibl'pe~ted of conniving with them, 179, is rurprized and leized
b~y Bothwell, I So, and forced to comply with his terms, ibid.
hris lenity to Rothwell abuled, rIs, is fulpetted of favouring
the popith Lords, ibid. is in new danger from them, I ~y, dele-
gates his authority to Argyl and Forbes againlt them, a 86,
goes mn person againfl them, ibid. waries their lands and garri-
tons their calties, ibid. his right of the succession to the crown
of England opposed by the papifts, a 87, his lenity to them in-
cenfes the clergy and people, a 92, is much provoked by the
obitinacy of the clergy, 193, gives orders againlt them, 196,
is much insulted and in great danger at Edinburgh, 197* '99,
leaves Edinburgh and proceeds with leverity againit the citi-
zens, ibid. acquires ablolute domninion in ecclefinflical affairs,
202, firengthens his in parliament by refforing the feats of the
ecclefinitics, 204, 205, endeavours with fuccels to gain a par-
ty in England, zog, zo6, increases his reputation by publithing
his Bafilicon Doren, zo6, is acculed by Q ;Elizabeth of cor-
relponding with the Pope, so8, this he denies and how ac-
counted for, 209, other reports concerning this, ibid. is at
g reat pains to gain the roman catholicks, za0, his regulations
with regard to the church, as I, the myfterous affair of
Gowry's conspiracy, 229, his cautious behaviour in regard to
the Earl of Eff'ex, sp1, sends ambaffadorpse save him, "33,
they arrive too late, ibidi. he restores his son and affociartes to
their honours after his accellion, 234, continues his intrigues
in England, ibid. his interest greatly firengthened there, 236,
endeavours to civilize the highlands and illes, asy, as pro-
claimed King in England after the death of Q3 Elizabeth, 242.
243, as proclaimed likrewife in Scotland and prepares for his
journey to England, 244, enters London and takes polleflion of
the throne, ibid. his charadter how different from that of CQ
Elizabeth, 244, P litCte, from him to Mr. Archd. Douglas,
app. 360

Intertnefs Castle. refules to surrender to Q Mary, I. 238, it is

forcedi, and the governor punithed ` --- ibid.

i:a/y, the liberry of, how preferred, cL--..I 73

K E 17H Sir William, feet to intercede for Q Mary when

under sentence, II. ' 38, letter to him from fecretar y

M~aitland, app. -- - -- - 360

Kent. Endl of, appointed to fee the sentence against Q M/ar y

executed ---- - - - II. I44

K r of Ferniherit, ravages EnglAnd on the murder of Murray

the Regent, II. 3, 4, his detign, 6;, has a (culffe wlith theC

Ker, Geo. brother to L. Newbottle, is dilcovered, when ready

to fail to promote a plot in Spain, II. 177, his scheme opened,
I8o, escapes out of prison ibid.

Killigre- Henry, his declaration on the peace, 40, app. 342
Kings feudal, the most limited of all Princes, I. i. z. eneral

cadres of this, a 4. their revenues were but imall, ibsd. I5*
had no ftanlding armies, ibid. and jurildiction limited, 16,
means used to extend the royal authority, 33, their jurifdic-
tion enlarged, 35, the extraordinary influence of the Scottith
Kings in Parliament, 69, the reason of this, ibid. 68, 69

Kirka~ld of Grange, one of the murderers of Beatoun is re-

called by the Q Dowager, I. I 28, his attainder reversed in
Parliament, 248. offers to fight Bothwell in single combat,
350, his interview with QL Mary, in name of the con-
federate Lords, ibid. rescues Maitland from confinement,
41I, labours to support the King's authority and reffore
harmony after the murder of the Regent, II. 4, accedes to
the queen's party, ibid. 5, Provides for a siege by increating
his garrilon and fortifying Edinburgh, s7. proclaims Lenox's
authority unlawful and usurped, a 8, attempts io vain to
prevent a meeting of the Parliament, ibid. forms a scheme
for surprising the King's party, so, is at firik fuccefafld but
afterwards defeated, 2I, comes near to an agreement with
Mar the Regent, 32, a treaty with Morton, breaks it off,
- 38, fires upon Edinburgh from the <;ftle, 3g, is belieged by

the Regent alifted by Englith forces, 4s, is forced by a mu-
tiny of the garrison to capitulate, ibid. surrenders to Drury
the E~nglith general, ibid. is by order of Qt Elizabeth deli-
vered up to the Regent, 42, he and his brother are ex-
ecuted. -4 3

Knollys Sir Francis, sent by Q. Elizabeth with letters of condo-

lence to Q Mary on her arrival in England, I. 378, fomle of
his letters, app. 3ar* 324

Knox John, a famous reformer, his charafter, I. s o8, after

being some time abroad he is recalled by the persecuted Pro-
teftents, l46, inflames the mlultitude at Perth with rage~
against the papifts, ibid. his notion concerning the gover~n-
ment of women whence, ' 5z, I 53, his irefience fixed in
]Edinburgh, a 56, complains of the luktewarmnners of the re-
formers, 168, his opinion to the convention of reformers that
it is lawful to refi~t and deprive tyrannical Princes, l70,
animates and revives the delponding congregation, a 79, a So.
complains of the negleft of the reformers in providing mlain-
tainance for their preachers, zoo, recommends the Geneva
model ofthe church government, 206, propoles fuperintendants
an the church. 207, compoles the first book of discipline,
208, renounces friendship with the Earl of Murray for hiu
.moderation, l30, is tried for encouraging a murmny mornog the

the eope ad aquited ag, ppith judges concur in this

dec'iain, ibid. 24 s, is publickly cue y a rdo
preaching seditious doarine concerning re6(lance. 259, cha-
radters of the two dirputants, ibid. approved of leveral in-
flances of aflfalination, 300. 30s, agrees to some regulations
concernmng the cleation of Biihops, II- 34, his death and cha-
radter, 35, his enlogium by M/orton the Regent, 36, articles
lent by him to the general aiffembly, app. 340

Lawreau cardinal, is sent as Nuncio from the Pope with

aGSI

,tebateo -31

prdlent to Q. Mary of Scotland, I* 3' 3, is flopped at Paris,

League holy, a confederacy of roman catholics To called, II.

ri o, was universally agreed to by them all over Europe

- - ibid.

Learning, the revival of promotes the reforma~tion I. rs 6
Leitcffe Earl of, appointed a commiioner to the conference at

Weftminfier i. 396

Leith, burnt by the Engliih, 1. go, fortified by the French,

164, besieged by the Enghtfh, 186, Q: M~ary lands
there from Frarnce, 218, the superiority of it granted by her
to Edinburgh, 281, is seized and fortified by Morton and the
Regen t - II. I 8

Ljero Earl of, arrives in Scotland from France, I. 89, is much

courted by cardinal Bearoun, ibid. his pretenfrons to the
Auccedlion how founded, 88, rerenta Beatoun's deceitful-
nels to him, 89, heads the reformers and the advocates ror
the Englilk alliance, ibid. furprizes the Regent and cardinal,
90, is outwitted by the cardinal, ibid. continues alone in the
interest of England, 9:, is forced to fly to that court, where
he is rewarded, ibid. is manried to a niece of K. Henry's, by
which he became father to a race of Kings, ibid. 92, his
claiml to the luccefll00, 2~5, is imprisoned for a lecret cor-
relpondence with Q Mary, 256, is invited secretly by her to
return to Scotland, ibid. ar rives in Scotland, and is received
with great familiarity by her, a47, his forteiture is repe~led,
and he is refoloed to his estate and honours by the YPrlianlcnt,
253, his lady lent prisoner to the tower of London, 26",
and treated with rigour, zy s, he infsits on the piroecution of
his son Darnly's murderers, 330, charges Bothwell with it.
ibid. the profi-cution is hurried, 331, he craves a delay which
is refuled, 332, he is left alone in it, ibid. follicits Q: Eliza-
beth's interest to obtain a delay, 333, infi'is on it by proxy
at the trial but is over-ruled, 334, beaing apprchealive of
danger he flics towards England, 335, his counrefs accules

Qi ~ary

QMary of the murder to QElizabeth, 38o, he appears at
the contevecnce at Weftminiter and accules Qt Mary o~f the
murder upon oath, 397, returns to S~ot~hnd prote~ted by an
Englith army, II. (j, is ele~ted Regent, 9, s o, his progrels
againfl the Queen's party, ibid, appoints commll~ioners to
frame a~ treary with those of the Queen, a 2, furprizes Dum-
barron cattle, 14, joins the earl of Morton at Leith, 18,
holds a Parliament in the Canongate, ibid. another at Stir-
ling, zo, he is furprized and killed there ibid za

Lenox, late Aubigne, his chara~ter, IL. 60, joins with the

King's other new favourite to undermrine Mloron 61, re-
nounces popery, bz Q Elizabeth demrands himr to be re-
moved from the privy council, 63, is acculed by her ambaf-
fador. 66, Arran tries in vain to supplant him,, 70, is com-
mianded by K. Ja nes at the request of the nobles to leave the
kingdom, 77. puts off his departure on various pretences,
79, 80, returns unwdllingly to France where he loon dies,
ibid. his memory vindicared and mnuc'h regarded by the King,
ibid. died a Protellant ---- ibid.

--- E of, left as the King's lieutenant in the north after di!L

perting the popilh Lords ---II. a 67

Lethei Norman, murders cardinal Beatoun, I. 93, he and his

a~ssociates keep poifellion of the castle of St. Andrews, 94.
makes a truce with the Regent, 95, are encouraged by
Henry Vlll. - --ibid.
- bihopof Ross, is sent by the catholics in Scotland to

engae QMary in their interelt, i. 209,) hi8 pfopolals to

her rejeaed, ibid. 210, his negotiations so England in fa-
vour of Qt Mary. II, 23. 24. is confined long in the tower
and afterwards is banished England 26

Lindfayt Lord, carries the proposals from the confederates to

Q~ Mlr y that the thould resign the government, I. 3g9, joins
the Ruthven conipirators 11 76

Locb/evUin cattle, Q Mary committed a prisoner there, 1. 3j4,

her ecacpe from thence 368

--- Lord. letters to and from him, appendix 344. 345
Logarl of' Hreairig, an alledged accomplice in Gowrie a conly -

racy. II. 2 '7, a 1 , is tried, and his e(tate forfeited long as-
ter his deal b aa , a Zo

Lords contetderate, affocirtce against Bothwell and Q Mary, I.

3416. raiice forces againtt them, 347, publilh the motives of
their condud, 347, Prevail on the Queen to surrender to
theml, 355. affumle the title of Lords of the recret council
and the royal authority 3F+
----- popith, conlpire againit K. Jamnes. II. a 66, are
treated by himr with great lenity, a 68, form a new
conspiracy, I77, the King proceeds againl1 themn,
178, mlore of his lenity to themn, 18a, freth dangers fromn
them, 185, they receive mloney from Spain, Ibid. aeall

of the clergy againlt themn, r 86, are declared guilty of tree-
son and their estates forfeited, ibid. defeat the King's armiy,
186, are dilperled on the King's approach, I87, go abroad
and give lecurity to keep the peace, ibid. return to Scotland,
and petition for leave to reltde in their own boules, rt~t, this
granted by a convention of effates, ibid. recant their errors
and are ablolved from excommuonication. 202, ft ap C, 2nti
are again reconciled to the church of Rome, 20), are reitored
to their ellates and honours ibid.

torrain cardinal, gets rlome of the bell benefices in Scotland,

- - - 1. 3 5

'--- Princes of, their amibitious views. I. * 40, infligate the

Dauphin and Q Mary to take the titles of King and Q2~ueerr
of England, '4', relolve to invade Eingland, r~z, and to
check the reformation in Scotland, ibid. the cardinal's great
influence over the young King, r oo, 161, drives the Queen
Regent of Scotland to violent mealines, 1:65, a 67, their vio-
Jences occallon a conspiracy againfl themi, i91, I92. are
forced to withdraw their troops fromi Scotland, ibid. they in-
fult the Scotti~h amiballador, 202, have great power over the
young King and Queen, 203, are forced to contra8 their
views on the death of~ the King - 204

Luther, a bold and principal promoter of the reformation, I.

21 6, the rapid progrers of bis doatrine - 1'7

M A O R John, his hillory of Scotand, loe account OF
Maidandr of Lethington, secretary to Mary Queen Regent,

leaves her service and joins the congregation, 1. 178, his cha-
radter, ibid. is sent by them amnbaffador to Q. Elizabeth, ta 8.
sends them affiarances of her procedion,, t82, is lent by Q.
IMary to the court of England, 223, makes a conceliron to
Q. Elizabeth, ibid. accomupanies Q Mary in a progrels to the
north, 237, he is emiployed~ by Q Mary to derire a perfon1i
interview with Q Elizabeth, 242, publickly accules Knox ol
preaching seditio~us deatrine concerning trefllance, zS9, in-
timates to Q Ellzabeth the intention of Q: Mary to miarry
Darnly, 265, prudently conceals her relentment fiomi Q, Eli-
zabeth, aby, propolets moderate mnedures with regard to Q·
IVlary when insprifoned, z57, attends the Regent when calledl
on to accule her in England, j86, he dlifapproves of this m~rea-
thre, ibid. his intrigue with the duke of Nortolk, 390. 39 1, i:;
im~prilonerd by the Regent, 403. is relieved by Kirkaldy and tI--
curcd in the caltle, ibid. 4 I 2, propoles a coalition of' the two pair-
tien tier the miurder of the Regent. I I. 4,accedes to thle Queen s
party, 6,, is deprived of his oilice of Iecretary, and pro-
claimued traitor, 9), is attainted in a parliament of the King s

par-

party 18, agrees with Mar, 32, his views in refusing a re-
conciliation with Morton the Regent, 38, rejeas overtures
of a treaty with him~, ibid, is belieged by him in the cal-
die of Edinburgh, 39, is forced to capitulare and riarren-
ders to the Englith general, si, to avoid the Regent's re-
fentment he dilpatches himlelf, 43, leveral of his letters,
app. II. 3J33 358

.----- Sir John, is made Cecretary for Scotiand, II, 1, 2, con-

curs with others in promotring QL Elizabeth's interests there,
ibid. attempts againlt bian by capt. James Stewart, late Ar-
ran, a 5, they prove abortive, and he is adv inced to be
chancellor, ib~id. an attempt to remlove himn from that office,
fruttrated, 168, his death, 188, a copy of verles in h~onour
of him wrote by the King, - a89

Mar Earl of, that title conferred on the prior of St. And·ews,

I. s35. accompanies the Queen in a progrefa to the north,
237, he and hrs associates narrowly elcape affallination, 238,
he is crearcJ )·. 01 of' Murray, 239. See Murray.

~-c- the titlc Is conferred on L. Erikine, ibid. the pedion

of the young r-inee put into his hands, 3 30, his relolution
in prefeiving him fromn Bothwell, 345, is cholen Regent,
II. 22. labours to bring about a general peace, 32, is thwart-
ed by Morton and his associates, ibid. dies of melancholy, 3 3.
his charadter, ibid. his merit and integricy was acknowledged
by both parties - ibid.

-- the younger Earl, being imposed on by Morton, turns

out his un~cle fromt the cattle of Srirling, 11. g3, joins the
Ruthren conspirators, 76, he with the others seize Stirling
cattle, and eredt their itandard, 89, ir attainted and his
estate forfeited, 97, is pardoned and reflored to eitate and
honours - t a6

1March countres of, her infamous marriage with the Earl of

Arran II 0

Mary of Guise, Q( Dowager of Scolland, takes a conlfidera-

ble Ilhre in the government, I. 102. is mluch addierd to
the French interett, ibid. projeas a marriage of her daugah-
ter to the D~auphin of F~rance, ibid. i03, becomies intitu-
miental in promoting the reformatcion, t o9, sipires to the
office of Regent, a so, promlotesl difaffedtian to the prelent
one and finvours the reformers, as s, vilsts the court of
F;rance, ibid. returns to Scotland to take po~Lkilion ot'
the Regency, ss 3, after some oppofstion the obtains it,
as 4, confiers leveral offaces of trutt upon (Irangets, a 29,
propoles to lay a tax upon land, ibid. is forced~ to drop
st, a ab, tries in vamn to excite a war with England, a 27, the
nobles vigorouuly oppole the mealures, a 28, treats the re-
formers with great rerp 8, t :9, obtains a coocellion frean
the Priliament in favor' of the Dauphin, '34, her artful
management of the reformiers, ibid, 135, beitows the vacant

VOL. 1l* C; g beneficca

benefices on foreigners, 5 36, the alters her consina to the
reformers, I 39, remonfirares argainlt the violent measures of
the Princes of Lorrain, a 43* is Persuad~ed by them to per-
fecur the ref ormers, a 44, her ralh answer to their remon-
thrance, ibid. fummlons their preachers to appear before her,
'45, breaks a promile te had made themn ibld. marches with
an armly againlt theml, a 47, concludes a~ treaty with them,
148. this the again breaks, 149, her leverity at Perth, ibid.
her (chemes dilCovered, ibid. the goes to attack them, t jo,
has again recourle to negotiation, SIr, the is startled at their
demands and gets time to anlwer them, r s2, violates another
treaty, I 53, lfoes Perth and forced to abandon Stirling and
Eidinburgh, the retires wit b precipitation to Dvnbar, a 4,
marches to attack the reformers st Edinburgh, a 96,~ gains
time by her artifice, a (7, m~qkes another treaty with them,
ibid. her artifices to undermine the prior of St. Andrew's,
a 63, the abl~urdity of her scheme, a 64, gets a reinforce-
ment of French troops who fortify Leith, ibid; the disregards
a remonfirance of the reformers, r66, is influenced by French
countellors and perfwaded to violent measures, ibid. a 67, re-
tires to Leith on the approach of the refornars army, a 68,
her pruldent and artfurl condue tbere, 169, her haughty and
imperious anfwrer to a frelh remooftratsce from them, abid, is
by a convention of them deprived of her office of Regent,
syo0, the foundationr of this featence, ibid. '7z, fomeets
differences amnoqg them. 174, is delerted by her principal-le-
cretary, 178, sends French troops again(t the ref'ormers, 183.
retires into the caifle of Pdinburgh on the approach of the
]Engliih, a 87, her death and charrAer, r90, repented of her
violent meafrures, ibid. liltened to the in~truations of a re-
formed preacher -- - a9'

.Ilary Queen of England, her perlecutin% reign, 1. I'5, her

death, a 36
--Queen of Scots born, I: 79, a propofld tCg marry. her to Ed.
VI. 82, the is demanded by~ Henry VIII. &4, her marriage to
the Daruphin of France proposed, soz, a treaty for that purpole
concluded, lo04, the is lent to be educated in France, ibid. the
fatal· consequence of this, ibid. is inipofed on by the artifices
of the F2rench in the treaty of miarriage, a 3 a her miarriage
celebrared with great pomnp, a 32, they take the title of
King and Queen of England, r4*, the mlakes conceflions to
the congregation, I93, declares Q; Elizabeth's right to the
crown of England, ibid. the acquires an entire afrcendrupt
over her huiband, 203, the is overwhelmed with great al-
ficaion on his death and retires to Rheims, zo4, the is in-
vited by the convention to return to Scotland, 209, an emif-
fary from the catholics in Scotland propolrc violent measures

to her, 209, the is determined to moderation by the French
tand the prior of St. Andrew's, ibid. is prevailed on to
prepare for her return to Scotland, aI 1, the origin of the
diicord between her and V Elizabeth, ibid. z s 2- her pre-
tenfrons to she crown of England, ibid. is envded on ac-
count of' her beauty, zz6, demands a rfde conauit rromn V
Elizab~eth v ·bich is refuled, ibid. leaves France with great
reludance. zr7, lands at Leith, 214, is much iaffedled by
the change of' her frtuation, ibid. ieveral diladvantages at-
tending her accellion, 2 I9, some circumi~tanes to her ad-
vantage, 22o, her accomplifhmients of' body and mind, ibid.
the servants of her chapel infultedi, ibid. procures the~ free
exercise of h~er religion, z z , iffies a proclamation in favour-
of the P~rotelthntr, Ibid. 2Z, Cup Oys them only in the ad-
ministration. ibid. attemlpts to gnln 4 Eliz:·be-th's iavour,
223, makens a concel~lon to her. ibid which is rejeded, ibid.
the makes hel puicii entry into Edinburgh, 224, an inible
offew ed to her religion on thor occation, ibid. dilcourages the
attemlpts of the papills to gain her favour, t22, her averflon
to the f~amily of' Hamilton, ibid. sunakes a progrers into the
north, 237, her minitters narrowly escape affaffination, z34,
is refured access to the cattle of Invernels, ibid. when in the
utmost conflernation is relieved by the Monros and other
Clans, ibid. her forces defeat Huntl~ey's rebellion, 240, the
defares an interview with QL Elizabeth, 242, negociations
concerning her marriage, 243, is follicited by different Princes,
244. 249, her deliberations concerning: it, ibid. is forced to
bear the authoritative behaviour of Qi Elizabeth, 246, to
please her fubjed~s determines against a foreign alliance, z47,
determines not to ratify the treaty of Edinburgh, 248, further
neg~ociations for her marriage, aS'. dilcovers the views of
Catlherine of Medicis, ibid. t92, Lord Robert D~udley re-
commended to her as a husband by Q Elizab~eth, ibid. the
is highly offended at this, 252, diffe~mbles with V Elizabeth,
ibid. 254, entertsmns thoughts of mlarrying Lord LDarnly, SyS,
the recalls Lenox, ag6, is affronted at a letter of Q Eli-
zabeth's, ibid. her indifference as to the reformed, and zsal
for the catholic religion, 258, is taken with Darnly at fir~t
fight, 261, is greatly moved at Qt Elizabeth's inrulting
craftiness, ibid. 262. negotiates with the court of Romle for
a difpenlation tc marry D~arnly, ibid. and the content of the
court of` France. 262, imnpoles on Randolph, but applies to
Q Elizabeth for codlent to her man inge, 265, 266, which
the a~ffea to rrfuie, ibid. in releentlnt the propoles to tend
ain angry me~ffge to Elizabeth, which M~airland prevents,
267, Juflifies her condua to the Englilth amnbaffador, ibid.
endeavours to get Mnurray's code~nt, zo9, courts the pope's
protedion, and receives a iubfidy from himI, ibid. her great

G g2 addrels

. addrels in gaining the codlent of her fubjefts, 27 I, prevents
a plot against Darnly, 2-72, sUmmons her vassals to take arms
agaiinft Murray, z*74, and him to appear before her. ibid.
her mlarriage with Darnly celebrated, 27<;, the confers the
title of King of Scots upon him, ibid. this flep cealizred,
ibid. her r efentmient agaalat the malecentents, 276, the
mnarches againlt them, 277, retjeas the interceiion of Q.
E~lizabeth in their behalf, ibid. continues her march againlt
the rebels, 278, her conduQ and courage on that occallon,
ibid. drives themn out of Scotland, 279, her further rel~ent-
anent againit them, z~S, has recourse to several devices to
raile money, ibij. her prosperity promotes her religion, 282,
her deliberations concerning the exiled Lords, 28 3, determines
to treat them~ with lenity, 289, is diverted fromn this by her
religion and French influence, ibidi. 286, this the source of
her after misfortunes, z87, intention to reffore popery, ibid.
is dilgiled with Darnly's idfolent behaviour, 288, her fa-
miliaruty with Rizio offends the King, 289, vindicated fromt
any crimninal correspondence with Rizio, 291, ures her utmost
endeavours to prevent his miurder, z94, the is confined by
the conspirators, ibid. the gains the King, and escapes fromn
them, 299, is reconciled to the exiled nobles, 296, her hatred
to Darnly encreafes, 30s. 302, and favour for Bothwell com-
mlences, ibid. extinguilfes some domncific feuds among the
nobles. 3o+, is delivered of her Con Jamies VI. in the Caffle of
Edinburgh, ibid. invites leveral foreign princes to his bap-
tifmn, 309, continues to treat Darnly with negledt, ibid. her
attachmnent to Bothwell increases, ibid. prevents Darnly's in-
tended flight, 308, vi~tis the borders, ibid. art inflance of
her regard for Bothwell on that occallon, 309, how the
rivalled Q Elizabeth. 3 i0. her right of Succellion favoured
by the Englilh parliamient, 3t0, the endeavours to avail
herself of that opportunity, 3r I. 31 z, the takes an extraor-
dinary flep in favour of popery, 3'3, 'rceives a prelent from
the pope, but flops his nuncio at Paris, 3r 4, endeavours to
procure a bettect lubfittence for the refonrmed clergy, ibid. her
averlion to the King excellive, ibid. becomies mielancholy,
ibid. the declines a divorce fromn him. 3';, goes to Stirling
to celebrate her lon,'s baptiltin, 3r6, is greatly offended at the
king'3: behaviour on that occallon, 3'?, rellores the popilh
ecclefiallical jurildli~ian, 321, her negleat of the King during
his (icknels, 3'3, the breach between theml becomnes irrepa-
rable, ibid. 324. the vitits him ait Glasgow, ibid. the m~otives
of her dillimulation on that occallon, ibid. 325* Prevails on
him~ to coe. ibdo37 E i

n Pbu , 32b, her thfpicious behaviour to

him her. iid. 27,iffes a proclamiation for dilcovering his

mnurderers> 328, is fuppoled to have twen accelrory to it, ibid.
13; charged with it abroad as wel! as at homes 329, goes to

vifat

virit her Ton at Stirling, 34', is met on her return by
Bothwell, who seizes andl carrie; her to Dunbar, ibidi. this
supposed with her codfent, 342, is conduded to E~fdinburgh,
343, and married to Bothwell, 344, lends an apology to, the
C'ourts of France and England, ibid her condutt cad~es a
general indignation against her abroad* 346, is alarmed at a
combination of the nobles againit her, 347, the publilhes a1
manifeffo to vindicate her condua, ibid. is condufted to the
caltle of Botthwick, ibid. miarches with Bothwell's forces
againrt the confederate Lords. 349, an attemipt of an ac-
commiodation proves vain, ibid is forced to surrender to
the confederates, 34 s, is insulted by the soldiers and mnob,
ibid., is carried to Edinburgh, where miany abults are otffr-
ed her, ibid. 354· sent a priloner to L~ochievin Catlle, 354*
Q Elizabeth interpoles in her behalf, jg6, the E~nglih amn-
baffador is refulfed access to her, ibid. various pr opulab
amnong the confederates concerning her, 3;7, they oblige hier
to resign the Government, 358, 359, different reasonings on
this measure, 3 363,61, is much mioved with the freedfom
of the Earl of' Murray, 363. her party among the not cs be-
come dispirited, 365, her refagnation of the C'rown accepited
by the Parliviment, and her iniprifonmient declared lawful,
366, her le ters to Bothwell read, and the de·clared acctffory
.to the King's murder, ibid. fcape~s from Lochievin, 368,
arrives at Hamilton, ibid. is attended by many noblecs and
a numerous army, 369. an association ilgned in her defence,
ibid. her imprudence in hazarding a batrie* 372. her armly
defeated by thle confederates, ibid. her precipitate flight int;,
Galloway, 373, rathly determines to retiie to Englandl i;,id.
goes thither againlt the advice of her attendants. 37; 4, irives
at Carlisle, ibid. writes to VL Elizabeth, imiploring: her goodi
offices, ibid. receives letters of condolence froml her, a~nd
demairnds admittance into her prelence, 378, this refuledl andl
why, ibid. 379, offers to f~ubmiit her caure to Q. E~lizabetht,
ibid. is much deceived in her expe~tation from this, 30 s, and'
offended on discovering the artifices of Q Eliza~beth, 3 *
earnestly follicites to be admitted into her prelence, ibid. the
is carried to Bolron Cafkle, 383, chagrined at finding herlelf ar
prisoner, ibid. agrees to an enquiry into her condud, 384.,
her dillimulation with regard to religion, ibid. comrmiloloers
appointed to appear mn her namle, 387, her chief view in
this affair, 388, codecnts to moving the conference to Yvett-
aninfier, 393, the is carried to 'Tuthbury in Staff~ordhire,
394, is much off~ended at the regard thewn the KRegnt, andL
re~calls her codtent to the conference, 395, thre accultiario
againlt her produced by the Regent, 39r, is accuIPed lIkcwiLe
by the Earl of Lenox, 39)7. her comnlliflionerls reflei to unr-
twcr, and demni~d a pe~rlonal interview, 398, they Flosit
againit futU e pr~cCedings, ibidl a tIsfp'aou cilrurltan~c · g.inith

her, ibid. 399, her commillioners withdraw from the
m~eeting, 399, her resolute adw~her to a harth proposal of Q;
E1lizabeth, 400, avoids any farther progress in the inquiry,
ibid. is corageJ at the proceedings, and propolesr derFerate
m~eaisres, 4is, rpreads chierirr cal conjedtures with that
view, ibid 40 ~, provofes a divorce from Bothwell, 404, is
influenced by the D. of N~orfolk's (chemres, ibidl exchanges
many letters and love tokens with himi, 4ob, code~nts to pro-
pothis fromn the Englilh nobles, 408. their views in th~is
trlnfadtion, 407, 408. a rebellion by her adhereats againct
Q. Elizarbeth, 412, is removed to Uoventry, 414, L

L* i

zabeth thiniks of' delivering hier up to the Regent. 4 4, this
projeaz how difaippomnted, ibid., 4t6, acceirson of fevzral to
her party after the mnurder of the Regenrt, II. 5, they en-
deavour to foment a war with England, 6, her au:horityr
proclaim\ed at Linlithg~ow, 7, hier parties defeated by the
new Regent, t0,rI1, the answers propslrab by QEizab~eth,
ibid. attempts in vain to get foreign adititanct, ab~id. appoints
commillioners to framte a treaty tor her liberation, a 3, this
proving fruitlers, the is mlore firiclly contined, r4, the inva-
lidity of her resignation declared in a Parliamlent held by her
adherents, 18, aa of Parliament in England to curb her rad
her party, zz, the looks for proeteion from the King of
Sipain, 23, is denied the privilege of an ambrlledor at the
court of England, =6, is more close confined and watched,
ibid. proceedings againit her in England, 29, her inercta ne-
gle~ted by the French, 30r, is hurt by the mallacre at Pacris,
3', her adherents divided into two fadions, 37, 38, one of
them, joins with Mlorton the Regent, 39, review of the cha-
ra~ers of her adherents and opponents, 4a. her forlorn ficu-
ation, ibid. is entried to F'uxton W·ells* 43, loles reveral of
her filends by death, .49, reods a letter and prelents to her
lonl, F8. her necifenger why diliniffed without feeing hias,
ibid. her unealinefs at his cofiserment by the Ruthren con-
lpiraltors, ho, comnplains to· Q. Elizabeth of her hard u'age,
ibid. and begs her intercellion fobr the King her lon, ibid.
'I'brogm~orton's cojnfpi acy in her fav·our, 93.-97, a fruit-
les3 negociation with Q Eliruabeth, 98, is alarmed at a s aso-
ciation in defence of Q Elizabth, 99, is committedc to more
tevere keepers, t00, berrayed by L~ord Gray the Scots amt
baffador, roL, a Ltatoute for the· preservation of Q Elizabeth
proves fatal to her. 10 >, is more rigorovily treated, ro7,
her com~plaints to Q Elizabeth diriegarded, ibid, is, by the
F~rcnch ambatfadgor's interest, remioved to Tuthbury, iot,
is undutifully treated by the King her lon, ibid. her pathi-
onate comuplaint to the French am~batr;dor on that occallon,
ibid. sog, threatens to dilanherit himn, ibidt. several dilco-
vctics alledged~ ag~ainlt her, a 23, a 24, thre is guardedl with

unusual

andrust vigilance, r24, hler dometicsc, papers, &c. are seized,
ibid the is conveyed to Fotheringay CaAle, i k,. delibera-
fions concerning the method of proceeding aganinf her, ibid.
is tisfpicious of phoilbn or private murder, r27, vindicates
herfeit to the D. of Gulfe, ibid. the commilioners for try-
ing her arrive at Fotheringay Caltle, ihid. her Ipirited Cpeech
when relfufng t~o Plead, ibid. a S, is at length prevailed o~n,
a 29, the prottiets againlit tk6C authority of the court, a 30,
the accusation againfl heri , her defence, ibid. her fen-
tence, '33, Irregularities in r trial, ibid. the featence is
csonfirmed by Parliament, a 34, who demand the execution
of it, ibid. ag 9, France iriterpoles feebly in her behalf, * 36,
a 37, the sentence againtl her publithedf, I 39, the is treated
with the utch~bit rigour, ibid. her lart requell to Q. Eilzabeth,
a 40, refuses the affittance of a Ptoteilant B~ilhop or D~ean,
ibid. artifices aled to inflame the people againit hecr, r42,
her behaviour at her ;death, r44, lentimients of hIihorians
concerning her, 147· her chaiaraderS, a4.er person de-
fcribed, '4919. Maried, first at Peterborough and after-
wards at Weftminfler-Abbey, ' <0, letters fromn her, app.
373· 3;8, her wvill, app. 354, obje~ions aanthrb
Wati~ng~ham, aPP- 38 9, what course to betkewihhr
ibid a dillerration on the genriineners of' her letters to Both-
w~ell. End of Vol. II.

Manvwell Lord. arrives from Spain and prepares forces to Jomn

them, 11. s82z, his followers dispersed, he is taken prisoner,

- ibid.

Me Cli ent by th~e French Iking to observe the motions of

the Queen Regent and htr adverlaries, 1. I60, sent to mlake
up a difference between El~iabeth and Mary, 257, brings
about an appearane of friendlhips between themn, ibid. is
sent to inform pElizabieth of tht bihht of K Jamecs VIl.
304, putS a letter into the Queen's hand againf1 her mar-
riage with Bothwell. 340, is forced to fly from court 3+'*
advises K. James to moderate measures upon his escape froml
the Ruthven conspirators II. s3
---- Mr. Andrew a clergyman, his chara~ter, II 4;.
zealoudy oppoles Epilcopacy, ibid. declines the civil jurif-
dialion in aclefialtical matters, 88, is forced to fly mrto
England to avoid persecution ibid.

--- Sir Robert, sent by IC. James to intercede with Q Eli-

zabeth for Q Mary when under i'entence, II. s40, executes
his commillion with fidelity and zeal, L4'1 a memortal of
his to the Kipg, app. ---...- e

------ M~atter of the houthold to Q Mary, takes his let fare-

well of her, II. I46, her Parting speech to him ibutf.

Mlild~mny, Sir Wm. fetit by E llizabeth with propoaljl to Z

M at y -------

C; g 4 1n/,

hEnrluc. Bilhop of Valence, emplye y the French to conclude

a peace with England and coad, I. r9z, terms agreed to
by him '933 '95

MIonigo~msey appointed Archbishop of Glargow, II. 79, is refused

and excomlmunicated by the general A(Tealtbly for his immoral
life - ibid.

Alonimorenry, Corlltable of France, e~ndeavours to prevent the

Dauphin's ma~rriage with Q IMary, 1. z 29, ' S. his prudent
advic·L to Henry II. i60, makes a slender appearance in fa-
vour of Qe Mar~y I.

nlo~ron, Earl of, his irrelolute· conduat as to tbe Reformation,

J. r77, accomipanies Q Mary in a progress to the North,
237, infligates 1)arnly to- be avenged of Rizio, 29s. takes
the dire~tioni of that enterprize, 293, is admitted into the
Queen's prerence, who promniles himn a pardon, 295, is forced
to fly into England, 296, obtains his pardon on Bothwelf's
interceflion, 3'9> 320. se~izes a calket wid2 levters From Qt
M/ary to Bothwell, 355, he is, by Q Elizabeth a interpofi-
tion, in favour with the King's party after the murder of the
Regent, II. 5. appointed one of the commillioners to treat
w~ith the Queen s party, I 3, his demands fruffrate the mdeet-
ing, ibid. is entirely influenced by the Court of England, i9.
commiands the King's forces at Leith, sy, has leveral Ikir-
mnithes with the Queen's forces, ibid. closely belleges Edin-
burgh, and comimits great cruelties, ibid. a fulpenflon pro-
cured by the Englilhl and French amrballadors, zS. a coall-
tion ofif parties prevented by himi, 32, 33. he is choren Re-
gent, bd.his mercenary ingratitude to the Earl of Nor-
thumnberland, 34, obtains the tem~poralities of the Archbilho-
prick of St. Andrew's, ibidl. labours to procure a peace be-
tween the two parties, 37, attemnpts io varn to gain Mait-
land and Kirkakil* 38, makes a treaty with Chatelherault
and Huntly* 39, gets poeffelio;n of the Caltle of Edinburgh,
41, his levenity to Kirkarldy and his brother* 4t3, his admi-
niltration becomnes odious, 44, hiis various miethods of gratify-
ing his avarice, ibid. 4 5, connives at the dilrputes of the Cler-
gy, 46, he irri:ates the' nobleS, ibid. A~rgyll~ and Athol refuse
to anluwer his furrnions, ibid. makes a vain attemnpt against
Lord Claud Hamiilton, 48, dilcovers the ddligns of the no-
bles againlt himi, and proupoles to iedagp his office, 5o, his
refigna:ion accepted by the King gives univeflal Ioy, 5',
obtains an approbationr of his conduA and a pardon mn amiple
tormn, 52, continues to watch the mlotions ofl his adverlaries,
ibid. is for'ced to furrenderr the Caltle of Edinburgh, ibid.
reliues~ his authority, 53, gains the Cal~le of Stirling and a
flat in the Privy Counc~ils 5, procures a meeting of the
Parliame~nt at brirling ibid. 55. his security ratified in it,
ibid. forces are railrd for andJ against him,, ibid. he is' recon-
ciledl to his advetrfaries by the interceion of V Elizabeth,

5 6,

)6, is fulpec~ed of foul play at an entertainment in his ows
houle, 57, his illegal proceedings against the family of Ha-
milton, ibid. 58s, the King's new favourites undeinmine him,
61, he endrcavours to prevent them, 62, Q; ElizLabeih inter-
poles in his favour, 63, is charged with being accessary to
the late King's death, ibid. he is confined in diffetrent prirons,
64, discourages an artempt to rescue him, ibid. all his frirnds
are turned out of office, 67, he is tried and condemned 93,
his retolute calm behaviour and confefflion before and at his
death, 69), 70, his body is tteated withr ignominy, ibid.

Alsrray, Earl of, lace prior of St, Andrew's, goes w~ith a hand-

ful of men agaiaft Huntly, i. z39), by his grea: fkri'1 and
courage hie gains a complete vitc:: , go,O his gr:nt is con-
firmed by Parliament, 248, caba:s again? him by I .nox Jndi
D~arnly, at3~, his aver:ion to Darily and orher court favou-
rites, 268, calls Uns~hwe~l to fland a tsial. ibid. his re..Cons
for oppoling Daraly's marriage with the Queen, 269, he and
his alrfociates are mlade the dupes of Q Elizabetrhi's policy,
271, co~nerts to seize Darrnly and carry him to E~nglandl,
272, this prevented by the Q~uten, ibid. avoids affallination
intended him hy parniy, ibid. evidences of there plots, 2;3.
274q, the· Queen's valfals are called to arms againit him, 274,
he is fummoneld to appear before her, 275, is again fum-
moned and outlawed o~n his non-appearance, 276, is forced
to fly with his alleciates into Argylthire, 277. they are inter-
ceded foi b QtElizabeth, ibid. are purlied by the Queen,

an bied to tly into England, 279, they meet with unex-
peed i teatment from q Elizabeth, ibid. z8o, courts

Rizio to intercede with the Queen for him, 284, many of
his friends follicit for him, ibid. the Queen's tavour how in-
tercepted, 285, a Parliament is called to attaint them, 287.
this how prevented, 288, he and his afbciates arrive at Edin..
burgh, 29;, are graciounly received by the King and Queen.
ibid. are alarmed at the Vueen's escape, but soon reconciled
to her, 296, hie is appointed Regent during the minority of
I~ing Jnmes VI. 363, his hadlh behaviour io a vilst to the
Queen, ibid. the fi'ccefs of his wife adminiffration, 365. Pro-
cures many of the Queen's party to join him, ibid. gers the
places of firengfth into his handrs. 366, his office of Regent
consumed by Parliament, his levere and haraghty behaviour
difguits Several* 368, his adherents io great conflternation at
the Q~ueen's ereape fromn Lochlevin, 369, his prudent con.
duat on that occaflon, 370, Defeats the Vueen's army at
Langfides 372, he imiproves this vi~tory, 383, his lenity to
the prifooners, ibid. he calls a parliament, 384, is called upon
by 4 Elizabeth ro vindicate his conduds, 386, he arrives at
Yorlk* 388, hiu views in this affair, ibid. complaints of the

ocen'y comm~iithursc agains1t him> 389, he behaves with

great

great reserve on this occation, ibid. 39o. this part of his con-
dua accounted for, 390, 39t, intrigues with the Duke of
Norfolk, ibid. his demands from the Englilh commidioners,
319', 39a, 'anivers the complaints of the Queen's comanif-
fioners without touching on the mnurder. 39s. 391 ',aR'ees to
have the conference moved t~o WFetimintler, 39f, is a~ffe-ian-
ately received by QLElisabeth, which o~ffends Q. Mlary, 495,
is prevailed on by ~Elizabeth to accule Mary o; the murder,
3 *, produces his evidences, 309, is dism~itted b. Q Eliza-
berth without approving or condemaing bi· condud 0Si his
party is recreely Cupported by her, ibid. returns to S~cotland
and by his vigorous conduA breaks the Q1a -:-n's calrt j o3.
he receives propotals both tiom 12 E iznet~h and~ Mary,
404, he diCappoints Nortolk, 4s0. an accoun* of hi· m~ider,
4'6, 4' , his charadter, 4'17. 4t 8. hiJ dea b much Izmnt~ned
by Qt Elizabeth an~d the King's party, IL. 5, much anarchy
the consequence of it, 4, Patrt oft a letter at hi·, app. 328,
his beir murdered by the Earl of Huintly 11. r74

N.

'rAire recretary to QMary is sent by her with a ice wr .1-I
Sprelents to her ion, II. i8, why diftinifed withou~ ing;
him, ibid. is sent with offers of humble resignation to Q Eli-
aabeth, a or, is leized and lent prisoner to London, 1 zy, is
produced as an evidence agtainfl her ' 33

Need/i dilcovers and prevents Parry's design to murder Q Eliza-

bethi - I. ri,5. so6

NobleI their extensive power, 1. IS, i9, become turbulent and

formidable, ze, their power greater in Scotland thari in any
other kmfgdom, zat, the caules of this, r1 a, z, their power
of long duration, 3r, it becomes'intolerable to the Princes,
;2, they are humbled in France and England, ibid. but con-
rinwe rigorous in Scotland, 33, discords among them encou-
raged, ibid. their jurifdiation circumforibed, 3C, are greatly
mortified by King James 17. 55. 58, are dilappoisited its a
(cheme to thew their relentment, 6r, refule to attend the Kn
into England, ibid. shey Seize the revenues of the church,
son, refule to part with them to the reformedt clerey, zot,
208, so9, dilfehtions among them, z32, a convention of
them appvrov the Queen's marriage to Darnly, spo, several
of them recommend Bothwell as a hufbind to her, 338, a
thrange combination of them on this occation. 3 19, a body of
them adfociate againit her and Bothwecll, 347, theit different
views in this, ibrd. a pary of them favours the Queen, 395,
thley are much dispirited by the good conduft of Murray,
f65* 386,d they are much provoked by Morton the Regent,
II. 47 thinki of` redtref from the KinZ* 47> 48, infule iurpi-

CIiln

clon of the Regent's power into him, 49, a meeting of them
called by him, go, a party of them conspire againik the
King's tavourites, 7j, they seize his perlon and drive them
off, 76i, their negleat of, and ingratitude to the clergy, as 6,
the Kinig attempts to reconcile their sends and unite them,
sq u. See Lords.

Norjo~k. Duke of, appointed a comnmiftioner to hear a cad~e

belween ~Qgen Mary and his acculers, I. 387, formr a
Icheme of miounting the throne of Scotland, 390, intrigues
with the hrgent and Mbidaond with that view, ibid, 39', he
replefents the demands of the Scots to Q Elizabeth 392, his
farther negociations wish relpedt to VQ Man y. 40s, 40e, en-
deavours to conceal his deligas from Q Elizabe:h, 406, is
imposed on by the artitice of' the Regents 406, 407, gets the
content of many of the English nobles, 407, his proje6L ap-
proved at foreign courts, 408, is discovered and defeated by
Q Elizabeth, 4 to, flies to Norfolk, 4 I , he rurrenders on a
fecondl summons, and is sant priloner to the Tower, ibid. is
for at liberty, and continues his intrigues with Q;Mary, II.
24, is berrayedf by his secre~tary, 25, is ieized with his depend-
ants, anld acc~uled by them, 26, is executed ibid.

Northum~berland, Earlof, attempts a rebellion in favour of Q.

Mary, I. 4s z, his scheme defeated, 413, he is (cized by the
Regent, 4r4, is delivered up to the governor of Berwick,
and put to death at York II, 33

Nqeuingham~, CounteiS of, rome account of the tranfaion con-

cerning the Earl of` Effex's ring II. jgg

O.

OCTAVIANS, their inlkt~ution and extenfrve powers, If.
O 189, they undermine the King's miniters, ibid. become
odious, and a combination is formed againlt them, ibid. being
split into faaions, and envied by the courtiers, they refagn
their commdion so3

Ogilade, Lord, has a Ccufhe with Sir John Gordon in the (treers

of Edinburgh - -I. zj6

Oliphant, Ma~ter of, joins the Ruthven coalpirators II. 76
Orange, Prince of, sends an agent into Scotland, II. 67, his in-

~tru~ions, ibid. is alffadiasted - a o

D'Oyfel, commander of the French troops in Scotland, I*ndea-

vours to promote a war with England, I. 128, his design fro-
fIrated, ibid. the number of troops under his command, a So,
infligates the Queen Regent to violent measures against the
Reformers, ibid. is lent by QL Mary to demand a Glae condua
from Q~Elizabeth, during her voy~age to Scotland 216

P-AIS LE 7

Abbot of, arrives in Scotland, I. 8g

creates a

fulpicion of the Earl of Lenox in the Earl of Arran, Re-

gent, ibid. is made Archbithop of St. Andrews - 96

Paris, the massacre of, 29, 30, rejoicings of the popith party

on account of it, 3r, the coniternation and horror of the
Prote~ants - -- ibid.

Parlialment, the nature of their original conititution, I. 6s, 67,

particularly that of Scotlond, 67, 9g, '96 a parliament held
on an extraordinary o~cca 100, sg4. a difticulty flatted and
adlwered, ag-, their proceeding with regard to religion. i98,
condemn the Popith and approve the Refraumed Deatines,
agg, tieveral other regulations of the lame rendency, ,oo,
their validity called in que~tion, zo , exceed the·ir powers,
scz, their proceedings laid beiore the K~ing and Quecen, ibid,
a parliament in favour of Both well, 336. pdls an act in favour
of the Refidrmation, ibid. 337, conthrm the procee~dings of the
confederate·, 366. parliaments held both by the King's and
Queen's parties, II. 18, r9, anorther of the Queen's adhe-
rents, '9, attaint upwards of 200r of their oppoinents, 20, a
pharliamnent at Stirling by the King's party, i9, f~urprized by

th Qeen's adherents, so, another at Srirling, 54, 59, one at
Edinburgh, 6r, and on the King's being of age, 1 g-, ibid.
several new laws made there, a 58, a 39, the les er Barons ad-
w~itted into parliament, ibid.

Farry, Dodor, undertakes to murder Q Elizabeth, II. rag, is

encouraged by and gets abrloition from the Pope, ibid, his
design how prevented, ibid. is executed, ibid.

PaJrpas, a lefuir, publishes a book in favour of the Infanta of

Spain's right of succession to the Crown of England II. 1 88

PafqUinades and Pi~ures, acculang Bothwell of Da;rnly's murder,

1. 328, 336, a law made against them -ibid.
attenr, William, his account of the Scottith ancient military
dilcipline - . s oo

,pa/la, Sir Amias, is appointed one of Queen Mary's keepers,

II. rot. his rigid severity to her, r07, discovers her foreign
correspondence, a z3, his rude treatment of her, 539, refUtes
to be concerned in privately alTaffinating her, '43, a leter
fromn him - pp. 3Y0

Pelle~vi, Bithop of Amiens, is appointed to fopport the poplth

inlterral in Scotland, 1. 166. drives the Queen Regent to vio-
lent measures agfainft the Protellants ---- '67

perth, an infurrettion of the Reformers there againlt the Papills,

I. * 46, its inhabitants are ceverely treated by the Qu5een Re-
gear, a 49, a French gartifon placed there. ibid. is belieged and

and taken by the protellants, IC3, a great tumult there on
account of Gowrie's conspiracy - 11. zr 5

Philip II. of Spain, married to Marry Queen of England, las 4 ,

reinforces his army with her croops. * 27, his great power, II.
a s0, joins in the holy league, ibid. resolves to Invade and
conquer England, bis, his preparations for it dilatory, rby,
his design fruffrared, ibid. meditates an invalson of Enlgland
through Scotland, I ttb, intrigues with iome Scois Lords w ich
that view ibid. remits money to them -185
Pinkey, the battle of -I. 98)
Pius V. Pope, excommunicates Q t*.lizabeth, deprives her of

her kingdom, and ablolves her lubjeds II. 8.

Polly, one of B~abington's conflpirators againit QL Elizaberb, II.

1as, dil~covers the plot ---- - azz

Po/tret, the frantic zealot, aaffalinates the Duke of Guise at the

siege of Orleans I +

Pont, Mr. Robert, a miniller, and one of the Lords of Seflion,

prote(1s againit laws opprd~five to the Church -II. 9a

Popery. where moit flour inthing, I. Is y, what kind prevailed in

Scotland, ibid. r ab, was partly gratred on Heathenism, ~q4,
is much hurt by the co~ngregation, '97, their dear~ines con-
demned by pasliament. ibid. the jurildi~ion of their courts
abolithed, i99), their worship prohibited, ibid. attempt in
vain to gain Queen Mary's favour, az6, the great influence
of Popery -286, 287

Po~wer, theP balaznce of, the great consequence of preserving it,

II. 7 a

Prejbyterian church government e8ablithed in Scotland, I. sog,

is confirmed by K~ing James VI. - I. sy9

Plr otepnts, in France, violently persecuted, 1. s 6z, are mode-

rate on Q Mary's arrival from France, us1, are employed by
her in the adminiitration, 222, a (C chme f00 iUppftifing thera
all over Europe. 286, a league formed for that purpore, II.
as o, fee Refor ationr.

RRA MS A , favourite of K. James III. narrowly ercapes

the fare of his associates, 1. 49, is appointed Captain of the

King a guard, and created Earl of~ Bothwell, go, ice Bothwerll.

Randnr, Sieur de, employed by the French to negociate a peace

with England and Scotland, 1. 192, terms agreed on by him,

194, r99

Randolph, sent to encourage the congregation, 1. *75, (see app.

t57,) congratulates Q. Mary's arrival in Scotland, zot, urges
the rantiication of the treaty of Edinburgh, a z3, is imposed
on by QMary in the affair of her marniage wi h Darnly,
265, fewt Into Scotland on the murder of Murray, 11. 4, in-

terpofes

terpoles for Morton, 66, 6·1, Bies from Scotlandt in the night,
68, is feat again there, and conciardes a treaty with England,
rar, several of his lessers, app. t65, 170, 279, 287, 29$,
"9'7, 298

Rwrchf, fee Sufe~x.
ReformPratio its progrers in Scotland, i. r07, account of ira firfl

preachers, so8, is much inlroenced by England, ibid. two
remarkable infirements of promoting it, lo9, it makes great
progress, a s4q, caules contributing to promote is, we I , its ad-
vantages over popery, r z4, is favoured by the Queen Re-
gent, r 29, an inflane of regard fRn it in Scotland, r 30, the
whole party not chargeable with Cardinal Beatoun's murder,
s37, a priedtburns for em~brracig it* r 38, the reformers vio-
lently persecuted by the Archbithop of St. Andrew's, ibid.
are prodteaed by the Q Regent. ibtid. apply in vain to the
popish clergy, a 39, a perfectrton against them1 pathed on by
the French interest, r 44, the prearchrs fumewomed before the
Regent, ibid. they are deceived and declared out-laws by her,
a 46, a riotous infrwreftion of them at Perth againA t he pa-
pills, ibid-. prepare to defend themfeilves againit the Queen,
a 47, concIede a treaty with her which the prdlently breaks,
sr49, they take arms against the Queen, a So, insist on re-
dreeding civil as well as seigioUs %rievances, a ps, the inftuence
of the reformation on libercy, abidt. they beliege and take
Perth, a 53, they frize Stirling and Edinburgh, ibid. commit
great violence on chur~chs and monalteries, a s4, their conl-
deft how accounted for, ibid. an initance of their modera-
tion, ag 9, 62 their refadence at Edinburgh, * 56, the Queen
prepares to actac them, itaid. make anorker treaty with er,
a~t 97 e forced to abandon Edinburgh, &rc. but allowed the
exrcrift of their religion, ibid. demand the expulflon of the
French army, a98. are aware of their danger from France,
t~r, their partyArengthened, ibid. resnontrate against the
French fortifying Leith, 166, take arms irr their own de-
fence, a 67, remonfirate again to the Regent, a 69, are high-
ly incensed at her imperious answer, ibid. 170. by advice of
a convention deprive the Queen Dowager of the oftice of
Regent, a 70, the f~oundationP of this conduft, ibid. sy s, the
growth of it encouraged by parliament, 366, fee Congrega-
ties.

RegakreSf,, the ample jurifdittion of I. I 8
Repkd_'pieS, the privilege of, to whom belonging - . I 8
Revengs, encouraged both by cullom and law - . 34
srevenes of the church, proceedings of parliament concerning
them - I. s2co

Ridelphi, an agent for the Pope at London negociates for (2

Muary, II. 23, his arguments with the Duke of Norfolk,

94, 25
Raio,

Rizrio, DaviLd, lome account of him and his rife, I. 264, 269,

Darnly's connettion with him, ibid. his good oilices courred
by Murray, r84, his great interedt and tramiliariry with the
Queen, 289 incurs the hatred of Darnly, ibid and of the
friends of e extiled L~ords, 29)0, leveral concurring cadres of
this, ibid. 39', a combinarion tormed to murder him, ibid.
he is murdered in the Queen's palace -394

Romans invade Britain, J. z, give the earlielt accounts of the

Scots ibid.

Ro/s biihop of, zealouily promotes Queen Mvar y's interelt at Lon-

don, II, 24, 26, is coolmned to the Tower and threateaed
with capital punilhment, ibid. is fetrat liberty and banithd
the kingdom, ibid. some letters of his app. 3a s, 338

Rubay, a foreigacr, made keeper of the great feaJ of Scotland,

I. I 2

Rurbee Lord, the m~uder of Rizio propeled to him by Darn-

l,1 9,heads the conrpirators againit him, 294, his part

in that tranlattion, ibid. is admitted mnto the Queen's presence
who promiLes him a pardon, a95, did not repeat of it at
his death See

30

Screated E. of Gowrie, he and his oaffciates seise the
King, and remonfirate agaisit his favourits, II. 76, 77, drive
them from him, ibld. mauir coa~u~k approved in an adfembly
of the ctates, 78, the King escapes (som them, 83, by Ar-
ran's influence violent mearures are determined againA them,
84, Q;Elizabeth intercedesin their behalf, ibid. 8<;. are de-
clared giy of high treason, 86, take refuge in foreign coun-
tries, id.are harmiby treated by Q;Elisabeth, sot, recon-
ciliation with her brought about, a*3.· r14, return to Scot-
land and are reconciled to the King, r '5, their moderation
on being reitored to their cRates rad honours, s r6, their ne-
gicit of: their friends the clergy -ibid.

that name abolilhed by parliament, II. 226. fee Gosuari.

Rurbuen aid, what --77

S ADLER,~ Sir Ralph, appointed acomnroidioner to hear the

cadle between Q. Mary and her acculers - . 387

Sandilatnds of Calder, lord St. John, sent to lay the proceeding

of the congregational parliament before the King and Queen
in France, I2OS, is coldly received and dismi~ed without a
ratifciction by them -zo3

Sasage a Spanilh officer, his desperate relolution to kill Q. ELii-

zabeth -11. tao

Scotland its antient hiltory fabulous, J. i, the origin of the

Scots, 2, their hiflory why remrarkshly obscure, 3, some ac-
count of the writers of it, 4, is divided into four periods,

5, a

<;. a review of the third zra, 6, rome account of the con-
troverty concerning its independency, ibid.lr0, this the
cause of grear animohtices and much bloodshed, s I, the slate
of Scotland when Bruce began his reign, i2. It begins to
have an influence on the fate of dirtant nations, 76, 77, in-
fluence as to the balance of power, 77, slate of Scotlanhd at
the birth of Q Mary, 79, is invaded by the Englith, and fe-
veral places burnt and plundered 90, much alrenated from
the Englith, ibid. 92, a peace concluded between England,
France and Scotland, ibid. computation of damages done by
the Englith in Scotland, 9z, 93, a new breach with England,
97, is invaded by a great Englilh army, 98, the Scots are de-
feared with great slaughter, 99, too, their manner of fight-
ing at that time, too, tot, a marriage agreed of their young
Queen and the Dauphin of France, a 04, they soon repent
this fLep, to6, a fray at Edinburgh occations their utter a-
vrerflon to the French, 107, this inflamed by another inci-
dent, rz5, they decline a war with England, Iz27, fend repre-
fecntatives to witners Q Mary's mnarriage, I30, their care
as to the marriage articles, ibid. I3I, they refule codrent to
the demands of the French, '32, four of their deputies luf-
peArd to be poisoned, a31, which much increases the aver-
floi, a 35, grant the crow·n matrimonial to the Dauphin, ibid.
they apply to the Engliih for aliftance againit the French,
175, 179, an Eng~lish fleet arrives fbt that purpole, I84, con-
clnde a peace with england and receive an English army,
a 89, a 86, all par ties agree in relenting the French, a 89. a
treaty between England, France and Scotland, 192, s93, both
Englilh and Frnchb armies leave Scotland, '95, they rejoice
much art he death of the young King of France, ros, fend
to invite the QLseen to Scotland, 208, 209, rejeat proposals of
an ambaildor from France, z z , flt~re of Scotland on Bt
Mary's return from France, 218, the great zeal of the na-
rion against popery, aa r, the Scots brought into contempt by
Q; Mary's conduA, as1, mna miierable condition after the
murder of Murray the regent, II. a 8, slate of fad~ions at
that time in it, ibid, I 9. a league concluded betweed Scorland
and England, as 8, a view of the revolutions of Scotland
since the accellion of James VI. 299j, a96, of the policy of
the (tate, z45, and of the church, 2590, of the genius and
talke as to learning ---- 25L, 256

Scott of H~uccleagh, enters and ravages England after the murder

of Murray the Regent. II. 3, 4, the deli~gn of this 6

Scroop Lord, feat to condole with, and watch Q Mary on her

arrival in England -- -- i. 378

SrOior, Lords and Court of, by whom firit appointed, I. 36, the

President and one half of their number of the Clergy ta o

Stless

SetonI Lord, adilts the Queen Regent in defending Leith r77.
Sbrew,;Oury Earl of, the charge of Q Mary's pedfon committed

to him, I- 394, why removed from that offace, sot, is sp-
pointed to fee~ the sentence againit her execured, i43, letter
from him and the Earl of Kent concerning her death, Ap-
pendix 39r

Sirclair, Bidhop of Roks, a zealous Papill, concurs as prelident

of ibe fediron mn acquitting knaox of a charge ~of treason,

1. l 5o

Somerfr Duke of, enters Scotland with a awerfil army, I. gr.

is reduced to a very critical fitruation, ibid. defeats the Scots
with great slaughter, 99, this viaory why of little advan-
rage, tos, cabels against him, at the Coirrt of England, force
him to retitin, ibid. is ruined by his enemies - 05

Spain, gret warIlike preparalion~s there, II. 16r, See dreadas

the Infshts of, for up as candidate for the Crown of

England a--- 88g

Sparnif ambelfaded is otddred to Ileste England, for intriguing in

favour of Q Mary II. 26

Sprot, his dilc~overies concerning Gowric's onfpirarcy, II. z s ,

a r 9, is execurted - ibid.

Steivart, James, prioi of St. Andrews, is appoisted to carry

the Crown matrimonial to the Dauphin of France, I. 130.
See St. AndrewsJ.
I--- Elmne, Lord Aubigne, his arrival in Scotland, II, 6o.
See Aubigiry. -Cap.Jmes, his charaaer, II. 60, becomes a favou-

rit ofKatg ames, jbid. accules Mbrtoil of the minrder of'

the late King, 64, is created Earl of Arran. See Arrasr.

--- Col. William, coummnder of the King's guard, con-

tributes to his escape from the Ruthven conspirators, II. 83.
seizes the Earl of Gowrie - 89

;--Fiancis. ctested Earl of Bothivell, II. 166, joins in a
treasonable corrdipondence with the Popith lords, a 67. See
BobrustlI.

------ all of that name combine in oppoling the 6hancellor,

Stirlkag seized by the Reformers, I. a 53, a parliament there

by the King's patty, II. so, is futPrized by the Qjacco a ad-
herents, an~d a great fray ensue* r

s

Strozed, L~eon, comniands a body of French feirt into ScOt-

land, 1. 96, redluces and demolithes the Castle of St. An-
drews, tbid. See France.

Succefosr, a remarktable fLature concerning it 1. 97
Gaperintenarts p~roposed in the Church of Scotland, I. so:,

their business ibid.

SafeiX Earl of, one of the cotnrunilIhore to hcar the catale

Ves.. II. H b betwecca

between Q Mary and her acculers, T. 387, a~embles a powes-
ful army on the borderrs 11. 7, he jnd Scroop enter, and ra-
vage Scotland ---- 7

T.

TA X upon land, fir(t proposed in Scotlanld 1. s ad

Thrymo, to~ Sir Nicholas, rent ambaifador extraordinary

from Q~ Elizabeth, to oppole Mary's marriage with
Darnly, I 26i7, his intercellion for the exiled lords, is much
regarded, zq4, 285, his enmity to Cecil, ibid. is sent to ne-
gaciate QMary's liberation*, 356, is refuted accels to her by
the confederates, ibid. some letters of his, App. 303. 304,

305* 3'o* 313*~15 3?$* id?17, Si*

·IIC Francis, is charged wsth a conspiracy against Q. Eli-

zabeth, II. 93. at tiff he denies, but afterwards confelles
it, ibid. 94, refteeions on his confedironiid executed

ibid.

7iebbourne designs to affalr~nate pElizabeth -IT. tzs
'Jrea/on, pei thns guilty of it, tried after their death by the law

of Scotland - I. zag

~V IL MO a foreigner, made comptroller of Scotland

I. I 25

UniOn of Scotland and England, the advantages of, II. 249,

W.

WT~ALLACE Sir William, bravely afferred the liberty of

his country i,

- o

I~aingham, recretary to Qt Elizabeth, fren ambassador to K.

James VI. (I. 89, returns without faccd~s, ibid. makles a fa-
vourable re rt to her cover~nirtg James, 86, interpoles in
favour of .~ M~ary, 1oo, dilcovers 13abington's coolrpiracy,
Ia2, why a deitrmined and inveterate enemy to QMary,
a 29, a letter from him, Appen. -- 380

Isar wick Earl of, lucceeds Somlerlet in the government of

England 1. 'o$

Wy/Pmin/fer, the conferences concerning Q Mary t~here,
Il~e/71sorlanJ, Earl of, attempts a rebellion in favour o3

Mary, 1. 4* 2. his (chemes dilcovered and defleated, 4 ,3, he
efcapea to thc Neh~eirlands ibid.

WhY~irbstn, the plior of` impriloned for celebrating Mar~s I. z48

IWillox,

H'~lliox, a moinifler, declares for refritance and deprivation of

tyrannical rulers, I. s yo, is called to attend the QL Dowager
on her death-bed - -sr

WaYibart George, his illegal execution, revenged .4
Witchcmraf, vigoroudly prosecuted in Scotland -II. as 4
Wottonr, dean of Canterbury, employed to negociate a peace

with France - --- 1. r92

- Sir Edward, sent by Queen Elizabeth into Scotland, II.

s 12, his charader, ibid. soon gets into high favour with King
James, ibid. procures a league between the two kingdoms,
ibid. I '3, undermines Arran's power, ibid. forms a plor on
King Jamnes, and forced to withdraw without ataing leave

u s, sa y

Y.

y""- ~LS~r - m~l~~-u" I9. 387

Z.

ZO UCHE, Lord, sent ambassador by Q; Elizabeth, to

remonstrate againit King James's lenity to thre Popilh lords,

51. 183, his treachery on that occalion ibid.

F IN IS.
