The Situation of the World at the Time

of CHRIST'S Appearance, and its Con-
nexion with the SucceJs of his Religion,
confidered.

A ,
SERMON

Preached before
The SOCIETY in Scotland for propaga-,

ting CHRISTIAN KNOWLEDGE,

At their ANNIVERSARY MEETING,
In the HIGH CHURCH of EDINBURGH,

On Monday, January 6. 1755.

, . [Publifled at their Desire]
ByWILLIAM ROBERTSON, D.D.

Minilier of Lady YESTER'S, Edinburgh.
o which is subjoined, a short Account of the

present State of the S c I ETY.

The Third Edition.

E D I N B U R G H:

rinted for HAMILTON &BALFOUR, and fold by
them, and Mr. A. MILLAR, London.

M,DCC,LIX.

# COLOSS. i. 26. Even the Mystery, which hath been hid from Ages, and Generations, but now is made manifest to his Saints.

A

S E R M 0 N.
SERMON

U P o N
UPON
The Situation of the World at the Time

of CHRIST'S Appearance, &c.

COLOSS. i. 26.
Even the Myflery, vhit/h hath been hid fromt Ages,

aind Generations, but now is made manifelf to
his Saints.
T H E R E is no employment more de-

lightful to a devout mind, than the
contemplation of the divine wis-

dom, in the government of this world. The
civil history of mankind opens a wide field
for this pious exercise. Careful observers
may often, by the light of reason, form pro-

bable

4 ]

bable conjectures with regard to the plan of
God's Providence, and can discover a Ikil-
ful hand, direcing the revolutions of human
affairs, and compassing the best ends, by the
most effectual and furprizing means: But
sacred history, by drawing aside that veil
which covers the counsels of the Almighty,
lays open his designs to the view of his
creatures, and we can there trace the steps
which he taketh towards them, with more
certainty, and greater pleasure. The facts
which inspired writers relate, are no less in-
itruetive, than the doctrines which they teach.
The latter inform us, that God is powerful,
and wife, and good; the former discoverthofe
perfections brought forth into acion, and con-
firm speculative opinions, by real and lrinking
examples.

TH E publication and eftablifiment ofChri-

ftianity in the world, is a remarkable event
of this kind, and contributes greatly to il-
lufirate and magnify the divine power and
wisdom. From beginnings the most incon-
fiderable, and by instruments the most un-
likely, the Almighty, with incredible faci-
lity, raised that glorious fabric of his Church,
which hitherto hath withstood all the rage
of his enemies, and the gates of hell we be-
lieve, Jhall not prevail agnail it '. Accord-

igM
.* Matth. xvi. s8.

[ 5 1
[5]

ing to our Saviour's beautiful image, 7he
Icaf of all feeds grew lip, and waxed a great
tree, andfpread out its branches, andfilled the
earth*. The hand of God .heltered this
feeble plant from the florm, and by his
care it was reared, and cultivated, and
brought to maturity. The wisdom and
power of men united to oppose the doctrine
of God: But it confounded the one, and o-
vercame the other. Neither the bigotry of
the Jews, nor the superstition of the Hea-
then, could resist its progrcfs; and in vain
did Herod and Pontius Pilate, with te Gentiles,
ald people of IJiael, gather t/heieflveJ togetlcr
againfi the Lord and his Alointcdt.

MANY circumstances concurred in procu-

ring, for Christianity, such a favourable re-
ception, and firm eitablilhment in the world.
Whoever rcflects upon the Iituation of man-
kind in that period, will find abundant rca-
Ibn to admire the divine witidom, which dilt
posed these circumstances with so much art,
and improved thenm with such Ikill and fuc-
cess. The text naturally leads me to confi-
der the condut and administration of Provi-
dence, in this particular light. The wrord of
God, faith the Apostle, the mfitcry hid fJiol
ages, and fiom? generations, is now mzade 'mani-
ft to his faints. Why was the gospel of

Christ
*Mark iv. f. At As iv. 27.

[6]

Christ so long concealed from the world?
Why was it published at that time ? What
do we find in that particular juncture to ren-
der the discovery of the Christian religion
more necessary, or the propagation of it more
successful ?

IN the following discourse, I shall endea-

vour to account for this-part of the divine aeco-
nomy, by feleAing some remarkable circum-
fiances, in the situation of mankind, which
prove that God manifefied the myfiery of the
gospel, at a time when the world itood moit
in need of such a revelation, and was best pre-
pared for receiving it.

THE appearance of Christ in so late an

age, was an objection railed, by his antient
adversaries, against the truth of his mission;
and modern infidels have not failed to revive
and urge it, with their usual confidence and
triumph. But, if we can establish the truth
of our general proposition, this cavil falls to
the ground, and the divine condut is fully
vindicated.
-t- I. ABOUT the time of Chrifl's appearance,
there prevailed a general opinion, that the
Almighty would fend forth some eminent
meflenger, to communicate a more perfed
discovery of his will to mankind. The fu-
preme Being condudteth all his operations
by general laws. It seems to be one among

;i. ssss¢ w g these.I

{ i^ -^ /: X . ni,

t ;Ie

'
s r an --- ,)t,7 X ./ ^.·,,(<>v .tz ^

s'wztis *- /ire47

o/r-tS,-s^ 't < /i te
_ ~~_____^ NIL_

[7]

these, that no perfection of any kind, can be
attained of a sudden. The motion, bywhich
his works advance towards their finished and
compleat state, is gradual and progreflive.
This holds with regard to all the produaions
in the natural, and all the changes in the
moral world. The fame principle appears
to have regulated the dispensations of religi-
on. The light of revelation was not poured
in upon mankind all at once, and with its full
splendor. The obscurity of the dawn went
before the brightness of the noon-day. The
will of God was at first made known by re-
velations, useful indeed, but dark and my-
fterious. To these, succeeded others more
clear and perfect. In proportion as the situ-
ation of the world made it necessary, the Al-
mighty was pleased farther to open and un-
fold his scheme. And men came by degrees
to understand this progressive plan of Provi-
dence, and to conceive how systems tempo-
rary and incompleat might serve to introduce
that concluding and perfect revelation, which
would declare the whole council of God to
man *.

The dignity of the person employed to pu-

blifh this revelation, the virtues of his cha-
radter, the glory of his kingdom, and the
signs of his coming, were described by the

antient
* As xx. 27.

-., ,/4 Iet
e 4 tm9 sectsrsZ S

/ *eJ

antient Prophets with the utmost perspicuity.
Guided by thisure zword ofprophecy, the Jews
of that age concluded the period predeter-
mined by God, to be then conpleated; and
that thefiullncfi of time being come, the pro-
mifed Messiah would suddenly appear. De-
vout persons among them, waited day and
night for the conjblation of Israel * ; and the
whole nation, groaning under the Roman
yoke, and stimulated by the desire of liberty
or of vengeance, expected their Deliverer,
with the most anxious impatience.

NOR were these expectations peculiar to

the Jews. By their dilperfions amongfo ma-
ny nations; by their conversation with the
learned men among the Heathens; and by
the translation of their inspired writings into a
language almost universal; the principles of
their religion were spread all over the
East: and it became the common belief, that
a Prince Would arise at that time in JYtdea,
who would change the face of the world,
and extend his empire from one end of the
earth to the other.

IN this due time, did the wisdom of God fend

forth his Son, not to assume any firange chara-
cter, or to claim any new and unknown digni,
ty, but to fulfil all that had been spoken by the
mlouth of his holy Prophctsflice the , ootldbegant.

While
* Luke ii. 25, 38. t AEts iii. zr.

[ 9

While the eyes of men were employed in
search of the promised Messiah; while they
watched everyfign that could indicate his
coming; and observed every circumiftance-
which could lead them to dilcover him;
ztwile the carnji expctation of all creatures
waited jbr the revelation of God; at that hap-
py and favourable juncure, was the m1Jlery
hlidfrom ages manifested to the world. No
wonder, the Jtews should receive our Saviour,
on his first appearance, not only without pre-
judice, but even with eagerness and applause:
No wonder the Gentiles mhould gather together
unto him, who had ib long been the dejire of
all nations *. Had Christ been manifested at
a more early period, the world would not have
been prepared to meet him with the fame
fondness and zeal: Had his appearance been
put off for any considerable time, men's ex-
pecdations would have begun to languish, and
the warmth of delire, from a delay of gratifi-
cation, might have cooled and died away.

II. BUT, it is not only fiom circumstances

peculiar to the Jews and neighbouring nati-
ons, that we conclude the Christian religion
to have been published at the most proper
time: We propose to bring a farther con-
firmation of this truth, from a survey of the
condition and circumstances of mankind in
general. Let us venture then into this large

B field,

*Gen. x.

x ix .
18 Hag. ii. 7.

[ 10 ]

field, and take a view of the'political, of tbe
moral, of the religious, and of the'domeftic
state of the world.

.WE begin, by confidering the political fate
of the world about the time of our Saviour's ap-
pearance. The world, in the mot early ages,
was divided into finall independent fates,
differing from each other in language, man-
ners, laws, and religion. The fliock of so
many opposite interests, the interfering of so
many contrary views, occasioned the most vio-
lent convulsions and disorders. Perpetual dif-
cord subsisted between these rival Rtates; and
hostility and bloodfled never ceased, during
that turbulent and restless period. Commerce
had not hitherto united mankind, and opened
the communication of one nation with ano-
ther. The world may now be confidered as
one vast society, closely cemented by mutual
wants; each part contributing its fliare to-
wards the subsistence, the pleasure, and im-
provement of the whole. But in those more
simple ages, the intercourse between nations
was extremely inconsiderable. Voyages into
remote countries, in quest either of wealth or
of knowledge, were very rare. Men moved
in a narrow circle, little acquainted with any
thing beyond the limits of their own small
territory, and utter firangers to the condition
and characer of distant nations.

AT

[ II ]

'AT last the Roman ambition undertook the
arduous enterprize of conquering the world,
and conducted it with such refined policy, ir-
resistible courage, and inimitableiperleverance,
as, in the end, crowned the attempt with fuc-
cess. Thcy trode down the kingdoms, according
to Danicl's prophetic description, by their
exceeding flrength, they devoured the whole
earth*. However, by enslaving the world,
they civilized it; and while they oppressed
mankind, they united them together. The
fame laws were every where established, and
the fame languages understood. Men ap-
proached nearer to one another in sentiments
and manners; and the intercourse between
the most distant comers of the earth wras
rendered secure and agreeable. Satiated with
vitory, the first Emperors abandoned all
thoughts of new conquests. Peace, an un-
known blessing, was enjoyed thro'out all that
vast empire; or if a flight war was waged on
an outlying and barbarous frontier, far from
disturbing the tranquillity, it scarce drew the
attention of mankind.

SUCH was the political tfate of the world,

when Christianity made its first appearance;
and, from this representation of it, many cir-
cumftances occur to justify the divine wis-
dom, in chufing that particular conljunCure,

for
Dan. vii. 7, z3.

[ 12 ]

for publishing it. During the period, which
I first described, the propagation of any new
religion, must have been extremely flow and
'uncertain. How could it have forced its way,
thro' innumerable difficulties, arising from
the unsettled state of the world, from the
fierceness and animosity of hostile and divi-
ded nations? The power of God, no doubt,
could have surmounted all these obstacles:
But it is observable, that this power is never
exerted but on the most necefary occasions.
The Almighty seldom effects, by supernatural
means, any thing, which could have been
accomplished by fich as are natural. And
were .we to judge by maxims merely human,
the propagation of Clriftianity, in those cir-
cumftances, would have proved not only a
dangerous but an impossible enterprize.

BuT, favoured by the union and tranquilli-

ty of the Roman empire, the disciples of Christ
executed their commiflion to great advantage.
The success and rapidity, with which they
diffused the knowledge of his name over the
world, are aftonihinrg. This epitfle to the
Cdloaflan, was written about thirtyyears after
our Saviour's ascension; and even then, the
Apostle could aflert, that the gospel had been
preacied to every creature whlich is under hea-
Wve; , i. e. thro' the whole extent of the

Ronman
Col. i. 23.

[ '3 ].

Rornan empire. Nations were then acceffi-
ble, which formerly had been unknown.
Under this situation, into which the Provi-
dence of God had brought the world, the
jo)ful found, in a few years, reached those re-
mote corners of the earth, into which it
could not, otherwise, have penetrated for ma-
ny ages.

TH I s view of our fubjedt, presents to us

an idea of the Chritfian religion, equal to the
greatest and most magnificent conception of
the human mind. The noblest people, that
ever entered upon the stage of the world, ap-
pear to have been only instruments in the di-
vine hand, for the execution of wife pur-
poses, concealed from themfelvesk The Ro-
man ambition and bravery paved the way,
and prepared the world for the reception of
the Christian dodtrine: They fought and con-
quered, that it might triumph with the greater
ease. Howbeit, they ineanednot o, .neither did
their heart think Jo; but it was in their heart to
defirfoy and cut of nations not a few .r By
means of their vi&ories, the over-ruling vis-
domn of God etfablifhed an empire, which
really pQffeffes that perpetuity and eternal du-
ration, which, they vainly arrogated to their
own: He erected a throne which /fall conti-

nue
* Ifa. x. 7,

[ I4 1

onu fir ever *, and of the increase of that go-
vernment there Jhall be no endt.

III. LET US confider the state of the world,

with regard to morals. We cannot expect
to find pure and undefiled virtue, among thole
people who were destitute of the inlfrudions,
the promises, and assistance of divine revela-
tion. Unenlightened reason often errs: Un-
directed virtue frequently deviates from the
right path. But, even in those less favour-
ed ages, righteoufnefi had not altogether
periJbedfromn the earth; and the nations -which
had Iwt the law, did by nature the things contain-
ed in the laws.. Thofevirtuous but feeble es-
forts of the human mind, were encouraged
and seconded by several happy circumstances,
in the situation of the world, owing in appear-
ance to, the sagacity of men, but ordained in
reality by the wisdom of God. One of there
was of a singular nature, and well deserves our
particular attention.

WE have already mentioned the early di-

vision of the world into small independent
itates. These states, unbroken by the refine-
ments of luxury, and animated with the no-
blest of human paflions, struggled for liberty,
and obtained it. Lawgivers, intimately ac-
quainted with human nature, deep politicians,
and lovers of mankind, arose in different

places,
*Heb.. 8. f - Ifa. ix. 7. Rom. ii. 14.

[ 15 ]

places, and founded those equal and happy
governments, which have been the admira-
tion and envy of all succeeding ages. Tem-
perance, frugality, decency, public spirit,
love to their fellow-citizens, magnanimity:
These are the virtues which flourished under
such wife institutions. At the fame time,
in those finall commonwealths, the conduct
of every citizen was fubjeded to the eye of the
magistrate; and the nature of the govern-
ment obliged him, to infpec their manners,
with severity. The finalleft crimes could
not escape observation: Even dangerous vir.
tues were exposed to censure. On this foun-
dation of public liberty, did antient virtue
reft; an effet of government little known in
modem times, wherein the views of legifla-
tors are confined to inferior objects. But
from this source, were derived all those
splendid acions among the heathens, which,
on the one hand, have been so invidiously
mentioned by infidels, as a reproach to our
holy religion, and on the other, so justly
celebrated by Christians, in order to rouze
the zeal and emulation of a degenerate age.

VIRTUE, however, did not long enjoy

this temporary and precarious support. Those
wife institutions were the works of men, and
mortal like their authors. Some of them
periihed by the malignity of internal diseases:

And,

[ r6 ]

And, if a vigorous constitution and more iki!-
ful management prolonged the period of o-
thers, they yielded at last to the violence of
external injuries. It was impoflible either to
divert or refiit the torrent of Roman power:
It gathered strength from opposition, and
bore down all nations before it. But, by
subduing the world, the Romans loft their
own liberty. Many causes, which it is not
our present business to explain, concurred in
producing this effe&: Many vices, engen-
dered or nourished by prosperity, delivered
them over to the vileit race of tyrants that
ever affliaed or disgraced human nature.

THE alliance between morals and govern-

ment was now broken; and an influence hi-
therto so friendly to virtue, became alto-
gether malignant, and was exerted with
most fatal success, to poison and debase the
human mind. Together with despotic
power, entered all those odious vices, which
are usually found in its train: and in a flort
time, they grew to an incredible pitch. The
colours are not too strong, which the A-
poftle employs in drawing the character of
that age; Cotemporary historians justify
him, when he describes it to be alienatcd
from the life of God, 'walking in vanity thro'
blindneft of mind; to be pai feeling, and given

lzip

[ 17 ]

zp to lafciiiolfiefiJ, and to work all unclean-
neJf with greedinef s.

IN this time of universal corruption, did

the wisdom of God manifest the Chriflian
revelation to the world, not to re-establish
virtue upon the fame insecure foundation of
civil government; but to eret it upon the e-
ternal and immoveable basis of a religion,
which teacheth righteoufilefs by the authori-
ty of God. What the wisdom of men could
do for the encouragement of virtue in a cor-
rupt world, had been tried during several
ages; and all human devices were found, by
experience, to be of very finall avail: So
that no juncture could be more proper for
publishing a religion, which, independent
on human laws and inflitutions, explains
the principles of morals with admirable per-
fpicuity, and enforces the practice of them by
most persuasive arguments. Had not Chrifti-
anitv appeared to check and to mitigate the
pernicious effeds of despotic unlimited empire,
it is hard to fay how far they might have gone
towards extinguishing the name and exercise
of virtue among men. This we know, that
in a most dissolute age, and under the worst
government, the primitive Christians attain-
ed, in evely virtue, to an eminence, of
which there is no example in the history

C of
*Ephef. iv. 17, 18, 19.

t 1t 1

of mankind. The spirit of their religion,
superior to the corrupt genius of the age,
continued pure and vigorous; and men saw
with admiration, that when every other
foundation of virtue was overthrown, the
foundation of God flood Jire, immoveable a-
midit the floods which came, the rains that
descended, and the winds that blew and beat
upon it*.

IV. LET us confider the world with re-

gard to its religious slate. The national
character of the Jews, seems to have been
deeply tinaured with superstition. Their
early education in Egypt, the example of
neighbouring nations, the influence of the
climate, but above all the perverseness of
their own disposition, rendered this impref-
sion indelible. Obstinate againit all the en-
deavours employed by their divine Law-
giver to repress or extirpate it, this fuperfRi-
tious spirit broke out on every occasion.
Delighted with the ceremonial prescriptions
of the law, the Jews utterly neglected the
moral: And, fond of such rites as please the
imagination, they undervalued those duties
which improve the heart. This unhappy
biass was greatly increased by the doctrine of
the Pharisees, which reduced the prejudices of'
their countrymen into a regular system of fu-

perfition,
* Malltb. viii. 25.

[ I9 ]

perftition. By their vain traditions, they ad-
ded to the load of ceremonies: By their
wretched interpretations of the law, they a-
bridged the number of moral precepts. They
openly preferred the former before the latter;
and substituted observances frivolous and in-
significant, in the place of the weighty matters
in tbe law, judgment, mercy, andfaith *.

WH I L E the Pharisees undermined religion,

on one hand, their rivals the Sadducees car-
ried on, from another quarter, a more bold
and impious attack against it. By denying
the immortality of the foul, they wounded
religion in a vital part; and overturned the
doctrine of future rewards and punithments,
which hath been, and must ever be, the chief
foundation of virtuous obedience. The prac-
tice of these two contending feds, was per-
fetly suitable to their principles: The fol-
lowers of the one, were scandalous libertines;
the disciples of the other, notorious hypo-
crites: And between them, the knowledge
and power of true religion were intirely de-
stroyed. It was high time then for the wis-
dom of God to vindicate his injured law, and
to revive languishing and decayed religion, a-
mong his ancient people. To recal the Jews
from their former wanderings, the Almighty
had with success employed the ministry of his

holy
T Matth. xxiii. 23.

[ o2 ]

holy Prophets: But the malignant distempers
of that age, would not have yielded to any
common remedy: A conceited and perverse
generation would have listened to no inferior
messenger; and therefore, the great Prophet
was sent forth in this due time, to explain, to
extend, and to perfect the law, and tofill Zion
with judgment and righteoufiefJi *.
BUT the deplorable situation of the heathen
world with regard to religion, called still more
loudly for an immediate interposition of the
divine hand. * I shall not mention the chara-
sers of the heathen deities, infamous for the
most enormous crimes; nor describe their
religious worship, consisting frequently in the
vilest and most shameful rites. Certain it is,
the more any man honoured such gods, the
worse himself was; and the oftner he served
them, the more wicked he would become.

e THE spirit and genius of heathen religion
are what I hall endeavour to represent.
These, according to the Apofile's observation,
were in all things too much SfpeCflitioiist. 1 State-
ly temples, expensive sacrifices, pompous ce-
remonies, magnificent feflivals, with all the
other circumstances of shew and splendor,
were the objects which false religion present-
ed to its votaries: But jult notions of God,
obedience to his moral laws, purity of heart,

and
Ira. xxxiii. 5. f A&s xvii. 23.

[ 2I ]

and fandity of life, were not once mentioned
as ingredients in religious service. Superfti.
tion never prevailed among any people, but
at the expence of morals. The heathen fu-
perftition, far from giving any aid to virtue,
seems not to have had the least conneaion
with it. No repentance of palt crimes, no
future amendment of conduct, are ever pre-
fcribed by it, as proper means of appealing
their offended deities. " Sacrifice a chosen vi-
crim; bow down before an hallowed Image;
be initiated in the sacred mysteries; and the
wrath of the gods ihall be averted, and the
thunder (hall drop from their hands." Suitable
to these sentiments, is the behaviour of Balak
King of Moab, described by the Prophet Mi-
cab. That Prince had provoked the God of
Ifracl; and in order to regain his favour,
thought of the fame means, which fuperftiti-
on employs to mitigate the rage of its false
gods. IFTherewith, fays he, fiall I come before
the Lord, and bow myself before the high God?
Shall I come before him with burnt-offerings, with
calves of a year old? WIill the Lord be pleased
wvillt thousands of rams, or with tenhouftol ds of
ivrcrs ofoil? Shall I give m, ' fifl-born for my
trafrefleon, thie fruit of my body, for the fin of
my fo.ul* ? To do jufly, to love mercy, and to
wialk hzumbly with God, were acceptable services,

which
Micah vi. 6, 7, 8.

[ 22 ]

which made no part in the system of heathen
religion.

APPI tY, the wisdom and simplicity of

antient government, checked the progress of
this infectious principle, and corrected, in
some degree, its poisonous and deftrutive
qualities. But, no sooner had the tyranny
of the Roman Emperors removed this re-
itraint, by subverting libertytthan fuperftiti-
on made its advances on the world by sudden
ai/d mighty steps, and exercised an uncon-
trolled dominion inWevery corner'of the earth.
Tyranny and fuperfition, like those other
destroyers of mankind, famine and pestilence,
are nearly allied. Superstition breaks the
spirit, and prepares it for servitude. Tyranny,
for this reason, encourages superstition, and
employs it as an useful auxiliary to illegal
power. {Accordingly, Rome adopted the
gods of almost every nation, whom she had
conquered; and opened her temples to the
grofleft fuperflitions of the most barbarous
people, Herfoolijh heart being darkened, she
changed the glory of the uncorruptible God, into
an image made like to corruptible man, and to
birds and four-footed beafis, and creeping
things*.

AT this time, therefore, did a good God,
in pity to his deluded creatures, publish the

Christian

* Rom. i. zi, 23.

C , 7 t,(/4A.

1

X / . Ct..'" a

C i
jjiz

t 23 ]

Christian revelation. By it, the God of truth
was made known; and the idols of the nations
were moved at his presence . Rational and
sublime in its doctrines, humane and benefi-
cent in its precepts, pure and simple in its
worlhip; Christianity was better calculated
than any other religion, to repress the inroads
of superstition, and to eftablilh an acceptable
and manly devotion, consisting inspirit and
in trut-ht. No period can be mentioned,
when inftrudion in these important articles,
would have been more seasonable or necef-
fary. The absurd fictions, and abominable
practices of fuperfitiion, had gone near to
extinguish the natural sentiments of the hu-
man mind, concerning the supreme Being,
and to banish his name and worship from the
earth. No wonder, men, under there cir-
cumftances, Thould liften, with joy, to the
Christian revelation, which delivered them
from that hateful yoke, and taught them, to
firve God without fear, inholinefs, and righte-
oufiefi before himS. /

V. LtT us confider the world with regard

to its domestic situation; a view, perhaps, less
extensive and magnificent than those, which
hitherto have engaged our attention; but
not less important. The private and domestic
situation of mankind, is the chiefcircumftance,

which
1 ra. xix. r. { John iv. 24. t Luke i. 74.

[ 24 ]

Which forms their charader, and becomes
the great source of their happiness or misery.
Any poison in this fountain, communicates
itself to the manners of men; any bittemefs
there, infeds all the pleasures of life. Many
circumstances, of the most fatal influence on
domestic virtue and happiness, occur to at-
tentive observers of the period under review.

Do M EST I c society is founded in the union

between husband and wife. Among all civi-
lized nations, this union hath been esteemed
sacred and honourable; and from it are de-
rived those exquisite joys or sorrows, which
can imbitter all the pleasures, or alleviate all
the pains in human life. In the antient world,
there prevailed two practices equally pernici-
ous to the peace and happiness of the married
state. From the most early times, polygamy
seems to have been universal among the east-
em nations; and men married as many wives,
as their fancy wiffed for, or their fortune
could maintain. Now, this practice not on-
ly appears to be contrary to the intention of
the Almighty, who at first created but one
person of each sex, and hath since preserved
an admirable proportion between the number
of males and females, whom he fends into
the world; but, by it, likewise, were banifled
from domestic life, all those enjoyments
which sweeten and endear it. Fricendilip,

social

[ 25 ]

social intercourie, confidence, and the mu-
tual care of children, were utterly unknown:
On the one hand, rigour, voluptuoufiefs,
jealousy; on the other, ifubjeedion without
love, fidelity, or virtue. One half of the
human species became the property of the
other; and the hufiband, initead of being
the friend and protedtor of a wife, was no
better than the mafler and tyrant over a slave.
The envy and dilcord which w-ere introduced
into the families of Jacob and El/,knaa, by a
plurality of wives, are but imperfe'tQ pidures
of the enormities occasioned by the fame
practice, under maiters less virtuous, and in
ages more difrolute and luxurious. Where-
ever the Christian religion is eftabliflled, an
end hath been put to an institution so incon-
fiftent with the felicityofdomeftic life. Mar-
riage, suitable to the ordinance of God, is
rendered a friendly and indissoluble alliance
between two persons; and tranquillity, con-
fidence, and joy bleis an union, begun and
cemented by mutual love.

IN the weitern parts of the world, the

maxims with rregard to marriage were more
conformable to nature: One man was confin-
ed to one wonan : But at the fame tinme,
their laws allowed a practice, w hich introdu-
ced the most fatal disorders into domestic life.
The Almighty, bocaif/ of /' .air;:cJ; of':dr

D At'a s,

[ 26 ]

hearts, permitted the Jews, on certain oc-
calions, to give a writilln of divoicemncit to
their wzives*. According to their ulual
custom, the Jews itretched this indulgence
to most extra\ agant lengths; and, defining
the cafes in which they pretended divorcec
to be lawful, with a minute and over-curious
accuracy, they altogether perverted the infti-
tution of God. h eir I)otors permitted di-
vorces for causes so trivial and ridiculous, as
cannot be mentioned in a grave dilcourfe.
The utlmof diflblution of manners, was the
effece of tich licentious opinions: And our
Saviour found the abuses to be grown so e-
normous, as to render the ftriteft and molt
precise limitations of the MaoJiic precept ab-
folutely necessary.

NOR was this matter on any better footing

among the heathen nations. Divorces, on
very flight pretences, were permitted both by
Greek and Roman legislators. And tho' the
pure manners of those republics, restrained,
for some time, the operation of such a per-
nicious institution; tho' the virtue of private
persons seldom abused the indulgence whichI
the laws allowed them : Yet no sooner had
the progress of luxury, and the establishment
of deipotic power, vitiated the taste of men,
than the law with regard to divorces, was

found
* Mark ., 4, 5.

1 27 ]

found to be among the worflc corruptions
which prevailed in that abandoned age. The
facility of separations rendered married per-
sons careless of obtaining or praitiiing thole
virtues which render domeitic life tranquil
and delightful. The education of children
was utterly neglected by parents, who often met
together with a lchele of separation in both
their thoughts. Marriage, instead of re-
firaining, added to the violence of irregular
desire; and under a legal name, became the
vilest and nmof lhamelcfs prostitution. From
all there causes, the married state fell into
difreputation and contempt; and it became
neceifary, to force menl, by penal laws, into
a lociet,\ where thle expected no secure or
laiting happiness. Among the Roia,.r, do-
nieflIc corruption grew, of a iudden, to an
incredible height; an d perhaps, in tie hi-
i'ory of mankind, iwe can iind no parallel
to the undifguitld impurity and liceiniouficfs
of that age *. It was in a good time, thcrc-
ibre, that our Saviour abolilhed a practice,
which had been one of the most fertile
sources of these disorders. The bonds of the
marriage-union were, by him,rendered almoff
indissoluble; and the cords of love were drawn
as close as possible. Political projeCtors may
please themselves with imaginary advantages,

reulitilng
Rom. i, 26, &c.

[ s2 ]

resulting from the liberty of divorces; but
reason, as well as the experience of mankind,
justify the wisdom of the divine decree con-
cerning them. If the manners of men be not
extremely pure and simple, the least indul-
gence in this article hath always proved fatal
to the peace and virtue of domestic life; and
whatever remains of these wee now find in a
difiblute age, muff be intirely ascribed to that
regulation in the gospel , which superficial
reasoners represent as a grievance, tho' it be
in truth the greatest bleling to mankind.

IF the lives of those, who are at the head

of domeflic society, needed reformation; the
sufferings of those who were fubjeft to them
merited relief.

So many are the wants of human society,

that far the greater part of mankind is con-
demned to constant toil and labour in order
to supply them. In the antient world, the
condition of this numerous and useful race of
men, differed widely from that, wherein they
are now placed. They were not freemen,
but slaves, who occupied the inferior, tho'
necessary, itation in human life. Their la-
bour, was not a voluntary duty to the foci-
ety, which intitlcd them to a reward; it was
an hard talk, imposed without their content,
and exacted with the utmost rigour. The

number
* Matth. v. 32.

[ 29 ]

number of persons, reduced to this unhappy
condition, was inlmenfe. In those parts of
the world, whose history and situation are best
known, above two thirds of the whole inha-
bitants are computed to have been in a state
of slavery. The persons, the goods, the chil-
dren of these slaves were the property of their
masters, disposed of at pleasure, and trans-
ferred, like any other poffeflion, from one
hand to another. No inequality of condition,
no superiority in power, no pretext of con-
sent, can jufiify this ignominious deprefflon
of human nature, or can confer upon one
man, the right of dominion over the person
of another: But not only doth reafbn con-
demn this inffitution as unjust; experience
proved it to be pernicious both to maffers
and saves. The elevation of the former, in-
spired them with pride, insolence, impatience,
cruelty, and voluptuoufnefs: The dependent
and hopeless state of the letter, dejedced the
human mind, and extinguished every gene-
rous and noble principle in the heart. Were
I to mention the laws and regulations of the
most civilized states among the antients, con-
cerning these unfortunate sufferers; were I
to relate the treatment which they met with,
from persons the most renowned for their
virtue; maxims so inhumane, and adtions
so barbarous, would excite the strongest pi-

ty

[ 30 ]

ty and indignation, in an age, which never
beheld the tyranny of the oppressor, nor
heard the groans of the captive.

IT is true, while men enjoyed those wife

institutions of government, which we former-
ly described, the state of servitude did not
become altogether intolerable; many expedi-
ents were used for mitigating the rigour of
command, and lightening the yoke of obedi-
ence: But, upon eftablithing despotic go-
vernment in the Roman Empire, domestic ty-
ranny role, in a hort time, to an aftoniih-
ing height. In that rank foil, every vice,
which power nourishes in the great, or op-
pression engenders in the mean, thrived and
grew up apace.

HERE then is an object worthy the atten-

tion of that merciful God, 7who delivereth the
foul of the afflided from violence, vL.wo bearcth
the cry of the needy, and him who hat/h no help-
er*. The groans of such an innumerable
multitude of his reasonable creatures, berea-
ved of the noblest privilege of their nature,
liberty and independence, would not, we
may believe, be uttered in vain. He could
not always keep silence and be flill, when he
beheld their wretched situation, so deftrudtive
ofhappinefs, and so fatal to virtue. At last,
the divine wisdom interposed; and when the

evil
* Pfal. xxii. 12.

[ 31 ]

evil had become intolerable, and seemed to
be past cure, the promulgation of Chriftia-
nity brought an effectual and timely remedy.

IT is not the authority of any single de-

tached precept in the gospel, but the spirit
and genius of Christian religion, more
powerful than any particular command,
which hath abolished the practice of slavery
thro' the world. The temper, which Chri-
ftbanityinfpired, was mild and gentle; and
the doctrines it taught, added ftch dignity
and lustre to human nature, as retcued it
from the dishonourable servitude into which
it was funk. All men, of every condition,
are declared to be the offspring of the fame
God, and the heirs of the fame heavenly in-
heritance: One Saviour redeemed them from
iniquity by his death, and one Spirit worketh
powerfully in their hearts. Where-ever such
opnions prevail, no human creature can be
regarded as altogether insignificant and vile;
even the meanest acquire dignity; exterior
diftintions disappear; and men approach
nearer to that original equality, in which
they were at first placed, and are frill view-
ed by their impartial Creator.

What a wonderful and blessed change

hath Christianity produced in the face of the
world ! Together with the knowledge of it,
liberty, humanity, and domestic happiness,

diffused

[ 32 ]

diffused themselves over every corner of the
earth. It is deemed a virtue, to admire and
praise those illustrious personages, who deli-
vered mankind from the rage of tyrants, and
vindicated the violated laws and conflitution
of their country: And is no admiration due
to the generous spirit of that religion, which
restored liberty, not to one nation or society
alone, but rescued from the worst servitude,
far the greater number of the human race, and
acquired for them that happy freedom, which
they still enjoy ? When we behold Chriftia-
nity making its progress thro' the world, and
working, every where, such an important al-
teration in the condition of mankind; we may
well apply to a temporal deliverance, what
the Prophet spoke concerning a spiritual fal-
vation: Behold the acceptable year of the Lord
is come! Liberty is proclaimed to the captive,
and the opening of the prison to them that are
bound; they tiall reft from their firrow7, and
from their fear, and from the hard bondage
-wherein they 'were made to serve .

THE

*Ifa. Ixi. r. xiv. 3.
The permillion of slavery in our Ainerican colonies, is a

specious, not a real objection againfi the reasoning under this
head. The genius and tendency of any religion are known
by the operations of its vigorous, not of its declining age:
And if avarice hath revived, in a degenerate world, an intliI
tution, which Chriflianity had utterly abolilhed; this, like
many other vices which prevail among Chrillians, mufl be
charged upon the corruption of the human heart, not upon
that religion, which teltifies against it.

[ 33;

THE abolition of domestic slavery was the
occasion of another change in the manners of
men, which is no lels remarkable. Captives
taken in war, were, in all probability, the
lirit persons lubjeded to perpetual fcrvitude:
And when the necessities or luxury of man-
kind increased the demand for slaves, every
new war recruited their number, by rel'ucing
the vanquilhed to that wretched condition.
Hence proceeded the fierce and desperate fpi-
rit, with which wars were carried on among
antient nations. While chains and Ilavery
were the certain lot of the conquered, battles
were fought and towns defended with a
rage and obstinacy, which nothing but horror
at such a fate could have ilfpired: But by
putting an end to the cruel institution of slave-
ry, Christianity extended its mild influences
to the practice of war; and that barbarous
art, softened by its humane ipirit, ceased to
be so deftrurtive. Secure, in every event, of
personal liberty, the refitance of the van-
quiflled became less obfiinatc, and the triumph
of the vidor less cruel; Thus humanity was
introduced into the exercise of war, with
which it appears to be almost incompatible;
and it is to the merciful maxims of Chriftiani-
ty, much more than to any other cause, that
we muff ascribe the little ferocity and blood-
filed, which accompany modern victories.

E Even

[ 34 ]

Wven where the pafflons of men are fiercest,
and nmoft highly inflamed, the powerful geni-
us of our religion interposes, reffrains the
fury of war, and lets bounds to its deltroy-
ing rage. The benevolent spirit of the go-
fpel, delivereth the captive from his fetters,
loo/tth tl1o/ '"l'ho were appoiited to denath , atl:!
faitb to the Jord. that is read.y to devour, R'-
tur.'z into thy scabbard, andt beftill-'.

IT hath become a faihionable topic among

political rexfoners, to celebrate the mildness
and humanity of modern manners, and to
prefer the charater of present times, in thail
refpedt, before the antient: To what cauie
fllall we afcribc this important revolution, in
the fentinents and diipofitions of mankind
Not to the influence of better instituted go-
vernments ;tfor in legislative wiflom the an-
tients far excelled us :,-Not to the effets of
a better-direted education; that duty, ihame-
fully negleted by us, was among them an ob-
jec of chief attention: Not to our superior
refinements in elegant and polite arts; there
we must be content to equal without pretend-
ing to i:frpat; the antients. The ChriftiIa
religion, hil/ Jiom ages, b:t :o-vj mlanifjifed tjO
t1hr: world, i the only cause capable of prc-
ducin lob rl'eai an effeet. That *wi/lom '/ii'
is fi-iz above, ispu, an
p e, pac.a:.Ca'', geitl', ct:'

Pal. cii 2z. f Jer. xlvii. .

-I- -

./- '- -

t-1 t j--
s , ts

L + - ; JC94I /L#

^
- w //

ZI-- ~ r·Cg i~Z~h rr~jl~~,2

' ~o% ~ lc-,~- ·,,,, ..> CI"-

W''' "

"
~"-

i 35 3

to be intrentc'i, fidl cf' merccy '. Genuine
Chriflianity is diftinguifiled above all other
religions, by the mildnei; of its tipirit: Thec
enemy of cvery practice which hardens the
heart: The encouragLer of ev ery virtuc, which
renders the charader humane. \'here-cvcr
it hath blen efCabllihed in purity, and prafti-
ted with zeal; kiil./w'!, l/,'-/u75'iriz, m-Ak-
;/l, cIl;arlii , , are the grasces w\hich ac-
company it. Even the \ices and ilnven-
tions of men, which have ningled them-
lel\es with the truths of God, have not been
able intirely to (leftrov their cff cts. Under
all disadvantages, the -ellius of lic gospel ex-
erts itI flf, civilii.!; the ficrceli and moll bar-
barous natiolls, aii inip ring a gent!enifs of
u;fi,)Oition, iunlknovii to an', oil:hr religion.
I'oiL.thcr with tihe lcft liritual hIleiiiigls, the
i;iot valuable te1:paoral mercies have been
conimunilcated tio til world, bv ClrifRianity.
It not only fancliiics our tbuls, but refines our
lilIanllers ; and while ii (ives the pl',i;les o
tlle necxt life, im inprovcs and adorns thc pre-
sent: That happy change, which thc wis:
dom of man could not effiet, God in his
good time accompliflled by ma;!iflying to t/e
world the mJTc r) hii filom ages mi, gc:nrati-

THESF.
* Jam. ili. 7. i Col. iii. t .

[ 36 ]

TH ESE observations, which we have made,

suggest many useful refledions, with regard
to the future and universal propagation es
Christian knowledge. At the time when the
diiciples of Christ set out, in obedience to
their Lord's command, to tench all nations;
no undertaking could appear in the judg-
ment of man more wild and improbable:
But, betides the blessing of God, which ac-
companied them where-ever they went, we
have discovered several circumpftances in the
situation of the world, which contributed
powerfully towards the success and facility of
their enterprize. Aided by these, the word of
God increafJd, and tbe number of difiliples mul-
tiplied greatly *. The 2reakncfJ of God becanme
fironger than men; and in a /flort tilme, he e-
nabledthefooli/h things of the iworld, to consolid,
the wife; the weak things of the world, to con-
found the things Vwhich are flrong; and things
that are not, to bring to nolght things that are 1.
That the fame effedtual blefling of God still
continueth to second every sincere and vigo-
rous attempt, to spread the knowledge of his
name, we have good reason to believe. What
powerful unknown causes may co-operate
with this blefing of the Almighty, we are not
yet permitted to discover. It cannot, how-
ever, be more improbable, that the influences

of
* Asls vi. 7. t i Cor. i. z25, 27, 28.

[ 37 ]

ofChriftianity fiall reach farther, than it once
was, that they should reach so far. And,
after we have seen the light of the gospel pe-
netrate into so many dark places of the earth;
why doth it seem incredible, that its splendor
should, at last, fill the world, and scatter the
remainder of darkness which covereth the
nations ?

IT is obvious to observe one circumstance,

which cannot fail of introducing the gospel
into distant nations with great advantage.
That part of the world, wherein Christianity
is eftabliflled, infinitely surpasses the reft in
all the sciences and improvements which
raise one nation above another in reputation
or power. Of this superiority the Europeans
have availed themselves to the utmost, in e-
very project for extending their empire or
commerce; and have brought a great part
of the globe into a dependence, either upon
their arts or arms. Now, these fame attain-
ments in science or policy, might be employ-
ed to good purpose, on the fide of religion:
and tho' hitherto subservient to the designs
ofintereft or ambition, may we not flatter
curfelves, that, at last, they ihall become
noble instruments in the hand of God,
for preparing the world to receive the gof-
pel?

THIS

[ 38 J

TH I s glorious prospect may be dillant; bui

it is not imaginary. Even in a degenerate
age, zealous and active ipirits have arielu,
and societies have been formed, upon the ge-
nerous plan of propagating the knowledge of
Christ to nationsfar of, 'which never heard lhi
fame, nor have Jcen his glory *. VWhat they
have already done, encourages the most ian-
guine hopes offartherfuccefs. And, if it flall
please God to increase the number, and
strengthen the hands, of ifch well-difpofid per-
sons: If he shall fee fit, to haJtcn his time uwhenl
one frall become a thoaifind, an finall one
flrongt: Then might we expeetthat the klow-
ledge of the Lordwould fill the earth, as the iwa.
ters cover the /fa ; that the de/art wvould llof-
fbi as the rose 11, and tbe wilderneJi bIrcone a
f;-uitfil field:" : Then might the spirit of
Christianity, which languishes so visibly in
those places where it hath long been planted,
revive with new vigour in unknown lands,
and shine with its first splendor, amnong : ;
people -who noaw fit in dan'klncJ andl in the rcaio'
andfhadow of death tt: Then might the J-
litary place rejoiceTT, the barren break r fol, i
into singing 111J, and the tongue of the dumb pr.ail i
the Lord**.

BUT

'Ifa. Ixvi. 19. t Ila. Ix. 2. + Ibid. xi. o.
I Ibid. xxxv. i. ** Ibid. xxxii. 15. -t Matth. iv. 16.
f1 Ifa. xxxv. i. i. Ibid. liv. 1. * Ibid. xxxv. 6.

r 39 ]

BUT the conversion of diflant nations, is

not the chief care of the Society for propaga-
ting Chriltian Knowledge: An object nearer
at hand demands their more immediate atten-
tion. The Highlands and Islands of Scotland
prelent to us a icene, which we would little
expect in a nation where true religion and po-
lified manners have long flourished. There,
lbciety fiill appears in its rudest and most im-
pertect fornm: Strangers to industry, averse
from labour, inured to rapine; the fierce in-
habitants scorn all the arts of peace, and stand
ready for every bold and delperate action. At-
tached to their own cultoms, from ignorance
and habit, they have hitherto continued a fe-
parate people. And tho' the religion efta-
blilhed among them be the lame which we
enjoy, its progress hath been imperfect; and
the fixed Pastors were never able to surmount
the disadvantages of their situation, or the ob-
itinacv of their people. In this neglected
iield, the enemies of our religion and liberty
!ave sown the feeds of the worst fuperiition
and the most pernicious principles of !govern-

ielnt.
TH Is field, the Society have occupied; and
lhave endeavoured by their pious care, to render
many of their deluded countrymen good Chri-
flians and ulieful Iubjects. Happily for them,
they do not labour alone in this noble work.

The

[ 4a ]

The reformation of the Highlands was never
totally negleded by the legislature: But rouz-
ed by a late danger, it hath since merited
their more particular attention. Suitable to
this view, laws have been enacted with a
most humane spirit, in order to retrieve that
part of the kingdom from ignorance and
barbarism, and to introduce the fame regu-
lar government and independence which are
the bleflings of other BritiJh fubjecas. From
these salutary laws, the Society expet great
afliftance, in the prosecution of their design.

In the mean time, they adore the divine

goodness which hath opened the hearts of
many charitable persons among ourselves and
neighbours, whose liberality hath put it in
their power to carry on their plan with vi-
gour and fucceis; enabling them not only to
begin a good work, but in many places
to bring it to great perfection. What a re-
proach will it be to an age, wherein no hand
is backward to supply the most extravagant
demands of luxury and pleasure, if this ge-
nerous undertaking shall languifl and decay
for want of support! The pleasures, after
which a giddy generation run, are unworthy
to be compared with that sacred joy which
fills the heart of a Christian who hath been
instrumental in reccuing an immortal foul
from vice, in adorning it with virtue, in

seasoning

l 41'

leafoning it with grace, in ma:n!ffiiug the

)1le'ry of the gofpcl to thof firom 7twhom it was
hi,, and in feeding the hungry with the
bread of lif'. If we ourselves have tafted of
the eavenvl) gift, if we have paed firom death to
life, and have not only heard the found, but
felt the power of the gospel; the greater will
be our zeal in communicating the fame glad
tidings to others, that they alio may be per-
iluaded to fly fjt r1fge to the co,,!/lliion ,s z/ich
are in C(riJt: If honour to our blessed Re-
deemer be the leading principle in our hearts,
we will never rcft satisfied, till his glory fill
tle earth, and every kece bowv o his Jfcrcd
;name. Byendeavouring thus to bless others,
wve shall draw down the divine blefling upon
ourftlves. Thc'; that l/c wis, /.1//hinie as
he brig,1tlef of the firmament ; awld tey that
trn many to rigitCo /q/ss, as the fJars fJo
''T'r alld ever *.

F
* Dan. xii. 3.

# STATE OF THE SOCIETY IN SCOTLAND, For propagating CHRISTIAN KNOWLEDGE, for the Year 1754.

STATE

OF THE

SOCIETY IN SCOTLAND,
For propagating CHRISTIAN KNOWLEDG Ej

so- the Year 1754.

H E piety and zeal of a few private per-
sons, gave rife to this Society, about

the year I700. The propagation of Chri-
ftian Knowledge, among their countrymen
in the Highlands of Scotland, was the only
object which they at first proposed to them-
selves. A design so laudable merited public
encouragement; and, in 1709, they were
erected into a body corporate by letters-
patent from Queen Anne. The donations,
which they have received, since that time,
from charitable persons both among ourselves
and our neighbours, have enabled them to
carry on their scheme with considerable fuc-
cess.

BY-

[ 44 ]

13Y fettling schools in the most remote corI

thers of the Highlands, where children are
initrueted in the principles of true religion,
they have in a great measure defeated the
pernicious adivity of the Popish missionaries:
By teaching the children under their care to
speak and read the Eiglifh language, they
have made tome progress towards incor-
porating those who fornerly spoke only the
Irish tongue with the reft of the Island: By
instilling into their minds an early knowledge
of the Christian dotrines, they hope by de-
grees to reclaim them from that fierce and
barbarous course of life, which is so contrary
to the humane and gentle spirit of the go-
fpel.

THE funds of the Society are not confider-

able; but they have endeavoured to supply
this defect by the most frugal ceconomy,
which hath put it in their power to prosecute
their plan, to an extent fat beyond what they
could have expected. Near 70,000 persons
have been educated by the Society since
its first commencement. At present, their
schools amount to the number of I55, at
which no fewer than 5831 children are c-
ducated. These schools are under the im-
mediate inlpeCtion of the Preflyteries, in
whose bounds they lie. Whoever is ac-
quainted with the Peographv of the country,

will

[45

will find them to be situated in the wildest,
and least civilized places of the Highlands and
Islands. And, could the funds of the Socie-
ty permit, schools might be opened with no
less advantage, in many other places of that
extensive country.

To change the manners of a whole people,

must be the work of unwearied perleverance
and attention. Attached by habit and ex-
ample to the customs of their ancestors, the
children educated bv the Society were too
ready to forget the good principles which
they had been taught; and the love of idle-
nets and rapine often wore out the imprefri-
ons which religion and virtue had made in
their minds. In order to provide a remedy
for this, the Society applied for a new char-
ter, which they obtained in 1738; and by
it, they are impowered to instruct the chil-
dren under their care in the different parts of
agriculture, trade, and manufactures. To
the execution of that part of their plan, they
have reckoned themselves impowered to ap-
ply those thins, which, by the express defti-
nation of the Donor, are not appropriated
for the other ends of the Society. And now,
when thele flins have amounted to Iome-
thing worth notice, they are beginning to lay
them out in this way. But those funds which
belonged to the Society previous to the date

of

[ 46 1

of their new charter, and whatever new do
nations are granted them to be employed in
the religious education of youth, they frill
apply with the utmost fidelity to that purpose
alone. For these reasons, the progrefi of
the Society, in this part of their underta-
king, must needs be gradual. However, the
attempts which they make, have been at-
tended with such fuccets, as abundantly jufti-
fies the wisdom of the scheme. Happily,
there two branches of their design are inti-
mately connected. Where-ever true Chri-
ftianity is established, it improves, adorns,
and perfets human society. Religion and
industry go hand and hand, strengthen and
establish one another. Conformable to the
spirit of their second patent, the Society,
since the commencement of the year I755
have engaged to support a design, which
seems greatly to merit the public attention
and encouragement,

THE Honourable Board of Trustees for

improving the manufactures and fiiheries in
Scotladul, have agreed to employ part of their
funds in fettling small colonies of linen-ma-
nufacturers in different parts of the High-
lands. The station of one of these colonies,
they have fixed at Lochcarron, a place which
by its situation appears to be very proper for
that purpose. The Trustees have already

provided

[ 47 ]

provided a sufficient number of manufadlu-
rers for this new settlement, and have ap-
pointed skilful overseers to direcct them. The
Proprietor of the lands of Lochcarron, who
hath given all the encouragement in his
power to this laudable undertaking, repre-
sinted to the Trustees, that betides the diffe-
rent tradesmen employed by them, in the
linen-manufadory, a fchoolmafer well-qua-
lified for inftrufing youth, a blacksmith, a
ihoemaker, a cart-wright, and a ploughman,
would be of great advantage to this infant-
colony. However much the Trustees ap-
proved this proposal, they could contribute
nothing towards the execution of it. The
funds under their management are appro-
priated by aft of Parliament for the encou-
ragement of the linen-manufadory and the
fisheries; and they had no powers to em-
ploy them for any other purpose, however
necelfary. But, by their direction, the Pro-
prietor applied to the Society for propaga-
ting Christian Knowledge, in order to obtain
their charitable affitlance to promote so good
a design.

TH E Society, whose funds have been rai-

led intirely by private contributions, were
not limited by the fame reffridions which
bound the Trustees. The design appeared
to them to be useful and well-concerted: It

is

[ 48 ]

is perfectly suitable to the spirit and intention
of their second patent: It tends evidently to
encourage religion, virtue, and industry in
the Highlands. They resolved, therefore,
to promote it in the most effectual manner
that their funds would permit. For this
purpose, betides a schoolmaster, whom they
have fettled at Lochcarron, they agreed to al-
low considerable yearly salaries to a black-
smith, a ihoemaker, a cart-wright, and a
ploughman, who are to be employed by
them for five years. The ploughman is to
instruct, gratis, all that offer themselves;
and the others are obliged to inftrut a num-
ber of apprentices, and to give maintenance
at bed and board to them, if the Society
finds that expedient, at a reasonable rate, to
be paid by the Society. And if, in other
places of the Hlighlands, the fame plan could
be followed out, the inhabitants, who have
hitherto been burdensome to the nation,
fiom idleness, or formidable by their aCtivity,
might at last become ufcful, industrious, and
valuable members of society.

BESIDES their endeavours towards the in-

struting and improving the Highlands, the
Society have of late been engaged in a new
and more extensive undertaking. The late
Dr. Williams, and some other well-difpofed
persons in England, confiding in the prudence

and

[49 ]

and fidelity of the Society, have committed
to their management certain fums which they
ordain to be employed for the inftrucCtion of
the Indians in Allerica. Conformable to their
pious intentions, the Society have dispatched
Miflionaries into that country; and tho', in
bo wide and neglectcd a field, the industry
of a few labourers can produce no great or
sudden effect, yet, from their success, it is e-
vident, that, with proper cultivation, a blet-
fed and joyful increase might be expe&ed.

T'H ERE are indeed many obstacles, which

retard the propagation of Christianity in that
corner of the world. Among the Indians, in
the neighbourhood of our colonies, society is
till in its finplelt form! They lead the un-
fettled life of savages, who uipport them-
selves by hunting, and wander from one place
to another ini queit of game: They are di-
vided into many finall tribes, differing front
each other in language and in manners: At-
tached to their own superstitious rites, they
discover great aversion for the Christian reli-
gion, which is but ill-recommended to them
by the example of many who profess it.

NOTWITHSTANDING all these difadvan-

tages, the Society have the pleasure to hear
from Mr. Brainerd their Miflionary, that
many among the Indians whom he hath form-
td into a Christian congregations still con-

G tinue

[ 5° 1
[ so

tinue Jftefafl and immoveable in the profeflion
of the gospel: And he is not without good
hopes of adding to their number by his dili-
gence and care.

AT a time, when the friendship of the I-

dian nations appears to be of so great con-
sequence towards the security and pre-
servation of our American colonies, no at-
tempt to instruct them, however feeble,
ought to be regarded with indifference. E-
very person among them, .whom we gain o-
ver to the belief and pratice of true Chri-
ftianity, becomes from that moment the ally
of Britain, and is bound to its interest by a
powerful and sacred tie.

FROM this brief account of the intention

and management of the Society for propa-
gating Chriflian Knowledge, they flatter
themselves, that the former will be efieenmed
commendable, and that in the latter they
cannot justly incur the imputation either of
imprudence or unfaithfulness.

EVERY good man will bless God who hath

honoured the Society to be his instruments
for publishing the gospel of Christ to so ma-
ny persons who must otherwise have peri/l-
ed for lack of knowleldge: And every man ca-
pable of reflection, will approve inftitutioni
of this nature which contribute so much to
prepare the world for the full manifeftatiol

[ 5S ]

of the myflery hid from ages and generations;
when the deaffkall hear the zwords of the book,
and te eyes of the blind frall fee out of ob-
fcurity and out of darknefJ; when the meek

.l.all increase their joy in the Lord, and the
poor among men Jhall rejoice in the Holy One
of Israel.

F I N I S
