AN

HISTORICAL
DISQUISITION

CONCERNING
The Knowledge which the ANCIENTS had of

INDIA;

AND THE
PROGRESS of TRADE with that COUNTRY

prior to the Discovery of the Passage to it by the

CAPE OF GOOD HOPE.
With an APPENDIX,

CONTAINING
Observations on the Civil Policy - the Laws and

Judicial Proceedings - the Arts - the Sciences -
and Religious Institutions, of the INDIANS.
By WILLIAM ROBERTSON D. D. F. R. S. Ed.

PRINCIPIA OF THE vINIVERsITY *, A9D H1i5TORIqOGRAIU

T0 HIS IMAJESTY FOB SCOTLAND.

BASIL:
Printed and fold BY J. J. TOURNEISXN.

M DCC XCII.

# PREFACE.

PREFACE.

THE perural of Major Rennell's Memoir for
illufirating his Map of Indoftan, one of the most
valuable geographical treatises that has appeared
in any age or country, gave rife to the folowing.
work. It suggested to me the idea of examining
more fully than I had done in the IntroduCtory
Book to my History of America, into the knowledge
which the Ancients had of India, and of confider-
ing what is certain, what is obscure, and what is
fabulous, in the accounts of that country which
they have handed down to us. In undertaking
this inquiry, I had originally no other object
thon my own amusement and initruaion: But

A 2

in carrying it on, and consulting with care
the authors of antiquity, some facts, hitherto
unobserved, and many which had not been
examined with proper attention, occurred; new
views opened; my ideas gradually extended and
became more interesting; until , at length, I
imagined that the result of my researches might
prove amusing and instructive to others, by
exhibiting such a view of the various modes in
which inrercourfe with India had been carried on

from the earliest times, as might show how much
that great branch of commerce has contributed,
in every age, to increase the wealth and power
of the nations which possessed it.

Thus the Historical Disquisition which I now

lay before the Reader was begun and completed.
What degree of merit it possesses, the Public
mutl determine. My grateful recollection of the
favorable manner in which my other works have
been received, naturally increases the solicitude
with which I wait for its decision concerning this
which I now publish.

When I first turned my thoughts to this fubjeca,

I was so fully aware of the disadvantage under
which I labored in undertaking to describe
countries of which I had not any local knowledge,

T»

that I have been at the utmost pains to guard
against any errors which this might occasion. I
have consulted, with persevering industry, the
works of all the authors I could procure, who
have given any account of India; I have never
formed any decided opinion, which was not
supported by refpetable authority; and as I have
the good fortune to reckon among the number
of my friends some Gentlemen who have filled
important flations, civil and military, in India,
and who,have visited many different parts of it,
I had recourse frequently to them, and from their
conversation learned things which I could not
have found in books. Were it proper to mention
their names, the Public would allow that by their
discernment and abilities they are fully entitled
to the confidence which I have placed in them.

In the progress of the work, I became sensible

of my own deficiency with refpet to another
point. In order to give an accurate idea of the
imperfe&tion both of the theory and practice of
navigation among the Ancients, and to explain
with scientific precision, the manner in which they
ascertained the position of places, and calculated
their longitude and latitude, a greater portion of
mathematical knowledge was requisite, than my

attention to other studies had permitted me to
acquire. What I wanted, the friendship of my
ingenious and respectable Colleague, Mr. Playfair,
Professor of Mathematics, has supplied, and I
have been enabled by him to elucidate all the
points I have mentioned, in a manner which, I
am confident, will afford my Readers complete
satisfaction. To him, likewise, I am indebted
for the construction of two maps necessary for
illustrating this Disquisition, which without his
assistance I could not have undertaken.

I have adhered, in this work, to an arrangement

I followed in my former compositions, and to
whicn the Public has been long accustomed. I
have kept historical narrative as much separate as
possible from icientific and critical discussions,
by refervin the latter for Notes and Illustrations.
I latter m)Yyiif that I may claim , without
prernmption, the merit of having examined with
dii*eace w'at I fmnt to public inplion, and of
hza4nz referred, wth kr

iC usO c aoCra.cy, to the
·a-nr,- from wiho I h'e derived informanon.

Cr2ege ct' Edinbug h,

Ma- Ioth, 1791.

# CONTENTS.

CON T ENT S.

SECTION I.

Page

ntercourfe with India, from the carlieft ri.mes,
until the Conqucfi of Egypt by the Romans.

SECTION II.
Intercoure lwith India, from the Etablishment of

the Roman Dominion in Egyt, to the Congque
of that Kinudom by tke Mahonedam. 45

SECTION III
ItctrcGrf wi India, frca the Co S.cefr FFip

iy tAeC .ahomedm , to t-s Difcry aof tt
Pasyge by the Cape cf Good Hpe, and the
EJiablu. ors the Po~rtzuc Dcsie~ inr
the £f.

SECTION IV.

Page

General Obferations. 6o

NOTES and ILLUSTRATIONS. 191

APPENDIX. 251
NOTES to the APPENDIX. 343

AN

# SECTION I.

AN
HISTORICAL DISQUISITION

CONCERNING
ANCIENT INDIA.

SECTION L
Intercourse witb India, from tbe ecrlieft Timer, until

the Conquest of Egypt by the RDmans.

H O E V E R attempts to trace the operations s B C T.

of men in remote times, and to mark the various x,
steps of their progress in any line of exertion,
will soon have the mortification to find , tL-t the
period of authentic history is extremely limi. d.
It is little more than three thousand years since t, -
Books of Moses, the most ancient and only ge-
nuine record of what passed in the early ages of
the world, were composed. Herodotus, the molt an-
cient Heathen historian whose works have reached

B

s E c T. us, flourished a thoufrnd years later. If we pufl

. our inquiries concerning any point beyond the

era xvlire written hiltory commences, we enter
upon the region of conjecture, of fable, and of
uncertainty. Upon that ground I will neither ven-
ture myself, nor endeavour to condud my readers.
In my researches concerning the intei course between
the Eastern and Western regions of the earth, and
concerning the progress of that great branch of
trade, which, in every age, has contributed so
conspicuously towards raising the people who carried
it on, to wealth and power, I shall confine myself
within the precincts I have marked out. Where.
ever the inspired writers, intent upon higher objecs,
mention occasionally any circumstance that tends
to illustrate the subject of my inquiries, I (hall
attend to it with reverence. Whatever other writers
relate, I shall examine with freedom, and endea-
vour to ascertain the degree of credit to which
they are entitled.

The original station allotted to man by his

Creator, was in the mild and fertile regions of the
East. There the human race began its career of
improvement; and from the remains of sciences
which were anciently cultivated, as well as of arts
which were anciently exercised in India, we may
conclude it to be one of the first countries in
which men made any considerable progress in that
career. The wisdom of the East was early cele-
brated', and its producions were early in request

* a Kings, iv. ;o.

among distant nations'. The intercourse, how- SECT.
ever, between different countries was carried on I.
at first entirely by land. As the people of the
East appear soon to have acquired complete domi-
nion over the useful animals', they could early
undertake the long and toilsome journies which it
was necessary to make, in order to maintain this
intelcourfe; and by the provident bounty of Hea.
ven, they were furnished with a beast of burden,
without whose aid it would have been impossible
to accomplilh them. The Camel, by its perfever-
ing strength, by its moderation in the use of food,
and the singularity of its internal ftrudure, which
enables it to lay in a flock of water sufficient for
several days, put it in their power to convey bulky
commodities through those deserts, which must be
traversed by all who travel from any of the coun-
tries wetl of the Euphrates towards India. Trade
was carried on in this manner, particularly by the
nations near to the Arabian Gulf, from the earliest
period to which historical information reaches.
Distant journies, however, would be undertaken
at sirs only occasionally, and by a few adventurers.
But by degrees, from attention to their mutual
safety and comfort, numerous bodies of merchants
assembled at flated times, and forming a tempo-
rary association (known afterwards by the name
of a Caravan), governed by officers of their own
choice, and subjed to regulations of which experi-
ence had taught them the utility, they performed

Gen. xxxvii. 2S. ' Ibid. xii. 16. xxiv. so, 1X.

B 2

SECT. journies of such extent and duration, as appears

L aftonilhing to nations not accustomed to this mode

of carrying on commerce.

But notwithstanding every improvement that

could be made in the manner of conveying the pro-
duclions of one country to another by land, the
inconveniences which attended it were obvious
and unavoidable. It was often dangerous; always
expensive, and tedious, and fatiguing. A method
of communication more easy and expeditious was
fought, and the ingenuity of man gradually dif-
covered, that the rivers, the arms of the sea, and
even the ocean itself, were destined to open and
facilitate intercourse with the various regions of
the earth, between which they appear, at first
view, to be placed as insuperable barriers. Navi-
gation, however, and ihip-building, (as I have
observed in another work') are arts so nice and
complicated, that they require the talents, as well
as experience of many successive ages, to bring
them to any degree of perfecion. From the raft
or canoe, which first served to carry a savage
over the river that obfiruced him in the chafe,
to the conftrucdion of a vessel capable of convey-
ing a numerous crew, or a considerable cargo of
goods, to a distant coast, the progress of improve-
ment is immense. Ilany efforts would be made,
many experiments would be tried, and much labor
as well as ingenuity would be employed, before
this arduous and important undertaking could be
acconplilcd!.

* Hist. of Amcrica vol. i. p. 2.

Even after some improvement was made in (hip- s E c T.

building, the intercourse of nations with each other 1.
by sea was far from being extensive. From the
accounts of the earliest historians, we learn that
navigation made its first efforts in the Mediterranean
and the Arabian Gulf, and in them the first active
operations of commerce were carried on. From
an attentive infpedion of the position and form
of these two great inland seas, these accounts
appear to be highly probable. These seas lay
open the continents of Europe, Asia, and Africa,
and spreading to a great extent along the coasts
of the most fertile and most early civilized coun-
tries in each, seem to have been destined by nature
to facilitate their communication with one another.
We find, accordingly, that the first voyages of
the Egyptians and Phenicians, the most ancient
navigators mentioned in history, were made in
the Mediterranean. Their trade, however, was
not long confined to the countries bordering upon
it. By acquiring early poffeflion of ports on the
Arabian Gulf, they extended the sphere of their
commerce, and are represented as the first people
of the Weft who opened a communication by sea
with India.

In that account of the progress of navigation and

discovery which I prefixed to the History of Ame-
rica, I confidered with attention the maritime opera-
tions of the Egyptians and Phenicians; a brief
review of them here, as far as they relate to their
connexion with India, is all that is requisite for il.
luflrating the subjed of my present inquiries. With

B 3

SECT. respect to the former of these people, the infor-

1. mation which history affords is slender, and of

doubtful authority. The fertile foil and mild climate
of Egypt produced the necessaries and comforts of
life in such profusion, as to render its inhabitants
so independent of other countries, that it became
early an established maxim in their policy, to re-
nounce all intercourse with foreigners. In confe.
quence of this, they held all sea-faring persons in
detestation, as impious and profane; and fortifying
their harbours, they denied strangers admiflion
into them'.

The enterprising ambition of Sefoftris, disdaining

the restraints imposed upon it by these contraced
ideas of his fubjeas, prompted him to render the
Egyptians a commercial people; and in the course
of his reign, he so completely accomplished this,
that (if we may give credit to some historians) he
was able to fit out a fleet of four hundred Ihips in the
Arabian Gulf, which conquered all the countries
firetchingalong the Erythrean sea to India. At the
fame time, his army, led byhimfelf, marched through
Asia, and fubjeced to his dominion every part
of it as far as the banks of the Ganges; and crof-
sing that river, advanced to the Eastern Ocean'.
But these efforts produced no permanent effet,
and appear to have been so contrary to the genius
and habits of the Egyptians, that, on the death

Diodbr. Sicul. lib. i. p. 78. edit. Weflelingi. Amft. 1746.
Strab. Geog. lib. xvii. p. i 4z. A. edit. Cafaub. Amft. 1707.

' Diod. Sic. lib. i. p. 64.

of Sef'ftris, they resumed their ancient maxims, SECT.
and many ages elapsed before the commercial I.
connexion of Egypt with India came to be of such
importance as to merit any notice in this Disquisition'.

The history of the early maritime operations of

Phenicia are not involved in the fame obscurity
with those of Egypt. Every circumstance in the cha-
ratcr and situation of the Phenicians, was favor-
able to the commercial spirit. The territory which
they possessed, was neither large nor fertile. It was
from commerce only, that they could derive
either opulence or power. Accordingly, the trade
carried on by the Phenicians of Sidon and Tyre,
was extensive and adventurous; and, both in their
manners and policy, they resemble the great com-
mercial Rates of modern times, more than any
people in the ancient world. Among the various
branches of their commerce, that with India may
be regarded as one of the molt considerable and
most lucrative. As by their situation on the Mediter-
ranean, and the imperfee Rate of navigation,
they could not attempt to open a direc commu-
nication with India by sea; the enterprising spirit
of commerce prompted them to wrest from the
Idumaeans some commodious harbours towards the
bottom of the Arabian Gulf. From these they held a
regular intercourse with India, on the one hand,
and with the EaRtern and Southern coasts of Africa
on the other. The distance, however, from the Ara-
bian'Gulf to Tyre was considerable, and rendered

' See NOTE I.

i RB4

s C T. the conveyance of goods to it by land carriage so

I. tediou, and expensive, thtt it became necessary

for them to take possession of Rhinocolura, the
nearest port in the Mediterranean to the Arabian
Gulf. Thither all the commodities brought from
India, were conveyed over land by a route much
Thorter, and more practicable than that by which
the productions of the Raft were carried at a sub-
sequent period from the opposite shore of the Ara-
bian Gulf to the Nile'. At Rhinocolura, they
were refhipped, and transported by an easy navi-
gation to 'ryre, and distributed through the world.
This as it is the earliest route of communication
with India, of which we have any authentic de-
scription, had so many advantages over any ever
known before the modern discovery of a new
course of navigation to the East, that the Pheni-
cians could supply other nations with the productions
of India in greater abundance, and at a cheaper
rate, than any people of antiquity. To this circum-
fiance, which, for a considerable time, secured to
them a monopoly of that trade, was owing, not
only the extraordinary wealth of individuals, which
rendered the "merchants of Tyre, Princes, and
" her traffickers the Honorable of the Earth';"
but the extensive power of the state itself, which
first taught mankind to conceive what vast resources
a commercial people possess, and what great exer-
tions they are capable of making ".

Diod. Sic. lib. i. p. 70. Strab. lib. xvi. p. zi28. A.
Isaiah, xxiii. 8. " See NOTE II.

The Jews, by their vicinity to Tyre, had suchs E CT.
an opportunity of obfcrving the wealth which I.
flowed into that city from the lucrative commerce
carried on by the Phenicians from their settlements
on the Arabian Gulf, as incited them to aim at
obtaining some Ihare of it. This they effected
under the prosperous reigns of David and Solomon,
partly by the conquets which they made of a
finall diftrid in the land of Edom, that gave them
poffeflion of the harbours of Elath and Efiongeber
on the Red Sea, and partly by the friendship of
Hiram, king of Tyre; who enabled Solomon to
fit out fleets, which, under the direction of Phe-
nician pilots, failed to Tarshish and Ophir". In
what region of the earth we should search for
these famous ports which furnifled the navy of
Solomon with the various commodities enumerated
by the sacred historians, is ah inquiry that has long
exercised the industry of learned men. They were
early supposed to be situated in some part of In-
dia, and the Jews were held to be one of the
nations which traded with that country. Buc the
opinion more generally adopted is, that Solomon's
fleets, after pafring the straits of Babelmandel,
held their course along the south-west coast of
Africa, as far as the kingdom of Sofala; a coun-
try celebrated for its rich mines of gold and silver,
(from which it has been denominated the Golden
Sofala by Oriental writers",) and abounding in

" Kings, ix. 26. x. 22. " Notices des MSS. du
Roi, tom. ii. p. 40.

S E C T. all the other articles which composed the cargoes

1. of the Jewish flips. This opinion which the accu-

rate researches of AI. D'Anville rendered highly
probable", seems now to be eltablifhed with the
utmolt certainty by a late learned traveller; who,
by his knowledge of the monsoons in the Arabian
Gulf, and his attention to the ancient mode of
navigation, both in that sea and along the African
coast, has not only accounted for the extraordinary
length of time which the fleets of Solomon took
in going and returning, but has shown, from cir-
cumftances mentioned concerning the voyage, that
it was not made to any place in India'. The
Jews, then, we may conclude, have no title to
be reckoned among the nations which carried on
intercourse with India by, sea; and if, from defer.
ence to the sentiments of some refpeciable authors,
their claim were to be almitted, we know with
certainty, that the commercial effort which they
made in the reign of Solomon was merely a tran-
fient one, and that they quickly returned to their
former state of unsocial seclusion from the reft of
mankind.

From colleding the scanty information which

history affords, concerning the most early attempts
to open a commercial intercourse with India, I
now proceed, with more certainty and greater
confidence, to trace the progress of communication
with that country, under the guidance of authors

" Dissert. fur le Pays d'Ophir, Mem. de Literat. torr.
xxx. p. 83, &c. "'lruce's Travels, book ii. ch. 4.

who recorded events nearer to their own times, SECT.
and with refpeft to which, they had received more I.
full and accurate intelligence.

The first establishment of any foreign power in

India, which can be ascertained by evidence, me-
riting any degree of credit, is that of the Perdfans;
and even of this we have only a very general and
doubtful account. Darius, the son of Hyftafpes,
though raised to the throne of Persia, by chance
or by artifice, possessed such active and enterprising
talents, as rendered him worthy of that high fta-
tion. He examined the different provinces of his
kingdom more diligently than any of his predecef-
fors, and explored regions of Asia formerly little
known". Having fubjeaed to his dominion many
of the countries which stretch south-east from the
Caspian sea towards the river Oxus, his curiosity
was excited to acquire a more extensive and accu-
rate knowledge of India, on which they bordered.
With this view he appointed Scylax of Caryandra
to take the command of a squadron fitted out at
Cafpatyrus, in the country of Padya, ( the modern
Pehkely,) towards the upper part of the navigable
course of the river Indus, and to fall down its stream
until he should reach the ocean. This Scylax per-
formed, though it should seem with much difficulty,
and notwithstanding many obstacles; for he spent no
less than two years and fix months in conducing
his squadron from the place were he embarked,
to the Arabian Gulf". The account which he

" Herod. lib. iv. c. 44. " Ibid. c. 42. 44.

s E C T. gave of the populousness, fertility, and high culti-

I. vation of that region of India through which his

course lay, rendered Darius impatient to become
master of a country so valuable. This he soon
accomplilhed; and though his conquests in India
seem not to have extended beyond the diftrid
watered by the Indus, we are led to form a high
idea of its opulence, as well as of the number
of its inhabitants, in ancient times, when we
learn, that the tribute which he levied from it,
was near a third part of the whole revenue of the
Persian monarchy ". But neither this voyage of
Scylax, nor the conquests of Darius, to which it
gave rife, diffused any general knowledge of India.
The Greeks, who were the only enlightened
people at that time in Europe, paid but little
attention to the tranfations of the people whom
they confidered as Barbarians, especially in coun-
tries far remote from their own; and Scylax had
embellished the narrative of his voyage with so
many circumstances, manifestly fabulous", that
he seems to have met with the jufl punishment, to
which persons who have a notorious propensity
to what is marvellous, are often fubjeded, of being
listened to with distrust, even when they relate
what is exacly true.

About a hundred and sixty years after the reign
of Darius Hyftafpes, Alexander the Great under-

7 Herod lib. iii. c. 90-96. See NOTE III.
"Philoftr. Vita Apoll. lib. iii. c. 47. and Note ;d of
Olearius Tzetzet. Chiliad. vii. verf. 630.

took his expedition into India. The wild sallies SECT.
of palfion, the indecent excesses of intemperance, I.
and the ostentatious display of vanity too frequent
in the conduct of this extraordinary man, have so
degraded his character, that the pre-eminence of
his merit, either as a conqueror, a politician, or
a legislator, has seldom been justly estimated. The
fubjedt of my present inquiry leads me to confider
his operations only in one light, but it will enable
me to exhibit a striking view of the grandeur and
extent of his plans. He seems, soon after his first
successes in Asia, to have formed the idea of eftab-
lifhing an universal monarchy, and aspired to the
dominion of the sea, as well as of the land. From
the wonderful efforts of the Tyrians in their own
defence, when left without any ally or protector,
he conceived a high opinion of the resources of
maritime power, and of the wealth to be derived
from commerce, especially that with India, which
he found engrossed by the citizens of Tyre. With
a view to secure this commerce, and to establish
a station for it, preferable in many refpets to
that of Tyre, as soon as he completed te 'con-
quest of Egypt, he founded a city near one of the
mouths of the Nile, which he honored with his own
name; and with such admirable discernment was the
situation of it chosen, that Alexandria soon be-
came the greatest trading city of the ancient world;
and, notwithltanding many successive revolutions in
empire, continued, during eighteen centuries, to
be the chief feat of commerce with India ". Amidst

* His. ofAmerica, voL i. p. 20.

siCT. the military operations to which Alexander was

I. soon obliged to turn his attention, the desire of

acquiring the lucrative commerce which the Tyrians
bad carried on with India, was not relinquished.
Events soon occurred that not only confirmed and
added strength to his desire, but opened to him
a profpec of obtaining the sovereignty of those
regions which supplied the reft of mankind with
so many precious commodities.

After his final victory over the Persians, he was

led in pursuit of the last Darius, and of Beffus,
the murderer of that unfortunate monarch, to tra.
verse that part of Asia which stretches from the
Caspian sea beyond the river Oxus. He advanced
towards the east as far as IMaracanda ', then a
city of some note, and destined, in a future peri-
od, under the modern name of Samarcand, to be
the capital of an empire not inferior to his own
in extent or power. In a progress of several months,
through provinces hitherto unknown to the Greeks,
in a line of march often approaching near to India,
and among people accustomed to much intercourse
with it, he learned many things concerning the
state of a country" that had been long the objet
of his thoughts and wishes", which increased his
desire of invading it. Decisive and prompt in all
his resolutions, he set out from Batria, and crof.
fed that ridge of mountains which, under various
denominations ,forms the Stony Girdle (if I may

Arrian, iii. c. 3o. " Strab. xv. p. oz21. A.
Arrian, iv. c. IS.

use an expression of the Oriental geographers) s ECT.
which encircles Afla, and constitutes the northern I.
barrier of India.

T'he molt pracicable avenue to every country,

it is obvious, must be formed by circumstances
in its natural situation, such as the defiles which
lead through mountains, the course of rivers, and
the places where they may be passed with the
greatest ease and safety. In no place of the earth
is this line of approach marked and defined more
conspicuously, than on the northern frontier of
India; insomuch that the three great invaders of
this country, Alexander, Tamerlane, and Nadir
Shah, in three distant ages, and with views and
talents extremely different, advanced by the fame
route, with hardly any deviation. Alexander had
the merit of having first discovered the way. After
passing the mountains, he encamped at Alexan-
dria Paropamifana, on the fame site with the
modern city Candahar; and having subdued or
conciliated the nations feated on the north-west
bank of the Indus, he crossed the river at Taxila,
now Attock, the only place where its fiream is
so tranquil that a bridge can be thrown over it".

After passing the Indus, Alexander marched

forward in the road which leads directly to the
Ganges, and the opulent provinces to the south-
east, now comprehended under the general name
of Indoftan. But, on the banks of the Hydafpes,
known in modern times by the name of the Betah

R' Rennell, Mem. p. 92.

SE cT. or Chelum, ihe was opposed by Porus, a power-

1. ful monarch of the country, at the head of a

numerous army. The war with Porus, and the
holtilities in which he was successively engaged
with other Indian princes, led him to deviate
from his original route, and to turn more towards
the south-west. In carrying on these operations,
Alexander marched through one of the richest and
belt peopled countries of India, now called the
Panjab. from the five great rivers by which it is
watered; and as we know that this march was
performed in the rainy season, when even Indian
armies cannot keep the field, it gives a high idea
both of Alexander's persevering spirit, and of the
extraordinary vigor and hardinef. of constitution
which soldiers, in ancient times, derived from the
united effeds of gymnastic exercise and military
discipline. In every ftep of his progress, objects
no less striking than new presented themselves to
Alexander. The magnitude of the Indus, even
after he had seen the Nile, the Euphrates, and
the Tigris, must have filled him with surprise*.
No country he had hitherto visited was so popu-
lous and well cultivated, or abounded in so many
valuable produaions of nature and of art, as that
part of India through which he had led his army.
But when he was informed in every place, and
probably with exaggerated description. how much
the Indus was inferior to the Ganges, and how
far all that he had hitherto beheld was surpassed

Strab. lib. xv. p. 1027. C. & note 5. Caufab.

in

in the happy regions through which that great SECT,
river flows, it is not wonderful that his eagerness 1.
to view and to take poffeflon of them Ihould have
prompted him to alfemble his soldiers, and to pro.
pose that they should resume their march towards
that quarter where wealth, dominion, and fame
awaited them. But they had already done so much,
and had suffered so greatly, especially from incef-
sant rains and extensive inundations, that their
patience as well as strength was exhausted', and
with one voice they refused to advance farther.
In this resolution they persisted with such fullen
obflinacy, that Alexander, though poIfeffed ina
the highest degree of every quality that gains an
ascendant over the minds of military men, was
obliged to yield, and to issue orders for marching
back to Persia".

The scene of this memorable tranfadcion was on
the banks of the Hyphafis, the modern Beyah,
which was the utmost limit of Alexander's progress
in India. From this it is manifest, that he did not
traverfc the whole extent of the Panjab. Its south-
weft boundary is formed by a river anciently known
by the name of Hyfudrus, and now by that of the
Setlege, to which Alexander never approached
nearer than the southern bank of the Hyphafis,
where be ereded twelve stupendous altars, whic
he intended as a monument of his exploits, and
which (if we may believe the biographer of Apollo
nius Tyanaeus) were fill remaining, with legible

"Sec NOTE V. " Aran, . c 24, at.

¢

s E c T. inscriptions, when that fantaltic sophist visited In.

dia, three hundred and seventy. three years after
Alexander's expedition". The breadth of the
Panjab, from Ludhana on the Setlege to Attock
on the Indus, is computed to be two hundred and
fifty-nine geographical miles, in a straight line;
and Alexander's march, computed in the fame man.
ner, did not extend above two hundred miles.
But, both as he advanced and returned, his troops
were so spread over the country, and often aded
in so many separate divisions, and all his move-
ments were so exadly measured and delineated by
men of science, whom he kept in pay for the
purpose, that he acquired a very extensive and
accurate knowledge of that part of India '.

When, upon his return, he reached the banks

of the Hydafpes, he found that the officers to whom
be had given it in charge to build and colled as
many vessels as possible, had executed his orders
with such adivity and success that they had assem-
bled a numerous fleet. As amidst the hurry of war,
and the rage of conquest, he never loft fight of his
pacific and commercial schemes, the destination of
this fleet was to fail down the Indus to the ocean,
and from its mouth to proceed to the Persian Gulf,
that a communication by sea might be opened with
India and the centre of his dominions.

The condud of this expedition was committed
to Nearchus, an officer equal to that important trust

' Philoft. Vita Apol. b. ii. c. 4.. edit. Olcar. Lips. 1709.

Plin. Nat.
AiL lib. ri. c. 17.

But as Alexander was ambitious to acquire fame S C T.
of every kind, and fond of engaging in new and I.
splendid undertakings, he himself accompanied
Nearchus in his navigation down the river. The
armament was, indeed, so great and magnificent,
as deserved to be commanded by the conqueror of
Asia. It was composed of an army of a hundred
and twenty thousand men, and two hundred ele-
phants, and of a fleet of near two thousand vessels,
various in burden and form'"; on board of which '
one-third of the troops embarked, while the re-
mainder marching in two divisions, one on the
right, and the other on the left, of the river,
accompanied them in their progress. As they ad-
vanced, the nations on each fide were either com-
pelled or persuaded to submit. Retarded by the
various operations in which this engaged him, as
well as by the flow navigation of such a fleet as
he conducted, Alexander was above nine months
before he reached the ocean'.

Alexander's progress in India, in this line of

diredtion , was far more considerable than that
which he made by the route we formerly traced;
and when we attend to the various movements of
his troops, the number of cities which they took,
and the different states which they subdued, he
may be said not only to have viewed, but to have
explored, the countries through which he passed.
This part of India has been so little frequented by-
Europeans in later times, that neither the position

" See NOTE V. " Strabo, lib. xv. p. 1ot4.

CeO

s c T. of places, nor their diltances, can be afccrtained

I. with the fame accuracy as in the interior provinces,

or even in the Panjab. But from the researches
of Major Kennell, carried on with no less discern-
ment than industry, the distance of that place on
the Hydafpes, where Alexander fitted out his fleet,
from the ocean, cannot be less than a thousand
Britilh miles. Of this extensive region a considerable
portion, particularly the upper Delta, stretching
from the capital of the ancient Mlalli, now lXloul-
tan, to Patala, the modern Tatta, is distinguished
for its fertility and population "

Soon after he reached the ocean, Alexander,

satisfied with having accomplished this arduous
undertaking, led his army by land back to Persia.
The command of the fleet, with a considerable
body of troops on board of it, he left to Nearchus,
who, after a coalting voyage of seven months,
conducted it safely up the Persian Gulf into the
Euphrates '.

In this manner did Alexander first open the

knowledge of India to the people of Europe, and
an extensive diftrid of it was surveyed with greater
accuracy than could have been expeced from' the
short time he remained in that country. Fortunately
an exat account, not only of his military opera-
tions, but of every thing worthy of notice in the
countries where they were carried on, was re-
corded in the Memoirs or Journals of three of his

" Rennell, Mem. 68, &c. Plin. Nat. Hist.
lib.vi c. 23. See NOTE VI.

principal officers, Ptolemy the son of Lagus, s E C T.
Arifobulus, and Nearchus. The two former have a.
not indeed reached our times, but it is probable
that the most important faas which they contained,
are preserved, as Arrian professes to have followed
them as his guides in his History of the Expedition
of Alexander ; a work which, though composed
long after Greece had loft its liberty, and in an
age when genius and taste were on the decline,
is not unworthy the purest times of Attic literature.

With refpet to the general state of India, we
learn from these writers, that in the age of Alex-
ander, though there was not eftablilhed in it any
powerful empire, resembling that which in modern
times stretched its dominion from the Indus almost
to Cape Comorin, it was even then formed into
monarchies ok considerable extent. The king of
the Prafij was prepared on the banks of the Ganges
to oppose the M.acedonians, with an army of twenty
thousand cavalry, two thousa'nd armed chariots,
and a great number of elephants". The territory
of which Alexander constituted Porus the fove-
reign, is said to have contained no fewer than two
thousand towns". Even in the most reftriced
sense that can be given to the vague indefinite
appellations of nations and towns, an idea is con-
veyed of a very great degree of population. As
the fleet failed down the river, the country on
each fide was found to be in no refpea inferior

" Arrian, lib. i. in proemio. '* Diod. Sicul. lib,
xvii. p. 232. ' Arrian, lib. vi. c. 2.

C3

s E C T. to that of which the government was committed

1. to Porus.

It was likewise from the Memoirs of the fame

officers that Europe derived its firfl authentic infor-
mation concerning the climate, the foil, the pro-
dudtions, and the inhabitants of India; and in a
country where the manners, the customs, and even
the dress of the people are almofr as permanent and
invariable as the face of nature itself, it is wonder-
ful how exatly the descriptions given by Alexan-
der's officers delineate what we now behold in
India, at the distance of two thousand years. The
stated change of seasons, now known by the name
of MoufJoonri the periodical rains; the swelling of
the rivers; the inundations which these occasion;
the appearance of the country during their conti-
nuance; are particularly mentioned and described.
No less accurate are the descriptions which they
have given of the inhabitants, their delicate and
slender form, their dark complexion, their black
uncurled hair, their garments of cotton, their
living entirely upon vegetable food, their division
into separate tribes or cafti, the members of which
never intermarry, the custom of wives burning
themselves with their deceased husbands, and many
other particulars, in all which they perfedly resemble
the modem Hindoos. To enter into any detail
with refped to these in this place would be pre-
mature; but as the subjed, though curious and
interesting, will lead unavoidably into discussions
not well suited to the nature of a historical work,
I shall reserve my ideas concerning it for an Appen.

dix, which I purpose to annex to this Disquisition; s ECT.
and hope they may contribute to throw some addi- I.
tional light upon the origin and nature of the
commerce with India.

Much as the Western world was indebted, for its

knowledge of India to the expedition of Alexander,
it was only a small portion of that vast continent
which he explored. His operations did not extend
beyond the modern province of Lahor, and the
countries on the banks of the Indus from Moultan
to the sea. These, however, were surveyed with
that degree of accuracy which I have already
described; and it is a circumstance not unworthy
of notice, that this diftrid of India which Euro-
peans first entered, and with which they were
best acquainted in ancient times, is now less known,
than any part of that continent ', neither commerce
nor war, to which, in every age, geography is
chiefly indebted for its improvement, having led
any nation of Europe to frequent or explore it.

If an untimely death had not put a period to

the reign of the Macedonian hero, India, we have
reason to think , would have been more fully
explored by the ancients, and the European domi-
nion would have been eflablifhed there two thousand
years sooner. When Alexander invaded India, he had
something more in view than a transient incursion.
It was his object to annex that extensive and opu.
lent country to his empire, and though the refracory
spirit of his army obliged him, at that time, to

" Rennell, Mem. x14.

C4

SECT. suspend the prosecution of his plan, he was far

1. from relinquifling it To exhibit a general view

of the measures which he adopted for this purpose,
and to point out their propriety and probable
success, is not foreign from the fubje& of this
Disquisition , and will convey a more just idea
than is usually entertained, of the original genius
' and extent of political wisdom which diftinguilhed
this illustrious man.

When Alexander became mailer of the Persian

empire, he early perceived, that with all the power
of his hereditary dominions, re-inforced by the
troops which the ascendant he had acquired over
the various states of Greece might enable him to
raise there, he could not hope to retain in subjec-
tion territories so extensive and populous; that to
render his authority secure and permanent, it must
be established in the affection of the nations which
he had subdued, and maintained by their arms;
and that in order to acquire this advantage, all
dillindions between the vitors and vanquilhed
must be abolitsed, and his European and Asiatic
fubjees must be incorporated, and become one
people, by obeying the fame laws, and by adopt-
ing the fame manners, inflitutions, and discipline.

Liberal as this plan of policy was, and well

adapted to accompliCh what he had in view, no-
thing could be more repugnant to the ideas and
prejudices -f his countrymen. The Greeks bad
such a high opinion of the pre-eminence to which
they were raised by civilization and science, that
they seem hardly to have acknowledged the reft

s

of mankind to be of the fame species with them- sE CT.
selves. To every other people they gave the 1.
degrading appellation of Barbarians, and in confe.
quence of their own boasted superiority, they
asserted a right of dominion over them, in the fame
manner as the foul has over the body, and men
h.ve over irrational animals. Extravagant as this
prctenfion may now appear, it found admission,
to the disgrace of ancient philosophy, into all the
schools. Aristotle, full of this opinion, in support
of which he employs arguments more subtle than
solid", advised Alexander to govern the Greeks
like fubjeds, and the Barbarians as slaves; to
confider the former as companions, the latter as
creatures of an inferior nature ". But the sentiments
of the pupil were more enlarged than those of his
master, and his experience in governing men taught
the monarch what the speculative science of the
.philosopher did not discover. Soon after the victory
at Arbela, Alexander himself, and by his perfua-
sion many of his officers, assumed the Persian dress,
and conformed to several of their customs. At the
fame time he encouraged the Persian nobles to
imitate the manners of the Macedonians, to learn
the Greek language, and to acquire a relifb for
the beauties of the elegant writers in that tongue,
which were then universally studied and admired.
In order to render the union more complete, he
resolved to marry one of the daughters of Darius,

" Ariftet. Polit. i. c. 3-7. "' Plut. de Fortuna Alex.
Orat. i. p. 302. vol. vii. edit. Reifke. Strab. lib.i. p. i16. A.

S E CT. and chose wives for a hundred of his principal

I. officers in the molt illustrious Persian families. Their

nuptials were celebrated with great pomp and fefti-
vity, and with high exultation of the conquered
people. In imitation of them, above ten thousand
Macedonians of inferior rank married Persian wo-
men, to each of whom Alexander gave nuptial
presents, as a testimony of his approbation of
their conduct".

But affiduouflv as Alexander labored to unite

his European and Asiatic subjects by the molt
indissoluble ties, he did not trust entirely to the
success of that measure for the security of his new
conquefls. In every province which he subdued,
he made choice of proper stations, where he built
and fortified cities, in which he placed garrisons,
composed partly of such of the natives as con-
formed to the Grecian manners and discipline,
and partly of such of his European fubjeds, as
were worn out with the fatigues of service, and
wished for repcfe, and a permanent establishment.
These cities wzre numerous, and served not only
as a chain of posts to keep open the communication
between the different provinces of his dominions,
but as places of strength to over-awe and curb the
conquered people. Thirty thousand of his new
fubjefts who had been disciplined in these cities,
and armed after the European falhion, appeared
before Alexander in Susa, and were formed by

, Arrian, lib. vii. c. 4. Plut. de Fort. Alex. p. 3o4.
See NOTE VII.

him into that compa.& solid body of infantry, SECT.
known by the name of the Phalanx, which con- I.
ftituted the strength of a Macedonian army. But
in order to secure entire authority over this new
corps, as well as to render it more effective, he
appointed that every officer in it intrusted with
command, either flperior or subaltern, should be
European. As the ingenuity of mankind naturally
has recourse in similar situations to the fame expe-
dients, the European powers, who now in their
Indian territories employ numerous bodies of the
natives in their service, have, in forming the eftab-
lilhment, of these troops, adopted the fame maxims;
and, probably without knowing it, have model-
led their battalions of Seapoys upon the fame
principles as Alexander did his Phalanx of Persians.

The farther Alexander puffed his conquests

from the banks of the Euphrates, which may be
confidered as the centre of his dominions, he found
it necessary to build and to fortify a greater num-
ber of cities. Several of these to the East and
South of the Caspian sea are mentioned by ancient
authors; and in India itself, he founded two cities
on the banks of the Hydafpes, and a third on
the Acefines, both navigable rivers, which, after
uniting their streams, fall into the Indus4. From
the choice of such situations, it is obvious that
he intended, by means of these cities, to keep
open a communication with India, not only by
land, but by sea. It was chiefly with a view to

" See NOTE VIIL

S E C T. the latter of theSe objects, (as I have already obferv-

I. ed,) that he examined the navigation of the Indus

with so much attention. With the fame view, on his
return to Susa, he, in person, surveyed the course
of the Euphrates and Tigris, and gave directions
to remove the cataracts or dams, with which the
ancient monarchs of Persia, induced by a peculiar
precept of their religion, which enjoined them to
guard with the utmost care against defiling any
of the elements, had confiruCted near the mouths
of these rivers, in order to shut out their subjects
from any access to the ocean". By opening the
navigation in this manner, he propefed, that the
valuable commodities of India flould be conveyed
from the Persian Gulf into the interior parts of
his Asiatic dominions, while by the Arabian Gulf
they should be carried to Alexandria, and diftri-
buted to the reft of the world.

Grand and extensive as these schemes were,

the precautions employed, and the arrangements
made for carrying them into execution, were so
various and so proper, that Alexander had good
reason to entertain sanguine hopes of their proving
successful. At the time when the mutinous spirit
of his soldiers obliged him to relinquith his ope-
rations in India, he was not thirty years of age
complete. At this enterprising period of life, a
prince, of a spirit so active, persevering, and inde-
fatigable, must have soon found means to resume

" Arrian, lib. vi c. :. Strab. lib. xvi. p. 1074. &c.
See NOTE IX.

a favorite measure on which he had been long SE C T.
intent. If he had invaded India a second time, 1.
he would not, as formerly, have been obliged to
force his way through holtile and unexplored re-
gions, opposed at every ftep by nations and tribes
of Barbarians, whose names had never reached
Greece. All Asia, from the shores of the Ionian
Lea to the banks of the Hyphafis, would then have
been subject to his dominion; and through that
immense firetch of country he had eftablified such
a chain of cities, or fortified stations". that his
armies might have continued their march with
safety, and have found a regular succession of
magazines provided for their fubfiflence. Nor
would it have been difficult for him to bring into
the field forces sufficient to have achieved the
conquest of a country so populous and extensive
as India. Having armed and disciplined his sub-
jets in the East like Europeans, they would
have been ambitious to imitate and to equal their
inftrudors, and Alexander might have drawn re-
cruits, not from his scanty domains in Macedonia
and Greece, but from the vast regions of Aia,
which, in every age, has covered the earth,, and
aftoniflied mankind with its numerous armies.
When at the head of such a formidable power he
had reached the confines of India, he might have
entered it under circumstances very different from
those in his first expedition. He had secured a firm
footing there, partly by means of the garrisons

*' See NOTE X.

SE c T. which he left in three cities which he had built

I. and fortified, and partly by his alliance with Taxiles

and Porus. These two Indian princes, won by
Alexander's humanity and beneficence, which, as
they were virtues seldom difpl.yc-e in the ancient
mode of carrying on war, excited of course a
higher degree of admiration and gratitude, had
continued fleady in their attachment to the Mace-
donians. Re-inforced by their troops, and guided
by their information as well as by the experience
which he had acquired in his former campaigns,
Alexander must have made a rapid progress in a
country, where every invader, from his. time to
the present age, has proved successful.

But this and all his other fplehdid schemes were

terminated at once by his untimely death. In
consequence of that, however, events took place,
which iliuftrate and confirm the justness of the
preceding speculations and conjectures by evidence
the molt striking and fatisfadory. When that
great empire, which the superior genius of Alex-
ander had kept united and in fubjedion, no longer
felt his fulperintending controul, it broke into pieces,
and its various provinces were seized by his prin-
cipal officers, and parcelled out among them.
From ambition, emulation, and personal animosity,
they soon turned their arms against one another;
and as several of the leaders were equally eminent
for political abilities and for military skill, the
contest was maintained long, and carried on with
frequent vicilIitudes of fortune. Amidst the various
convulsions and revolutions which these occasioned,

it was found that the measures of Alexander for s cl.
the preservation of his conquests had been con- I.
certed with such sagacity, that upon the final
restoration of tranquillity, the Macedonian domi-
nion continued to be established in every part of
Asia, and not one province had shaken off the
yoke. Even India, the most remote of Alexander's
conquests, quietly submitted to Pytho the son of
Agenor, and afterwards to Seleucus, who fuccef-
fively obtained dominion over that part of Asia.
Porus and Taxiles, notwithstanding the death of
their benefactor, neither declined submission to the
authority of the Mlacedonians, nor made any
attempt to recover independence.

During the contests for power and superiority
among the successors of Alexander, Seleucus, who,
in every effort of enterprising ambition, was infe-
rior to none of them, having rendered himself
master of all the provinces of the Persian empire
comprehended under the name of Upper Asia,
confidered those countries of India which had been
subdued by Alexander, at belonging to that portion
of the Macedonian empire of which he was now
the sovereign. Seleucus, like all the officers formed
under Alexander, entertained such high ideas of
the advantages which might be derived from a
commercial intercourse with India, as induced him
to march into that country, partly with a view
of establishing his own authority there, and partly
in order to curb Sandracottus, who having lately
acquired the sovereignty of the Prafij, a powerful
nation on the banks of the Ganges, threatened to

SECT. attack the Ilacedonians, whose Indian territories

I. bordered on his dominions. Unfortunately, no

account of this expedition, which seems to have
been splendid and fuccef-ful, has reached our times.
All we know of it is, that he advanced confider-
ably beyond the utmost boundary of Alexander's
progress in India", and would probably have
proceeded much farther if he had not been con.
strained to stop short in his carreer in order to
oppose Antigonus, who was preparing to invade
his dominions at the head of a formidable army.
Before he began his march towards the Euphrates,
he concluded a treaty with Sandracottus; in con.
sequence of which, that monarch quietly retained
the kingdom he had acquired. But the power
and possessions of the Macedonians seem to have
remained unimpaired during the reign of Sekucus,
which terminated forty-two years after the death
of Alexander.

With a view of cultivating a friendly intercourse

with Sandracottus, Seleucus made choice of Me-
gafthenes, an officer, who, from his having accom-
panied Alexander in his expedition into India,
had some knowledge of the state of the country,
and the manners of its inhabitants, and sent him
as his ambassador to Palibothra". In this famous
capital of the Prafij, situated on the banks of the
Ganges, Megafthenes resided several years, and
was probably the first European who ever beheld'

"* See NOTE XI. * Strabo, lib. ii. p. z2, &c.
Anian, HB Id. palim.

that

that mighty river, far superior to any of the s E C T.
an.lent continent in magnilude ' , and no less
dztlinguiiilcd by the fertility of the countries
through which it flows. I his journey of Megafl-
hencs to Palibothra made Europeans acquainted
wl.h a large extent of country, of which they
h.,i lnot hitherto any knowledge ; for Alexander
d;l! not advance farther towards the south-east,
th::! th.it pirt of the river Hydraotes or Rauvee,
wlltre the nindell city of Lahore is situated, and
Palibothra, the site oi which, as it is a capital
position in the geography ot at,:i. It India, I have
investigated with the ucmoft attenton, appears to
me the fame with that of the moder, city of Alla-
habad, at the confluence of the two treat rivers,
Jumna and Ganges 4. As the road ir(.-n Lahore
to Allahabad runs through some of the noRt cul-
tivated and opulent provinces of Indi.r, tie more
the country was explored the idea of its value
rose higher. Accordingly, what Mlegafthenes
observed during his progress to Palibothra, and
his residence there, made such an impression upon
his own mind, as induced him to publilh an ample
account of India, in order to make his countrymen
more thoroughly acquainted with its importance.
From his writings the ancients seem to have derived
almost all their knowledge of the interior state of
India, and from comparing the three molt ample
accounts of it, by Diodorus Siculus, Strabo, and
Arrian, they appear manifestly, from their near

" See NOTE XII. ' See NOTE XIII.

D

SI C T. resemblance to be a transcript of his words. But,

I. vnfortun.tely , il\egafthenes was so fond of the

mnrvellou', that he wingled wi'h the truths which
he related many extravagant ficlions; and to him
may be traced up the fabulous tales of men with
ear, so large that they could wrap themnilves up
in them, of others with a single eye, witnut
r.olj -s. without notes, with long fert. and toes
turrd backwardl,. E people onlv three spans in
height, of wild - i. -'h hea s in the shape of
a wedge, of - I ge as loxes that dug up
gold,ALA a. '

,t' 'ligs no less wonderful'

ThFe extrac,- ;orn his narrative which have been
tlaulfritted *: by Strabo, Arrian, and other
writers, fe.m not to be entitled to credit, unless
when thex arc supported by internal evidence, and
confirmed by the testimony of other ancient authors,
or when they coincide with the experience of modern
times fiis account, however, of the dimensions and
geography of India, is curious and accurate. His
description of the power and opulence of the Prafij
perfe:tiy referrbles that which might have been
given of some of the greater states in the modern
lnd(,fan, before the eftabl:lhment of the rlahomedan
or European po\ er in India, and is consonant to
the account' which Altxander had received con-
cerni'gz that ;eople. lHe was inform'd that they
wete ready to oppose him or the banks of the
Ga:nges, with an army confifiing of twenty thnu-
said cavalry, two hundred thoufind infantry, and

' Strabo, lib. xx. vo;:. A. .107. C.

tw,- t';oufdnd armed chariots"; and Megafthenes SECT.
rclace., ').t he hiar an audience of Sani'racottus 1.
i; a place where he was cncamped with an army
of four hundred thonf.nd men". Tie enormous
drmcnfions which he afliens to Palibothr,. of no
les than ten miles in length, and two in breadth,
and surrounded by walls in which there were five
hundred and seventy towers, and fixtv-ftor gates,
would probably have been ranked by Europeans
among the wonders which he delighted to relate,
if they were not now well acquainted with the
rambling manner in which the cities of India are
built, and did not know with certainty that,
both in former and in the prcfent times, it might
boast of cities still more extensive s.

This embassy of legafthenes to Sandracottus,

and another of Daimachus to his son and successor
Allitrochidas, are the last transactions of the Syrian
monarchs with India, of which we have any
account". Nor can we either fix with accuracy
the time, or describe the manner in which their
polffelions in India were wrested from them. It is
probable that they were obliged to abandon that
country soon after the death of Seleucus".

But though the great monarchs of Syria loft,

about this period, those provinces in India which
had been subjed to their dominion, the Greeks
in a finaller kingdom, composed of some fragments

Diod. Sicul. lib. xvii. p. 232. Q. Curt. lib. ix. c. 2.
Strabo,lib. xv. p. ic5. C. `' Rennell, Mem. 49, 50.
"See NOTE XIV. "' Juftin. lib. xv. c. 4.

D 2

S C T. of Alexander's empire, still maintained an inter-

I. course with India, and even made some confider-

able acquisition of territory there. This was the
kingdom of Bactria, originally subjec to Seleucus,
but wrested from his son or grandson, and ren-
dered an independent state, about fixty-nine years
after the death of Alexander. Concerning the
transactions of this kingdom, we must reft satisfied
with gleaning a few imperfec hints in ancient
authors. From them we learn that its commerce
with India was great; that the conquests of the
Bacrian kings in that country were more exten-
five than those of Alexander himself, and particu-
larly that they recovered possession of the dillric
near the mouth of the Indus, -which he had sub-
dued ". Each of the fix princes who reigned in

actria , carried on military operations in India
with such success, that they penetrated far into
the interior part of the country, and proud of the
conquefis which they had made, as well as of the
extensive dominions over which they reigned,
some of them afurned the lofty title of Great King,
which distinguished the Persian monarchs in the
days of their highest splendor. But we fliould not
have known how long this kingdom of Baaria
fubfifled, or in what manner it terminated, if
N1. de Guignes had not called in the historians
of China to supply the defects of the Greek and
Roman writers. By them we are informed, that

" Strabo, lib. xi. C. D.

li- b .

xv. oo. B. Juftin.
lib. xli. c. +. Bayer, Hist. Regni Grzcor. Bacriani, paflim.

about one hundred and twenty- fix years before SECT.
the Chrillan era, a powerful horde of Tartars, I.
pufhled from their native feats on the confines of
China, and obliged to move toxv.irds the weft
by the prefllre of a more numerous body that
rolled on behind them, passed the Jaxartes, and
pouring in upon Batria, like an irresistible torrent,
overwhelmed that kingdom, and put an end to
the dominion of the Greeks" there, after it had
been established near one hundred and thirty years".

From this time until the clefe of the fifteenth

century, when the Portuguese, by doubling the
Cape of Good Hope, opened a new communi-
cation with the East, and carried their viCtorious
arms into every part of India, no European pow-
er acquired territory, or eltabliflied its dominion
there. During this long period, of more than
sixteen hundred years, all fchcmes of conquest in
India seem to have been totally relinquished, and
nothing more was aimed at by any nation, than
to secure an intercourse of trade with that opu-
lent country.

It was in Egypt that the feat of this intercourse

was established; it is not without surprise that we
observe how soon and how regularly the com-
merce with the Eat came to be carried on by that
channel, in which the sagacity of Alexander
destined it to flow. Ptolemy, the son of Lagus,
as soon as he took possession of Egypt, eftablilhed

'1 Mem. de Literat. tom. xxv . p17, &c. " See
NOTE XV.

D3

S EC T. the feat of government in Alexandria. By some

tL exerion, of authority, and many ads of libera'ity,

but ch'eflv by the fame of his mild and equal
adminiflration, he drew such a number of inhabit-
ants to this favorite residence, that it soon became
a populou, and wealthy city. As Ptolemy deserved
and had poff.T.fd the confidence of Alexander
more perfectly than any of his officers, he knew
vcwll th.at hi chilf obJecd in fondting Alexandria
Vwa, tn secure the advantages arising from the trade
w:vth India. A lonot and prosperous reign was
fa.-orable :o the prosecution of that objec, and
though ancient au;i:ors have not enabled us to
trace the fleps which the first Ptolemy took for
this purpose, we have a striking evidence of his
extraordinary attention to naval affairs, in his ered-
inZ the light-hotife on the island of Pharos, at
the mouth of the harbour of Alexandria", a work
of such mngnificence as to be reckoned one of
the seven wonders of the world. WVith refped to
the commercial arrangementt of his son Ptolemy
rhiladelphus. we have more perfect information.
In order to brinr the trade with india (which
be:3'l, :o revie at 'lyvre, it a.incient station ",)
to c-:itre in Aleeandria, he set about forming a
ca.;.!, a hundred cubits in breadth, and thirty
cub;it in depth, between ArfiC oe on the Red Sea,
r.nt far from 'le fittu.lion of the modern Suez,
and the Pelufi,.c or c.f'tCrn branch of the Nile,
tb. mr. ns of wl:ich the prodl.i':o s of India might

" S:abo, lb. : P. 1:;vii . C. l'. bo.

' ib .
x io 9. A.

h vr: been conveyed to that capital wholly by s E CT.
w ,ecr. B't eilecr on account of some danger 1.
zpp-ehcnd.:d from completing it, that work was
never tinilihcd: or fro:-) the flow and dangerous
nal'igationl tol, .ids the norrhetn cxtremirt ot ti.e
Red Sea, this canll w.ss found to be of so 'ile
use, that in order to f;a:ilirtte the cormmunication
with India, he built a city on the weft coast of
that fca, almolt undler the 'Iropic , to which he
gave the name of Berenice ". This new city soon
became the staple of the trade with India ". From
Eerenice the goods were transported by land to
Coptos, a city three miles diftlnt from the Nile,
but which had a communication with that river
by a navigable canal, of which there are still some
remains6°, and thence carried down the stream to
Alexandria. The distance between Berenice and
Coptos was, according to Pliny, two hundred
and fifty-eight Roman miles, and the road lay
through the defart of Thebais, almost entirely
destitute of water. But the attention of a power-
ful monarch made provision for supplying this
want, by searching for springs, and wherever
these were found he built inns, or more probably
in the ealtern flyle caravanferas , for the accom-
modation of merchants". In this channel the
intercourse between the East and Weft continued

" Strabo, lib. xvii. ii 6. D. Plin. Nat. H'l lib. vi.

c. 29. " See NOTE XVI. " D'Anville Mlm.
de l'Egypte, p. 21. " Strabo, lib. xvii. p. 117.
D. 14 69

D4

SECT. to be carried on during two hundred and fifty

1. years, as long as Eiypt remained an independent

kin ;ionm .

1 he flhip, destined for India took their departure

from Bercnice, .and failing, according to the an-
cient mode of navigation, along the Arabian lhore,
to the proinmnncry Syagrus (now Cape Kafalgate),
held their course along the co.lft of Persia, either
directly to Parttla (!,ow Tatta) at the head of the
lower Delta of the Indus, or to foine other empo-
rium cn the weft coali of India. To this part of
Indci which Airxlndtr had visited and subdued,
the commerce under the protection of the Egyp-
tian mon.irchis fcms to have been confined for a
considerable time. Afterwards a more convenient
course was followed, and from Cape Rafalgate
veffeis fai!ed in a direct course to Zizerus. Ihis,
according to AI. de 1Montesquieu", was the king-
dom of Sigertis, on the sea-coast adjacent to the
mouth of the Indus, conquered by the Greek
monarchs of Bacdria; according to Major Rennell",
it was a port on the northern part of the Allalbar
coast. Ancient authors have not conveyed such
inforrration as will ern.ble us to pronounce with
certainty, which of t!efj tvwo opposite opinions
is b.ft toundled. Nor can we point out with
accuracy , wh.;t were the other ports in India
which the mer h.ints flomn Ber-enice frequented,
wv-en th.it trade wans irt opened. As they failed
in v-cfit;l of .fn..,! burden, whiLh crept timidly
along the coast, it is prob.t.h: that their voyages

L'Eprit de Loii, lib. xxi. c. 7. ' Introducl. p. xx::vii.

were circumscribed within very narrow limits, SEC T.
an p that under the Ptolemies no considerable pro- I.
gr:fs was made in the discovery of India".

From this monopoly of the commerce by sea
between the east and weft, which Egypt. long
enjoyed, it derived that extraordinary degree of
opulence and power for which it was conspicuous.
In modern times, acquainted with the vigilant
and enterprising activity of commercial rivallhip,
there is hardly any circumstance in ancient story
which appears more surprising, than that the fove-
reigns of Egypt should have been permitted to
engross this lucrative trade without competition,
or any attempt to wrest it out of their hands;
especially as the powerful monarchs of Syria might,
from the Persian Gulf, have carried on an inter-
course with the fame parts of India, by a shorter
and safer course of navigation. Different confider-
ations seem to have induced them so tamely to
relinquifl all the obvious advantages of this com-
merce. The kings of Egypt, by their attention
to maritime affairs, had formed a powerful fleet,
which gave them such decided command of the
sea, that they could have crufied with ease any
rival in trade. No commercial intercourse seems
ever to have been carried on by sea between
Perria and India. The Persians had such an infu-
perable aversion to that element, or were so much
afraid of foreign invafign, that their monarchs
(as I have already observed) obftruded the navi-
gation of the great rivers, which gave access to

'o See NOTE XVIL

SECT. the interior parts of the country, by artificial

1. works. A h their subjects, howcver, were no lcfs

desirous than the people arounl them, to possess
the valuable produchions and elegant manufactures
of India, thcfe were convey d to all the paits of
their extensive dominions by lrnd carriage. The
commodities destined for the fiipplyilng of the
northern provinces, were tranfpo ted on camels
from the banks of the Indus to those of the Oxus,
down the stream of which they were carried to
the Caspian sea, and diftrlbuted, partly by land-
carriage, and partly by navigable rivers, through
the different countries, bounded on one hand by
the Caspian and on the other by the Euxine sea".
The commodities of Irtdia intended for the south.
ern and interior provinces, proceeded by land
from the Cafplan gates to some of the great rivers,
by which they were circulated through every
part of the country. This was the ancient mode
of intercourse with India, while the Persian empire
was governed by its native princes; and it has
been observed in every age, that when any branch
of commerce has got into a certain channel, al-
though it may be neither the molt proper nor
the molt commodious one, it requires long time,
and considerable efforts, to give it a different
direction ".

To all these reasons for suffering the monarchs

of Egypt to continue in the undisturbed possession
of the trade with India by sea, another may be

" Strabo, lib. xii. 7-6. D. Plin. Nat. Hilt. lib. vi. c. 17.

See NO'lE X111.

added. Many of the ancients, by an error in SE CT.
geography extremely unaccountable. and in which I.
they perfifled, notwitrh(tlding repeated oppor-
tunitiec of obtaining more accurate information,
believed the Cafplan sea to be a branch of the
great Norrhirn Ocean, and the kings of Syria
might hope by that means to open a communi-
cation with Europe, and to circulate through it
the valuable pronduttions of the art . without
intruding into those seas, the navigation of which
the Ezyptian monarchs seem to confider as their
exclusive right. This idea had been early formed
by the cGeeks, when they became malters of
Asia. Seleuius Nicator, the first and most saga-
cinn< of the Syrian kings, at the time when he was
afflinate(d, entertained thoughts of forming a junc-
tion between the Caspian and Euxine seas by a
canal", and if this could have been effected, his
fubjecs , besides the extension of their trade in
Europe, might have supplied all the countries
in the North of Asia, on the coast of the Euxine
sea, as well as many of those which stretch east-
ward from the Caspian, with the productions of
India. As those countries, though now thinly
inhabited by a miserable race of men, destitute of
industry and of wealth, were in ancient times
extremely populous, and filled with great and
opulent cities, this mufd have been confidered as
a branch of commerce of such magnitude and value,
as to render the securing of it an objecd worthy
the attention of the molt powerful monarch.

' Plin. Nat. Iiift. lib. vi. c. II.

S E C T. But while the monarchs of Egypt and Syria

I. labored with emulation and ardor to secure to

their fubjtecs all the advantages of the Indian trade,
a power arose in the Weft which proved fatal to
both. The Romans, by the vigor of their military
inftiiutions, and the wifdorn of their political con-
duct, having rendered thefelves maskers of all
Italy and Sicily, soon overturned the rival repub-
a. C.. lic of Carthage, fubjeded Macedonia and Greece,

extended their dominion over Syria, and at last
turned their victorious arms against Eevpt, the
only kingdom remaining of those established by
the successors of Alexander the Great. After a
series of events, which belong not to the subject
of this Disquisition, Egypt was annexed to the
Roman empire, and reduced into the form of a
Roman province by Auguflus. Aware of its great
importance, he. with that provident sagacity which
diftinguifhcs his character, not only reserved it as
one of the provinces subject immediately to Impe-
rial authority, but by various precautions, well
known to every scholar, provided for its security.
This extraordinary solicitude seems to have pro.
ceeded not only from confidering Egypt as one
of the chief granaries on which the capital depend.
ed for fubfiitence, but as the feat of that lucrative
commerce which had enabled its ancient monarchs
to amass such enormous wealth, as excited the
admiration and envy of other princes, and pro.
duced, when brought into the treasury of thl
empire, an alteration in the value of property, anc
the state of manners, in Rome itself.

# SECTION II.

HISTORICAL DISQUISITION

CONCERNING
ANCIENT INDIA.

SECTIO N II.
Inttrcoter e witb India, from the Eflabtirbment of the

Roman Dominion in Egypt, to the Conquefj of thai
Kingdom by the Mabomedans.

UPON the conquest of Egypt by the Romans, s c T.
and the reducion of that kingdom to a province II.
of their empire, the trade with India continued
to be carried on in the fame mode, under their
powerful protection: Rome enriched with the
spoils and tribute of almost all the known world,
had acquired a tafle for luxuries of every kind.
Among people of this description, the producions

SECT. of India have always been hell in the highest

11. estimation. he capital of the greartel empire

ever eftablifled in Europe, filled wi'h citizens who
had no occupation, but to enjoy and diffpate the
wealth accumulated by their ancestors, demanded
every thing elegant, rare, or costly, which that
remote region could furnish, in order to support
its pomp, or heighten its ple.fures. t1 o supply
this demand, new and extraordinary efforts became
requisite, and the commerce with India increased
to a degree, w}lich (as I ha\'e observed in another
place') will appear aftonifling even to the prefcnt
age, in which that branch of trade has been ex.
tended far beyond the practice or conception of
any former period.

Besides the Indian commodities imported into

the capital of the empire from Fgypt, the Romans
received an additional supply of them by another
mode of conveyance. From the earliest times,
there seems to have been some communication
between Mesopotamia , and other provinces on
the banks of the Euphrates, and those parts of
Syria and Palestine, which lay near the \lediter.
ranean. The migration of Abram from Ur, of
the Chaldees to Sichem in the land of Canaan, is
an instance of this'. The journey through the
defart, which separated these countries, was much
facilitated by its affording a station abounding
with water, and capable of cultivation. As the
intercourse increased, the possession of this tation

Hist of America, vol. i. p. 25. ' Genes. xi. and xii.

became an object of so much importance, that SECT.
Solomon, when he turned his attention towards 11.
the extension of commerce among his fubjeAs,
built a fenced city there'. Its Syrian name of
Tiaiior in the wilderness, and its Greek one of
pa,,myra, are both descriptive of its situation in a
spot adorned with palm - trees. This is plentifully
ftup;lied with water, and surrounded by a portion
of fertile land, which (though of no great extent)
render it a delightful habitation in the midst of
barren sands and an inhospitable defart. Its happy
position, at the distance of little more than sixty
miles from the river Euphrates, and of two hundred
and three miles from the nearest coast of the Medi-
terranean, induced it, inhabitants to enter with
ardor into the trade of conveying commodities
from one of these to the other. As the most valu-
able productions of India, brought up the Euphrates
from the Persian Gulf, are of such small bulk as
to bear the expense of a long land-carriage, this
trade soon became so considerable that the opulence
and power of Palmyra increased rapidly. Its govern-
ment was of the form which is best filited to the
genius of a commercial city, republican; and from
the peculiar advantages of its situation, as well as
the spirit of its inhabitants, it long maintained its
independence, though surrounded by powerful and
ambitious neighbours. Under the Syrian monarchs
descended from Seleucus it attained to its highest
degree of splendor and wealth, one great source

I Kings. ix. 18. 2 Chron. viii. 4.

* E C T. of which seems to have been the supplying their

11. fubjecs with Indian commodities. When Syria

submitted to the irrcfiltibie arms of Kome, Pal-
myra continued upwards of two centuries a free
state, and its friendship w.is courted with emula.
tion and solicitude by the Komans, and their rivals
for empire, the Parthians. 1 hat it traded with
both, particularly that from it the capital, as well
as other parts of the empire received the produc-
tions of India, we learn from Appian, an author
of good credit'. But in tracing the progress of
the commerce of the ancients with the East, I
should not have ventured, upon his single tefti-
mony, to mention this among the channels of
note in which it was carried on, if a singular
discovery. for which we are indebted to the liberal
curiosity and enterprising spirit of our own country-
men, did not confirm and illustrate what he relates.
Towards the close of the last century, some gen-
tlemen of the English fadory at Aleppo incited
by what they heard in the East conccrning the
wonderful ruins of Palmyra, ventured, notwith-
itanding the fatigue and danger of a iourney through
the defart, to visit them. To their aftonilhment
they beheld a fertile spot of some miles in extent,
arising like an iflind out of a vast plain of sand,
covered with the remains of temples, porticoes,
aqueduds, and other public works, which in
magnificence and splendor, and some of them in
elegance, were not unworthy of Athens or of

Appian. de Bello Civil. lib. v. p. 1076. edit. Tollii.

Rome

Rome in their molt prosperous state. Allured by s E CT,
their description of them, about sixty years there- IL
after, a party of more enlightened travellers, having
reviewed the ruins of Palmyra with greater atten-
tion and more scientific lkill, declared that what
they beheld there exceeded the most exalted ideas
which they had formed concerning it'.

From both these accounts, as well as from recol-

leding the extraordinary degree of power to which
Palmyra had attained , when Egypt, Syria, Mefo-
potamia, and a considerable part of Asia Minor
were conquered by its arms; when Odenatus, its
chief magitfrate, was decorated with the Imperial
purple, and Zenobia contended for the dominion
of the East with Rome under one of its molt
warlike Emperors; it is evident, that a state which
could derive little importance from its original
territory must have owed its aggrandisement to
the opulence acquired by extensive commerce Of
this the Indian trade was undoubtedly the most
considerable, and most lucrative branch. But it is
a cruel mortilication, in searching for what is *
inftrucive in the history of past times, to find that
the exploits of conquerors who have desolated the
earth, and the freaks of tyrants who have rendered
nations unhappy, are recorded with minute and
often disgusting accuracy, while the discovery of
useful arts, and the progress of the most beneficial
branches of commerce, are passed over in silence,
and suffered to fink into oblivion.

After the conquest of Palmyra by Aurelian, trade

Wood's Ruins of Palmyra, p. 37.

E

1 E C T. never revived tlere. At present a few miserable

11. huts of begg-riy Ar.ibs are scattered in the courts

of its ateuly temples, or deform its elegant porti.
coes; and exhibit an humiliating contrast to its
ancient magnificence.

But while the merchants of Egypt and Syria

exerted their activity in order to supply the increa-
fin demands of Rome for Indian commodities, and
vied with each other in their efforts, the eagerness
of gain (as Pliny observes) brought India itself
nearer to the reft of the world. In the course of
their voyages to that country, the Greek and Egyp-
tian pilots could not fail to observe the regular
shifting of the periodical winds or monsoons, and
how steadily they continued to blow during one
part of the year from the East, and during the
other from the Weft. Encouraged by attending to
this circumstance, Hippalus, the commander of a
ship engaged in the Indian trade, ventured, about
fourscore years after Egypt was annexed to the
Roman empire, to relinquinl the flow and circuit-
ous course which I have described, and stretching
boldly from the mouth of the Arabian Gulf across
the ocean, was carried by the western monsoon to
Ilufiris, a harbour in that part of India, now known
by the name of the Mllalabar coast.

This route to India was held to be a discovery

of such importance, that in order to perpetuate the
memory of the inventor, the name of Iippalus was
given to the wind which enabled him to perform the
voyage'. As this was one of the greatest efforts of

Perip. Mlar. Erythr. p. 32.

navigation in the ancient world, and opened the s E C T4
best communication by fia between the East and II.
Weft that was known for fourteen hundred years,
it merits a particular description. Fortunately Pliny
has enabled us to give it with a degree of accuracy,
which can seldom be attained in tracing the naval
or commercial operations of the ancients. From
Alexandria (he observes) toJuliopolis is two miles;
there the cargo destined for India is embarked on the
Ni;le, ;;nd is carried to Coptos, which is distant
three hundred and three miles, and the voyage is
ufj.tlly accomplifled in twelve days. brom Coptos
goods are conveyed to Berenice on the Arabian
Gulf, haling at different fations regulated accord-
ing to the conveniency of watering. he distance
between there cities is two hundred and fifty-eight
miles. On account of the heat, the caravan travels
only during the night, and the journey is finished
on the twelfth day. From Berenice, ships take their
departure about midsummer, and in thirty days reach
Ocelis (Gella) at the mouth of the Arabian Gulf,
or Cane (Cape Fartaque) on the coast of Arabia
Felix. Thence they fail in forty days to Mufiris,
the first emporium in India. They begin their
voyage homewards early in the Egyptian month
Thibi, which answers to our December; they fail
with a north-caft wind, and when they enter the
Arabian Gulf meet with a south or south-west
wind, and thus complete the voyage in less than
a year '.

Plin. Nat. Hiss. lib. vi. c. 23. See NOTE XIX.

E2

S E C T. The account which Pliry giv es of llufiric, and

li. of BIrace, alnothtr h.irbour not far diltant, which

was l;kce\ if frerquented by the fLips from Berenice,
as being both so incommodious for trade on
account of the fPallownefs of the ports , that it
became neceff.ry to discharge and take in the
cargoes in small boats, does not enable us to fix
their position with perfect accuracy. This defcrip-
tion applies to many ports on the Ilalabar coast,
but from two circumfLinces mentioned by him;
one, that they are not far distant from Cottonara,
the country which produces pepper in great abun-
dance; and the other, that in failing towards them
the course lav near Nitrias, the station of the
pirates; I adopt the opinion of Ilajor Rennell,
that they were situated somewhere between Goa
and Teliicherry, and that probably the modern
Aleerzaw or lMerjee is the llufiris of the ancients,
and Barcelone their Barace '

As in thrfe two ports was the principal staple

of the trade between iEgypt and India, when in
its mot fiourifhing Rlate, this seems to be the pro-
per place for inquiring into the nature of the
commerce which the ancients, particularly the
Romans, carried on with that country, and for
enumerating the commodities most in request,
which they imported from it. But as the opera-
tion, of commerce, zn:l the mode of regulating
it, were lit le attended to in those states of anti-
quity, of whose transactions we have any accurate

' Inrod. p. xxxvii.

knowledge; their hiltorians hardly enter into any s EC T.
detail concerning a subject of such subordinate 11.
importance in their political fyflem , and it is
mofily from brief hints, detached fads, and inci-
dental observations, that we can gather informa-
tion concerning it .

In every age, it ha; been a commerce of luxury,

rather than of necessity, which has been carried
on between Europe and India. Its elegant manu-
fadtures, spices, and precious stones, are neither
objeds of desire to nations of simple manners, nor
are such nations possessed of wealth sufficient to
purchase them. But at the time the Romans became
mailers of the Indian trade, they were not only
(as I have already observed) in that stage offociety
when men are eager to obtain every thing that
can render the enjoyment of life more exquisite,
or add to its splendor, but they had acquired all
the fantaflic tafles formed by the caprice and extra-
vagance of wealth. They were of consequence
highly delighted witlr those new objets of gratifi-
cation with which India fipplied them in such
abundance. The productions of that country, na-
tural as well as artificial, seem to have been much
the fame in that age as in the present. But the taste
of the Romans in luxury differed in many refpets
from that of modern times, and of course their
demands from India differed considerably from ours:

In order to convey an idea of their demands as

complete as possible, I flall in the first place make
some observations on the three great articles of

9 See NOTE XX.

E3

S E C T. general importation from India. I. Spices and

I1. aromatics. 2. Precious flones and pearls. 3. Silk.

And then I shall give forne account (as far as I
can venture to do it from authentic information)
of the assortment of cargoev, both outward and
homeward bound, for thei veff ls fitted out at
Berenice for different ports of India.

I. Spices and aromatics. From the mode of reli-

gious worflip in the heathen world; from the
incredible number of t'eir deities, and of the
temples consecrated to them; the conflumption of
frankincense and other aromatics which vwee ufced
in every sacred function, must h.ave bten vciy
great. But the vanity of men occafinned a grcater
consumption of these fia r.ant ftblliances than their
piety. It was the curtom of the Romans to burn
the bodies of their dead, and they denmed it a
display cf magnificence. to cover, not otlly the
body but the funeral pile on which it wvas laid,
with the most coflyv spices. At the funeral of
Syila, two! hundred and ten burdens of spices
were firewed upon the pile. Nero is reported to
have burnt a quantity of cinnamon and cassia at
the funeral of Pappea, greater than the countries
from which it was imported produced in one year.
'We consume in heaps these precious fubsianices
with the carcases of the dead (fays Pliny): YWe
offer them to the Gois only in grains °. It was
not from India, I am aware, but from Arabia,
that aromatics were first imported into Europe;
and some of them, particularly frankinccnfe, were

' Nat. His. lib. xii. c. 18.

productions of that country. But the Arabians were s E c T.
accustomed, together with spices of native growth, 11.
to furnifl foreign merchants with others of higher
value, which they brought from India, and the
regions beyond it. The commercial intercourse of
the Arabians with the Eastern parts of Asia, was
not only early (as has been already obfcrved) but
considerable. By means of their trading caravans,
they conveyed into their own country all the
valuable productions of the Fast, among which,
spices held a chief place. In every ancient account
of Indian commodities, spices and aromatics of
various kinds form a principal article ". Some
authors afnert that the greater part of those pur-
chased in Arabia were not the growth of that
country, but brought from India '. That this
afertion was well-founded, appears from what has
been observed in modern times. The frankincense
of Arabia, though reckoned the peculiar and molt
precious prodution of the country, is much inferior
in quality to that imported into it from the Fast;
and it is chiefly with the latter, that the Arabians
at present supply the extensive demands of various
provinces of Asia for this commodity ". It is upon
good authority, then, that 1 have mentioned the
importation -of spices as one of the molt confider-
able branches of ancient commerce with India.

" Peripl. Mar. Eryth. p. 22. ~8. Strab. lib. ii. p. x5&
A. lib. xv. p. 1018. A.

" Strab. lib. xvii. p. 1129. C.
" Niebuhr. Defcript. de l'Arabie, tom. i. p. 126.

E4

SE C T. II. Precion; fione;, together with which pearls

11. may be classed, seem to be the ;rt:icle next in

value imported by the Roman; from the aift. As
these have no pretension to be of any real use,
their value arises entirely from thrir beautv and
their rarity, and even when enetimated molt mode-
rately is always high. But amo:ng nations far
advanced in luxury, when thev are deemed not
only ornaments but marks of dliincion, the vain
and the opulent vie so eagerlv with one another
for the poffcffion of them, that they rife in price
to an exorbitant and alinoft incredible height. Dia-
mond , though the art of cutting them was
imperfedlv known to the ancients, held a hihh
place in cftimation amonz- them as well as among
us. The comparative value of other precious rones
varied according to the diversity of taftes and the
caprice of fashion. The immense number of them
mentioned by Pliny, and the laborious care with
which he describes and arranges them "4, xill
astonish, I fiould suppose, the mollt skilful lapi-
dary or jeweller of modern times, and flows the
high request in which they weie held by the
Romans.

But among all the articles of luxury, the Romans

seem to have given the preference to pearls '. Ptr-
sons of every rank purchased them with eagerness
they were worn in every part of dress; and
there is such a difference, both in size and in

Nat. Hit lib. xYxsii.
" See NOTE XXI.

value, among pearls, that while such as were E C T.
large and of fiperior lullre adorned the wealthy II.
and the great, fmallerones, and of inferior quality,
gratified the vanity of persons in more humble
llations of life. Julius Cxcfir presented Servilia, the
mother of Brutus, with a pearl, for which he paid
forty-eight thousand four hundred and fiftv-fevern
pounds. The famous pearl ear-ring- of Cleopatra
were in value one hundred and fixty-one thous4nd
four hundred and fifty eight pounds ". Precious
flones, it is true, as well as pearls, were found
not only in India, but in many different countries,
and all were ransacked in order to gratify the pridle
of Rome. India, however, furninifed the chief
part, and its productions were allowed to be molf
abundant, diverififed, and valuab!e.

II. Another producion of India in great demand
at Rome, was silk; and when we recolled the
variety of elegant fabrics into which it may be
formed, and how much these have added to the
splendor of dress and furniture, we cannot wonder
at its being held in fich estimation by a luxurious
people. The price it bore was exorbitant; but it
was deemed a dress too cxpenfive and too delicate
for men ", and was appropriated wholly to
women of eminent rank and opulence. This,
however, did not render the demand for it less
eager, especially after the example of the diffo'ute
Elagabalus introduced the use of it among the other

" Plin. Nat. Iilt. lib. ix. c. 3 s. See NOTE XXII.
" Tacit. Annal. lib. ii. c. t;.

SEC T. sex, and accustomed men to the disgrace (as the

1. severity of ancient ideas accounted it) of wearing

this effeminate garb. Two circumfiances concern-
ing the traffic of silk among the Romans merit
observation. Contrary to what usually takes place
in the oper.ations of trade, the more general use
of that commodity seems not to have increased the
quantity imported, in such proportion as to anvfwer
the growing demand for it, and the price of silk
was not reduced during the course of two hundred
and fifty years from the time of its being first
known in Rome. In the reign of Aurelian, it fill
continued to be valued at its weight in gold. This,
it is probable, was owing to the mode in which
that commodity was procured by the merchants
of Alexandria. They had no direct intercourse
with China, the only cou:.ry in which the silk-
worm was then reared, and its labor rendered an
article of commerce. All the silk which they
purch.fed in the different ports of India which
they frequented , was brought thither in flips of
the country; and either from some defec of skill
in managing the silk worm, the produce of its
ingenious indufiry among the Chinese was scanty,
or the intermediate dealers found greater advantage
in furnishing the market of Alexandria with a small
quantity at a high pice, than to lower its value
by increasing the quantity. The other circumstance
which I had in view, is more extraordinary , and
affords a striking proof of the imperfect communi-
cation of the ancients with remote nations, and
of the slender knowledge which they had of

their natural produdtions or arts. Mluch as the s E C T.
manufactures of silk were admired, and often as it.
silk is mentioned by the Greek and Ron.an
authors, they had not for several centuries after
the use of it became comnon , any certain
knowledge either of the countries to which they
were indebted for this favorite article of elegance,
or of the manner in which it was produced. By
some, silk was supposed to be a fine down
adhering to the leaves of certain trees or flowers;
others imagined it to be a delicate species of wool
or cotton; and even those who had learned that
it was the work of an infect, Ihow, by their
descriptions, that they had no diftind idea of the
manner in which it was formed ". It was in cnfe-
quence of an event that happened in the sixth
century of the Christian era, of which I flhnll
hereafter take notice, that the real nature of silk
became known in Europe.

The other commodities usually imported from

India, will be mentioned in the account, which
I now proceed to give of the cargoes sent out
and brought home in the flips employed in that
trade. For this we are indebted to the circumnavi-
g3tion of the 1Frythr;an fra, ascribed to Arrian,
a curious though flort treatifr, less known than
it deserves to be, and which enters into some
details concerning commerce, to which there is
nothing similar in any ancient writer. The first

" See ,NOTE XXIII.

s E C T. place in India, in which the flips from Fgypt,

II. while they followed the ancient course of navigation,

were accuflomed to trade, was Patala in the river
Indun. They imported into it woollen cloth of
a flight fabric, linen in checker work, foime pre-
cious itones, and some aromatics unknown in
India, coral, frorax, glass vessels of different kinds,
some wrought silver, money, and wine. In return
for these, they received spices of various kinds,
fapphirs, and other gems, silk fluffs, silk thread,
cotton cloths", and bl.ack pepper. But a far more
considerable emprcium on the fane coafl was
Ba.rrvg.za, and en that account the author, wvhom
I follow here, refcribes its situation, and the
mode of approactlin it, with great minuteness
and accuracy. Ith situation cnrrcfpnnds entirely
with that of Baroach, on the great river Ncrbuddah,
down the stream of which, or by land-carriage,
from the great city of Tag^ra across high moun-
tains °, all the productions of the interior country
were conveved to ij. The articles of importation
and exportation in this great mart were extensive
and various. Besides these already mentioned,
our author enumerates among the former, Italian,
Greek, and Arabian wines, brass, tin, lead,
girdle; or safes of curioun texture, melilot, white
glass, red arsenic, bla:k lead, gold and silver coin.
Among the exports he mentions the onyx, and
other gem;, ivory, myrrh. various fabrics of
cotton, both plain and ornamcnted with flowers,

" See NOTE XXIV. ' See NOTE XXV.

and long pepper". At Mufiris, the next emporium s E c T.
of note on that coast, the articles imported were I,
much the fame as at Barygaza; but as it lay nearer
to the eastern parts of India, and seems to have
had much communication with them, the com-
modities exported from it were more numerous
and more valuable. He specifies particularly pearls
in great abundance and of extraordinary beauty,
a variety of silk fluffs, rich perfumes, tortoife-lhell,
different kinds of transparent gems, especially
diamonds, and pepper in large quantities, and of
the belt quality ".

The jutnefs of the account given by this author
of the articles imported from India, is confirmedt
by a Roman law, in which the Indian commodi-
ties subjet to the payment of duties are enumerat-
ed ". By comparing these two accounts, we
may form an idea, tolerably exact, of the nature
and extent of the trade with India in ancient times.

As the Itate of society and manners among the

natives of India, in the earliest period in which
they are known , nearly resembled what we observe
among their descendants in the present age; their
wants and demands were, of course, much the
fame. The ingenuity of their own artists were so
able to supply these, that they stood little in need
of foreign manufactures or producions, except
some of the useful metals, which their own

Peripl. Mar. Erythr. p. 2g. "Ibid. ; , ;2.
Digest, lib. xxxix. tit. iv. §. I6. De publicanis et
vectigalibus.

s E C T. country did not furnirh in sufficient quantity; and

11. then, as n:ow, it was mofllv with gold and silver

that the luxuries of the haft were purchased. In
two particulars, however, our importations from
India differ greatly from those of the ancients.
The dress, both of the Greeks and Romans, was
almost entirely woollen, which , by their frequent
use of the warm bath, was rendered abundantly
comfortable. I heir consumption of linen and
cotton cloths was much inferior to that of modern
times, when these are worn by persons in every
rank of life. Accordingly, a great branch of
modern importation from that part of India
with which the ancients were acquainted, is in
piece.goods; comprehending, under that mercantile
term, the immense variety of fabrics, which Indian
ingenuity has formed of cotton. But, as far as I
have observed, we have no authority that will
justify us in flating the ancient importation of
these to be in any degree considerable.

In modern times, though it continues still to

be chiefly a commerce of luxury that is carried on
with India, yet, together with the articles that
minilter to it , we import, to a considerable extent,
various commo'dities, which are to be confidered
merely as the materials of our domeflic manufac-
tures. Such are the cotton-wool of Indoftan, the
silk of China , and salt-petre of Bengal. But in
the accounts of ancient importations from India,
raw silk. thread excepted, 1 find nothing mentioned
that could serve as the materials of any home-
manufacure. The navigation of the ancients never

having extended to China, the quantity of SECT.
unwrought silk with which they were supplied, II.
by means of the Indian traders, appears to have
been so scanty, that the manufacture of it could
not make an addition of any moment, to their
dornellic industry.

After this fuccinc account of the commerce
carried on by the ancients in India, I proceed to
inquire what knowledge they had of the countries
beyond the ports of Mufiris and Barace, the utmost
boundary towards the East to which I have hitherto
traced their progress. The Author of the Circum.
navigation of the Erythr-ean Sea, whose accuracy
of description juRifies the confidence with which
I have followed him for some time, seems to have
been little acquainted with that part of the coast
which firetches from Barace towards the south.
He mentions, indeed, cursorily, two or three
different ports, but gives no intimation that any
of them were f(aples of the commerce with Egypt.
He hastens to Comar or Cape Comorin, the
southernmost point of the Indian peninsula, and
his description of it is so accurate, and so confor-
mable to its real slate, as fliows his information
concerning it to have been perfectly authentic ".
Near to this he places the pearl-fifhery of Colchos,
the modern Kilkare, undoubtedly the fame with
that now carried on by the Dutch in the strait
which separates the iland of Ceylon from the
continent. As adjacent to this he mentions three
different ports, which appear to have been situated

' PeripL p. 3 3. D'Anville Ant. de l'Inde, x g; &6.

S E C T. on the east fide of the peninsula now known by the

11. name of the Coromandel coast. He describes these

as c,-:,oria, or flations of trade "; but from an
ante:ti\-e consideration of some circumstances in his
accout of them, i think it probable that the flips
fromn Berenice did not fail to any of these ports,
t!,cugh thev were supplied, as he informs us, with the
commodities brought from fcgypt, as well as with
the productions of the opposite coast of the penin.
fula; but these seem to have been imported in coun.
ry Sh:,s :'. It was likewise in vessels of their own,
varyilng iM form and burden, and distinguished
by different names, some of which he mentions,
that they traded with the Go!den Cherfonefus, or
kingdom of lMalacca, and the countries near the
Ganges. Not far from the mouth of that river he
places an iflard, which he describes as situated under
the rising fun, and as the last region in the l'ast
that wv.a inhabited '. Of all these parts of India,
the Author of the Circumnavigation appears to
have had very slender knowledge, as is manifolt,
not only from what he mentions concerning
this imaginary island, and from his not attcmptinl
to describe them, but from his relating, with
the credulity and love of the marvellous, which
always accompany and characierife ignnrance,
that thcfe remote regions were peopled with
cannib.l's, and men of uncouth and monstrous
forms ".

" Peripl. p. 4. . s-'ix-s.:.
" Peripl. p. 36. ." Ibid. p. 35.

I have been induced to below this attention, s E CT.
in tracing the course delineated in the Circumnavi- 11.
gation of the Erythrean Sea, because the Author
of it is the first ancient writer to whom we are
ind(ebted for any knowledge of the eastern coast
of the great peninsula of India, or of the countries
which lie beyond it. To Strabo, who composed
his great woik on geography in the reign of
Augustus, India, particularly the moit ealtern
p.its of it, wa- little known. He begins his
dcfcription of it with requefling the indulgence
of hi, readers, on account of the scanty informa-
tion he could obtain with refped to a country so
remote, which Europeans had seldom visited, and
many of them transiently only, in the funtions of
military service He observes, that even com-
merce had contributed little towards an accurate
inveltigation of the country, as few of the mer-
chants fiom Egypt and the Arabian Gulf had ever
failed as far as the Ganges; and from men so
illiterate, intelligence that merited a full degree of
confidence could hardly be expected. His defcrip-
tions of India, particularly its interior provinces,
are borrowed almost entirely from the Memoirs
of Alexander's Officers, with some slender addi-
tions from more recent accounts, and these so few
in number, and sometimes so inaccurate, as to
furniih a fitking proof of the f.nall progress which
the ancients had made, from the time of Alexander,
in exploring that country. Whea an author, pof-
sessed of such dilferi:ment and indultry as Strabo,
who visited in person fevcral dillant regions that

F

SE CT. be might be able o d(escribe them with greater

I. accuracy, relates. that the Ganges enters the ocean

by one mouth ", we are warranted in conclud-
irg. ,that in his time there was either no direct
navigation carried on to that great river, by the
traders from the Arabian Gulf, or that this voyage
was undertaken so seldom, that science had not
then derived much information from it.

The next author, in order of time, from whom

we receive any account of India, is the elder Pliny,
who flourished about fifty years later than Strabo.
As in the short description of India given in his
Natural History, he follows the fame guides with
Strabo, and seems to have had no knowledge of
the interior country, but what he derived from
the officers who served under Alexander and his
immediate successors, it is unnecessary to examine
his description minutely. He has added, however,
two valuable articles, for which he was indebted
to more recent discoveries. The one is the account
of the new course of navigation from the Arabian
Gulf to the coast of IValabar, the nature and
importance of which I have already explained.
The other is a description of the island of Ta-
probana, which I fiall confider particularly ,
after inquiring into what Ptolemy has contributed
towards our knowledge of the ancient slate of
India.

Though Ptolemy, who published his works
about fourscore years after Pliny, seems to have

s Strabo, lib. xv. ionl. C.
i;

been more diflinguifhed for his persevering indus- E C T.
try, and talent for arrangement, than for an 11.
inventive genius; geography has been more in-
debted to him for its improvement, than to any
other philosopher. Fortunately for that science, in
forming his general fyltem of geography, he
adopted the ideas, and imitated the practice of
Hijparchus, who lived near four hundred years
b-fore his time. That great philosopher was the
si-ft who attempted to make a catalogue of the
liars. In order to ascertain their pofiion in the
htavens with accuracy, he measured their distance
from certain circles of the sphere, computing it
by degrees, either from eAst to weft, or from
north to south. I he former was denominated the
longitude of the star, the latter its latitude. This
mode he found to be of fich utility in his aftrono-
mical researches, that he applied it with no less
happy effect to geography; and it is a circumltance
worthy of notice, that it was by observing and
delfcibing the heavens , men were first taught to
measure and delineate the earth with exactness.
'Ihis method of fixing the position of places,
invented by Hipparchus, though known to the
geographers between his time and that of Ptolemy,
an-, mentioned both by Strabo ', and by Pliny",
was not employed by any of them. Of this neglect
the molt probable account seems to be, that, as
none of them were astronomers, they did not fully
comprehend all the advantages geography might

" Lib. ii. ' Nat. Hist. lib. ii. c. 12. 26. 70.

F z

I E c T. derive from this invention '. These Ptolemy, who

iL had devoted a long life to the improv'ement of

altronorv , theorctical as well as practical, per-
fectlv discerned, and, as in both these Hipparchus
was his guide, he, in his famous treatise on geogra-
phy, described the different parts of the earth
according to their longitude and latitude. Geogra-
phy was thus elablifled upon its proper principles,
and intimately connected with astronomical obfer-
vation and mathematical science. This work of
Ptolemy soon rose high in estimation among the
ancients "'. During the middle ages, both in
Arabia and in Europe, the decisions of Ptolemy,
in every thing relative to geography, were sub.
mitted to with an assent as implicit, as was yielded
to those of Aristotle in all other departments of
science. On the revival of a more liberal spirit of
inquiry in the sixteenth century, the merit of
Ptolemy's improvements in geography was exa-
mined and recognised; that scientific language
which he first rendered general, continues to be
uled, and the position of places is still ascertained
in the fame diRlindl and compendious manner, by
specifying their longitude and latitude.

Not satisfied with adopting the general princi-

ples of Hipparchus, Ptolemy emulated him in the
application of them; and, as that philosopher had
arranged all the constellations , he ventured upon
what was no less arduous, to survey all the
regions of the earth, which were then known,

" See NOTE XXVI. " See NOTE XXVII.

and with minute and bold decision he fixed the Ion- s E C T.
gitude and latitude of the most remarkable places 1I.
in each of them. All his determinations, however,
are not to be confidered as the result of adual
observation, nor did Ptolemy pujli(h them as
such. Astronomical science was confined, at that
time, to a few countries. A considerable part of the
globe was little visited, and imperfedly described.
The position of a small number of places only had
been fixed with any degree of accuracy. Ptolemy
was therefore obliged to consult the itineraries and
surveys of the Roman Empire, which the political
wif(lom of that great slate had completed with
immense labor and expense ". Beyond the pre-
cincts of the empire, he had nothing on which he
could rely, but the journals and reports of travellers.
Upon these all his conclusions were founded; and
as he resided in Alexandria at a time when the
trade from that city to India was carried on to
its utmost extent, this situation might have been
expeded to afford him the means of procuring
ample information concerning it. But either from
the imperfect manner in which that country was
explored in his time, or from his placing too1
much confidence in the reports of persons who
had visited it with little attention or discernment",
his general delineation of the form of the Indian
continent is the molf erroneous that has been tranf-
mitted to us from antiquity. By an aftonilhing
mistake, he has made the peninsula of India stretch

" See NOTE XXVIII. " Geogr. lib. i.c. 17.

F3

S E C T. from the Sinus Barygazenus, or Gulf of Cambay,

I1. from weft to east, instead of extending, according

to it9 rzal d.rection, from nerth to south '. This
error will appear the more unaccountable, when
we recollec that \legathenes had publifled a
measurement of the Indian peninsula, which ap-
proaches near to its true fdimeilioti ; and that
this had been adopted, with some variations, by
Eratofihenes, Strabo, Diodorus Sicilus, and Pliny,
who wrote prior to the age of Ptolemy ".

Although Ptolemy was led to form such an

erroneous opinion concerning the general dimen-
sions of the Indian continent, his information with
respect to the country in detail, and the situation
of particular places, was more accurate; and he
is the firtl author pofftifed of such knowledge as
enabled him to trace the sea-coast, to mention the
roft noted places situated upon it, and to specify
the longitude and latitude of each from Cape
Comorin eaflward , to the utnmot boundary of
ancient navigation. W\ith regard to fonm diltricis,
particularly along the earl fide of the peninsula as
far as the mouth of the Ganges, the accounts
which he had received seem to have been to .ar
exad, as to correspond more nearly peihaip with
the actual state of the country, thain the defcrip-
tions which he gives of any other part of India.

" See NOTE XXIX.

Straoo, lib. xv. otor. B. Arrian, Hist. Indic. c. 3, 4.

Diod. SicLl. lib. ii. 148. Piin. Nat. Hist. lib. vi. c. 2i.
See NOTE XXX.

MI. D'Anville, with his fual industry and discern- s E C T.
ment, has confidered the principal stations as they I.
are fixed by him, and finds that they correspond
to Kilkare, Negapatam, the mouth of the river
Cauveri, Nlafulipatan, Point Gordeware, &c. It
is foreign to the object of this Disquisition, to
enter into such a minute detail; but in several
inflances we may observe, that not only the con-
formity of position, but the similarity of ancient
and modern names, is very striking. The great
river Cauveri is by Ptolemy named Chaberis;
Arcot, in the interior country, is Arcati Regia;
and probably the whole coast has received its pre-
sent name of Coromandel from Sor Mandulam, or
the kingdom of Sorxe, which is situated upon it ".

In the course of one hundred and thirty -fix
years, which elapsed from the death of Strabo to
that of Ptolemy, the commercial intercourse with
India was greatly extended; the latter geographer
had acquired such an accession of new information
concerning the Ganges, that he mentions the
names of fix different mouths of that river, and
describes their positions. His delineation, however,
of that part of India which lies beyond the Ganges,
is not less erroneous in its general form, than that
which he gave of the peninsula, and bears as
little resemblance to the actual position of those
countries. He ventures, nevertheless, upon a fur-
vey of them, similar to that which he had made

J Ptolem. Geogr. lib. vii. c. i. D'Anville, Antiq. de
l'lnde, 127, &c.

F4

SE C T. of the other great division of India, which I

II. have already examined. He mentions the places of

rote along the coast, some of which he ditin-
guifhe" as E-npoza i but whether that name was
given to them on account of their being ftiples
of trade to the natives. in their traffic carried on
from one diftrirt of India to another, or whether
they were ports. to which veifcls from the Arabi.n
Gus resorttd directly, is not fpecitied. The latter
1 Ihould think to be the idea which Ptolemy means
to convey; but these regions of India were so
remote, and, from the t.mid and flow course of
ancient navigation, were probably to little fre-
quented, that his information concerning them is
extremely defective, and his defcrlptions more
obscure, more inaccurate, and less conformable to
the real state of the country, than il any part of
his geography. That. peni:fnila to which he gives
the name of the Golden Cherfonefus, he delineates
as if it tifetched directly from north to south, and
fixes the latitude of Sabana Emporium, its southern
extremity, three degrees beyond the line. To the
east of this peninsula he places, what he calls the
Great Bay. and in the molt remote part of it the
station of Catigara, the utnoft boundary of navi-
gation in ancient times, to which he aligns no less
than eight degrees and a half of southern latitude.
Beyond this, he declares the earth to be altogether
unknown, and affertn that the land turns thence
to the westward, and stretches in that direction
until it joins the promontory of Praffum in Ethio-
pia, which, according to his idea, terminated the

continent of Africa to the south ". In consequence s E C T.
of this error, no less unaccountable than enormous, 11.
he muff have believed the Erythrean Sea, in its
whole extent from the coast of Africa to that of
Cambodia, to be a vast bafon, without any com-
munication with the ocean '

Out of the confusion of those wild ideas, in

which the accounts of ignorant or fabulnos travel-
lers have involved the geography of Ptolemy,
IlM. D'Anville has attempted to bring order; and,
with much ingenuity, he has formed opinions
with respeCt to some capital positions, which have
the appearance of being well founded. The penin-
fula of 1Malacca is, according to him, the Golden
Cherfonefils of Ptolemy; but instead of the direc-
tion which he has given it, we know that it
bends some degrees towards the east, and that
Cape de.Romania, its southern extremity, is more
than a degree to the north of the line. The Gulf
of Siam he confiders as the Great Bay of Ptolemy,
but the position on the east fide of that Bay,
corresponding to Catigara, is actually as many
degrees to the north of the Equator, as he sup-
posed it to be south of it. Beyond this he mentions
an inland city, to which he gives the name of
'Ihine or Sine Metropolis. 'Ihe longitude which
he afligns to it, is one hundred and eighty degrees
from his first meridian in the Fortunate Island,
and is the utmost point towards the East to which

Ptolem. Geogr. lib. vii. c. 3. 5. D'Anville, Ant. de
l'Inde, 187.

" See NOTE XXXI.

S E c T. the ancients had advanced by sea. Its latitude he

ii. calculates to be three degrees south of the line.

If, with lM. D'Anville, we conclude the situation
of Sin-hoa, in the western part of the kingdom of
Cochin-China, to be the fame with Sina: Metro.
polls. Ptolemy has erred in fixing its position no
less than fifty degrees of longitude, and twenty
degrees of latitude ".

These errors of Ptolemy concerning the remote

parts of Asia, have been rendered more conspicuous
by a mistaken opinion of modern times ingrafted
upon them. Sinae, the molt distant station men-
tioned in his geography, has such a near refem-
blance in found to China, the name by which
the greatest and molt civilized empire in the East
is known to Europeans, that upon their first ac-
quaintance with it, they hastily concluded them to
be the fame; and of consequence it was supposed
that China was known to the ancients, though no
point seems to be more ascertained, than that they
never advanced by sea beyond that boundary
which I have allotted to their navigation.

Having thus traced the discoveries of India which

the ancients made by sea, I shall next examine what
additional knowledge of that country they ac-
quired from their progress by land. It appears (as
1 have formerly related) that there was a trade

' Ptolem. Geogr. lib. vii. c. ;. D'Anville, Limites du

Monde connu des Anciens au-dela du Gange. Mem. de
Litera. xxxii. 604, &c. Ant. de l'Inde, Supplem. i.
x6 . &c. See NOTE XXXII.

carried on eaily with India through the provinces s E c T.
that firetch along its northern frontier. Its various 11.
productions and manufactures were transported by
land-carriage into the interior parts of the Perflan
doninions, or were conveyed, by means of the
naiigable rivers which flow through the Upper
Alia, to the Caspian Sea and from that to the
Euxine. While the successors of Seleucus retained
the dominion of the East, this continued to be the
mode of supplying their fubjeds with the commo-
dities of India. YWhen the Romans had extended
their conquests so far that the Euphrates was the
iaftern limit of their empire, they found this trade
Itill established, and as it opened to them a new
communication with the East, by means of which
they received an additional fuipply of luxuries,
for which they had acquired the highest relish, it
became an object of their policy to protect and
encourage it. As the progress of the caravans or
companies of merchants, which travelled towards
the countries whence they received the most va-
luable manufactures, particularly those of silk, was
often interrupted, a;:l rendered dangerous by the
Parthians, who had acquired possession of all the
provinces which extend from the Caspian Sea to
that part of Scythia or Tartary which borders on
China, the Romans endeavoured to render this
intercourse more secure by a negociation with one
of the monarchs of that great empire. Of this
singular tranlfacion there is, indeed, no veflige
in the Greek or Roman writers; our knowledge
of it is derived entirely from the Chinese historians,

S E C T. by whom we are informed that An-toun, (the

II. Emperor Mlarcus Antoninus,) the king of the

people of the \Veftern Ocean, sent an embassy
with this view to Oun-ti, who reigned over
China in the hundred and fixty-fixth year of the
Christian era 4. What was the success of tlis
attempt is not known, nor can we fay whether
it facilitated such an intercourse between there
two remote nations as contributed towards the
supply of their mutual wants. The design cer.
tainlv was not unworthy of the enlightened emperor
of Rome to whom it is ascribed.

It is evident, however, that in prosecuting

this trade with China, a considerable part of the
extensive countries to the east of the Caspian Sea
must have been traversed; and though the chief
inducement to undertake those distant journies
was gain, yet, in the course of ages, there mult
have mingled among the adventurers, persons of
curiosity and abilities, who could turn their
attention from commercial objets to those of
more general concern. From them such informa-
tion was procured, and irbjeded to fcientitic
discussion, as enabled Ptolemy to give a defcri)p
tion of those inland and remote regions of Aia ',
fully as accurate as that of several countries, of

4 Nlemnoire fur les Liaisons & le Commerce des Romains,

avec les Tartares & les Chinois, rar AI. de Guignes.
/ltm. de Litcrat. xxxii. 355, &c.

·3 Lib. vi. c. ii-18.

which, from their vicinity, we may have been s C T.
flppofed to have received more diftind accounts. 11.
'he farthest point towards the East, to which
his knowledge of this part of Asia extended, is
Sera Metropolis, which, from various circum.
fiances, appears to have been in the fame situation
with Kant-cheou, a city of some note in Chen-fi,
the most westerly province of the Chinese em-
pire. This he places in the longitude of one
hundred and feventy-feven degrees fifteen minu-
tes, near three degrees to the weft of Sin2e
Metropolis, which he had described as the utmost
limit of Asia discovered by sea. Nor was Ptole-
my's knowledge of this diflrict of Asia confined
only to that part of it through which the cara-
vans may be supposed to have proceeded directly
in their route eastward; he had received like-
wife some general information concerning various
nations towards the north, which, according to
the position that he gives them, occupied parts
of the great plain of Tartary, extending confider-
ably beyond Lassa, the capital of Thibet, and
the residence of the Dalai Lama.

The latitudes of several places in this part of
Asia are fixed by Ptolerny with such uncommon
precision, that we can hardly doubt of their
having been ascertained by acual observation.
Out of many instances of this, I thall feled three
of places situated in very different parts of the
country under review. The latitude of Nagara,
on the river Cophenes, (the modern Attock,)
is, according to Ptolemy, thirty . two degrees

s E C T. ard thirty minutes, which co - incides precisely

11. with the observation of an Ealtern geographer

quoted by 1M. D'Anville ". The latitude of
Alaracanda, or Samarcand, as fixed by him, is
thirty- nine degrees fifteen minutes. According to
the Astronomical Tables of Ulug Beg, the grand.
son of Timur, whose royal residence was in that
city, it is thiity-nine degrees thirty-feven minu.
tes '. 'he latitude of Sera NIetropolis, in Ptolemy,
is thirty-eight degrees fifteen minutes; that of
Kant-cheou, as determined by the Jesuit Miflion.
aries, i, thirty nine degrees. I have enumerated
these firiking examples of the co incidence of his
calculations with those eftablifned by modern
observations , for two re.fons: One, because
they clearly prove that there remote parts of
Asia had been examined with some considerable
degree of attention; the other, because I feel
great fatisfadtion, after having been obliged to
mention several errors and defects in Ptolemy's
geography, in rendering jultice to a philosopher,
who has contributed so much towards the improve-
ment of that science. The fads which I have
produced afford the firongeft evidence of the ex-
tent of his information, as well as the justness
of his conclusions concerning countries with which
from their remote fi:uation, we might have sup-
posed him to be least acquainted.

" Eclairciffemens, &c. Engliih Translation, p. ro.
"Tab. Geogr., ap. Hudson. Geogr. ilinores , iii.
145.

Hitherto I have confined my researches con- s E C T

cerning the knowledge which the ancients had of II.
India, to the continent; I return now to con-
fider the discoveries which they had made, of
the islands situated in various parts of the ocean
with which it is surrounded, and begin, as I
proposed, with Taprobane, the greatest and molt
valuable of them. This island lay so directly
in the course of navigators who ventured beyond
Cape Cornorin, especially when, according to
the ancient mode of failing, they seldom ven-
tured far from the coast, that its position, one
thould have thought, must have been determined
with the utmost precision. There is, however,
hardly any point in the geography of the ancients
more undecided and uncertain. Prior to the age
of Alexander the Great, the name of Taprobane
was unknown in Europe. In consequence of the
active curiosity with which he explored every
country that he subdued or visited, some informa-
tion concerning it seems to have been obtained.
From his time, almost every writer on geogra-
phy has mentioned it, but their accounts of it
are so various, and often so contradiCtory, that
we can hardly believe them to be describing the
fame island. Strabo, the earliest writer now ex-
tant, from whom we have any particular account
of it, affirms that it was as large as Britain, and
situated at the distance of seven days, according
to some reports, and according to other, of
twenty days failing from the southern extremity of
the Indian peninlula; from which, contrary to what

S E C T. is known to be its real position, he describes it

I1. as stretching towards the weft above five hundred

stadia '. Pomponius Alela, the author next in
order of time, is uncertain whether he should
confider Taprobane as an island, or as the begin.
ning of another world; but as no person, he
fays, had ever failed round it , he feemn to
incline towards the latter opinion '. Pliny gives
a more ample description of Taprobane, which,
instead of bringing any acceflion of light, invol-
ves every thing relating to it in additional
obscurity. After enumerating the various and
discordant opinions of the Greek writers, he
informs us, that ambassadors were sent by a king
of that island to the emperor Claudius, from
who:n the Romans learned several things con-
cerning it, which were formerly unknown; par-
ticularly that there were five hundred towns in
the ifl3nd, and that in the centre of it there was
a lake three hundred and feventy-five miles in
circumference. These ambassadors were astonished
at the fight of the Great Bear, and the Pleiades,
being constellations which did not appear in their
flkv: and were trill more amazed when they be-
held their shadows point towards the north, and
the fan rife on their left hand, and set on their
right. They affirmed too. that in their country
the moon was never seen until the eighth day

Strabo, lib. ii. 124. B. ISo. B. 192. A. lib. xv.

Iot:. B.
4' De Sicu Orbis, lib. iii. c. 7.

after the change, and continued to be visible s E C TS
only to the sixteenth ". It is surprising to find I1.
an author so intelligent as Pliny relating all these
circumltances without animadversion, and particu.
larly that he does not take notice, that what the
anbaffadors reported concerning the appearance
of the moon, could not take place in any region
of the earth.

1tolemy, though so near to the age of Pliny,
seems to have been altogether unacquainted with
his description of Taprobane, or with the embassy
to the emperor Claudius. He places that island
opposite to Cape Comorin, at no great diflance
from the continent, and delineates it as firetch-
ing from north to south no less than fifteen degrees,
two of which he supposes to be south of the
Equator; and if his representation of its dimen.
sions had been just, it was well entitled from its
magnitude to be compared with Britain". Agathe-
merus, who wrote after Ptolemy, and was well
acquainted with his geography, confiders Tapro.
bane as the laIgerf of all islands, and assigns to
Britain only the second place '.

orom this diversity of the descriptions given

by ancient writers, it is not furpriling that the
moderns should have entertained very different
sentiments with rcfpect to the island in the Indian

Nat. Hil. lib. vi. c. 22.

" Ptol. lib. vii. c. 4. D'Anville, Ant. de l'lndeg
p. 142.

Lib. ii. c. 8. apud Hudson. Geogr. Minor. vol. ii.

G

S E C T. ocean which was to be confidered as the fame

11. with the Tlapr;onane of the Greeks and Romans.

As both Pliny ai-d Ptolmnv d(escribe it as lying
in part to the south of the Equator, some learned
men maintain Sumatra to be the island which
corresponds to this description. But the great
ditance of Sumatra from the peninsula of India
does not accord with any account which the
Greek or Roman writers have given of the fitua-
tion of Taprobane, and we have no evidence that
the navigation of the ancients ever extended so
far as Sumatra. The opinion more generally re-
ceived is, that the Taprobane of the ancients is
the island of Ceylon; and not only its vicinity to
the continent of India, but the general form of
the island, as delineated by Ptolemy, as well as
the position of several places in it, mentioned by
him, establish this opinion (notwithftaiding some
extraordinary mistakes, of which I flall afterwards
take notice) with a great degree of certainty.

The other islands to the east of Taprobane,

mentioned by Ptolemy, might be Ihown (if such
a detail were necessary ) to be the Andaman and
Nicobar Islands in the Gulf of Bengal.

After this log , and, I am afraid, tedious

inves'tigation of the progress made by the ancients,
in exploring the different parts of India, and
after tracing them as far as they advanced towards
the East, cither by sea or land, I ihall offer some
general rem.iks concerning the mode in which
their difcoveices were conducted, and the degree
of confidence with which we may rely on the

accounts of them, which could not have been s E CT.
offered with the fame advantage until this invefti- 11.
gation was finished.

The art of delineating maps, exhibiting either

the figure of the whole earth, as far as it had
been explored , or that of particular countries,
was known to the ancients; and without the use
of them to alitft the imagination, it was impossible
to have formed a distinct idea either of th.e one
or of the other. Some of these maps are men-
tioned by Herodotus, and other early Greek
writers. But no maps prior to those which were
formed in order to illustrate the geography of
Ptolemy, have reached our times, in consequence
of which it is very difficult to conceive what
was the relative situation of the different places
mentioned by the ancient geographers, unless
wh n it is precisely ascertained by measurement ".
As soon, however, as the mode of marking the
fitaltion of each place by specifying its longitude
and latitude was introduced, and came to be
generally adopted, every position could be de-
fcribed in compendious and scientific terms. But
tfill the accuracy of this new method, and the
improvement which geography derived from it,
depends upon the mode in which the ancients
estimated the latitude and longitude of places.

Though the ancients proceeded in determining
the latitude and longitude of places upon the fame

"See NOTE XXXIII.

G 3

E C T. principles with the moderns, yet it was by
II. means of instruments very inferior in their con.

firucion to thlife now used , and -vithout the
fame minute attention to every circumstance that
may affect the accuracy of an observation, an
attention of which long experience only can
demonfirate the necessity. In order to ascertain
the lI.ritude of any place, the ancients observed
the meridian altitude of the fun, either by means
of the shadow of a perpendicular gnomon, or
by means of an aflrolabe, from which it was
easy to compute how many degrees and minutes
the place of observation was distant from the
Equator. 'When neither of there methods could
be employed, they inferred the latitude of any
place from the belt accounts which they could
procure of the length of its longest day.

With respect to determining the longitude of

any place, they were much more at a loss, as
there was only one set of celestial phenomena
to which they could have recourse. These were
the eclipses of the moon ( for those of the fun
were not so wel! understood as to be fibfer-
vient to the purposes of geography): the differ-
ence between the time at which an eclipse was
observed to begln or to end at two different
places. gave immediately the difference between
the meridiann of those places. But the difficulty
of making those observations with accuracy, and
the impoflibiliry of repeating them often, ren-
dered them of so little use in geography , that
the ancients in determining longitudes were

obliged, for the mosd part, to have recourse to S EC T.
adtual furvevs, or to the vague information which 11.
was to be obtained from the reckonings of sailors,
or the itineraries of travellers.

But though the ancients, by means of the

operations which I have mentioned, could de-
termine the position of places with a confider-
able degree of accuracy at land, it is very
uncertain whether or not they had any proper
mode of determining this at sea. The naviga-
tors of antiquity seem rarely to have had re-
course to astronomical observation. They had
no instruments suited to a moveable and unsteady
observatory; and though by their practice of
landing frequently, they might, in some measure,
have supplied that defeCt, yet no ancient author,
as far as I know, has given an account of any
astronomical observation made by them during
the course of their voyages. It seems to be evi-
dent from Ptolemy, who employs some chapters
in llowing how geography may be improved,
and its errors may be recified , from the re-
ports of navigators ", that all their calculations
were founded solely upon reckoning, and were
not the result of observation. Even after all the
improvements which the moderns have made in
the science of navigation , this mode of com-
puting by reckoning is known to be so loose
and uncertain, that, from it alone, no con-
clufion can be deduced with any great degree

" Lib. i. c. 7-14.

G3

S EC T. of precision. Among the ancient . this inac-

II. curacy mufi have been greatly augmented , as

they were accustomed in their voyages, instead
of fteerinz a direc co'.lrfe which might have
been more easily measured, to a circuitous
naviga3tion along the coaf ; and were unac-
quainted with the compaf>, or any other infiru-
ment bv which its bearings micht have been
ascertained lWe find, accordingly, the position
of many places which we may suppose to have
been determined at sea, fixed with little exact-
neSs. W hen. in confequerice of an adive trade,
the ports of any country were much frequented,
the reckonings of different navigators may 'have
served in some me.fure to corred each other,
and may have enabled geographers to form their
conclusions with a nearer approximation to truth.
But in remote countries, which have neither
been the feat of military operation , nor ex.
plored by caravans travelling frequently through
them. evcrv thing ic more vague and undetined,
and the resemblance b-tween the ancient defcrip-
tionc of them, and their aAual figure, is often
so faint that it can hardly be traced. The lati-
tude of place, too. as n'ight be expected, was
in general much more accurately known by the
ancients than their longitude The obfkrvations
by which the former was determined are simple,
made wsth ease, and are not liable to much
error. The other cannot be ascertained precisely,
without more complex operations, and the use
of instruments much more perfect than any that

the ancients seem to have possessed ". Among s E C T.
the valt number of places, the position of which 11.
ii fixed by Ptolemy, I know not if he ap-
proaches as near to truth in the longitude of any
one, as he has done in fixing the latitude of
the three cities which I formerly mentioned as
a striking, though not singular, instance of his
exadcnefs.

These observations induce me to adhere to an
opinion , which I proposed in another place ",
that the Greeks and Romans, in their commer-
cial intercourse with India, were seldom led,
either by curiosity or the love of gain, to visit
the more eastern parts of it. A variety of parti-
culars occur to confirm this opinion. Though
Ptolemy bestows the appellation of Emporia on
several places situated on the coast, which stretches
from the eastern mouth of the Ganges to the
extremity of the Golden Cherfonefus, it is un-
certain, as I formerly observed, whether from
his having given them this name, we are to
confider them as harbours frequented by ships
from Egypt, or merely by vessels of the country.
Beyond the Golden Cherfonefus, it is remarkable
that he mentions one Emporium only " , which
plainly indicates the intercourse with this region
of India to have been very inconsiderable. Had
voyages from the Arabian Gulf to those countries

" See NOTE XXXIV.

Hlift. of America, vol. i. p. 80. 3 1.
5 Lib. vii. c. 2.

G4

s e c T. of India been aQ frequent, as to have enti'l-ed

I. Ptolemv to specify so n'nutely the longirude

and latitude of the great nu:nber of places which
he mentions, he mull, in conflquence of this,
have a.-'tired such jiformarion as would have
prevented several great error> into which he has
fallen. Had it been usual to double t.ape Como.
rin, and to fail up the P,ay of Bengal to the
mnu'h of the Ganges, so l.e of the ancient geo-
graphers would not have been so uncertain, and
others so widely mistaken, with refped to the
situation and magnitude of the island of Ceylon.
If the merchants of Alexandria had often visited
the ports of the Golden Cherfonefus, and of the
Great Bay, Ptolem,'s descriptions of them muff
have been rendered more correspondent to their
real form, nor could he have believed several
places to lie beyond the line, which are in truth
some degrees on this fide of it

But though the navigation of the ancients may

not have extended to the farthcr India, we are
certain that various commodiuts of that country
were imported into Fg, pt, and thence were con-
veyed to Rome, and to other parts of the em-
pire. I-rom circumfiances which I have already
enumerated, we are warranted in concluding,
that these were brought in velftls of the country
to Ilufiris, and to the other ports on the Mlaa-
bar coast, which were, at that period, the
fltplcs of trade with Egypt. In a country of
such extent as India, where the natural pro-
ductions are various, and greatly diverrfied by

art and induflry, an adive domestic commerce, s E CT.
both by sea and by land, muit have early takn 11.
place among its different provinces. Of this we
have some hints in ancient authors; and where
the sources of information are so few and so
scanty, we must reft satisfied with hints. Among
the different classes, or calls, into which the
people of India were divided, merchants are
mentioned as one , from which we may con-
clude trade to have been one of the eftablifeled
occupations of men in that country. From the
Author of the Circumnavigation of the Erythrean
Sea, we learn that the inhabitants of the Coro-
mandel coast traded in veffcls of their own with
those of Mlalabar; that the interior trade of
B.lrygaza was considerable; and that there was,
at all seasons, a number of country fllps to be
found in the harbour of Mufiris ". By Strabo
we are informed , that the molt valuable pro-
dudions of Taprobane were carried to different
Enporia of India ". In this way the traders from
Fgypt might be supplied with them, an:l thus
could fiinif their voyages within the year, which
muil have been protracted much longer if they
had extended as far towards the east as is gene-
rally supposed.

-rom all this it appears to be probable, that
Ptolemy derived the information concerning the

" lin. Nat. Ilift. lib. vi. c. 22.

Pcrip. Mar. Erythr. 30. 34.
" Lib. ii. 124. B.

S EC T. eatern parts of India, upon which he founds

II. his calculations, not so much from any diret

and regular intercourse between Egypt and these
countries, as from the reports of a few adven-
turers, whom an enterprising spirit, or the love
of gain, prompted to proceed beyond the usual
limits of navigation.

Though, from the age of Ptolemy, the trade

with India continued to be carried on in its
former channel, and both Rome, the ancient
capital of the empire, and Constantinople, the
new feat of government, were supplied with the
precious commodities of that country by the
merchants of Alexandria, yet, until the reign of
the emperor Justinian, we have no new informa.
tion concerning the intercourse with the East by
sea, or the progress which was made in the
discovery of its remote regions. Under Justinian,
Cofmas , an Egyptian merchant, in the course
of his traffic, made some voyages to India,
whence he acquired the firname of Indicopleu.
fies; but afterwards, by a transition not uncom-
mon in that superstitious age, he renounced all
the concerns of this life, and assumed the mona-
ftic characer. In the solitude and leisure of a
cell , he composed several works , one of
which, dignified by him with the name of ChriJian
Toponralhy, has reached us. The main design
of it is to combat the opinion of those philofo-
phers, who assert the earth to be of a spherical
figure , and to prove that it is an oblong plane,
of twelve thousand miles in length from east to

welt, and of fix thousand miles in breadth from s E c T.
north Wo south, surrounded by high walls, co- 1i.
vered by the firmament as with a canopy or
vault; that the vicissitude of day and night was
occasioned by a mountain of prodigious height,
situated in the extremities of the north, round
which the fun moved; that when it appeared on
one fide of this mountain, the earth was illumi-
nated, when concealed on the other fide, the
earth was left involved in darkness ". But amidfl
those wild reveries, more suited to the credulity
of his new profession, than to the found fen fe
characderiftic of that in which he was formerly
engaged, Cofmas seems to relate what he him-
felt had observed in his travels, or what he had
learned from others, with great simplicity and
regard for truth.

He appears to have been well acquainted with
the weft coalt of the Indian penirfula, and names
fevcral places situated upon it; he describes It as
the chief feat of the pepper trade, and mentions
M ale, in particular, as one of the most frequented
ports on that account '°. From Male , it is pro-
bable that this fide of the continent has derived
it< modern name of lV]alabar; and the cluller of
ilandls contiguous to it, that of the Mlaldives.
From him too we learn, that the island of
Taprobane, which he supposes to lie at an equal

" Cofmas ap. Alontfaucon Collect. Patrum, ii. il ,
&c. 1 8.

Cofin. lib. ii. p. i;8. lib. xi. 3 7.

SE C T. ditance from the Persian Gulf on the weft, and

11. the country of the Siaie on the eaRt, had b8|ome,

in consequence of this commodious situation, a
great fltplv of trade; that into it were imported
the silk of the Sinx, and the precious spices of
the Eastern countries, which were conveyed
thence to all p:ats of India, to Persia, and to
the Arabian Gulf. To this island he gives the
name of Sieledlba", the fame with that of Selen.
dib, or Serendib, by which it is till known all
over the Fast.

To Cofinas we are also indebted for the first

information of a new rival to the Romans in trade
having appeared in the Indian seas. The Persians,
after having overturned the empire of the Par.
thians, and re- established the line of their ancient
monarchs , seem to have surmounted entirely the
aversion of their ancestors to maritime exertion,
and made early and vigorous efforts in order to
acquire a share in the lucrative commerce with
India. All its considerable ports were frequented
by traders from Persia, who, in return for some
producions of their own country in request among
the Indians, received the precious commodities,
which they conveyed up the Persian Gulf, and
by means of the great rivers, Euphrates and
Tigris, difiributed them through every province
of their empire. As the voyage from Persia to
India was much shorter than that from Egypt,
and attended with less expense and danger, the

" Lib. xi. 336.

intercourse between the two countries increased s E C T.
rapidly. A circumnlance is mentioned by Cofmas il.
which is a friking proof of this. In most of the
cities of any no:e in India he found Christian
churches established , in which the funcions of
religion were performed by prielts ordained by the
archbishop of Seleucia, the capital of the Persian
empire, and who continued subjet to his jurif-
diction ". India appears to have been more
thoroughly explored at this period, than it was
in the age of Ptolemy, and a greater number of
strangers seem to have been fettled there. It is
remarkable, however, that, according to the ac-
count of Cofmas, none of these strangers were
accustomed to visit the eastern regions of Asia,
but refted satisfied with receiving their silk, their
spices, and other valuable producions, as they
were imported into Ceylon, and conveyed thence
to the various marts of India".

The frequency of open hostilities between the
emperors of Constantinople and the monarchs of
Persia, together with the increasing rivalfhip of
their fubjeCis in the trade with India, gave rife
to an event which produced a considerable change
in the nature of that commerce. As the use of silk,
both in dress and furniture , became gradually
more general in the court of the Greek emperors,
who imitated and surpasscd the sovereigns of Asia
in splendor and magnificence; and as China, in

Cofm. lib. iii. 178.
Lib. xi. 337.

S E C T. which, according to the concurring teflimony of

II. Oriental writers, the culture of silk was originally

known ' , fuill continued to be the only country
wvhch produced that valuable commodity; the
Persians , improving the advantages which their
situation gave them over the merchants from the
Arabian Gulf, supplanted them in all the marts
of India to which silk was brought by sea from
the East. Having it likewise in their power to
molest or to cut off the caravans,. which, in order
to procure a supply for the Greek empire, tra.
veiled by land to China, through the northern
provinces of their kingdom, they entirely en-
grofTed that branch of commerce. Confltantinoplc
was obliged to depend on a rival power for an
article which luxury viewed and desired as effen-
tial to elegance. The Persians^ with the usual
rapacity of monopolists, raised the price of silk to
such an exorbitant height ", that Justinian, eager
not only to obtain a full and certain supply of a
commodity which was become of indispensable
use, but solicitous to deliver the commerce of his
subjects from the exactions of his enemies, en-
deavoured, by means of his ally, the Christian
monarch of Abyflinia, to wrest some portion of
A. D. ;I1. the silk trade from the Persians. In this attempt

he failed; but when he least expected it, he, by
an unforeseen event, attained, in some measure,
the object which he had in view. Iwo Persian

'4 Herbelot Biblioth. Orient. attic. Harir.
" Procop. Hist. Arcan. c. :i.

monks having been employed as miflionaries in s E C T.
some of the Christian churches, which were 11.
efrablified (as we are informed by Cofmas) in
different parts of India, had penetrated into the
country of the Seres, or China. There they ob-
served the labors of the silk- worm, and became
acquainted with all the arts of man in working
up its produtions into such a variety of elegant
fabrics. The profpecd of gain, or perhaps an
indignant zeal, excited by feeing this lucrative
branch of commerce engrossed by unbelieving na-
tions, prompted them to repair to Constantinople.
There they explained to the emperor the origin
of silk, as well as the various modes of preparing
and manufacturing it, mysteries hitherto unknown,
or very imperfedly understood in Europe; and
encouraged by his liberal promises, they under-
took to bring to the capital a sufficient number of
those wonderful infecs, to whose labors man is
so much indebted. This they accomplished by
conveying the eggs of the silk-worm in a hollow
cane. They were hatched by the heat of a dung-
hill, fed with the leaves of a wild mulberry tree,
and they multiplied and worked in the fame
manner as in those climates where they first be-
came objects of human attention and care". Valt
numbers of these infeds were soon reared in dif-
ferent parts of Greece, particularly in the Pelopo.
nefus. Sicily afterwards undertook to breed silk-
worms with equal success, and was imitated, from

Procop. de Bello Gothic. lib. iv. c. £7.

!P C T. time to time, in several towns of Italy. In all
11. th, fe pI.ce, extenive manufactures were eftablifled,

aind c.rriL-d on, with silk of domestic produtdon.
The demrnin for silk from the East diminished of
course, the fubjeds of the Greek emperors were
no lIo,:gr obliged to have recourse to the Persians
for a supply of it, and a considerable change took
place in the nature of the commercial intercourse
between Europe and India ".

"See NOTE XXXV.

AN

# SECTION III.

AN
HISTORICAL DISQUISITION

CONCERNING
ANCIENT INDIA.

SECTION III.

Intercourse with India, from the Cop quest of Egypt b>.

the Alahomedans, to the DiJcovery )f the Pajfge by
the Cape of Good Hope, and the A, ablisbment of tbo
Portuguese Dominion in the East.

ABOUT fourscore years after the death of s E C T.
Jultinian, an event happened, which occafiorled a 11.
revolution 1till more considerable in the intercourse
of Europe with the East. Mahomet, by publish-
ing a new religion, seems to have animated his
countrymen with a new spirit, and to have called
forth latent passions and talents into exertion.

H

S F c T The grelteft pirt cf the Arabs, satisfied from

ll. the a'l!eft times wv:th n.tionl indepeidence and

perfrnal l1bcrv , tedj;lc tieir camels, or reared
th'ir p Im-r -rs , withinl the prcc;nct of their
own penrilftla , and had 1!;tli: igntercourfe witli
the rtli of marn kin i . unlefc when fhey sallied
out 'o p[lhr'dtr a caravan or to rob a traveller.
In f',me d!irrict . howv, r. they h .d begiln to
add the labor> of agrict.lture, and the business
of conimerce, to the occup.'ion of paloral life.
All tbtft. orders of men, wi'en prompted by the
enthuriaftic ardor wit-h which the exhortations and
example of ]2ahomet inspired them, displayed,
at opce, all the zeal of miflionaries, and the
ambition of conquerors They spread the doclrine
of their prophet, and extended the dominion of
his faccecfors, from the fiores of the Atlantic to
the frontier of China, with a rapidity of fucccfs
to which there is nothi'g Cimilar in the hiflory
A D. 64c. of mankind. Egypt was one of their earliell

conquests; and as they fettled in that inviting
coun(ry, and kept pofftlion of it, the Greeks
were excluded from all inte;courfe with Alexan-
dria, to which they had loig resortcd as the
chief mnrt of Indian goods. Nor was this the
only eff- c whiLh the progref, of the r\lahomedan
arm' had upon the comrerce of Europe with
India Prior to their invasion of Kgvpt , the
Arabians h.'d fublued the grnat kilgdom of
Persia. and adLded it to the empire of their
Caliphs. Th-ey found their new f'bjPct eng' zed
in prosecuting that extensive trade with India,

and the country to the eamt of it, the corn- s ECT.
mencement and progress of which in Persia I il11
have already mentioned; and 'they were so fen.
fible of the great advantages derived from it, that
they became desirous to partake of them. As
the active powers of the human mind, when
rouled to vigorous exertions in one line, are mofl
capable of operating with force in other direc-
tions; the Arabians, from impetuous warriors,
soon became enterprising merchants. They con-
tinued to carry on the trade with India in its
former channel from the Persian Gulf, but it was
with that ardor which characderizes all the early
efforts of Mahomet's followers. In a lhort time
they aldvanced far beyond the boundaries of ancient
navig.tion , and brorlght many of the mofi pre-
cious commodities of the Ealf directly from the
countries which produced them. In order to
engrols all the profit artsing from the sale of them,
the Caliph Om.ar', a few years after the conquest
of Persia, founded the city of Baffora, on the
western banks of the great fiream formed by the
junction of the Euphrates and Tigris, with a view
of securing the command of these two rivers, by
which goods imported from India were conveyed
into all parts of Asia. With such discernment was
the situation chosen, that Raffora soon became a
place of trade hardly inferior to Alexandria.

This general information with refped to the
trade of the Arabians with India, which is all

' Herbel. Biblioth. Orient. attic. Bafirah.

H9

Sl C T. that can be der:Eed( from the hiflorians of that

III. period, is confirmed and illustrated by the Rtla-

tion of a Voyage from the Persian Gulf towards
the East, written by an Arabian merchant in the
year of the ChriPi.m era eight hundrtd and fifty.
one, about two centuries after Persia was sub-
jt ded to the Caliph , and explained by the
Commentary of another Arabian, who had like-
wife ifited the Eastern parts of Asia '. This
curious Relation, which enables us to fill up a
chasm in the history of mercantile communication
with India, furnishes materials for describing more
in detail the extent of the Arabian discoveries in
the East, and the manner in which they made
them.

Though some have imagined that the wonderful

property of the magnet, by vhikh it communica-
tes such virtue to a needle or slender rod of iron,
as to make it point towards the poles of the
earth, was known in the .aft long before it was
observed in Furope. it is manifest, both from the
Relation of the Mlahomedan merchant, and from
much concurring evidence, that not only the
Arabians, but the Chinese, were deflitute of this
faithful guide, and that their mode of navigation
was not more adventurous than that of the Greeks
and Romans '. They fleered servilely along the
coafl ftldom flietching out to fia so far as to
lose fight of land, and as they shaped their course

' See NOTE XXXVI.
* Kiairsun, p. 2. $, &eC.

in this timid manner, their mode of reckoning s E C T.
was defective, and liable to the fame errors which ill.
I observed in that of the Greeks and Romans '

Notwithltanding these difadvanmages, the pro-

grefs of the Arabians towards the Fall extended
far beyond the Gulf of Siam , the boundary of
European navigation. They became acquainted
with Sumatra, and the other island, of the great
Indian Archipelago, and advanced as far as the
city of Canton in China. Nor are these discoveries
to be confidered as the effect of the enterprising
curiosity of individuals ; they were owing to a
regular commerce carried on from the Persian Gulf
with China, and all the intermediate countries.
'lany Mahomedans, imitating the example of
the Persians described by Cofmas Iridicopleufltes,
fettled in India and the countries beyond it. They
were so numerous in the city of Canton, that the
emperor (as the Arabian authors relate) permitted
them to have a Cadi or judge of their own fe&,
who decided controversies among his countrymen
by their own laws, and presided in all the func-
tions of religion '. In other places proselytes were
gained to the Mahomedan faith, and the Arabian
language was understood and spoken in almost
every sea-port of any note. Ships from China and
different places of India traded in the Persian

Renaudot, Inquiry into the Time when the Mahome.
dans tirft entered China, p. 14).

'Relation, p. 7. Remarks, p. 19. Inquiry, p. 171,
&c.

H3

S E C T. Gulf', and bv the frequency of mutual intercomoie,

ill. ail tle nation- of the Lalt became better acquainted

with each other '

A ftiiki, g proof of this is the new information

concerning China and India we receive from the
two authors 1 have mentioned. TIhey point out
the firuation of Canton. now so wcll known to
Europeans, with a confiderabic d(gree of exad-
nef;. They take notice of the geicr.,i use of silk
among tne Chinese. 1 hey are the si-ft who men-
tion thir celebrated manuf.iclire of porcelan,
twhich, on account of its delicacy and tranfpar-
en.y, theys compare to gl f-. IVhty dcfjribe the
tea-tree. .i'd the mode ot using its leaves; and
from the great revenue wvhlch w;a levied (as riey
inform u.) from the conirnni,tion of it , tea feenms
to have been as univerLtillv the f.tvorite beverage
of the Chinmcf in the ninth century, as it is at
present '.

Even with refnecc to thoifc parts of India whilh

the Gre(ki and Kom.ns wiure accuf.ltmed to vifir,
the Aiabians had acqu;red more p si fee: infoi na-
tion. They mention a great empire eliablinficd ou
the ilalab.ir cc.af, go.ern. d' bv monarclhs whose
atoit}o ity W. p.irlamc.uf t th at of cveiv power
in lndia. These monarch, 'were diftiguitinied by
the appi)llation *cf E1t /.'a, a name Vyt ck:lown in
India ' and i: is p:oh.ble lhat the S.imorin, or
emperor of Calicut, so frc.ierntly mentioned in

ee NOTE XXXVII. ' Eclation, p. 8.
Rel:;ioi, p. . . 2;. ' Herbelot, artic. Hrc;i. & Bclbar.

the accounts of the first voyages of the Portuguese s E c T.
to Itdia, pcffelfed some portiotn of their dominions. IiI.
They celebrate the extraordinary progress which
the Indians had made in afironomical knowledge,
a circumtinftce which seems to have been unk;,nowv
to tle Gre.ks and Romans, and alTert that in this
brmnch of Lience they were far lulerior to the
nolt enlightened nations of the katl, on which
act ount their sovereign was denominated the King
of \Vifloin '°. 0;her peculiarities in the political
insti utions, the mode of judicial pro-eedings, the
p.iliines, and the superstitions of the Indiidns.,
palticutlarly the excruciating mortifications and pe-
nances of the faquirs, might be produced as proofs
of the superior knowledge which the Arabians
had acquired of the manners of that people.

1he fame commercial spirit, or rel!gious zeal,

which prompted the Mlahomedans of Persia to
visit the remotest regions of the East, animated
the Christians of that kingdom. ' he Neftorian
churches planted in Persia, under the protection
first of its native sovereigns, and afterwards of its
conquerors the Caliphs , were numerous , and
governed by respect ble ecclesiastics. They had
cailv sint mifionaries into India, and eflabliyhed
churches in different parts of it, partirul.rly, as
I have formerly related, in the Island of Ceylon.
Y-When the Arabians extended th,.ir navigation as
far as China, a more ample field, both for th-ir
commerce and their zeal, opened to their view.
If we may rely on the concurring evidence of

Relation, p. 37. S .

H4

SE C T. Christian authors, in the East as well as in the

I e. Wef. confirmed by the testimony of the two

Ilahomedan travellers, their pious labors were
attended with such success, that in the ninth
and tenth centuries the number of Christians in
India and China was very considerable ". As the
churches in both there countries received all their
ecclesiastics from Persia, where they were ordained
by the Cathozios, or Neftorian Primate, whose
supremacy they acknowledged, this became a re-
gular channel of intercouife and intelligence; and
to the combined effet of all these circumstances,
we are indebted for the information we receive
from the two Arabian writers ", concerning those
regions of Asia which the Greeks and Romans
rDever visited.

But while both the Mlahomedan and Chriflian

fubjeds of the Caliphs continued to extend their
know ledge of the East, the people of Europe found
themselves excluded almost entirely from any in-
tercourfe with it. To them the great port of
Alexandria was now Ihut, and the new lords of
the Persian Gulf, satisfied with supplying the
demand in their own vast dominions for the com-
modities of the Ealt, neglected to convey them,
by any of the usual channels, to the trading towns
on the Mediterranean. The opulent inhabitants of
Constantinople, and other great cities of Europe,
bore this deprivation of luxuries, to which they
had been long accultomed, with such impatience,
that all the activity of commerce was exerted, in

" See NOTE XXXVIII. " Relation, p. 39.

order to find a remedy for an evil which they, s C T.
deemed intolerable. The difficulties which were to ill.
be surmounted in order to accomplish this, afford
the mot striking proof of the high estimation in
which the commodities of the Fast were held at
that time. The silk of China was purchased in
Chenfi, the westernmost province of that empire,
and conveyed thence by a caravan, in a march of
eighty or a hundred days, to the banks of the
Oxus, where it was embarked, and carried down
the stream of that river to the Cafriian. After a
dangerous voyage across that sea, and ascending
the river Cyrus as far as it is navigable, it was
condudted by a short land-carriage of five days to
the river Phafis ", which falls into the Euxine or
Black Sea. Thence, by an easy and well known
course, it was transported to Constantinople. The
conveyance of commodities from that region of
the East, now known by the name of Indoflan,
was somewhat less tedious and operose. They were
carried from the banks of the Indus, by a route
early frequented, and which I have already de-
fcribed, either to the river Oxus, or direcly to
the Caspian, from which they held the fame course
to Constantinople.

It is obvious, that only commodities of small

bulk, and of considerable value, could bear the
expense of such a mode of conveyance; and in
regulating the price of those commodities; not
only the expense, but the risk and danger of
conveying them, were to be taken into account.

" Plin. Nat. Hilt. lib. vi. c. 17.

S E C T. In their journey across the vf't plain extending

111. from S marcande to the frontier of China, cara.

vans were eypofed to the alff.lts and depredations
of the Tartar, the Huns, the lutiks, and other
rovinz tribes which infest the north-east of Asia,
and which have always confidercd the merchant
and traveller as their lawful piey; nor were they
exempt from iifult'an] pil'age in their journey
from the Cyrus to the Phafis, through the king.
dom of Colchis, a country noted, both in ancient
and in modrn times, for the thievish (lifpofition
of its inhibitant. Even under all these difadvan-
tazes, the trade with the .'aft was carried on with
ardor. Constantinople became a considerable mart
of Indian and Chinese commodities, and the
wealth which flowed into it in consequence of
this. not only added to the fplcndor of that
great city, but f.ems to have retarded, for some
time, the decline of the empire of which it was
th, capital.

As far as we mav venture to conjedure, from

the imperfect infcrrnaion of cn:ltemporary histori.
an,, it wa, chiefy hv the molie of conx eyance
which I have (cfcribed, perilous and operose as
it was, that i uope was supplicd with the com-
mod.:ies of the Faf , (uring more than two
centuries. I liroughout that period the Christians
and A Ilhomedins were engaged in almost unin-
terrnpted hoftiiitit ; pr'frecuted with all the ani-
rnofiy whiLh rivailflip for power, heightened by
re!i gous zeal, naturally excites. Under circumftan-
ces \,h1ich ocafioned such alicnatlon, commercial

intercourse could hardly fififl, and the merchants s E c T.
of Chrifiendom either did not refrt at all to Ill.
Alexandria, and the ports of Syria, the ancient
staples for the commodities of the lEast, after they
were in possession of the illahomedans, or if the
love of gain, surmounting their abhorrence of the
Infidlds, prompted them to visit the marts whic'
they had long frequented , it was with much
caution and ditfruft.

While the difiiculties of procuring the produc-
tions of the East were thus augmented, the people
cf lulrop becaine more desirous of obtaining them.
About this time some cities of Italy, pArticulaily
Ainalphi and Venice, having acquired a greater
d!egrie of independence than they formerly pof-
fcfftd, began to cultivate the arts of d.)meftic
i:ndufiry, with an ardor and ingenuity uncommon
in the middle ages. The effedt of these exertions
wnas ftch an increase of wealth, as created new
wants and desires. and formed a tafle for elegance
a:,;l luxury, which induced them to visit foreign
countries in order to gratify it. Among men in this
ftige of their advancement, the productions of India
have always been held in high etlimation, and from
this period they were imported in Italy in larger
quantities, and came into more general use. Several
circumstances which indicate this reviv:,l of a
commercial spirit, are colledited by the industrious
Muratori, and, from the close of the seventh cen-
tury, an attentive observer may discern faint traces
of its progress ".

Antiquit. Ital. medi lEvi, ii. 400. 408. 41C. 88g.
si. 894. Rer. Ital. Script. ii. 487.

s E C T. Even in enlightened ages, when the tranfadions

Ill. of nations are observed and recorded with the

greatest care, and the t(ore of hifiorical materials
seems to be abundantly ample, so little attention
lhas been paid to the operations of commerce,
that every attempt towards a regular deduction of
them, has been found an undertaking of the it.
most difficu'tv. The era, however, to which I
have conduced this Disquisition, is one of the
periods in the annalb of mankind concerning which
history furnishes most scanty information. As it was
chiefy in the Greek empire, and in some cities of
Italv, that any efforts were made to procure the
commodities of India, and the other regions of
the Fail, it is only from the Hiflorians of those
countries we can expect to find any account of
that trade. But from the age of MIahomet, until
the time when the Comneni ascended the throne
of Conflantinople, a period of more than four
centuries and a half, the Byzantine history is con.
tained in meagre chronicles, the compilers of which
seldom extended their views beyond the intrigues
in the palace, the facions in the theatre, or the
disputes of theologians. To them the monkith
annalists of the different states and cities of Italy,
during the fame period, are (if pollible) far inferior
in merit, and in the early accounts of those cities
which have been molt celebrated for their corn
mercial spirit, we search with little success foi
the origin or nature of that trade by which they
first rose to eminence ". It is manifet, however:

" See NOTE XXXIX.

from the slightest attention to the events which
hippened in the seventh and eighth centuries, that
the Italian Rates, while their coasts were continu. i
ally infllted by the Mahomedans, who had made
some settlements there, and had fubjeded Sicily
almost entirely to their dominion, could not trade
with much confidence and security in Egypt and
Syria. With what implacable hatred Chrftians
viewed Mahomedans, as the disciples of an impof-
tor, is well known; and as all the nations which
professed the Christian faith, both in the East and
Welt, had mingled the worflhp of angels and
faints with that of the Supreme Being, and had
adorned their churches with pictures and flatues;
the true Mofloms confidered themselves as the only
aflertors of the unity of God, and beheld Chris-
tians of every denomination with abhorrence, as
idolaters. Much time was requisite to soften this
mutual animosity, so far as to render intercourse
in any degree cordial.

Meanwhile a tate for the luxuries of the East
continued not only to spread in Italy, but, from
imitation of the Italians, or from some improve.
ment in their own situation, the people of Mar-
feilles, and other towns of Irance on the Mediter-
ranean became equally fond of them. But the
profits exadted by the merchants of Amalphi or
Venice, from whom they received those precious
commodities, were so exorbitant as prompted them
to make some effort to supply their own demands.
lWih this view, they not only opened a trade
with Constantinople, but ventured at times to vifii

S E C T. the ports of F^y pt and Syria ". This eagernefi of

I11. the urrcprin, on the one hand, to obtain the

pioduct oni of India, atd, on the other hand, the
iInIImnIC .d\vantages which bo:h the t.aliphs and
th ir fubjccts derived horn thie fle of them, in.
duced both so far to conceal their reciprocal
antipathy , as to carry on a triffic mamnfeftly !or
their common bentfit. How far this traffic ex.
tended, and in what mode it was conducted by
these new adventurers, the scanty information
which can be gathered from contemporary writers,
does not enable me to trace with accuracy. It is
probable, how ver, that this communication would
have prodiced insensibly its usual effect, of famili.
arizing and reconciling men ot hostile principles
and discordant manners to one another, and a
regular commerce might have been eftablifled
gradually between Christians and 1Mahomedans,
upon fluh equal terms, tli.t the nations of Europe
might have rceivcd all the luxuries of the East,
by the f.me channels in which they were formerly
conveyed to them, firfl by the 'l rians, then by
the (reek, of Alexandria, next by the Romans,
and at lAst by the fubjccts of the Conflantiuopoli-
tan emp re.

But whitever might have been the influence of

this growni r. correfpo;.d.nce , it was prevented
from op ,a-ing with tull effect by the crufaidce,
or exl)plition, for the recovery of the Holy
Land, which, during two centuries, occupied

' Mlem. d: Literat. tom. xxxvii. p. 467, &c. 4853

the professors of the two rival religions, and con. s E C T.
tributed to alienate them more than ever from 111.
each other. I have, in anoher work ", contem-
plated mankind while under the dominion of this
frenzy, the most singular, perhaps and the longest
continued, of any that occurs in the hiflory of
our species; and I pointed out such effed', of it
upon government, upon property, upon manners
and taste, as were suited to what were then the
objects of my inquiry. At present my attention
is confined to observe the commercial confequen.
ces of the crusades, and how far they contributed
to retard, or to promote, the conveyance of
Indian commodities into l"urope.

To fix an idea of peculiar fandity to that coun-
try, which the Author of our Rtligion feleded
as the place of his residence while o:r earth, and
in which he accomplished the redemption of man-
kind, is a sentiment so natural to the human
mind, that, from the sift eflablifliment of Chris-
tianity, the visiting of the holy places in Judea
was confidered as an exercise of piety, tending
powerfully to awaken and cherilh a spirit of
devotion. Through succeeding ages, the practice
continued, and increifed in every part of Chris-
tendom. When Jerusalem was fubjeded to the
Mahomedan empire. and danger was added to
the fatigue and expense of a lif;t..t pilgrimage,
the undertaking was viewed as still more merito-
rious. It was sometimes enjoined as a pcnance to
" Hist. of Charles V. vol. i. p. 26.

S E C T. be performed by heinous transgressors. It was

111. more frequently a duty undertaken with volun.

tary zeal, and in both cafes it was deemed an
expiation for all past offences. From various
causes, which I have elsewhere enumerated ",
these pious visits to the Holy Land multiplied
amazingly during the tenth and eleventh cen-
turies. Not only individuals in the lower and
middle rank1 of life, but persons of superior con-
dition, attended by large retinues, and numerous
caravans of opulent pilgrims, resorted to Jeru.
falem.

In all their operations, however, men have a

wonderful dexterity in mingling some attention
to interest with those functions which seem to be
molt purely spiritual. The Mahomedan caravans
which, in obedience to the injundions of their
religion, visit the holy temple of Mecca, are
not composed, as I (hall hereafter explain more
fully, of devout pilgrims only, but of merchants,
who, both in going and returning, are provided
with such an assortment of goods, that they carry
on a considerable traffic ". Even the Faquirs of
India, whose wild enthufiafmn seems to elevate
them above all solicitude about the concerns of
this world, have rendered their frequent pilgrim-
ages subservient to their interest, by trading in
every country through which they travel '. In

" Hil. of Charles V. vol. i. p. 27. 28s.
x" Viaggj di Ramufio, vol. i. p. X , i12.
' Sec NOTE XL.

like

like manner, it was not by devotion alone that s E C Ti
such numerous bands of Christian pilgrims were Ill,
induced to visit Jerusalem. To many of them
commerce was the chief motive of undertaking
that distant voyage, and by exchanging the pro.
dutions of Europe for the more valuable com-
modities of Alia, particularly those of India, which
at that time were diffused through every part of
the Caliphs' dominions. they enriched themselves
and firnilhed their countrymen with such an ad.
ditirnal supply of Eallern luxuries, as augmented
their relilh for them '.

But how faint soever the lines may be, which,
prior to the crufadcs, mark the influence of the
freqlent pilgrim,.ges to the Fat upon commerce,
they become so conspicuous after the commence-
mei,! of there eCvpeditions, as to meet the eye of
everv observer. Various circumstances concurred
towards this, from an enumeration of which it
wrvl appear, that by attentling to the progress
and cffects of the crusades, conliderable light is
thrown upon the fiblect of my inquiries. Great
armies, condutdcd by the molt illustrious nobles
of Europe and conlpofed of men of the most en-
terprifinv 'irie in 1ll the kingdoms of it, marched
towards l'a!eftitie. through countries far advanced
beyon I tifle which thty left, in every species
of imprcvemcnI. hl y beheld the dawn of pro.
fperity i,- the rcpublics of Italy, which had begun

" Gu. Tyr. lib. xvii. 4. p. 935. ap. Gefta Dci pen
Francos.

I

E C T. tu vie with each other in the arts of indufiry,
IiL. and in their efforts to engross the lucrative corn.

mrr,'e with the East. They next admired the
moic advanced state of opulcuce and fplcndor in
Contan:inorle, r'Tfed to a pre-eminence above all
the citir.s rhci known, by its extensive trade,
parti-ularl hat which it ca-ricd on with India,
an 1 ; e countries beyond it. They afterwards
fTrv\d' in thnfe provin:ces of Asia throuhi which
the coniimodl.ties of the Fat wcie tifually ton-
veved, an!l became masters of several *ities wvich
h-d bren fiaple; of that trade. They eftablnfhed
the kingdom of Jerufilem, which sublisted near
two hundred years. ! hey took ponefillon of the
throne of the Greek empile, .ndt governed it above
hlit a century. Amiiill such a variety of events
and operations, the idcas of the fierce warriors
of Europe gradually opened and irrproved; they
became acqu.inted wivi the policy and arts of the
people whom they subdued ; they observed the
sources of their wealth , and availed themselves
of ali .his knowledge. Antioch and 'yre, when
cntl':ercd by the crufitde,, were flourilting cities,
inhabited by opulent merchants, who fipplied all
the na ions trad .n, in the Mlediterranean with
the production: of the '.:ft ' , a , as far as can
be g.aL-.e! .i itrm in-ije:-tal occurrti'es , mrn-
tinnr . L, tthe lifloi.ins of ihe Holy \Var, who,
beirc ,luoftly priests .,id mnonks, had their attention

a: Gul. T)r. lib . xii. . Alb. Aquenf. Hist. H.crof.
ap. G.la Dc., ^o1. L p. 247.

directed to objects very different from those re- s E c T.
lat ng to commerce, there is reason to believe uII.
that both in Co:lftantinople, while subject to the
Franks , and in the ports of Syria acquired
by the Christians, the long - eftablilhed trade
with the East continued to be protected and
encouraged.

But though commerce may have been only a

secondary object wilh the martial leaders of the
crulades , engaged in perpetual hostilities with
the Turks on one hand, and with the Soldans
of lFgypt on the other, it was the primary object
with the associates, in conjunction with whom
they carried on their operations. Numerous as the
armies were which assumed the cross, and enter-
p:lrog- as the fanatical zeal was with which they
were animated, they could not have accomplished
their purpose, or even have reached the feat of
their warfare, without securing the assistance of
th- Italian states. None of the other European
poIvers could either furnifi a sufficient number of
transports to convey the armies of the crusaders
to the coast of Dalmatia, whence they marched
to Constantinople, the place of general rendez-
vus; or were able to fipply them with military
flores and provisions in filch abundance as to
enable them to invade a distant country. In all
the fucctffive expeditions, the fleets of the Ge-
notfe, of the l'ifans, or of the Venetians, kept
on the colft as the armies advanced by land, and
supplying them, from time to time, with what-
ever was wanting, cngrolled all the profits of a

1 2

SE C T. branch of commerce which, in every age, has

iii. been extremelv lucrative. It was with all the

in'erefted attention of merchants, that the Italians
afforded their aid. On the reduction of any place
in which they found it for their interest to fettle,
they obtained from the crusaders valuable immu-
nities of different kinds; freedom of trade; an
abatement of the usual duties paid for what was
imported and exported, or a total exemption
from them; the property of entire suburbs in
some cities, and of extensive streets in others;
and a privilege granted to every person who
resided within their precincts, or who traded under
their protection, of being tried by their own laws,
and by judges of their own appointment ". In
consequence of so many advantages, we can
trace, during the progress of the crusades, a
rapid increase of wealth and of power in all the
commercial flates of Italy. Every port open to
trade was frequented by their merchants, who,
having now engrossed entirely the commerce of
the East, strove with such active emulation to
find new markets for the commodities which it
furnished, that they extended a taste for them to
many parts of Europe in which they had hitherto
been little known.

Two events happened, prior to the termination

of the Holy War, which, by acquiring to the
Venetians and Genoese the poffeflion of several
provinces in the Greek empire, enabled them io

" iiift of Charles V. vol. i. p. 34.

supply Europe more abundantly with all the pro- E C T.
ductions of the East. The first was the conquest 1I1.
of Conflantinople, in the year one thousand two
hundred and four, by the Venetians, and the
leaders of the fourth crusade. An account of
the political interests and intrigues which formed
this alliance, and turned the hallowed arms de-
ftined to deliver the Holy City from the dominion
of infidels, againlt a Chriltian monarch, is foreign
from the design of this Disquisition. Confatntino-
pie was taken by storm, and plundered by the
confederates. An earl of Slanders was placed on
the Imperial throne. The dominions which fiill
remained fubjedt to the successors of Constantine,
were divided into four parts, one of which
being allotted to the new emperor, for support.
ing the dignity and expense of government, an
equal partition of the other three was made
between the Venetians and the chiefs of the
crusade. The former, who, both in concerting
and in conduding this enterprise, kept their eye
steadily fixed on what might be most for the
emolument of their commerce, secured the terri-
tories of greatest value to a trading people.
They obtained some part of the Peloponnefus,
at that time the feat of flourishing manufacures,
particularly of silk. They became mailers of
several of the largest and belt cultivated islands
in the Archipelago, and established a chain
of settlements, partly military and partly com-
mercial, extending from the Adriatic to the

I3

S E C T. Bosphorus". Many Venetians fettled in Conftan.

iiI. tiinople, and without obftrution from their war-

like associates, little attentive to the arts of indus-
try, they engrossed the virious branches of trade
which had f lIon, enriched that capital. Two of
these particularly attracted their attention; the silk
trade, and that with India. From the reign of
Justinian, it was moflly in Greece, and some of
the adjacent islands, that silk-worms, which he
firlt introduced into Europe, were reared. I he
pro-Jilt of their labors was manufaclured into
stuff- of various kinds in mrany cities of the empire.
But it was in Constantinople, the feat of opulence
and luxury, that the demand for a commodity
of such high price was greatest, and there, of
consequence. the commerce of filik naturally cen-
tered In assorting cargoes for the several ports
in which they traded, the Venetia'is had for some
time found silk to be an essential article, as it
continued to grow more and more into request
in every part of Europe. By the residence of so
many of their citizens in Constantinople, and by
the immunities granted to them, they not only
procured silk in such abundance, and on such
terms, as enabled them to carry on trade more
extensively, and with greater profit than formerly,
but they became so thoroughly acquainted with
every branch of the silk manufacture, as induced

' Dandoli Chronic. ap. Murat. Script. Rer. Ital. vol.

xii. p. 328. ilar. Sanuto Vite de' Duchi di Venez. Murat.
vol. xxii. p. 3 2.

them to attempt the eftabl.flinent of it in their s E C T.
own dominins. The me.futires taken for this iii.
purpone by inlflviduals, as well as the regulations
fr.med by the slate , were concerted with so
much prudence, and executed with such fticcefs,
th;t in a short time the silk fabrics of Venice
vied with those of Gre.ce and Sicily, and con-
tributed both to enrih the republic, and to
enlarge the sphere of its commerce. At the fame
time, the Venetians availed therlflves of the
inRuence which they had acquired in Conftanti.
nople, in order to improve their Indian trade.
I he capital of the Greek .empire, besides the
mcar; of being supplied with the productions of
the East, which it enjoyed in common with the
other commercial cities of Europe, received a
considerable portion of them by a channel peculiar
to itself. Some of the most valuable commodities
of India and China were conveyed over land,
by routes which I have described, to the Black
Sea, and thence by a fliort navigation to Conftan-
tinople. To this market, the best stored of any
except Alexandria, the Venetians hld now easy
access, and the goods which they purch.fed there,
made an addition of great consequence to what
they were accustomed to acquire in the ports of
Egypt and Syria. 'Thus while the I atin empire
in Constantinople fibfif.ld , the Venetians poffefTed
such 'vantages o'ver 11 their rivalc, that their
cornmerce extended gr-a'ly. and it was chiefly
f:oin t'.ien every part of Euripe received the
comnodit;c. of the Last.

14

S EC T. The other event which I had in view, was

III. the f,,bv, rfion of the dominion of the l.atins in

Conftintinople, and the re-est ibliihment of the
Imperial family on the throne. This w.is effected
after a p rind of fifty fevtn years, Partly by a
transient effort of vigor with which i',digilna on
at a foreign yoke animated the Greek,, and p: tly
by the powerful afliftance wl'ich they rceived
from the republic ot Geno.. The Ge:iofc \vcre
so feaifible of the advantages whirh the \enctians,
their rival1 in trade, derived from their iunon
'with the Latin emperors of Coni.atli'-o;-Ie , that
in ordtr to dtprlve them of these. they fuirniounted
the most de p-rooted pr udi>,ec of their Ige, and
comhined with *he fchbifilcic Greeks to dethrone
a mnr..,rch protected by the Pap:il power, setting
at deahdace the thuil'rs of the Vatic'n, which at
th t time made the greareft princes tremble. Tlhis
underta;in . bold and i;nplous as it was then
d;-ined, proved fjccef-ful. In recompence for
their f;Tnal service., the gratitude or \veakni(fi
of the G:cek emperor, among other donations,
beatowed u.on the Geno fe Pera, the chief fubu!b
of Constantinople, to be htld as a lief ot the
cmpire, together with such exemprion from the
accustomed duties on goods ir,ported and ex.
ported, as gave them a decided superiority over
evers competitor in trade. WVith the vigilant atten-
tion of merchants, the Genoese availed themselves
of thin favorable situation. 1 hev surrounded their
new settlement in Pera with f rtific.tions. They
rendered their factories on the adjacent coalls

plces of strength"'. They were masters of the s E c T.
harbour of Conflantinople more than the Greeks 111.
theinfelves. The whole trade of the Black Sea
cjnme into their hands; and not satisfied with this,
they tok pofPT.ion of part of the Cherfonefus
T;lurica, the m* 'crn Crimea. and rendered Caffa,
it, principil town , the ch4ef fat of their trade
wi'' the .aft, and thli port in which all its p o-
d!'dions, conveyed to the Black Sea by the dif-
f reit routes I have formerly described, were
1.h ed ".

In consequence of this revolution, Genoa became
the greatcft cominercial power in Europe; and if
the Fnterprifing industry and intrepid courage of
it. citizens had been under the direcion of wife
donmefld policy, it might have long held that
rank. But n'ver was there a contrast more ftrik-
i;g, thin between the internal adminift'ation of
the two rival republics of Venice and Genoa. In
the former, government was condudted with
steady systematic prudence; in the latter, it was
confiflent in nothing but a fondnefc for novelty,
and a propensity to change. The one enjoyed a
perpetual calm, the other was agitated with all
the storms and vicifiitudes of fadion. The increase
of wealth , which flowed into Genoa from the

" Niceph. Gregor. lib. xi. c. r. §. 6. lib. xvii. c. r. § 2.
" Folieta Hilt. Genuenf. ap. Grav. TheC. Antiq. Ital. i.

;87. De Marinis de Genuen. Dignit. ib. 1468. Niceph.
Greg. lib. xiii. c. 12. Murat. Anna. d'ltal. lib. vii. c. 3)x,
See NO fE XLI.

S E C T. exertions of its merchants, did not counterbalance

All. the defects in its polttical constitution; aid even

in its most prfprerous state we mav discern the
appearance of symptoms which foreboded a dimi.
nu'ion of its opulence and power.

As long. however, as the Genoese retained the

arcendant which they had acquired in the Greek
empire, the Venetiai; felt their comm:rcial tranf.
actions with it to be carried on upon fuich unequal
terms, that their merchants visited Conflantinople
fildom, and with reluctace; and in order to
procure the commodities of the East in such quan-
tities as were demanded in the various parts of
Europe which they were accurtomed to flipply,
they were obl;gfd to resort to the ancient staples
of that trade. Of these Alexandria was the chief,
and the mol abundantly supplied, as the con-
veyance of Indian goods by land through Asia,
to any of the ports of the Mediterranean, was
often rendered inpracticable by the incursions of
Turks, Tartars, and other hordes, which fuc-
ceflively desolated that fertile country, or con-
tended for the dominion of it. But u.lder the
military and vigorous government of the Sc.ldans
of the MlIameluks, security and order were fteadly
maintainpd in Fgypt, and trade, though loaded
with htavy duties, was open to all. In proportion
to the progrr fS of the Genoese, in engrossing the
comrrerce of Conflantinople and the Black Sea",
the Venet-inz found it more and more neceffaryto
enlarge tr ir tranfactlons with Alexandria.

" See NOTE XLII.

But such an avowed intercourse with infidels s E c T.
being confidered, in that age, as unbecoming the in.
character of Christians, the senate of Venice, in
order to silence its own scruples, or those of its
fubjeds , had recourse to the infallible authority
of the Pope, who was supposed to be possessed of
power to dispense with the rigorous observation
of the most sacred laws, and obtained permillion
from him to fit out annually a fperified number
of Ihips for the ports of Egypt and of Syria ".
Under this fandcion, the republic concluded a
treaty of commerce with the Soldans of Egypt,
on equitable terms; in consequence of which the
senate appointed one consul to reside in Alexandria,
and another in Damascus, in a public charater,
and to exercise a mercantile jurisdiCtion, author-
ized by the Soldans. Under their protecion, Vene-
tian merchants and artisans fettled in each of these
cities. Ancient prejudices and antipathies were
forgotten, and their mutual interests established,
for the first time, a fair and open trade between
Christians and Mahomedans "

While the Venetians and Genoese were alter-
nately making those extraordinary efforts, in order
to engross all the advantages of supplying Europe
with the productions of the East, the republic
of Florence, originally a commercial democracy,
applied with such persevering vigor to trade, and
"See NOTE XLIII.

SandiStoria Civile Veneziana, lib. v. c. 15. p. 248,
&c.

SECT. the genius of the people, as well as the nature

III. of their inlitutions, were so favorable to its pro-

grefs, that the slate advanced rapidly in power,
and the people in opulence But as the Florentines
did not possess any commodious sea-port, their
active exertions were directed chiefly towards the
improvement of their manufadures, and domeflic
industry. About the beginning of the fourteenth
century, the Florentine manufactures of various
kinds, particularly those of silk and woollen cloth,
appear from the enumeration of a well-informed
Hiltorian, to have been very considerable '. The
connexion which they formed in different parts
of Europe, by furnishing them with the produc-
tions of their own industry, led them to engage
in another branch of trade, that of banking. In
this they soon became so eminent, that the money.
tranfaciions of almost every kingdom in Europe
passed through their hands, and in many of them
they were intrusted with the collection and ad-
minifration of the public revenues. In consequence
of the activity and success with which they con-
dudced their manufactures and money-tranfa&ions,
the former always attended with certain though
moderate profit, the latter lucrative in a high
degree, at a period when neither the interest of
money, nor the premium on bills of exchange,
were fettled with accuracy, Florence became one
of the first cities in ChriRlendom, and many of its

' Giov. Villani Hill. Fiorent. ap. Murat. Script. Rer.
Ital. vol. xiii. p. 82;.

citizens extremely opulent. Cosmo di Medici, s E C T.
the head of a family which rose from obscurity 11I.
by its success in trade, was reckoned the molf
wealthy merchant ever known in Europe "; and
in acs of public munificence, as well as of pri-
vate generosity, in the patronage of learning, and
in the encouragement of useful and elegant arts,
no monarch of the age could vie with him.
WhIether the Medici, in their first mercantile
tranfadions, carried on any commerce with the
East, I have not been able to discover ". It is
more probable, I Ihould think, that their trade
was confined to the fame articles with that of
their countrymen. But as soon as the common- A. C. 140.
wealth, by the conquest of Pisa, had acquired a
communication with the ocean, Cosmo di Medici,
who had the chief diredion of its affairs, endea-
voured to procure for his country a thare in
that lucrative commerce, which had raised Venice
and Genoa so far above all the other Italian
fiates. With this view ambassadors were sent to A. C. 14os
Alexandria, in order to prevail with the Soldan
to open that, and the other ports of his domi-
nions, to the fubjeds of the republic, and to
admit them to a participation of all the commer-
cial privileges which were enjoyed by the Vene-
tians. The negociation terminated with such success,

Fr. Mich. Brutus His. Flor. p. 17. 62. Chron,

Eugubinum ap. Murat. Script. Rer. Ital. vol. xiv . 10p .

o
Denina Revol. d'ltalie, tom. vi p. 63 , &4.

" See NOTE XLIV.

S E C T. that the Florentines seem to have obtained some

ill. share in the Indian trade"; and soon after this

period , we find spices enumerated among the
commodities imported by the Florentines into
England ".

In some parts of this Disquisition, concerning

the nature and course of trade with the East,
have been obliged to grope my way, and often
under the guidance of very feeble lights. But as
we are now approaching to the period when
the modern ideas, with refpedt to the importance
of commerce, began to unfold, and attention to
its progress and effects became a more confider.
able object of policy, we may hope to carry on
what researches yet remain to be made, with
greater certainty and precision. To this growing
attention we are indebted for the account which
IMarino Sanudo, a Venetian nobleman, gives of
the Indian trade , as carried on by his country-
men, about the beginning of the fourteenth cen-
tury. They were supplied, as he informs us,
with the productions of the East in two different
ways. Those of small bulk and high value, such
as cloves, nutmegs, mace, gems, pearls, &c.
were conveved from the Persian Gulf up the
Tigris to Bafiora, and thence to Bagdat, from
which they were carried to some port on the
1Mediterranean. All more bulky goods, such as
pepper, ginger, cinnamon, &c together with
some portion of the more valuable articles, were

" See NOTE XLV. " Hakluyt, vol. i p. I 91

eO

conveyed by the ancient route to the Red Sea, s C T.
and thence across the def.rrt, and down the Nile Ill.
to Alexandria. he goods received by the former
route were, as Sanudo observes, of superior qua-
lity but from the tediouflefs and expense of a
distant land carriage, the supply was often scanty,
nor can he conceal ( though contrary to a favorite
projed which he had in view when he wrote
the treatise to which I refer ) that, from the
state of the countries through which the caravans
pa(sed, this mode of conveyance was frequently
precarious, and attended with danger "

It was in Alexandria only, that the Venetians
found always a certain and full supply of Indian
goods; and as these were conveyed thither chiefly
by water-carriage, they might have purchased
them at a moderate price, if the Soldans had
not imposed upon them duties which amounted
to a third part of their full value Under this and
every other disadvantage, however, it was necef-
fary to procure them, as from many concurring
circumstances, particularly a more extensive inter-
course eftabliflled among the different nations of
Europe, the demand for them continued to in-
crease greitly during the fr)urteenth century. By
the irruptions of the various hofiile tribes of
Barbarians, who took poffeffon of the greater
part of Eurone, that poweriul bond by which
the Romans had united together all the people

"Mar. Sanuti Secreda Fidelium Crucis, p. 2a2 &c.
ap. Bongarfium.

S c T. of their vast empire was entirely dissolved, and

II. fuich lifcouragement was given to the communi.

cation of one nation with another, as would
appear altogether incredible, it the evidence of
ii relied oniv upon the tetflmony of hiltorians,
and were not conhirmed by what is still more
authentic, the exprcfs cnadctnent of laws. Several
statutes of thi; kind, which disgrace the jurif.
prudence of almuft every L.uropean nation, I have
enumerated and txpl.tined in another work '. But
when the wants and d firei (f men multiplied,
and they found that other countries could furnilh
the means of supplying and gratifying them, the
hoflile sentiments which kept nations at a diltance
from each other abated. and mutual correspondence
gradlally took place. From the time of the
crusades, which first brought people hardly
known to one another, to alfociate and to ad
in concert during two centuries, in pursuit of
one common en I, several circumstances had co-
operated toward, accelerating this general inter.
course. The people around the Baltic, hitherto
dreaded and .bhoere. by the rell of Lurope as
pirates anl invader , afiumed more pacific man.
ners, and beean n w to visit their neighbours
as merchant, Occlrritnces frreign from the sub.
ject of the prrf, n' inqurvy. litrd them togethcr in
the pow-erful comrnen lal confederacy so f.imous in
the middle ages. und-r the n.im f th, Haneatic
League, and led them to eftabl;f;i the fliple of

" Hilt. of Charles V. vol. i p. 92. 29.. &c.

their

their trade with the southern parts of Europe in s E C T.
Bruges. Thither the merchants of Italy, particu- III,
larlv those of Venice, resorted; and in return for
the productions of the East, and the manufatures
of their own country, they received not only
the naval flores and other commodities of the
North, but a considerable supply of gold and
silver from the mines in various provinces of
Germany, the most valuable and productive of
any known at that time in Europe `'. Bruges
continued to be the great mart or florehoufe of
Furopean trade during the period to which my
inquiries extend. A regular communication, for.
merly unknown, was kept up there among all
the kingdoms into which our continent is di-
vided, and we are enabled to account for the
rapid progress of the Italian Riates in wealth and
power, by observing how much tbhqr trade, the
fouIce from which both were derived, must have
augmented upon the vast increase in the confump.
tion of Asiatic goods, when all the extensive
countries towards the north-elft of Europe were
opened for their reception.

During this prosperous and improving slate of
Indian commerce, Venice received from one of
its citizens, such new information concerning the
countries which produced the precious commodi-
ties that formed the most valuable article of its
trade, as gave an idea of their opulence, their
population, and their extent, which rose far above

Zimmermann's Polit. Survey of Europe, p. 102.

K

S E C T. all the former conceptions of Europeans. From the

*II. time that the I.alhimcdans became maRlers of

Egypt, as no Chriflian was permitted to pass
through their dominions to the Earl", the direct
intcrcourfe of Europeans with India ceased e-.
tirely. The account of India by Cofnas Indico.
pleufles in the sixth century, is, as far as I know,
the last which the nations of the WVeft received
from any person who had visited that country.
But about the middle of the thirteenth century,
the spirit of commerce, now become more enter.
prifing, and more eager to discover new routes
which led to wealth, induced Mlarco Polo, a
Venetian of a noble family, after trading for forne
time in many of the opulent cities of the lerfer
Asia, to penetrate into the more eastern parts of
that continent, as far as to the court of the Great
Khan on th* frontier of China. During the course
of twenty-fix years, partly employed in mercantile
tranfadions, and partly in conducting negociation;
with which the Great Khan intrufled him, he
explored many regions of the East which no
European had ever visited.

He describes the great kingdom of Cathay, the

name by which China is still known in many parts
of the East ", and travelled through it from Cham-
balu, or Peking, on its northern frontier, to
tome of its most southern provinces. He visited

" Sanuto , p. 2 .
" Herbelot Bib. Orient. attic. K.,:th.ii. Stewart, Account

of Thibet, Phil. TranL lxvii. 474. Voyage of A. Jenkinfon,
Hakluyt. i. 33;.

different parts of Indoftan, and is the first who s E CT.
menctions deng.il and (uzzeiat, by their present IiI.
names, as great and opulent kingdolns. Belides
what he difiovered in his journics by land, he
made more than one voyage in the Indian ocean,
and acquired some information concerning an island
which he ca!ls Zipangri or Cipango, probably
Japan. He visited in person Java, and several islands
contiguous to it, the island of Ceylon, and the
coaat of MIlalabar as far as the Gulf of Cambay,
to all which he gives the names that they now
bear. This was the molt extensive survey hitherto
m.,de of the East, and the most complete defcrip-
tion of it ever given by any European; and in an
a'e which had hardly any knowledge of those
regions but what was derived from the geography
of Ptolemy, not only the Venetians, but all the
pcopie of Europe, were astonished at the discovery
of immense countries opened to their view beyond
what had hitherto been reputed the utmost boun-
dary of the earth in that quarter '.

But while men of leisure and speculation occu.
pied themselves with examining the ditcoveries of
51larco Polo, which gave rife to conjectures and
theories, productive of most important confequen.
ces; an event happened, that drew the attention
of all Europe, aad had a mort conspicuous effect
upon the course of that trade, the progress of
which I am endeavouring to trace.

The event to which I allude, is the final coan
quest cf the Greek empire by IMahomet II. and the

See NOTE XLVI.

K ,

s E C T. eRablifhing the feat of the Turkinf government in

11I. Cona.lntinople. The immediate effecd of this greac
A. D. 145;. revolution was , that the Genoese reiding ill

Pera, involved in the general calamity, were
obliged not only to abandon that settlement, but
all thole which they had made on the adjacent
sea-coast, after they had been in their possession
A D. 1474. near two centuries. Not long after, the vicorious

arms of the Sultan expelled them from Caffa, and
every other place which they held in the Crima'a.
Constantinople was no longer a mart open to the
nations of the Weft for Indian commodities, and
no supply of them could now be obtained but in
Egypt and the ports of Syria, fubjecd to the Sol-
dans of the Mameluks. The Venetians, in confe.
quence of the protection and privileges which
they had secured by their commercial treaty with
those powerful princes, carried on trade in every
part of their dominions with such advantage, as
gave them a superiority over every competitor.
Genoa, which had long been their mot formidable
rival, humbled by the loss of its possessions in the
East, and weakened by domestic dissensions, de-
clined so fast, that it was obliged to court foreign
protection, and submitted alternately to the domi.
nion of the Dukes of Milan and the Kings of
France In consequence of this diminution of their
political power, the commercial exertions of the
Genoese became less vigorous. A feeble attempt
which they made to recover that fliare of the

l Soliet Hist. Genu. 602. 626. Alurat. Annali d'ltal.
ix. 451.

Indian trade which they had formerly enjoyed, by s E c T.
offering to enter into treaty with the Soldans of llI.
Ilgypt upon terms similar to those which had been
eranted to the Venetians, proved unsuccessful;
an(l during the remainder of the fifteenth century,
Venice fipplied the greater part of Europe with
the produdions of the Ealf, and carried on trade
to an extent far beyond what had been known in
those times.

The Itate of the other European nations was

extremely favorable to the commercial progress of
tile Venetians. England, desolated by the civil
wars which the unhappy contest between the hou-
fes of York and Lancaster excited, had hardly
begun to turn its attention towards those objets
and pursuits to which it is indebted for its present
opulence and power. In France, the fatal effects
of the Englilh arms and conquests were still felt,
and the king had neither acquired power, nor the
people inclination, to dired the national genius
:ind activity to the arts of peace. The union of
the different kingdoms of Spain was not yet corn
pleted; some of its molt fertile provinces were still
under the dominion of the Moors, with whom
the Spanish monarchs waged perpetual war; and,
except by the Catalans, little attention was paid
to foreign trade. Portugal, though it i4ad already
entered upon that career of discovery which ter-
minated with molt splendid success, had not yet
made such progress in it as to be entitled to any
high rank among the commercial Rates of Europe.
'Ihus the Venetians, almost without rival or

K3

S E C T. competitor, except from fme of the inferior Italian

llI. flates, were left at liberty to concert and to execute

their mercantile plans and the trade with the
.citie of the Hanseatic l.ewTue, which utlitcdt the
Nirth alnd South of Eturope, and which hitherto
had been common to a!l the Italia.i n, was now
elr'roctd, in a great measure, by them alone.

.Vt ile the ;inc-rte:ng dcm:'d for the productions

of Alia i:niu -ed all the people of hurope to court
intercourse with the Venetin.s so eagerly, as to
allure them. by xvriouo immunitiecs, to frequent
ther fea-ilort;, we may observe a peculiarity in
their mod . of carrying on trade with the last,
\vh!ch dilifnguifhes it from what has taken place
in other countries in any period of history. In the
a:cient world, the Tyr!ans, the Greeks who were
matter, of Egvpt. andl the Romans, failed to In(lia
in qutft of tholfe commonlities with which they
supplied the people of the \'elit. In modern times,
the fame h , been the prao.Jit.' of the P'ortugulte,
the I)Dtch , the F']ngifli, and, after their example,
of other European natiocs. In both pe'iod, l:)d
coimpl.inlts have be:en made. that :in c;lar, izn, on
th:s trade every state muit be (lianled of the i.re-
cious meta:' which, in tie coirf,- of it, tlow icf-
fntiv from the W\eft to the ..ll:. r:ev r to rerlrt.
Iromn whate-ver los; might Ihve bec:i occasioncd
b) thi grradu.al but uinavoidable diminition of tiir
goid and silver (whether a real or only an imagiln
nr-v lors, it is not incumbent upon me, in this
place, to inquire or to determine), the Ve:lne.ns
were, in a great measure, exempted. They had no

direc intercourse with India. They found in Egypt, s E C T.
or in Syria, warehouses filled with all the commo- iI.
dities of the East, imported by the lahomedans;
and from the best accounts we have, with refpecd
to the nature of their trade, they purchased them
more frequently by barter, than with ready money.
Egypt, the chief mart for Indian goods, though a
most fertile country, is delitute of many things
requisite in an improved ftate'of society, either for
accommodation or for ornament. Too limited in
extent, and too highly cultivated to afford space
for forests; too level to have mines of the useful
metals; it must be supplied with timber for build-
ingr, with iron, lead, tin, and brass, by importa-
tion from other countries. The Egyptians, while
under the dominion of the Mameluks, seem not
themselves to have traded in the ports of any
Christian slate, and it was principally from the
Venetians that they received all the articles which
I have enumerated. Besides these, the ingenuity
of the Venetian artists furnished a variety of manu-
fadures of woollen cloths, silk fluffs of various
fabric, camlets, mirrors, arms, ornaments of
gold and silver, glass, and many other articles,
for all which they found a ready market in Egypt
and Syria. In return they received from the mer-
chants of Alexandria, spices of every kind, drugs,
gems, pearls, ivory, cotton and silk, unwrought as
awell as manufactured, in many different forms, and
other productions of the East, together with several
valuable articles of Egyptian growth or fabric. In
Aleppo, Baruth, and other cities, besides the proper

K-

S E C T. commodities of India brought thither by land, they

ill. added to their cargoes the carpets of Pcrfia, the

rich wroulht silks of Damiafcus, ft!ll known by a
name teken from that ci;v, and various produtidons
of art and nature peculiar to Syria. Paleltine. and
Arabia. If, at any time, their demand for the pro.
ductions of the East went beyond what they could
procure in exchange for their own manufaciures,
that trade with the cities of the tlanfeatic League,
which I have mentioned, furniffied them from the
min-e of Germany, with a regular supply o' gold
and silver, which they cou'd carry, with cdvan-
tage, to the markets of Egypt and Syria.

}rom a propensity, remarkable in all commercial

flates to fubjcct the operations of trade to poliical
regulation and restraint, the authority of the Vene-
tian government seems to have been interposed,
bo-h in direcling the importation of Asiatic goods,
and in the mode of circulating them among the
diff-rent nations of Europe. To every considerable
staple in the jlediterranean a certain number of
large vessels, known bv the name of Galeons or
Ca acs, vwa fitted out oil the public account, and
returned loaded with the richest merchandise ,
the profit arising from the sale of which must
have been no slender addition to the revenue of the
republic. Citizens, however. of e\ erv clas, parti-
cularly persons of noble families, were encouraged
to engage in foreign trade, and whoever employed

' Sabellicus, Hist. Rer. Venet. Dec. iv. lib. iii. p. 868.
Denina Revol. d'ltalie, tom. vi. 34o.

a vessel of a certain burden for this purpose, re- s E c T.
ceived a considerable bounty from the Itate ". It i1I.
was in the fame manner, partly in Ihips belong-
ing to the public, and partly in those of private
traders, that the Venetians circulated through
Europe the goods imported from the East, as
well as the produce of their own dominions and
manufaclures.

There are two different ways by which we may
come at forne knowledge of the magnitude of
those branches of commerce carried on by the
Venetians. The one, by attending to the great
variety and high value of the commodities which
they imported into Bruges, the (Iore - house from
which the other nations of Europe were supplied.
A full enumeration of these is given by a well-
informed author, in which is contained almolt
every article deemed, in that age, essential to
accommodation or to elegance ". The other, by
confidering the effects of the Venetian trade upon
the cities admitted to a participation of its advan-
tages. Never did wealth appear more conspicuously
in the train of commerce. The citizens of Bruges,
enriched by it, displayed in their dress, their
buildings, and mode of living, such magnificence
as even to mortify the pride and excite the envy
of royalty ''. Antwerp , when the faple was
removed thither, soon rivalled Bruges in opulence

' Sandi Stor. Civ. Venez. lib. viii. 89g.

Lod. Guicciardini Defcriz. de' Paefi Balfi, p. 173.
" See NOTE XLVII.

S E C T. and splendor. In some cities of Germany, parti

11. culaily in Augfburgh, the great mart for Indian

commodities in the interior parts of ihat cxtenfive
country, we meet with early examples of such
lai-e lortunes accumulated by mercantile induflry,
as raised the proprietors of them to high rank
and coniilderation in the empire.

From obfcrving this remarkable increase of

opulence in all the places where the Venetians
had an eltablified trade, we are led to conclude,
that the profit accruing to themselves from the
different branches of it, especially that with the
East, must have been fill! more considerable. It
is impoflibie, however, without information much
more minute than that to which we have access,
to form an eftimrat of this with accuracy; but
varlous circumPances may be produced to eftab.
lifh, in general, the juitnefs of this conclusion.
From the firt rc;ival of a commercial spirit in
Europe, the Ven.eti.s poffc.'fed a large share of
the trade with the East. It continued gradually
to increase, and during a great part of the sis-
teenth century, they had nearly a monopoly of
it. This was protducive of conlfequiences attend-
inzr all monopolies. Wherever there is no com-
petition, and the merchant has it in his power
to rezulate the market and to fix the price of
the comrmodities which he vends, his gains will
be exorbitant. Some idea of their magnitude,
during several cc(cuiies, may be formed, by
attending to the rate es the premium or interell
then paid for the use of roney. This is undoubtedly

the moss exad standard by which to measure s E C T.
the profit arising from the capital stock employed lii.
in commerce; for, according as the interest of
monty is high or low, the gain acquired by the
use of it munft vary, and become excessive or
moderate. From the close of the eleventh cen-
tury to the commencement of the sixteenth, the
period during which the Italians made their chief
commercial exertions, the rate of interest was
extremely high. It was usually twenty per cent.
fomerimes above that; and so late as the year
one thousand live hundred, it had not funk
below ten or twelve per cent. in any part of
Europe ". If the profits of a trade so extensive
.s that of the Venetians corresponded to this high
valuc of money, it could not fail of proving a
source of great wealth, both public and private .
The condition of Venice, accordingly, during
the period under review, is described by writers
of that a-e, in terms which are not appli-
cable to that of any other country in Europe.
'1he revenues of the republic, as well as the
wealth amassed by individuals, exceeded what-
ever was elclwhere known. In the magnificence
of thcir houfcs, in richness of furniture, in pro-
fusion of plate, and in every thing which con-
tributed either towards elegance or parade in
their mode of living, the nobles of Venice fur-
passcd the state of the greatest monarch beyond

"Hist. of Charles V. vol. i. p. 401 &c.
' See NOTE XLVIII.

s E c T. the Alps. Nor was all this display the effect of

MI. an ostentatious and inconsiderate dissipation, it

was the natural consequence of successful industry,
which, having accumulated wealth with ease, is
entitled to enjoy it in splendor *

Never did the Venetians believe the power of

their country to be more firmly established, or
rely with greater confidence on the continuance
and increase of its opulenc , than towards the
close of the fifteenth century , when two events
(which they could neither foresee nor prevent)
happened, that proved fatal to both. The one
was the discovery of America. The other was the
opening a direct course of navigation to the East-
Indies, by the Cape of Good Hope. Of all
occurrences in the history of the human race,
these are undoubtedly among the most intererting;
and as they occasioned a remarkable change of
intercourse among the different quarters of the
globe , and tinally eflablified those commercial
idea! and arrangements which constitute the chief
diftindion between the manners and policy of an-
cient and of modern times, an account of them is
intimately connected with the fubjecd of this Dif-
quifition, and will bring it to that period which
I have fixed upon for its boundary. But as I
have related the rife and progress of these disco-
verics at great length in another work 4, a rapid
view of them is all that is requisite in this place.

See NOTE XLIX.
* Hist. of America, Books I. and II.

The admiration or envy with which the other s E c T.
nations of Europe beheld the power and wealth ll.
of Venice, led them naturally to inquire into the
causes of this pre-eminence; and among these, its
lucrative commerce with the East appeared to be
by far the mos considerable. Mortified with being
excluded from a source of opulence, which to
the Venetians had proved so abundant, different
countries had attempted to acquire a fliare of the
Indian trade. Some of the Italian states (as I have
formerly hinted) endeavoured to obtain admission
into the ports of Egypt and Syria, upon the fame
terms with the Venetians; but either by the fu-
perior interest of the Venetians in the court of
the Soldans, their negociations for that purpose
were rendered unsuccessful; or from the manifold
advantages which merchants, long in possession
of any branch of trade, have in a competition
with new adventurers, all their exertions did not
produce effeas of any consequence '. In other
countries, various schemes were formed with the
fame view. As early as the year one thousand
four hundred and eighty, the inventive and
enterprising genius of Columbus conceived the
idea of opening a shorter and more certain com-
munication with India, by holding a direct wef-
terly course towards those regions, which, accord-
ing to Marco Polo and other travellers, extended
eastward far beyond the utmost limits of Asia
known to the Greeks or Romans. This scheme,

" See NOTE L.

S E C T. supported by arguments deduced from a scientific

11. acquaintance with cosmography , from his own

practical knowledge of navigation, from the re-
ports of skilful pilots, and from the theories and
conjci'ducs of the ancients, he proposed tirlt to
the Genoese his countrymen, and next to the
king of Portugal, into whose service he had
entered. It was rejec2ed by the former from ignor.
ance, and by the latter with circumltances molt
humiliating to a generous mind. By perfcverance,
however, and address, he at length induced the
molt wary and least adventurous court in Europe
to undertake the execution of his plan; and Spain,
as the reward of this deviation from its usual
cautious maxim?, had the glory of discovering a
new world, hardly inferior in magnitude to a
third part of the habitable globe. Aftonifling as
the success of Columbus was, it did not fully
accomp!ifl his own winses, or conduct him to
those regions of the East, the expectation of reach.
ing which was the original objett of his voyage.
The effects, however, of his discoveries were
great and extensive. By giving Spain the poffcf.
sion of immense territories, abounding in rich
mines, and many valuable productions of nature,
several of which had hitherto been deemed pecu.
liar to India, weal'h begA.n to flow so copiously
into tb.t kiigdoom, ai;d thence was so diffuscd
o-eor -urope, ai gra3d:.:ilv awakeied a gener.l
fpirlt cf i:dU!lrv, and caiies forth exertion;, which
alone must h.iv. loon turned the course of cor.-
merce into new channels.

But this was accomplished more speedily, as s E C T.
well as more completely, by the other great event III.
which I mentioned, the discovery of a new route
of navigation to the Ealt by the Cape of Good
Hope. When the Portuguese, to whom mankind
are indebted for opening this communication be-
tween the most remote parts of the habitable
globe, undertook their' sirs voyage of discovery,
it is probable that they had nothing farther in view
than to explore those parts of the coast of Africa
which lay nearest to their own country. But a spirit
of enterprise, when roused and put in motion, is
always progreflive; and that of the Portuguese,
though flow and timid in its first operations, gra-
dually acquired vigor, and prompted them to
advance along the western flore of the African
continent, far beyond the utmost boundary of
ancient navigation ir that direction. Encouraged
by fuccef., it became more adventurous, despised
dangers which formerly appaled it, and surmount.
ed difficulties which it once deemed insuperable.
When the Portugu -. found in the torrid zone,
which the ancients ! .d pronounced to be uninha-
bitable, fertile countries, occupied by numerous
nations; and perceived that the continent of Africa,
instead of extending in breadth towards the Weft,
according to the opinion of Ptolemy, appeared
to contract itself, and to bend Eastwards, more
extensive profpeds opened to their view, and
inspired them with hopes of reaching India, by
continuing to hold the fame course which they
had so long pursued.

S E C T. After several unsuccessful attempts to accomplish

Ii. what they had in view, a small squadron failed

from the Tagus, under the command of Vasco de
Gama , an officer of rank, whose abilities and
courage fitted him to conduct the molt difficult
and arduous enterprises. FLrom unacquaintance,
however, with the proper season and route of
navigation in that vast ocean through which he
had to lteer his course, his voyage was long and
dangerous. At length he doubled that promontory,
which, for several years, had been the object of
terror and of hope to his countrymen. From that,
after a prosperous naviga:ion along the fonth-eaft
of Africa, he arrived at the city of Melinda, and
had the fatisfaetion of discovering there, as well
as at other places where he touched, people of a
race very different from the rude inhabitants of
the \Western ihore of that continent, which alone
the Portuguese had hitherto visited. These he found
to be so far advanced in civilization, and acquaint.
ance with the various arts of life, that they earned
on an acive commerce, not only with the nations
on their own cost , but with remote countries
of Asia. Conducted by their pilots, who held a
course (with which experience had rendered them
well acquainted) he failed across the Indian ocean,
and landed at Calecut, on the coast of MalabIr,
on the twenty-fecond of MIay, one thousand four
hundred and ninety-eight, ten months and two
days after his departure from the port of Lisbon.

The Samorin, or Monarch of the country,
astonished at this unexpected visit of an unknown

people,

people, whose asped, and arms, and manners, sE C T(
bore no resemblance to any of the nations accuf- ill.
tomcd to frcquent his harbours, and who ariivcd
in his dominions by a route hitherto deemed
impradicable, received them, at first, with that
fond :,d'niration whi.h is often excited by novelty.
But in a niort tnie, as if he had been inspired
with forePght of all the calamities now approach-
In- India by this fatal communication opened with

inhabitants of Fiurope, he formed various

, ves to cut off G.tma and his followers. But
':,.r. every danger to which he was exposed, either

the open attacks or lecret machination of the

incilans, the Portuguese Admiral extricated himself
with singular prudence and intrepidity, and at
lat failed from Calecut with his flips loaded,
not only with the commodities peculiar to that
coast, but with many of the rich productions of
the alftern parts of India.

On his return to l.isbon, he was received with
the admiration and gratitude due to a man, who,
by his fupzrior abilities and resolution, had con-
ductcd to such a happy issue an undertaking of the
greatest importance, which had long occupied the
thou.ghts of his Sovereign, and excited the hopes
of his fellow-fubjeits". Nor did this event interest
the Portuguese alone. No nation in Europe beheld
it with unconcern. For although the discovery of
a npw world, whether we view it as a display of
: linui in the person who first conceived an idea

' Asia de Joan de PBarros, dec. i. lib. iv. c. t r.
C- tagneda, Hilt del'lnde trad. en Franqois, liv. i. c. 2-28.

L

s EC T. cf that undertsaking which led mankind to the

1lL knowledge of it, whether we contemplate its

inflience upon fciLnce by giving a more complete
krowledge of the globe which we inhabit, or
w hether we conf:der its effects upon the commer-
cial intercourse of mankind, be an event far more
fplerdid than the voya:ge of Gama, yet the latter
seems originally to have excited more general
attention. The former, indeed, filled the minds of
men with astonishment; it was some time, how.
ever, before they attained such a sufficient know-
ledge of that portion of the earth now laid open
to their view, as to form any just idea, or even
probable conjecture, with refpec to what might
be the consequences of communication with it.
But the immense value of the Indian trade, which
both in ancient and in modern times had enriched
every nation by which it was carried on, was a
subject familiar to the thoughts of all intelligent
men, mnd they at once perceived that the discovery
of this 'ew route of navigation to the East, muff
oc-afion great revolution s, not only in the courle
of crrrmice, but in the political slate of Europe.

> p'at ;hefc revolutions were most likely to be,

and now they would operate, were points examined
.: l particular attention in the cities of Lilbon and
of Venice, but with feelings very different. The
Portuguese, founding upon the rights to which,
in that age, priority of discovery, confirmed by a
papal grant, were supposed to confer, deeming
thtmfelves entitled to an exclusive commerce wi'h
the countries which they had first visited, began

to enjoy, by anticipation, all the benefits of it, SEC T.
a;t to fancy that their capital would soon be III.
what Venice then was, the great store-house of
,,1ltcrn commodities to all .urope, and the feat
of opule:ce and power. On the tirft intelligence
of Gamni' fuccef, f.l voyage, the Venetians, with
the quick - righted difcernm.:t of merchants, fore-
f;\v the iirimediate conleluence of it to be the
riln of that lucrative branch of commerce which
,li. contributed so greatly to enrich and aggrandize
their country; and they observed this wi'h more
p(o nant concern, as they were apprehensive that
they did not possess any effectudl means of pre-
venting, or even retarding, its operation.

1 l.: hopes and fears of both were well founded.

The l'ortuguefe enterid upon the new career
opcned to them with adi.'ity and ardor, and made
ext itions , both commercial and military , far
b:vondi w at could have been expected from a
kiug:lomn of ftchi inconsiderable extent. All these
were dirTctcd by an intelligent monarch, capable
of frming plans of the greatest magnitude with
coln fyltematic wif.om , and of prosecuting them
with unremitting perseverance. 'I he prudence and
vigor of his measures, however, would have
availed little without proper instruments to carry
them into execution. H.ippily for Portugal, the
ds crning eye of kmanudl feleded a succession of
ol0icer to take the fuprcme command in India,
who, by thoir enterprising valor, military Ikill,
at d political sagacity, accompanied with disinter-
tlfcd integrity, public spirit, and love of their

L2

S E C T. country, have a title to be ranked with the per.

1ll. f^ns rroi err.:nent for virtue and abilities in ary

age or narion. Greater things peihaps were at.
chicfed by them, than were ever accomplished
in so short a time. Btfore the close of Emanuel's
reign, twenty-four years only after the voyage of
Gama, the Portuguese had rendered themselves
rmailers of the city of Mlalacca, in which the great
flaple of trade carried on among the inhabitants
of all those regions in Asia, which European;
have diftinguilhed by the general name of the
Eaft-Indies, was then eftablifled. To this port,
situated nearly at an equal distance from the Ealtern
and WVeflern extremities of theef countries, and
poffefinng the command of that firait, by which
they keep communication with each other, the
merchants of China, of Japan, of every kingdom
on the continent, of the lMoluccas and all the
islands in the Archipelago, resorted from the East;
and those of Mlalabar, of Ceylon, of Coromandel,
and of Bengal, from the MWeft '. This conqucft
secured to the Portuguese great influence over the
interior commerce of India, while, at the fnme
time, by their settlements at Goa and Diu, they
were enabled to engross the trade of the IlMalabar
coalt, and to obitruct greatly the long eftablilied
intercourse of Egypt wiih India by the Red Sea.
Their ships frequented every port in the aRt
where valuable commodities were to be found,

" Dec3d. de Barros, dec. i. liv. viii. c. i. Ofor. de
reb. Eman. lib. vii. 2 3 , &c.

from the Cape of Good Hope to the river of SE CT.
Canton; and along this immense stretch of coast, mll.
extending upwards of four thousand leagues ",
they had cftablifled, for the conveniency or pro-
tction of trade, a chain of forts or factories. They
lad likewise taken pofflffion of fiations mofb
fLvorable to commerce along the Southern coast
of Africa, - and in many of the islands which lie
between Mladagafcar and the MIoluccas. In every
part of the Last they were received with refpet,
in many they had acquired the absolute command.
They carried on trade there without rival or
control; they prescribed to the natives the terms
of their mutual intercourse; they often set what
price they pleased on the goods which they
purchased ; and were thus enabled to import from
Indoftan and the regions beyond it, whatever is
ifcful, rare, or agreeable, in greater abundance,
and of more various kinds, than had been known
formerly in Europe.

Not satisfied with this ascendant which they
had acquired in India, the Portuguese early formed
a fcleme, no less bold than interested, of exclud-
in, all other nations from participating of the
advantages of commerce with the East. In order
to effect this, it was necessary to obtain poffefrion
of fich stations in the Arabian and Persian Gulfs,
as might render them masters of the navigation.of
these two inland seas, and enable them both to
obftrud the ancient commercial intercourse between

Hilt. Gener. des Voyages, torn i. p. 14o.

L3

S E C T. Fgypt and India. and to command the entrance

111. of the great rivers, which facilitated the con.

veyance of Indian goods, rot orlv through the
interior province of si a, but as fir as Conflln.
tinopec. 1 he coiduct of the measures for tlhi
*puipofe wa, comrmirted to Alphonfo Albuquerque,
tie mort cmiinnt of all the Portuguese genirials
vwho diflin.u:fled themfclves in India- After the
utmolt efforts of genius and valor, he wa, ab'e
to accomp.ifh one-half only of what the ambition
of I-;i countrymen had planned. By wresting t'.e
ifln.d of Ormu,. which commanded the mouellt
of the Perli.n Golf. from the petty prinmes, wlo,
as tributaries to the monarchs of Perfa , 1-a
elt3blflhed their dominion there , he f cured ;o
Portiugl that extenlive trtde with the Eraft. wlhich
(ai 1 h3-e formerly described) the 'Ptifin. had
carried on for fiveral centuries. In the hands of
the Portugut fe Ormus soon became the ;ralt
rmrt from which the Petfian empire, and 'ill the
piovinces of Aiia to tle wvRft of it, weil fupplikd
with the productions ot India; and a city w!vch
they built on that barren ifl.nd, d:;ftitute of water,
vad rendered on;e of the (hief feat; of opulence,
splendor, and luxury in the alltern xworld ".

The operationi of Albuquerque in the Red

Sea were far from being attended with tqtl
success. Partly by the vigorous retiftan-e of the
Arabian princes, whose ports he attacked, and

' Oorius de reb. gtefRs Eman. lib. x. p. 274, &c.
Tavernier's Travels, liook v. c. 23.

partly by the damage his fleet furfained in a sea s E c T.
of which the navigation is remarkably difficult ill.
and dangerous, he was constrained to retire,
without effecting any settlement of importance ".
The ancient channel of intercourse with India by
the Red Sea [till continued open to the Egypti-
ans ; but their commercial tr.anIacions in that
country were greatly circumscribed and obatrut-
ed, by the influence which the Portuguese had
acquired in every port to which they were
accuflomied to resort.

In consequence of this, the Venetians soon be-
gn to feel that decrease of their own Indian trade
which they had foreseen and dreaded. In order
to prevent the farther progress of this evil, they
p'rru.llded the Soldan of the I'lameluks , equally
alarmed with thernfelves at the rapid fuccef, of
the Portuguese in the East, and no less interested
to hinder them from engrossing that commerce,
which had so long been the chief source of opu-
lence both to the monarchs and to the people of
Egypt, to enter into a ncgociation with the Pope
and the King of Portugal. The tone which the
Soldan alfumed in this negociation was such as
became the fierce chief of a military government.
After stating his exclusive right to the trade with
India , he forewarned Julius I1. and Emanuel,
that, if the Portuguese did not relinquilh that
new course of navigation by which they had
penetrated into the Indian ocean, and cease from

"Oforius, lib. ix. p. 248, &c.

L4

S E C T. encroaching on that commerce, which from time

III. immemorial had been carried on between the alft

of Asia and hi. dominions, he would put to
death all the Chrntians in Egypt, Syria. and
Palefrtne. birn their churches, and demoliff the
holy f-pulchre irfelf . his frmitdable thleat,
which, a few ccnturics bteore this period, wouid
h.ve made all Chriftl.ndoin trcmble , seems to
have made so li'tl-- iinpriron, tha: the Venctia.is,
as the lif exp,!dient, had recoiirfe to a ne.afure,
which, in that nae, was l detnmc not only rp:-e.
henible, but impious. 1 hey iicitcd, the Soldaii
to fit out a fleet in the I.c 1 Sea , and to anta k
those unexpectel invaders of a gainkul mioopo'y,
ot which he and his predecessors had lo;, en-
j.- d undilurbed poffcflion. As Eg ypt d.d not
produce tin:ter proper for bui!dinll Ih!ps ot fore,
the \VeCttiti p rtnitted the Sl,Idan to cut it in
th ir for, ft- of Lalnmati3, whence it was conveycd
to Alexlndr i

, and then carried, partly by wxvter

and pat;ly by land, to Suez There twelve ships
of war were buli , on board of which a body of
nMIameluk' wav ordered to fcrve, under the com.
mand of an officer of merit. ThLfe new enemics,
far more formidable than the- natives of Indja
with whom the Portuguese n:,d hitherto con-
tended, they encountered, with undaunted cou-
rage, and after some severe conticts, they entirely

" Oforius de rehus Eman. lit. iv. r. iio. edit. s180.
Asia de Barros, decad. i. lib. vii:. c. 2.

ruined the fquadroa, and remained masters of the s E C T.
Indiain ocean . 111.

Soon after this disaster, the dominion of the
Inameluks was overturned, and Egypt, Syria,
aid PaleRfine were subjected to the Turkilh empire
by the vitorious arms of Selim I. Their mutual
in)ereft quickly induced the Turks and Venetians
to f.rge et ancient ofirties, and to co-operate
tonwvai!' the ruin of the Portuguese trade in India.
With this view Selim confirmed to the Venetians
the cxtenfive commercial privileges which they
h.bd eiijoyed under the government of the Miame-
luks, and publishi'd an edict permitting the free
entry of all the productions of the Eadt, imported
diredly from Alexandria, into every part of his
diniiions, and imposing heavy duties upon such
as were brought from Lilbon "

[ut all these were unavailing efforts against the

ful)'rior andvantages which the Portuguese possesscd,
in supplying Europe with the commodities of the
F:;ll, in coiifequence of having opened a new mode
of conmunication with it. At the fame time, the
Venetians, brought to the brink of ruin by the
fatal league of Cambray, which broke ihe power
and humbled the pride of the republic, were
incapable of such efforts for the preservation of
their commerce, as they might have made in the

5" AGa dc BIrros, dec. ii. lib ii. c. 6. Lafitau, HifR.

des Decouvertes des Portugais, i. 292, &c. Oror. lib. iv.
p. 120.

" Sandi Stor. Civ. Venez. part ii. 901. part iii. 432.

s E C T. more vigorous age of their government, and were

11I. reduced to the feeble expedients of a declining

itate. Of this there is a remarkable inflance in an
offer made by them to the King of Portugal in
the year one thousand five hundred and twenty.
one, to purchase, at a stipulated price, all the
spices imported into Lisbon, over and above what
might be requisite for the consumption of his own
fubjec-s. If Emanuel bad been so inconsiderate as
to close with this proposal, Venice would have
recovered all the b:nefit of the gairful monopoly
which mhe had loft. But the otfer met with the
reception that it merited, and was rejected without
hesitation '

The Portuguese, almost without obflrucion,

continued their progrtfs in the East , until they
established there a commercial empire; to which,
whether we confider it. extent, its opulence, the
slender power by which it was formed, or the
splendor with which the government of it was
conducted, there h.d hitherto been nothing com-
parable in the history of nations. Emanuel, who
laid the foundation of this fitpendous fabric had
the fatisfac2ion to fee it almo!t completed. Avery
part of Europe was supplied by the Portuguese
with the productions of the East; and if we ex-
cept some inconsiderable quantity of them, which
the Venetians still continued to receive by the
ancient channels of conveyance, our quarter of the
globe had no longer any commercial intercourse

" Ofor. de reb. Eman. lib. xii. 6g;.

with India, and the regions of Asia beyond it, SECT,'
but by the Cape of Good H',pe 1i.

Though from this period the people of Europe
have continued to carry on their trade with India
by sea, yet a considerable portion of the va!uatble
productions of the East is fill conveyed to other
regions of the earth by land-carriage. In tracing
the progrtfs of trade with India, this branch of
it is an object of considerable magnitude, which
has not been examined with sufficient attention.
That the ancients should have had recourse fre-
quently to the tedious and expenuive mode of
tra;fplorting goods by land, will not appear fur-
prfing, when we recolled the imperfec state of
navigation among them: The reason of this mode
of conveyance being not only continued, but
increascd, in modern times, demands some expla-

nttion.

If we inspect a map of Asia, we cannot fail to
oblerve, that the communication throughout all
the countries of that great continent to the weft
of Indofti and China, though opened in some
d'gree towards the south by the navigable rivers
Luphrates and Tigris, and towards the north by
two inland seas, the Euxine and Carpian, mult
be carried on in many extensive provinces wholly
by land This, as I have observed, was the firfi
mode of intercourse between different countries,
and during the infancy of navigation it was the
only one. Even after that art had attained foine
degree of improvement, the conveyance of goods
by the two rivers which I have mentioned,

s e c T. extended so little way into the interior country,

111. and the trade of the Euxine and Caspian seas was

so often obstructed by the barbarous nations scat-
tered along their shores, that, partly on that
account, and partly from the adherence of mankind
to ancient habits, the commerce of the various
provinces of Asia, particularly that with India
and the regions beyond it, continued to be con.
dudted by land.

The fame circumstances which induced the

inhabitants of Asia to carry on such a confider.
able part of their commerce with each other in this
manner, operated with still more powerful effect
in Africa. That vafl continent, which little re.
fembles the other divisions of the earth, is not
penetrated by inland seas, like Europe and Asia,
or by a chain of lakes, like North America, or
opened by rivers (the Nile alone excepted) of
extended navigation. It forms one uniform, con-
tinuous surface, between the various parts of which
there could be no intercourse, from the earlielt
times, but by land. Rude as all the people of
Africa are, and flcnder as the progress is which
they have made in the arts of life, such a com-
munication appears to have been always kept up.
How far it extended in the more early periods
to which I have directed my researches, and by
what different routes it was carried on, I have
not sufficient information to determine with accu-
racy. It is highly probable that, from time imme-
morial, the gold, the i'vor/, the perfumes, both
of the southern parts of Africa, and of its more

northern diftrics, were conveyed either to the s C T.
Arabian Gulf, or to Egypt, and exchanged for iii.
the spices and other productions of the East.

The Mahomedan religion, which spread with
amazing rapidity over all Asia and a considerable
part of Africa, contributed greatly towards the
increase of commercial intercourse by land in both
these quarters of the globe, and has given it addi-
tional vigor, by mingling with it a new principle
of acivi'y, and by directing it to a common cen-
tre. Ilahomet enjoined all his followers to visit
once in their lifetime, the Caaba or square build-
ing in the temple of Mecca, the immemorial obje3
of veneration among his countrymen; and, accord-
ing to their tradition, the first spot on this earth
which was consecrated to the worship of God:
In order to preserve continually upon their minds
a fciife of their obligation to perform this duty,
he directed that, in all the multiplied ads of
devotion which his religion prescribes, true be-
lievers Thould always turn their faces towards that
holy place ". In obedience to a precept solemnly
enjoined and sedulously inculcated, numerous
caravans of pilgrims assemble annually in every
country where the MIlahomedan faith is eftablilhed.
From the (hores ot the Atlantic on one hand, and
from the molt remote regions of the East on the
other, the votaries of the Prophet advance to
Mecca. Commercial ideas and objects mingle with
those of devotion. The numerous camels ' of

Herbelot Biblioth. Orient. artic. Caaba & Keblab.
" See NOTE LI.

SE C T. each car-wan are loaded with those commodities

IiI. of vcrv counlry whih are of eafleft carriage and

molt r:,.dv sale 'I he holy city is crowded , not
only with zealous devotees, but with opultnt
merchants. During the few days they remain there,
the fair of Mlecca i. the greatest, perhaps, on the
face of the earth. lMercantile transactions are
carried on in it to an iinmcnfe value, of which
the difp.^-h tlh silence, the mutual confidence
and good faith in conducting them, are the most
unequivocal proof. The productions and marufac.
tures of India form a capital article in this great
traffic, and the caravans, on their return, diffemi.
nate them through every part of Asia, and Africa.
Some of these are deemed necessary, not only to
the comfort but to the preservation of life, and
orhers contribute to its tlegance and pleasure. They
are f, xarious as to suit the taste of mankind in
every clim-te. and in different ftjge; of improve.
ment; and are in high requefl among the rude
natives of .frica. as well as the more luxuiious
ii.;liair3ats ot x si. In order to fnpplv their several
demands, the caravans return loa:led with the
rnt.fl:'.~ nd chintfe; of Beianl and the Decan,
the fhjiwls of Ca hemire, the pepper of Vlalabar,
the diamonds of Golconda, the pearls of Kilkare,
the (Ini a:n cf ( t' n, the nutmeg, cloves and
mace of th- N'\olucc:c , and an immense number
of other Indian commodities.

,-fide thr-fe great caravans, formed partly by

respect for a rcligiouc piecept, and partly with a
-vilw to cxLand a luLratLve branch of commerce,

there are other caravans, and these not inconfider- s E C T.
able, composed entirely of merchants, who have lI
po object but trade. These, at flated seasons, set
out from different parts of the Turkish and Persian
dominions, and proceeding to Indoftan, and even
to China, by routes which were anciently known,
they convey by land-carriage the most valuable
commodities of these countries to the remote pro-
vinces of both empires. It is only by confidering
the ditlance to which large quantities of these
commodities are carried, and frequently across
extensive deserts, which, without the aid of
camels, would have been impassable, that we can
form any idea of the magnitude of the trade with
India by land, and are led to perceive, that in a
Disquisition concerning the various modes of con-
duSting this commerce, it is well entitled to the
attention which I have bestowed in endeavouring
to trace it ".

" See NOTE LlI.

# SECTION IV.

HISTORICAL DISQUISITION

CONCERNING
ANCIENT INDIA.

SECTION IV.

Genn-al Observations.

E C T. 1- HUS I have endeavoured to describe the
IV. progress of trade with India, both by sea and by

land, from the earliest times in which hillory
affords any authentic information concerning it,
until an entire revoluto.n vas made in it, nature,
and the mode of carry ilg it on. by that grelt
d'fcovcry which I origin.:lly fixed as the utmost
boundarv of my inquiries. Here, then, thi lDifq(ui-
litic(n might have been terminated. But as I have
conducted my readers to that period, when a new
order of ideas, and new arrangemcnts of policy

began

began to be introduced into Europe, in confe- s E CT.
c,:i.nce of the value and importance of commerce Iv.
bcing so thoroughly underflood, that in almost
ev',v country the encouragement of it became a
clsui obsjed of public attention; as we have now
reached that point whence a line may be drawn
which marks the chief distinction between the
manners and political infliitutions of ancient and
modern times, it will render the work more in.
futirlive and useful, to conclude it with some
general obfhrvations, which naturally arise from a
survey of both, and a comparison of the one with
the other. These oblervations, I trut , will be
found, not only to have an intimate connexion
w:h th ftbjedit of my researches, and to throw
a!iitional light upon it; but will serve to illufRrate
many p.irticulars in the general history of com-
merce, and to point out effeds or consequences
of various events, which have not been generally
obfcrved. or coufidered with that attention which
they merited.

I. After viewing the great and extensive effects
of finding a new course of navigation to India
by the Cape of Good Hope, it may appear fur-
prifing to a modern observer, that a discovery of
such importance was not made, or even attempted,
by any of the commercial states of the ancient
world. But in judging with refped to the condud
of nations in remote times, we never err more
widely, than when we decide with regard to it,
not according to the ideas and views of their age,
but of our own. This is not, perhaps, more

M

$ E c T. conspicuous in any infIance, than in that under

IV. consideration. It was by the Tyrians, and by the

Greeks, who were maflers of Egypt, that the
different people of Furope were first supplied with
the productions of the East. From the account
that has been given of the manner in which they
procured these, it is manifclt that they had neither
the fame inducements with modern nations to with
for any new communication with India, nor the
fame means of accomplishing it. All the commer-
cial transactions of the ancients with the Ealt were
confined to the ports on the Mlalaba coast, or
extended at farthest to the island of Ceylon. To
these staples, the natives of all the different regi-
ons in the eastern parts of Asia brought the con.
modities which were the growth of their several
countries, or the product of their ingenuity, in
their own vessels, and with them the ships from
Tyre and from Egypt completed their investments.
W'hile the operations of their Indian trade were
carried an within a sphere so circumscribed, the
conveyance of a cargo by the Arabian Gulf, not.
withfianding the expense of land- carriage , either
from Elath to Rhinocolura, or across the defcrt
to the Nile, was so safe and commodious, that
the merchants of Tyre and Alexandria had little
reason to be solicitous for the discovery of any
other. The situation of both these cities, as well
as that of the other considerable commercial fta-
tes of antiquity, was very different from that of
the countries to which, in later times, mankind
have been indebted for keeping up intercourse

with the remote parts of the globe. Portugal, s E cT.
Spain, England, Holland, which have been most Iv.
active and successful in this line of enterprise,
all lie on the Atlantic ocean, (in which every
European voyage of discovery must commence,)
or have immediate access to it. But Tyre was
fittutc:f at the eastern extremity of the Mediterra-
nea,, Alexandria not far from it; Rhodes, Athens,
Corinth, which came afterwards to be ranked
among the most acive trading cities of antiquity,
lay considerably advanced towards the fame quar-
ter in that sea. -The commerce of all these states
was long confined within the precincts of the
Mediterranean; and in some of them never ex-
tended beyond it. The pillars of Hercules, or the
Straits of Gibraltar, were long confidered as the
utmost boundary of navigation. To reach this was
deemed a signal proof of naval skill; and before
any of these states could give a beginning to an
attempt towards exploring the vast unknown ocean
which lay beyond it, they had to accomplish a
voyage (according to their ideas) of great extent
and much danger. This was sufficient to deter them
from engaging in an arduous undertaking, from
which, even if attended with success, their fitua.
tion prevented their entertaining hopes of deriving
great advantage ',

But could we suppose the discovery of a new
palTage to India to have become an object of desire
or pursuit to any of these ltates, their science as

See NOTE LII.

M a2

S E C T. well as practice of navigation was so defective,

iv. that it would have been hardly possible for them

to attain it. The vessels which the ancients em.
ployed in trade were so fnall, as not to afford
stowage for provisions sufficient to subsist a crew
during a long voyage. Their confirudion wac such
that they could seldom venture to depart far fror
land, and their mode of Ileering along the coast
(which I have been obliged to mention often) so
circuitous and flow, that from these as well as
from other circumstances which I might have fpe.
cified ', we may pronounce a voyage from the
Ilediterranean to India by the Cape of Good
Hope, to have been an undertaking beyond their
power to accomplil , in such a manner as to
render it, in any degree, subservient to commerce.
Tlo this decision, the account preserved by Hero.
dotu-, of a voyage performed by some Phenician
flips employed by a king of Egypt, which,
taking their departure from the Arabian Gulf,
doubled the Sou:hern promontory of Africa, and
arrived, at the end of three years, by the Straits
of Gades. or Gibraltar, at the mouth of the Nile',
can hardly be confidered a- reputnant; for fevtral
writers of tie greatest eminence amoing theancients,
and molt distinguished for their proficiency in the
knowledge of geography , regarded this account
rather as an amuting talc, than the history of a
real transaction; and either entertained doubts

Goguet Orig. des Loix, des Arts, &c. ii. 303. 329,
J Lib. iv. c. 42.

concerning the pofibility of failing round Africa, s E c T.'
or absolutely denied it . But if what Herodotus Iv.
relates, concerning the course held by these Pheni-
clan ships, had ever been received by the ancients
with general assent, we can hardly suppose, that
any state could have been so wildly adventurous,
as to imagine that a voyage, which it required
three years to complete, could be undertaken
with a profpec of commercial benefit.

II. The rapid progress of the moderns in explor-
ing India, as wtll as the extensive power and
valuable settlements which they early acquired
there, mark such a diftindion between their mode
of conducing naval operations, and that of the
ancients, as merits to be confidered and explained
wi'h attention. From the reign of the first Pto-
Lmy, to the conquest of Egypt by the Mahomed-
ans, Europe had been supplied with the produc- r
tions of the East by the Greeks of Alexandria,
by the Romans while they were malters of Egypt,
and by the fubjeds of the Emperors of Confanti-
nople, when that kingdom became a province of
their dominions. During this long period, extend-
ing alnoft to a thousand years, none of those
people, the most enlightened, undoubtedly, in
the ancient world, ever advanced by sea farther
towards the East than the Gulf of Siam, and had
no regular eftablifned trade but with the ports
on the coast of Malabar, or those in the island

* Polyb. lib. iii. p. 19a. edit. Cafaub. Plin. Nat. Hilt
lib. ii. c. 6. Ptol. Geogr. lib. iv. c. 9. See NOTE LIV.

M 3

S E C T. of Ceylon. They attempted no conquelts in any

Iv. part of India, they made no fettlemcnts, they

erected no forts. Satisfied with an intercourse
merely commercial, they did not aim at acquir-
ing any degree of power or dominion in the
countries where they traded, though it fcers to
be prob.ible that they might have eftablifled it
without much opposition from the natives, a gentle,
effeminate people, with whom, at that time, no
foreign and more warlike race was mingled. But
the enterprising activity of the Portuguese was
not long confined within the fame limits; a few
years after their arrival at Calecut, they advanced
towards the East, into regions unknown to the
ancients. The kingdoms of Cambodia, Cochin
China, Tonquin, the vast empire of China. and
all the fertile ifiands in the great Indian Archi-
pelago, from Sumatra to the Philippines, were
difrovered , and the Portuguese , though op-
posed in every quarter by the I,%ahomedans of
Tartar or Arabian origin fettled in many parts
of India, enemies much more fornid.tble than
the natives, eftablilhed there that extensive influ-
ence and dominion which I have formerly de.
fcribed.

Cf this remarkable difference between the pro

grefs and operations of the ancients and moderns
in India, the imperfect knowledge of the former,
wviLh refped both to the theory and pracice of
navigation, seems to have been the princip.il
cause. From the coast of IMalabar to the Philip-
pines, was a voyage of an extent far beyond

any that the ancients were accustomed to under- s E cT.
tke, and, according to their manner of failing, Iv.
must have required a great length of time to
perform it. The nature of their trade with India
was such, that they had not (as I have already
observed ) the fame inducements with the mo-
derns, to profccute discovery with ardor; and,
according to the dcfcription given of the vessels
in which the merchants of Alexandria carried
on their trade from the Arabian Gulf, they
appear'to have been very unfit for that pur.
pose. On all these accounts, the ancients remained
satisfied with a slender knowledge of India; and
infilenced by reasons proceeding from the fame
cause, they attempted neither conquelt nor fettle-
ment there. In order to accomplish either of
these, they must have transported a considerable
number of men from India. But, from the de-
fective ftrudture of their Ihips, as well as from \
the imperfection of their art in navigating them,
the ancients seldom ventured to convey a body
of troops to any distance by sea. From Berenice
to Mufiris, was to them, even after Hippalus
had discovered the method of iteering a diret
course, and when their naval skill had attained
to its hiahcft state of improvement, a voyage
of no less than seventy days. By the ancient
route along the coast of Persia, a voyage from
the Arabian Gulf to any part of India rnrt have
been of greater length, and accompliflied more
slowly. As no hostile attack was ever made
upon India by sea, either by the Greek monarchs

M 4

S E C T. of Egypt, though the two firt of them were

IV. able and ambitious Princes, or by the molt en.

terprifing of the Roman mrrperors, it is evident
that they must have deemed it an attempt beyond
their power to execute. Alexander the Great,
and. in imitation of him, hi, successors, the
monarchs of Syria, w:re the only persons in the
ancient world who formed an idea of eftabliniing
their dominion in antv part of In:li; but it was
with armie, Ild thither by land, that they hoped
to achievt this

II1. The sudden tfl'z: of opening a direct corn.

mulnication wih the Kalt, in l.wering the price
of Iadian commodities, is a circumstance that
merits observation How compendious soever the
ancient intercouife with India may appear to have
been, it was attended with confider-ble expense.
The prodlutios ofthe remote parts of Asia, brought
to Ceylon, or the ports on the Malabar coafl, by
the natives, were put on board the ships which
arrived from the Arabian Gulf. At Berenice they
were landed, and carried by camels two hundred
and fifty eight miles to the banks of the Nile.
There they were again embarked, and conveyed
down the river to Alexaindrla, whence they were
dispatched to different mar' ets. The addition to
the price of goods by such a multiplicity of
operations mult have been considerable, especially
.when the rate chargeable on each operation was
fixed by monopolists, subject to no control. But
after the passage to India by the Cape of Good
Hope was discovered, its various commodities

were purchased at first hand in the countries of s C T.
which they were the growth or manufacture. In Iv.
all there, particularly in Indoftan and in China,
the subsistence of man is more abundant than in
any other part of the earth. The people live
chiefly upon rice, the most prolific of all grains.
Population, of consequence, is so great, and labor
so extremely cheap, that every production of
nature or of art is fold at a very low price.
When these were fh;pped in different parts of
India, they were conveyed directly to Lisbon, by
a navigation, long indeed, but uninterrupted and
fife, and thence circulated through Europe. The
carriage of mercantile goods by water is so much
less expensive than by any other mode of con-
veyance, that as soon as the Portuguese could
import the producions of India in sufficient quan-
titics to supply the demands of Europe, they were
able to afford them at such a reduced price, that
the competition of the Venetians ceased almost
entirely, and the full stream of commerce flowed
in its natural direcion towards the cheapest market.
!n vwh-t proportion the Portuguese lowered the
price of Indian commodities, 1 cannot ascertain
with precision, as I have not found in contempo-
rarv writers sufficient information with respeCt to
that point. Some idea, however, of this, approach-
ing perhaps near to accuracy, may be formed,
from the computations of MJ. Munn, an intelli-
sent Englifl merchant. He has publihfed a table
of the prices paid for various articles of goods
in India, compared with the prices for which they

S E C T. were fold in Aleppo, from which the difference

iv. appears to be nearly as three to one; and he

calculates, that, after a reasonable allowance for
the expense of the voyage from India, the fame
goods may be fold in England at half the price
which they bear in Aleppo. The expense of con.
veying the producions of India up the Persian
Gulf to Baffora, and thence either through the
Great or Little Desert to Aleppo, could not, I
should imagine, differ considerably from that by
the Red Sea to Alexandria. We may therefore
.suppose, that the Venetians might purchase them
from the merchants of that city, at nearly the
fame rate for which they were fold in Aleppo;
and when we add to this, what they must have
charged as their own profit in all the markets
which they frequented, it is evident that the
Portuguese might afford to reduce the commodities
of the East to a price below that which I have
mentioned, and might supply every part of Europe
with them more than one-half cheaper than for-
merly. The enterpr;fing schemes of the Portuguese
monarchs were accompliflied sooner, as well as
more completely, than in the hour of molt fan-
guine hope they could have presumed to expet;
and early in the fixteenzh century, their fubjeds
became poliefTed of a monopoly of the trade with
India, founded upon the only equitable title, that
of furnishing its productions in greater abundance,
and at a more moderate price.

IV. We may observe, that in consequence of a
more plentiful supply of Indian goods, and at a

cheaper rate , the demand for them increased s B C T.
rapidly in every part of Europe. To trace the 1v.
progress of this in detail , would lead me far
beyond the period which 1 have fixed as the limit
of this Disquisition , but some general remarks
concerning it will be found intimately connected
with the subjed of my inquiries. What were the
chief articles of importation from India, while the
Romans had the direcion of the trade with that
country, I have formerly mentioned. But upon
the fibverfion of their empire, and the settlement
of the fierce warriors of Scythia and Germany in
the various countries of Europe, the slate of so-
ciety, as well as the condition of individuals,
became so extremely different, that the wants and
desires of men were no longer the fame. Barbari-
ans, many of them not far advanced in their
progress beyond the rudest state of social life,
had little relifi for those accommodations, and
that elegance, which are so alluring to polished
nations. The curious manufacures of silk, the pre-
cious flones and pearls of the East, which had
beel the ornament and pride of the wealthy and
luxurious citizens of Pome, were not objects of
dcfire to men, who, for a considerable time after
they took poffefion of their new conquelis, re-
tained the original simplicity of their pastoral
manners. They advanced, however, from rudeness
to refinement in the usual course of progression
which nations are destined to hold, and an in-
crease of wants and desires requiring new objects
to gratify them, they began to acquire a relish for

s E C T. fome-of the luxuries of India. Among these they

IV. had a singular predilection for the fpiceries and

aromatics which that country yields in such variety
and abundance. Whence their peculiar fondness
for these arose, it is not of importance to inquire.
WV'hoeier peruses the writers of the middle ages,
will find many particulars which confirm this obfer.
vation. In every enumeration of Indian commodi-
ties which they give, spices are always mentioned
as the molt considerable and precious article '. In
their cookery, all dishes were highly seasoned
with them. In every entertainment of parade, a
profusion of them was deemed essential to magni.
ficence. In every medical prescription they were
principal ingredients '. But considerable as the
demand for spices had become, the mode in
which the nations of Europe had hitherto been
supplied with them was extremely disadvantage.
ous. The fhipi employed by the merchants of
Alexandria never ventured to visit those remote
regions which produce the most valuable spices,
and before they could be circulated through
Europe, they were loaded with the accumulated
profits received by four or five different hands
through which they had passcd. But the Portu-
guefe , wih a bolder spirit of navigation, having
penetrated into every part of Asia, took in their

' Jac. de Virriac. Hilt. Hierof. ap. Bongarf. i. o199.
\Vilh. Tyr. lib. sx:i. c. 2;.

Du Cange, GloTfar. Verb. Aromata, Species. Henry's
Hist. of G. Bri:. vol. iv. p. 597, 598.

cargo of spices in the places where they grew, s E C T.
and could afford to dispose of them at such a Iv.
price, that, from being an expensive luxury, they
became an article of such general use, as greatly
augmented the demand for them. An effet similar
to this may be observed, with respeCt to the
demand for other commodities imported from
India, upon the reducion of their price by the
Portuguese. From that period a growing taste for
Asiatic luxuries may be traced in every country
of Europe, and the number of ships fitted out for
that trade at Lisbon, continued to increase every
year

V. Lucrative as the trade with India was, and
had long been deemed, it is remarkable that the
Portuguese were fiffered to remain in the undif.
turbed and exclusive possession of it, during the
course of almost a century. In the ancient world,
though Alexandria, from the peculiar felicity of
its situation, could carry on an intercourse with
the East by sea, and circulate its productions
through Europe with such advantage, as gave it
a decided superiority over every rival; yet various
attempts (which I have described in their proper
places) were made, from time to time, to obtain
some share in a commerce so apparently beneficial
From the growing activity of the commercial
spirit in the sixteenth century, as well as from
the example of the eager solicitude with which
the Venetians and Genoese exerted themfelvce

7 See NOTE LV,

S E C T. alternately to shut out each other from any share

iv. in the Indian trade, it might have been expected

that some competitor would have arisen to call
in question the claim of the Portuguese to an
exclusive right of traffic with the East, and to
wrest from them some portion of it. There were,
however, at that time, some peculiar circumftan.
ces in the political slate of all those nations in
Europe, whose intrusion, as rivals, the Portuguese
had any reason to dread, which secured to them
the quiet enjoyment of their monopoly of Indian
commerce, during such a long period. From the
accession of Charles V. to the throne, Spain was
either so much occupied in a multiplicity of opera.
tions in which it was engaged by the ambition
of that monarch, and of his son Philip II. or
so intent on prosecuting its own discoveries and
conquests in the New World, that, although,
A. D. il. by the successful enterprise of Magellan, its fleets

were unexpetedly conducted by a new course
to that remote region of Asia which was the
feat of the most gainful and alluring branch of
trade carried on by the Portuguese , it could
make no considerable effort to avail itself of the
commercial advantages which it might have de-
rived from that event. By the acquisition of the
crown of Portugal, in the year one thousand
five hundred and eighty, the kings of Spain,
infled of the rivals, became the protectors of
the Portuguese trade, and the guardians of all
its extensive rights. Throughout the sixteenth
century, the strength and resources of France

were so much wafted by the fruitless expeditions s E C T.
of their monarchs into Italy, by their unequal Iv.
contest with the power and policy of Charles V.
and by the calamities of the civil wars which
desolated the kingdom upwards of forty years,
that it could neither bestow much attention upon
objects of commerce, nor engage in any scheme
of distant enterprise. The Venetians, how sensibly
soever they might feel the mortifying reverse of
being excluded, almost entirely, from the Indian
trade, of which their capital had been formerly
the chief feat, were so debilitated and humbled
by the League of Cambray, that they were no
longer capable of engaging in any undertaking
of magnitude. England, weakened (as I formerly
observed) by the long contest between the ho'uses
of York and Lancalter, and just beginning to
recover its proper vigor, was restrained from
active exertion, during one part of the sixteenth
century, by the cautious maxims of Henry VII.
and wafted its strength, during another part of it,
by engaging inconsiderately in the wars between
the princes on the continent. The nation, though
destined to acquire territories in India more exten-
five and valuable than were ever possessed by any
European power, had no such presentiment of its
future eminence there, as to take an early part
in the commerce or tranfadions of that country,
and a great part of the century elapsed before ic
began to turn its attention towards the East.

While the most considerable nations in Europe
found it necessary, from the circumltances which

S EC T. I have mentioned, to remain inacive fpetators

1V. of what paTed in the East, the Seven United

Provinces of the Low Countries, recently formed
into a frall fate , still struggling for political
exifence. and yet in the infancy of its power,
ventured to appear in the Indian ocean as the
rivals of the Portuguese; and, (efpifing their pre.
tensions to an exclusive light of commerce with
the extensive countries to the eastward of the
Cape of Good Hope, invaded that monopoly
which they had hitherto guarded with such jealous
attention. 'The English soon followed the example
of the Dutch, and both nations, at first by the
enterprising industry of private adventurers, and
aftr;wards by the more powerful efforts of trading
companies, under the protection of public author.
ity, advanced with aftonifting ardor and success
in this new career opened to them. The vafl fabric
of power which the Portuguese had erected in the
East (a superstructure much too large for the basis
on which it had to reft) was almost entirely over-
turned, in a short time, and with as much facility,
as it had been laifed. England and Holland, by
driving them from their noft valuable f:ttlcments,
and seizing the inotl lucrative branches of their
trade, have attained to that pre-eminence in naval
power and commerci'l opulence, by which they
are ditinguifhed amo.;g the nations of Europe.

VI. ' he co-incidence, in point of time, of

the difcoverieq made by Columbus in the WVeft,
and thole of Gama in the East, is a singular cir-
cumftance, which merits observation, on account

of

of the remarkable influence of those events in form, s C cT.
ing or strengthening the commercial connexion of IV.
the different quarters of the globe with each other.
In all ages, gold and silver, particularly the latter,
have been the commodities exported with the greate
eft profit to India. In no part of the earth do the
natives depend so little upon foreign countrie.,
either for the necessaries or luxuries of life. The
blessings of a favorable climate and fertile foil,
augmented by their own ingenuity, afford theni
whatever they desire. In consequence of this, trade
with them has always been carried on in one uni-
form manner, and the precious metals have been
given in exchange for their peculiar producions
whether of nature or art. But when the commu-
nication with India was rendered so much more
easy, that the demand for its commodities began
to increase far beyond what had been formerly
known, if Europe had not been supplied with the
gold and silver which it was necelfary to carry to
the markets of the East from sources richer and more
abundant than her own barren and impoverifled
mines, flie muff either have abandoned the trade
with India altogether, or have continued it with
manifest disadvantage. By such a continual drain
of gold and Alver, as well as by the unavoidable
walte of both in circulation and in manufacures,
the quantity of those metals muff have gone on
diminifling, and their value would have been so
much enhanced, that they could not have conti.
nued long to be of the fame utility in the commer.
Eial transactions between the two countries. But

N

s e Tr before the effcc1< of this diminution could be very

Iv. sensibly felt, America opened her mines, and poured

in treasures upon Europe in the most copious ftrearn
to which mankind ever had access. This treasure,
in spite of innumerable anxious precautions to pre.
vent it, flowed to the markets where the commo.
dities necessary for supplying the wants, or grati.
fying the luxury of the Spaniards. were to be found;
and from that time to the present, the English and
Dutch have purchased the produtions of China
and Indoftan, with silver brought from the mines
of Mlexico and Peru. The immense exportation of
silver to the East during the course of two centuries,
hIs not only been replaced by the continual influx
from America, but the quantity of it has been
considerably augmented, and at the fame time the
proportional rate of its value in Europe and in In.
dia has varied so little, that it is chiefly with silver
that many of the capital articles imported from the
East are still purchased.

Wrhile America contributed in this manner to

fa ilitate and extend the intercourse of 1urope
with Asia. it gave rife to a traffic with Africa,
which, from slender beginnings, has become so
considerable, as to form the chief bond of com-
mercial connexion with that continent. Soon after
the Portuguese had extended their discoveries on
the coast of Africa beyond the river Senegal, they
endeavoured to derive some benefit from their new
settlements there, by the sale of slaves Various
circumstances combined in favoring the revival ol
this odious traffic. In every pars of America, o!

which the Spaniards took pofeflion, they found SEc T.
that the natives, from the feebleness of their frame, Iv.
from their indolence, or from the injudicious man-
ner of treating them, were incapable of the exer-
tions requisite either for working mines, or for
cultivating the earth. Eager to find hands more
industrious and efficient, the Spaniards had recourse
to their neighbours the Portuguese, and purchased
from them negroe slaves. Experience soon difcovcr-
ed, that they were men of a more hardy race, and
so much better fitted for enduring fatigue, that
the labor of one negroe was computed to be equal
to that of four Americans'; and from that time
the number employed in the New World has gone
on increasing with rapid progress. In this practice,
no less repugnant to the feelings of humanity than
to the principles of religion, the Spaniards have
unhappily been imitated by all the nations of Eu-
rope, who have acquired territories in the warmer
climates of the New World. At present the number
of negroe slaves in the settlements of Great Britain
and France in the Weft Indies, exceeds a million;
and as the eftablilhment of servitude has been found,
both in ancient and in modern times, extremely
unfavorable to population, it requires an annual
importation from Africa of at least fifty-eight
thousand, to keep up the flock'. If it were pof-
fible to ascertain, with equal exadnefs, the number
of slaves in the Spanish dominions, in North Ame.

His. of America, vol. i. p. ;20.
'Report of Lords of the Privy council, A. D. 1788.

N2

s ECT. rica, the total number of negroe slaves might be
Iv. well reckoned at as many more.

Thus the commercial genius of Europe, which

has given it a visible ascendant over the three
other divisions of the earth, by discerning their
respective wants and resources, and by rendering
them reciprocally subservient to one another, has
established an union among them, from which it
has derived an immense increase of opulence, of
power, and of enjoyments.

VII. Though the discovery of a New World

in the Weft, and the opening of a more easy and
direct communication with the remote regions of
the East, co-operated towards extending the com-
merce, and adding to the enjoyments, of Europe,
a remarkable difference may be observed, with
refpeA both to the time and the manner in which
they produced these effecs. When the Portuguese
first visited the different countries of Asia, stretching
from the coast of Mlalabar to China, they found
them possessed by nations highly civilized, which
bad made considerable progress in elegant as well as
useful arts, which were accutfomed to intercourse
with strangers, and well acquainted with all the
advantages of commerce. But when the Spaniards
began to explore the New World which they
discovered, the asped which it presented to them
was very different. The islands were inhabited
by naked savages, so unacquainted with the fim.
pleft and most necessary arts of life, that they
subsisted chiefly on the spontaneous produtions
of a fertile foil and genial climate. The continent

appeared to be a forest of immense extent, along s e c T.
the coafl of which were scattered some feeble IV.
tribes, not greatly superior to the islanders in
indtftry or improvement. Even its two large
monarchies, which have been dignified with the
appellation of civilized states, had not advanced
so far beyond their countrymen, as to be'emitled
to that name. The inhabitants, both of Mexico
and Peru, unacquainted with the useful metals,
and deflitute of the address requisite for acquiring
such command of the inferior animals as to derive
any aid from their labor, had made so little
pragrcfs in agriculture, the first of all arts, that
one of the greatest difficulties with which the
firal number of Spaniards, who overturned those
empires which have been so highly extolled,
had to firuggle, was how to procure in them
what was fuflicient for their subsistence.

It was of consequence, with a very different
spirit, that the intcrcourfe between two countries,
resembling each other so little in their degree of
improvement, was begun and carried on. The
Portuguese, certain of finding in the East, not
only the productions with which the bountiful
hapd of Nature has enriched that part of the globe,
but various manufacures which had long been
known and admired in Europe, engaged in this allur-
ingtrade with the greatest eagerness. The encourage-
ment of it their monarchs confidered as a chief
objec of government, towards which they di-
reded all the power of the kingdom, and roused

N3

SE CT. their subjects to such vigorous exertions in the

Iv. prosecution of it, as occasioned that astonishing

rapidity of progress which I have described. 'he
sanguine hopes with which the Spaniards entered
upon their career of discovery, met not with the
fame speedy gratification. From the industry of
the rude inhabitants of the New World, they
did not receive a single article of commerce.
Even the natural productions of the foil and
climate, when not cherished and multiplied by
the softering and adtive hand of man, were of
little account. Hope, rather than success, incited
them to persist in extending their researches and
conquests; and as government derived little imme-
diate benefit from these, it left the prosecution
of them chiefly to private adventurers, by whose
enterprising activity, more than by any effort of
the state, the mcft valuable pofTeffions of Spain
in America were acquired. Instead of the inftan-
taneous and great advantages which the Portu.
guefe derived from their discoveries, above half
a century elapsed before the Spaniards reaped any
benefit of consequence from their conquests. ex-
cept the small quantities of gold which the island-
ers were compelled to collect, and the plunder of
the gold and silver employed by the Mexicans
and Peruvians as ornaments of their persons and
temples, or as utensils of sacred or domestic use.
It was not until the .discovery of the mines of
Potofi in Peru, in the year one thousand five
hundred and forty-five, and of those of Sacotecal

in Mexico, soon after, that the Spanish territories sE CT.
in the New World' brought a permanent and Iv.
valuable addition of wealth and revenue to the
mother country.

Nor did the trade with India differ more from
that with America, in refped of the particular
circumstance which I have explained, than in
refpee to the manner of carrying it on, after it
grew to be a considerable object of political atten-
tion. Trade with the East was a simple mercantile
tranfadion, confined to the purchase either of the
natural productions of the country, such as spices,
precious ltones, pearls, &c. or of the manufac-
tures which abounded among an industrious race
of men, such as silk and cotton stuffs, porcelain, &c.
Nothing more was requisite in conducting this
trade, than to fettle a few skilful agents in proper
places, to prepare a proper assortment of goods'
for completing the cargoes of ships as soon as
they arrived from Europe, or at the utmost to
acijuire the com,,and of a few fortified stations,
which might secure them admiflion into ports
where they might careen in safety, and find pro-
tedion from the insults of any hofrlle power.
I here was no necessity of making any attempt
to establish colonies, either for the cultivation of
the foil, or the conduct of manufadures. Both
these remained, as formerly, in the hands of the
natives.

But as soon as that wild spirit of enterprise,
which animated the Spaniards who first explored

N4

SECT, and subdued the New World, began to subside,

iv. and when, instead of roving as adventurers from

province to province in quest of gold and silver,
they seriously turned their thoughts towards.ren.
dering their conquests beneficial by cultivation
and industry, they found it necessary to eftablifl
colonies in every country which they wiffed to
improve. Other nations imitated their example
in the fettlcments which they afterwards made
in some of the islands, and on the continent of
North America. Europe, after having desolated
the New World, began to repeople it, and under
a fyfiem of colonization (the spirit and regulations
of which it is not the object of this Disquisition
to explain) the European race has multiplied there
amazingly. Every article of commerce imported
from the New World, if we except the furs and
fi;ins purchased from the independent tribes of
hunters in North America, and from a few tribes
in a timilar fate on the Southern continent, is the
produce of the industry of Europeans fettled there.
To their exertions, or to those of hands which
they have taught or compelled to labor, we are
indebted for sugar, rum, cotton, tobacco, indigo,
rice, and even the gold and silver extracted from
the bowels of the earth. Intent on those lucrative
branches of industry, the inhabitants of the New
World pay little attention to those kinds of labor
which occupy a considerable part of the members
of other societies, and depend, in some measure,
for their subsistence, and entirely for every article

of elegance and luxury, upon the ancient conti- SECT.
nent. Thus the Europeans have become manufac- iv.
turers for America, and their industry has been
greatly augmented by the vail demands for sup.
plying the wants of extensive countries, the
population of which is continually increasing.
Nor is the influence of this demand confined
solely to the nations which have a more imme.
diate connexion with the American colonies; it
is felt in every part of Europe that furnilhes any
article exported to them, and gives activity and
vigor to the hand of the artisan in the inland
provinces of Germany, as well as to those in
Great Britain and other countries, which carry
on a dired trade with the New World.

But while the discovery and conquest of Ame-
rica is allowed to be one principal cause of that
rapid increase of induflry and wealth, which is
conspicuous in Europe (luring the two last cen-
turies, some timid theorists have maintained, that
throughout the fame period Europe has been
gradually impoverished, by being drained of its
treasure, in order to carry on its trade with
India. But this apprehension has arisen from
inattention to the nature and use of the precious
metals. They are to be confidered in two differ-
ent lights; either as the signs which all civilized
nations have agreed to employ, in order to efti-
mate or represent the value both of labor and of
all commodities, and thus to facilitate the purchase
of the former, and the conveyance of the latter

S C T. from one proprietor to another; or gold and silver

iv. may be viewed as being themselves commodities

or articles of commerce, for which some equivalent
must be given by such as wish to acquire them.
In this light, the exportation of the precious me.
tals to the Fast mould be regarded; for, as the
nation by which they are exported must purthafe
them with the produce of its own labor and in.
gen iry, this trade muff contribute, though not
in the fame obvious and direc manner as that
with America, towards augmenting the general
ionuftry and opulence of Europe. If England
as the price of lexican and Peruvian dollars
which are necessary for carrying on its trade with
India, must give a certain quantity of its woollen
or cotton cloth or hard.ware, then the hands of
an additional number of manufacturers are rendered
ative, and work to a certain amount must be
executed, for which, without this trade, there
would not have been any demand. The nation
reaps all the benefit arfing from a new creation
of industry. With the gold and silver which her
manufactures have purchased in the Weft, she is
enabled to trade in the markets of the East, and
the exportation of treasure to India, which has
been so much dreaded, instead of impoverilhing,
enriches the kingdom.

VIII. It is to the discovery of the passage to

India by the Cape of Good Hope, and to the
vigor and success with which the Portuguese
prosecuted their conquests and eftablilhed their

dominion there, that Europe has been indebted SECT.
for its preservation from the most illiberal and Iv.
humiliating servitude that ever oppressed polilhed
nations. For this observation 1 am indebted to
an Author, whose ingenuity has illustrated, and
whose eloquence has adorned the History of the
Settlements and Commerce of Modern Nations
in the East and Weft Indies"; and it appears to
me so well founded as to merit more ample in-
veffigation. A few years after the first appearance
of the Portuguese in India, the dominion of the
Mameluks was overturned by the irresistible power
of the Turkish arms , and Egypt and Syria were
annexed as provinces to their empire. If after
this event the commercial intercourse with India
had continued to be carried oi in its ancient
channels, the Turkish Sultans, by being masters
of Egypt and Syria, must have possessed the.abfo-
lute command of it, whether the productions of
the East were conveyed by the Red Sea to Alex-
andria, or were transported by land-carriage from
the Persian Gulf to Conllantinople, and the ports
of the Mediterranean. The monarchs who were
then at the head of this great empire, were neither
destitute of abilities to perceive the pre-eminence
to which this would have elevated them, nor of
ambition to aspire to it. Selim, the conqueror
of the Mameluks, by confirming the ancient
privileges of the Venetians in Egypt and Syria;
and by his regulations concerning the duties on

" M. L'Abbe Raynal.

s e c T. Indian goods, which I have already mentioned,

iv. early discovered his solicitude to secure all the

advantages of commerce with the East to his own
dominions. The attention of Solyman the Mag.
nificent, his successor, seems to have been equally
direced towards the fame object. More enlight-
ened than any monarch of the Ottoman race, he
attended to all the tranfadions of the European
flates, and had observed the power as well as
opulence to which the republic of Venice had
attained by engrofling the commerce of the East.
He now beheld Portugal riCing towards the fame
elevation, by the fame means. Eager to imitate
and to supplant them, he formed a scheme suitable
to his charader for political wisdom and the
appellation of Inflitucor of liRler, by which the
Turkish Historians have diflinguifhed him, and
established, early in his reign, a system of com-
mercial laws in his dominions, by which he hoped
to render Conflantinople the great staple of Indian
trade, as it had been in the prosperous ages of
the Greek empire". For accompli(hing this
scheme, however, he did not rely on the opera.
tion of laws alone; he fitted out about the fame
time a formidable fleet in the Red Sea, under the
conduct of a confidential officer, with such a body
A.C. ss. of janizaries on board of it, as he deemed fuffici-

ent not only to drive the Portuguese out of all
their new settlements in India, but to take poltef-

" Patura, Hill. Venct. lib. vii. p. 89. Sandi, Stor. Civil.
Venez. part. ii. p. 90o.

ion of some commodious station in that country, SECT.
and to ered his standard there. The Portuguese, Iv.
by efforts of valor and constancy, entitled to the
splendid success with which they were crowned,
repulsed this powerful armament in every enter-
prise it undertook, and compelled the ihattered
remains of the Turkish fleet and army to return
with ignominy to the harbours from which they
had taken their departure, with the molt sanguine
hopes of terminating the expedition in a very
different manner". Solyman, though he never
relinquilhed the design of expelling the Portuguese
from India, and of acquiring some eltablifhment
there, was so occupied during the remainder of
his reign, by the multiplicity of arduous operations
in which an insatiable ambition involved him,
that he never had leisure to resume the prosecution
of it with vigor.

If either the measures of Selim had produced

the effect which he had expected, or if the more
adventurous and extensive plan of Solyman had
been carried into execution, the command of the
wealth of India, together with such a marine as
the monopoly of trade with that country has, in
every age, enabled the power which possessed it
to create and maintain, must have brought an
accession of force to an empire already formidable
to mankind, that would have rendered it alto-
gether irresistible. Europe, at that period, was
not in a condition to have defended itself against

Asia de Barros, dec. iv. lib. xc. c. , &c.

s c T. the combined exertions of such naval and military
Iv. power, supported by commercial wealth, and

under the direction of a monarch whose compre.
henfive genius was able to derive from each its
peculiar advantages, and to employ all with the
greatest effet. Happily for the human race, the
despotic fyvlem of Turkish government, founded
on such illiberal fanaticism as has extinguifsed
science in Egypt, in Assyria, and in Greece, its
three favorite mansions in ancient times, was
prevented from extending its dominion over Eu-
rope, and from suppressing liberty, learning, and
taste, when beginning to make successful efforts
to revive there, and again to bless, to enlighten,
and to polilh mankind.

4

# NOTES AND ILLUSTRATIONS.

N O T E S

AND
ILL US TRATIONS.

NOTE I. SECT. I. p. 7.

C R E D U L I T Y and scepticism are two opposite extre-
mes into which men are apt to run, in examining the events
which are said to have happened in the early ages of anti-
quity. Without incurring any suspicion of a propensity to
the latter of there, i may be allowed to entertain doubts
concerning the expedition of Sefollris into India, and his
conquest of that country. - 1. Few fads in ancient history
seem to be better established, than that of the early aver-
sion of the Egyptians to a sea.faring life. Even the power
of despotism cannot at once change the ideas and manners
of a nation, especially when they have been confirmed by
long habit, and rendered sacred by the fantion of religion.
That Sefoftris, in the course of a few years, should have so
entirely overcome the prejudices of a superstitious people,
as to be able to fit out four hundred lhips of force in the
Arabian Gulf, betides another fleet which he had in the
Mediterranean, appears to be extremely improbable. Arma.
ments of such magnitude would require the utmost efforts of
a great and long established maritime power. - a. It is

remarkable that Herodotus, who inquired urith the nmrt
persevering diligence into the ancient history of Egypt, and
who received all the information concerning it which the
priests of Alemphis, Heliopolis, and Thebes, could corn.
municate, Herodot. edit. XVclfelingij, lib. ii. c. ;. al.
though he relates the hltory of Sefoftris at some length, does
not mention his conquest of India. Lib. ii. c. 102, &c.
That tale, it is probable, was invented in the period be.
tween the age of Herodotus and that of Diodorus Siculus,
from whom we receive a particular detail of the Indian
expedition of Sefoftris. His account refts entirely upon the
authority of the Egyptian priests; and Diodorus himself not
only gives it as his general opinion, "that many things
" which they related, flowed rather from a desire to pro.
C mote the honor of their country, than from attentionto
" truth, " lib. i. p. 34. edit. k'efeclingij, Amft 1746;
but takes particular notice that the Egyptian priests, as
well as the Greek writers, differ widely from one another
in the accounts which they give of the actions of Sefoltris,
lib. i. p. 62.-;. Though Diodorus asserts, that in rela-
ting the history of Sefoftris he had fludied to feledt what
appeared to him moes probable, and most agreeable to the
monuments of that monarch ftiil remaining in Egypt, he
has admitted into his narrative many marvellous circum-
stances which render the whole extremely suspicious. The
father of Sefoftris, as he relates, collected all the mal;
children who were born in Egypt on the fame day with
his son, in order that they might be educated, together
with him, conformable to a mode which he prescribed,
with a view of preparing them as proper initruments to
carry into execution the great undertakings for which he
destined Sefoftris. Accordingly, when Sefoftris set out upon
his Indian expedition, which, from circumstances mentioned
by Diodorus, must have been about the fortieth year of
his age, one thousand seven hundred of his youthful affo.
ciates are said to have been till alive, and were intrusted
with high command in his army. But if we apply to the
examination of this itory the certain principles of political

arithmetic,

ari:hmetic, it is evident, that if one thousand fever
hundred of tie riale children burn on .he fame day with
Selbotris were 'Iive when his great expedition commenced,
the number i children burn in [gypt on each day of the
year mult hi :e been at lealt ten thousand, and the po-
pulation of tie kingdom nluit have exceeded sixty millions;
(;oguet, Origine des Loix, des Arcs, &c. tom. ii. p. 12,
&c. A number far beyond the bounds cf credibility, in
a kingdom which, from the accurate calculations of M.
D'Anville, Memoire fur 1'Egypte Anc. et Moderne, p. 2;,
&c. dues not contain more than two thousand one hun-
dred square leagues of habitable country. Another marvel-
lous particular is the description of a ship of cedar, four
hundred and ninety feet in length, covered on the outside
with gold, and on the inside with silver, which Sefofiris
consecrated to the deity who was the chief object of wor.
ship at Thebes. Lib. i. p. 67. Such too is the account
he gives of the Egyptian army, in which, betide fix
hundred thousand infantry, and twenty-four thousand ca-
valry, there were twenty-feven thousand armed chariots.
Ibid. p. 64. -4. There and other particulars appeared so
far to exceed the bounds of probability, that the found
understanding of Strabo the geographer rejected, without
hesitation, the accounts of the Indian expedition of Sefo.
firis; and he not only alferts, in the most explicit terms,
that this monarch never entered India, lib. xv. p. oo007.
C. edit. Cafaub. Ams. 70o7; but he ranks what has been
related concerning his operations in that country, with the
fabulus exploits of Bacchus and Hercules, p. zoo'. D.
1009. B. The philosophical HiRforian of ~lexa-der the Great
seems to have entertained the fame sentiments with refpet
to the exploits of Sefoltris in In3ia. Hill. Ind. c. s. Arrian,
Exped. Alex. edit. Gronov. L. Bat. 1704.-What slender
information concerning India, or its inhabitants, Herodotus
had received, seems to have been derived, not from the
Egyptians, but from the Persians, lib. iii. c. to , which
renders it probable, that in his time there was littit
intercourse between Egypt and India.

Q

NOTE II. SECT. I. p. 8.

W'hrn we cordfcer the extent and effecs of the Phenician

comrmrce , the scanty information concerning it which we
rec:.-e from ancient .:riters, mult, on a first view, appear
£fjrrfine. But when we recoilect that all the Greek Hifto.
ria s. Herodotus excepted,) who give any account of the
Phe: ici r,s. publinfed their uorks long after the destruction of
Tre by Alexander the Gre-t, we will ceale to wonder at
thir not having entered into minute details with refpet to
a tr.'.e which xwas then remnoved to new feats, and carried
on in other channels. But the Soser and opulence of Tsre,
in the Frofperous age of its commerce, must have attrated
general attention. In the prophecies of Ezekiel, ho flou.
rilecd two hundred and sixty years before the fall of Tyre,
there is the most p3ticular account of the nature and variety
of i;s commercial tranfaeions that is to be found in any
ancient w-riter , and .hhich conveys , at the fame time,
a magnificent idea of the extensive power of that state.
Ch. xxvi, xxvii, xxviii.

NOTE Ill. SECT. I. p. 12.

The account given of the revenue of the Persian monarchy

by Hcrodotus is curious, and seems to have been copied
from some public record, xwhich had been communicated to
him According to it, the Persian empire was divided into
t erty Satrapv's, or governments. The tribute levied from
each is specified, an:ounti g in all to I4,q60 EubaEan
talents, which Dr. Arburhnot reckons to be equal to
2.8o-,4I- 1- fterlino mo-.ey; a fum extremely fniall for the
reve.ue of the Great King, and which ill accords with
manx facts concerning the riches, magnificence, and luury
of the Eall, that occur in ancieat authors.

NOTE IV. SECT. I. p. 17.

It in furpriling that Alexander did not receive, in the pro;
vinccs contiguous to India, such an account of the periodic-

r1 rains in that country, as to fliow him the impropricty
f carrning on military operario-s there, while these conti-
nued llis expedition into India commenced towards the
enl of Spring, Arrsan, lib. iv. c 22, when the rains were
alr-ady begun in the mountains from which all the rivers
in the Paniab flow, and of courlf they must have been con.
fiderably fuveiled before he arrived on their banks. Rennell,
p. 268.--lie pafled the Hlydafpes at Alidfummer, about
the height of the rainy season. In a country through which
so many large rivers run, an army on service at this time
of the year mutt have suffered greatly. An accurate defcrip-
tion of the nature of the rains and inundations in this part
of India, is given by Arrian, lh. v c. 9.; and one till
fuller may be found in Strabo, lib. xv. rot. -It was of
what they suffered by these that Alexander's soldiers com-
piained, Strabo, lib. xv. 0lor. D.; and not without rea-
son , as it had rained incefrarntly during seventy days, Diod.
Sicul. xvii. c. 4. - A circumlrance which marks the ac.
curacy uith which Alexander's officers had attended to every
thing in that part of Indlia, dcferves notice. Ariftobulus,
in h;s Journal, which I have mentioned, takes notice that,
tlough heavy rains fell in the mountains, and in the country
near to them, in the plains belowv ; ot so much as a shower
fell. Strabo , lib. xv. io 3. B. wo!,. B. Major Ren-
nell was informed hv n perron of character, who had resided
in this d:Rrid of Irlia , which is now seldom visited by
Europ.eants tl.ht during u!rcat rart of the S W. monsoon
Or at least in rhe monors of J:lyv, Puguft, and part of
September, r.hich i the r:iid:v s:,.on in most other parts
of India, the atniofrlphere in the Delta of the Trduis is ge-
"nerlly clou'ded, hut ro rain f; lls. except very renr the
sea. Indeed, very few /howers fall during the whole season.

0 a

Captain Hamilton relates, that when he visited Tatta, no
rain had fJllen for three )ears before. Memoirs, p. 28R.-
Tamerlane, who, by the vicinity of the feat of his govern.
ment to India, had the means of being isell informed con.
cer.ing the nature of the country , avoided the error of
Alexander, and made his Indian campaign during tie dry
feafin. As Nadir Shah, both shen he invaded India, A.
D. 171$, and in his return next year, marched through
the fame countries with Alexander, and nearly in the fame
line of direction, nothing can give a more striking idea of the
persevering ardor of the lacedonian conqueror, than the
description of the difficulties which Nadir Shah had to fur-
mount, and the harJlhips ihich his army endured. Though
pofli'Ted of abfoiute power and immense wealth, and diftin.
guifhsd no less by great talents than long experience in the
conduct of war , he had the mortification to lose a great part
of his troops in croiling the rivers of the Panjab, in pene.
trating through the mountains to the north of India, and
in co:i.,cts uith the fierce natives inhabiting the countries
which firetch from the banks of the Oxus to the frontiers
of Persia. An interefling account of his retreat and sus-
ferings is given in the Memoirs of Khojeh Abdulkurreem,
a Calhmerian of diftinion, who served in his army.

NOTE V. SECT. I. p. 19.

That a fleet so numerous should have been collected in

such a fltort time, is apt to appear, at first fight, incredible.
'Arrian, howe\er, allures us, that in specifying this number,
he followed Ptolemyn, the son of Laeus , whose authority he
confidered tJ be of the grearet weight, lib. vi. c. ;. But
as the P.,ijib cou-,ry is full of navigable rivers, on which
all the in:ercourfe among the natives was carried on, it
abounded u\ith veKlis ready cor,ftucthd to the conqueror's
hands, so tht lie iniht caiilv coilect that number. if we
could give credit to the ac:ount of :he invasion of India by
$crmiramis, no fewer than four thousand vessels were afflnem

bled in the Indus to oppose her fleet. Diod. Sicul. lib,
ii. c. 74.-lc is remarkable that when Mahmoud of Gaz-
nah invaded India, a fleet was collected on the Indus to
rppofe him, consisting of the fame number of vefiels. We
le..rn from the A)een Akbery, that the inhabitants of this
p-rt of India frill continue to carry on all their communica-
tion .Xith each other by water; the inhab;tants of the Circar
of Tatta alone have not leTs than forty thousand vessels of
various conltruc'ions. Vol. ii. p. 14;.

NOTE VI. SECT. I. p. 20

All there particulars are taken from the Indian HmiRory

of Arrian , a work diftere:.t from that already mentioned,
and or.e of the most curious treatises transmitted to us from
aitiquity. The sift part of it conlfits of extracts from the
account given by Nearchus of the climate and foil of India,
a'ld the manners of the nateies. The second contains that
officer's journal of his vo!age from the mouth of the Indus
to the bottom of the l'cr{in Gulf. The perusal of it giies
rife to several obfcrvaticns. - 1. It is remark::ble that nei-
ther Nearchus nor Ptolemy , nor Aliftobulus , nor even
Arian , once mention the voyage of Scylax. This could
rot proceed from their being unacquainted v.ith it, for Hc-
rl)ditus was a favorite author in the hands of cvcry Greek
v:;o had any pretensions to literature, It u3as probably
occalioned by the re:asons which they had to difiruft the
veracity of Sclax, of which I have c.lleaily ea.:en notice.
Accordingly, in a speech wl.ich Arrian Futs into the mouth
of Alexander, hIe asserts that, except Bacchus, he was
tle fir[t who had paflcd the Indus; which imi;lics, that he
disbel;cved what is related co;ncer;ir:g Scyl;.x, and was not
atq~iinitcd with uhat Darius liH;ffptes is said to hI;ve done
i;i iidcr to subjet that part of India to the Persian crown.
Irrin, vii. c. 1o. This opinion is confirmed by Mega-
fihcnes, who resided a conliderable time in India. He
alTerts that, except Bacchus and Hercules, (to whose fabu-

0O

1bus e';--;ions Straho is zftonifhed that he should have
F'v-n a-y crce it 'b. :'.

I p.

x o

I c . I).' Alexaindir uas

t:-,e 1 '

tfi ¶

!v.!-,3 ? i s; e !: '1 a

: ; Arria:. I Ift. Indic. c. 5.

XXe a-e i.j.:-m_ h rri'j, , th. t!he Afl'icari, and otiler
reonp v.h r. ,!i fT . that c:u :try, vich is now called tlte
1i c?.,n .f FC( nhi r, paid tribu e. si;ft to the ,nrfyrins,
anJ af:c-:r:is, to tne .Ved'es an] Persians ; His. Inri.
c. i. -. ahi t' fcr:le Frn-inccs on the noitlh-weft cf
thI-d, s e

l-'s v acie-'.! rCeJ:o-d to be part of Indii,

it i; pr o:.'he that ,!'.: 1-s le i:.d fon:n thcn i' the fnum
rre:rtonrd in the tr bte-t r(l , fronm hich lierodotus drew
1'i{ account cf the ann;i:l ircl lue of the Perlian enmire,
an:d th t ncne of the prr .'i-ccs to the south of the Inrus
m-ere e.-rr subi-c , the !:i-;s of Perfa.-:. This voyuge
of Nearchus assrd; f. me ft ki'i: ir.cta ccs of the imperfct
klnowvleJde vhich the a-;ci,- s iad cf any nuvlgation diffir.
cnt fromn that to wHlih :'.V- \rere accuftlomed in the Ale-
di:erra'ean. Tho':Qh tl-e c:terrr;fiag genius and enlarged
views of AleanJi-.r promen-rrd him to attempt cpening an
inter;orfL by fca b :'.. ec I;-dt and his Persian dJminio-,,
vet botth h- ani Neirchrs knew o little of the ocean x.hich
the% 'i!l eJ to ex-lre?, as to be apprthe.nfive that it might
be found i cn:m.I,_' e to i '.- at i . on account o'f imper-
vious liral; , or c.- hr c' t!s. i 1. Indic. c. zo. Q Curt.
lib- i:. c. 9. v( I ,'n ' tcc t arrived neir the nouth cf
the 1-d s, the ;:. ),In:.:e exei:cd by the t,:raordinary
f:-.k arnd ehbb c' ti'c i' i t!'e ';

li, n ocean a phen;(n: ecn

(accnrdi ; g o rria' v. it1: :i ch a'lcxander and his fi,:;!i!r
,c;e unc.:uaintr. .

. v'. c. 19 is anoth:r proof of ti'.;r

ic-.o-r-e !n rn:: -:'. ,'* !;'icc-.c Nor is there any rc;icr,, t'
b0 '- i at '- '

: .o:-;mcll t, C the ti.es are I. '.

rerc--' :'. i e

-_ .:cr

, ,

' . i: d i,-h the lrn".:-

]ed e o' t- t; : - ' ! 3;:-I.Ide^ -' did r..-,t c,:.: ,' r
tic Cf -c rc:,: , -'.:.n ri.e Si 1.5: c rrc I th-r vc:i i:,;s

r. : ' -' e c:-
"r! -; .' ; : e A li:r 'c O,-.:1, Or

'.: '.,- ti'l'sv. S.; ,:, ...' e-l . f ' ".,': ,,'- : '

:. ,r toi t'-cnm.
Ccc r' dc'.c:.:.iz s ::.. _::; .-..;.: .,us '::i. d.l.ii.. , t a i;,xi,-tii.e,

which greatly damaged the fleet wikh which he invaded
Britain, and acknowlcd>es that it was an appearance wich
which they were unacquainted; Bell. Gaiiic. lib. iv. c. 29.
The ti:es on the coast near the mouth of the Indus are
remark.bly hi hh, and the effeds of then very great, efpe-
ciaiyV that sudden and abrupt influx of the tide into the
rr.outl-s of rivers or narrow ftrairs which is known in India
by the name of T7he Bore, and is accurately defer:bed by
AlSajor Rennell, Introd. xxiv. MTem. 278. In the PeripluI
Nlaris Er'chlai, p. 26., there high tides are mentioned,
and the description of them nearly resembles th'-t of the
Bore. A very exaggerated account of the tides in the Indian
ocean is given by Pliny, Nat. Hist. lib. xiii. c. 25. Mlajor
Rennell teens to thinlk, that Alexander and his followers
could not be so entirely unacquainted with the phenomenon
of the tiJes, as Herodotus had informed the Greeks,
" that in the Red Sea there was a regular ehb and flow of
c" the tide every day;" lib. ii. c. i r. This is all the ex-
planation of that phenomenon given by Herodotus. But
among the ancients there occur inflances of inattention to
facts, related by refplectble authors, which appear furpri-
sing in modern times. Though Iierodotus, as I have just
now oblfrvd , g.ve an account of the voyage performed
by Sc;\lax at ciltiderable lcng:h, neiih.r \lexaiider. nor
his IIilto-ians, t.:ke any nouice of that event. I lhall after-
wards have occasion to micnion a more remarkable intlance
of the inattention of la'cr wi'itcrs to an accurate description
vhiich Herodotus had given of the Calfia.n Sea. From these,
and other similar i:iitnces which migit 'lave been produ-
ced, we may conclude, that the iii;ht mention of the
rcgul:r flow and ebb of tide in the Red Sea, is not a
sufficient re-Cfon for rejecting, as incredible, Arrian's ac-
count of the surprise of Alexan;der's soldiers when they
firit beheld the extraordinary ciffecs of the tide at the mouth
of the Indus. - . The courfc of Nearchus's voyage, the
promontories, the creeks, the rivers, the cities, the moun.
tains, which came fucceflively in his view, are so clearly
dcfcribcd, and the distances of such as were molt worthy

0 4

of netice are so difinCtly marked, that M. D'Anville, by
cormarirg these xi:th the actual pefition of the country,
according to the best accounts of it, ancient as well as
rro:'.ern, has been able to point out molt of the places
which Ne:rchus mentions. nith a degree of certainty which
does as much honor to the veracity of the Grecian navi-
gator. as to the induftiy, learring. and penetration of the
French pgo.erapher Miem. de Literat. tom. xxx p. 2, &c.

In mnodern times the Red Sea is a name appropriated

to the Arabian Gulf, but the lncicntt denominated the ocean
v-kt:h fteetches from that Gulf to India, the Ery!hraan Sea,
frum l:nS Er thra , of whomn no:hirg more is known than
the rauim. which in the (reel; language lignifies red. From
this cal'Fal meanine of the word. it cnme to be believed,
that it -as of a different color from other seas, and con.
fequently of more dangerous navigation.

NOTE VII. SEC T. 1. p. 6.

Alexander was so intent on renderingr this union of his

subjects complete, that afrcr his death there was found in
hii tablets or commentaries, (amnong other rmna;ficent
schemes which he medinated ) a resolution to build fcveral
new cities, fume in Afi, and some in Europe, and to
people tl-ofe in Asia %ith Eu-opeans, and those in Europe
with Asiatics, " that, (ayvs the H,llorian) by intermarriages,
' and excharge of good (ffices, the inhabitants of these
u two gre3t continents nmight be gradually moulded into a
" Gmilaritv cf sentiments. and become attached to each
x other * ith mutual affection. " Diod. Sicul. lib. xviii. c. 4.

NOTE VIII. SECT. I p. . -

Tt feemn tn bh an oplnio- t"nc-allv

rc;ieved . th:lt Alv.

ender bui'j o-'v t-wo c;;ics in 1''a , Ni :. anti I'u- rnha.',
Ciuated on the Hsddfpes the mo;rn C(.heluni, and that

Crnterus fucerirtended the building of both. But it is
evident. friiim rrian, lib. v. c ult., that he built a third
cityv n the Acefines . now the .ena'ib, under the direcion
of HtFI.Ltlion; and if it wes his object to retain the com-
mandc of the country, a place of strength on some of the
river· to the south of the Hydafpes seems to have been
receftfry to that purpole. Thii part of India has been so
little vilited in modern times, that it is impolfible to point
out with precision the fitiation of these ciries. If P. Ties-
fenthaler were well foundcd in hiis con)ecdure, that the river
now calied Rauvee is tle Acefiles of Arrian, Bernoulli,
vol. i. p. ;9.. it is probable that this city was built some-
uhere near Lalhore, one of the most important stations in
that part of Iniia , and recko!.ed in the Aveen Akbery to
be a city of very high antiquity. But Major Kennell, in
my opinion, gives good reasons for supposing the Jenaub
to be the Accfines of the ancients.

NOTE IX. SECT. I. p. 28.

The religious scruples which prevented the Persians from

making any voyage by fen , were known to the ancients.
Pliny relates of one of the Ilagi, who was sent on an embassy
trom Tiridates to the emperor Nero, " Navigare noluerat,

quoniam exfpuere in Maria, a:iifque mortalium neceffitati-

" bus violare naturam eam, fas non putant; " Nat. Hilt.
lib. xxx. c. 2. This aversion to the sea they carried so far,
that, according to the oblervation of a well-informed Historian,
there was not a city of any note in their empire built upon the
sea-coast; Ammian. Marcel. lib. xxiii c. 6. We learn from
Dr. Hyde, how intimately these ideas were connected with the
doctrines of Zcroafter; Rel. Vet. l'erf. cap. vi. In all the
wars of the Persians with Greece, the fleets of the Great King
conlilted entirely of snip.s furnilfled by the Phenicians, Syri-
an,, the conquered provinces of the Lesser Asia, and the
ifands adjacent. Herodotus and Diodorus Siculus mention
the quota furnished by each country, in order to compose

the feet of twelve hundred ships with which Xcrxes invaded
Greece, and among thTee there is not one belonging to Perfa.
At the fame time it is proper to observe. that accord,ng to
Herodotus, Hwhofe authority is unexceptionable with reg-rd
to this point, the fleet was under the command of Ariabi.
gines, a Fn of Darius, who had several satraps of high
rank under his command, and both Persians and Medes
served as soldiers on board of it; Hlerod. lib. vii. c. 96,
97. By what motives, or what aethority, thev were in.
duced to acl in this manner, I cann,,t explain. From f:nme
religious scruples, similar to those of the Persians, m-, v of
the natives of Indoltan, in our own time, refuse to emnh-k
on board a ship. and to serve at fca; a.:d vet, o:i foe
occasions, the fepivs in the service of the European powers
have got the better of thefr scruples.

' OTE X. SECT. . I. F. 9

N1. TE BARON DE S.I.NTr'C-nl , in hiis in au nd

learned Critiq: c'es l ii:;.r: s .i \xvaiid;c Ie GrMld , p. q6,
seems to entert,;' frnce ','! hit i i:h refrpcc. t.) the nuni-cr
ofthe cities ahich .\i xun.r i c fa{. to have bult. P!utarih
de Fort. Alex. fiarms, that he fL;n'led no fewer than
seventy. It appears from n.,n\ . a!T.:;,s in ancient authors,
that the buildi..g of cities, cr, what mna be conGdered ;
the fame, the eft.ib'.;fn:in: of fbtriif.ed ftatiors, uas the
mode of main:taii. - their authorit- in the conquered na-
tions, atopted not ,nly by Alex:indcr, but by his iuccl.
fors. Seeucus and nctioc';us, to v.hcne the gredatr p.,.t
of the Peri an en-pi-e becan;e f bj.ct. were no lets renm:r.-
ahle f.-r fudini-t -new\ c::i.s ian Aie'andcr, and tliel
cieis seem fuli; to lave anf. cre] the puripoes of ti:e
founders, as they e:Tc'ru:ili; pcvtr.tcd (as I fiaall af:;r-
Aarcs have cccafon to obierve) the revolt of the con-
quered provinces. Though the Greeks, ani.nated with the
love ot liber:y a'.d 0o thcer native country, refused to lfttle
in tle i'.rdiaa enirire hiie under the dominion of its native

monarchs, even when al ired hy the prifpet of great
aiv;niltage. as M. de Saiantc-Croix' rer.l: s, 1-:' cife became
peri,&ly dicirerc, !wen that cmpire r v,',s ful'jected to their
oun dumihni,n anid t!,ey fre::lc : :re, nat as fubje cs,
but us r:ilers. Lc.h !lexander ard ins fLccefTrs disco-
vered mnuch dil'crnnicnt in cl.ti'f!! tie situation of the cities
wxhich they built. Se'eucia, :il v i Scle:cus founded, was
inferior only to Alexandrii in number of inlabitants, in
wealth, and in importarce; Mir. Gibbon, vul. i. p. 274.
Al. D'Anville, a.em. de Literat. xxx.

NOTE XI. SECT. I. p. ;2.

IT is from Juflin we receive the slender knowledge we

have of the proirefs v.hich Seleucus made in India; lib. xv.
c. 4. But we c:n!lot reiv on his evidence, unless when it
Is confirmed by the tcitim(eny of other authors. Plutarch
seems to affTrt, that Selcucus had penetrated far into India;
but that refpetable writer iq nmoie emninent for his diCcern-
ment of characters, and his happy felediun of those cir-
cumftances which mark and difcrimninate them, than for
the accuracy of his hiltorical researches. Pliny, whose au.
thority is of greater weight, seems to confiJer it as certain,
that Seleucus had carried his arms into diftrids of Indii
which Alexandcr never visited; Piin. Nat. Hill. lib. vi.
c. 17. The paliFige in iwhich this is mentioned, is some-
wlhat ohfcure, hut it seems to imply, that Seleucus had
mariched from tie ilypha{is to the lyfudrus, from thence
to Palibothra , and froi that to the mouth of the Ganges.
The distances of the 1 incipal ftitions in this march are
narl;ed, amn;t::ini: to 2244^. Roman miles. In this fenfc,
\1. BI.ye r iiimdcrsi2lnds t!e wor !s of Pliny; Hiltor. Regni
Gr!;:orun; B13lcrauii, p. ; 7. But to me it appears highly
improcable, t!:ht :, Irdiain expedition of Seleucus could
have conti;ued so Io;ig as to allow time for operations of
fuci exte;it. IF SciCucus had advanced as far into India
as the mouth of the cGanges, the ancients would have had

a more accurate knosledge of that part of the country than
they seem ever to have possesed.

NOTE XII. SECT. I. p. ;;.

sMAJOR RExNELIT. gives a magnificent idea of this, by

informing us, that the Ganges, after it has " escaped from
c' the mountainous tract in which it had wandered above
c eight hundred miles; " 'lem. p. c;i. "receives in its
<t course through the plains eleven rivers, some of them
'c as large as [he Rhine, and ninne smaller than the Tha-
C' mes, besides as mans more of lefTer note;" p. 257.

NOTE XIII. SECT. I. p. 3.

1N fixing the pof-i n of Palibnthra, I have ventured to

d;ser from IVajor .enrell, and I vcrture to do so ith
diffidence. Accordi'g to Strabo, I',il ,:hra vas fi:nated at
the junction of the C rges ar.d anrTthrr river; lib. xv.
p. irc8. A. Arrian is fill more ey-.licit. lie places Pali
bothra at the cor.flur.ce of the G(; -ges and Etranaboas, the
last of x\hich he describes as less than the Ganges or Indus,
but greater than any other knoun river; Ilift. Ind. c. Io.
This description of its firtuatin coTrerponds exactly with
that of 'i!bhabad. P. Eoudier , to gxhufe ohfervations the
geography of India is much irdtebtcd, fa;,s. that the .lunna,
at i:s junti;on with the Ganges, ap;-eared to him not in-
ftrior in niagnittOie to t!-it ,i;cr; D'Anville, Anciq. de
l'Inde, p. ;. Aiiahabk is t re ra.,e vih was given
to that city by the errrercr A.kbar, xuho creceed a tfrong
frrtrefs there; an elec:art de'in'a;Lon of x.hich is published
hy Mr. lio.lges, No-. IV. of lii Sclect Views in India. Its
a'cient name, bv which it is 1:ill liown among the liin-
dr. ,s, is Praeg, or /'.'.', ard t'e perp!e of the district

c-- ca''ci Pr;:c',. 'i;i. : Dbears a near resemblance to Pralij,
'e an.Cr iE appe!iation of the kingdom of which Palibothra

was the capital; P. Tieffenthaler chez Bernoulli, tom. L
223. D'Anville, p. <6. Allahahad is such a noted feat of
Hindoo devotion, that it is denominated The King of IVor
shipped Places; Ayeen Akbery, vol. ii. p. ;3. " The terri.
"tory around it, to the extent of forty miles, is deemed
"holy ground. The Hindoos believe, that when a man
"dies in this place, whatever he wishes, for he will obtain
" in his next regeneration. Although they teach that fui.
' cide in general will be punished with torments hereafter,
" yet they confider it as meritorious for a man to kill
" himself at Allahabad;" Ayeen Akbery, iii. 2 6. P. Ties.
fenthaler describes the various objecs of veneration at
Allahabad, which are itill visited with great devotion by an
immense number of pilgrims, Bernoulli, tom. i. 224.
From all these circumstances, we may conclude it to be a
place of great antiquity, and in the fame situation with tho
Palibothra of antiquity.

Major Rennell has been induced to place Palibothra on

the fame site with Patna, chiefly by two considerations. -
I. From having learned that on or near the site of Patna
flood anciently a very large city named Putelpoot-ber or
patalipputrar, which nearly resembles the ancient name of
Palibothra. Although there is not now a confluence of two
rivers at Patna, he was informed that the jundion of the
Soane with the Ganges, now twenty - two miles above Patna,
was formerly under the walls of that city. The rivers of
India sometimes change their course in a singular manner,
and he produces some remarkable instances of it. But evea
thould it be allowed, that the accounts which the natives
give of this variation in the course of the Soane were per.
fedly accurate, I question, whether Arrian's account of the
magnitude of the Erranaboas'be applicable to that river,
certainly not so juitly as to the Jumna. - . He seems to
have been influenced, in some degree, by Pliny's Itinerary,
or Table of Diftnces from Taxila (the modern Attock)
to the mouth of the Ganges; Nat. Hill. lib. vi. c. 17.
But the dilfances in thac Itinerary ate marked so inaccu.
lately, and in some inflances axe so palpably erroneous, tha

one cannot found upon them with much security. Ac.
cording to it, Palibo;hra is situated four hundred and
twenty-five miles below the co:fluence of the Jumna and
Ganges. The actual distance, hos ever, between Allahabad
and Patna, is not more than two hundred British mi!er.
A difacreemert so considerable cannot be accounted for,
without fuppofirg foine extraordinary error in the Itinerary,
or that the point of co.flux of the Jumna with the Gaages
has undergone a change. For the former of there fuppoli.
tions there is no authority (as far as I know) from any
manuscript, or for the latter from any tradition. I\lajor
Rennell has produced the rearons which led him to sup.
pose the fi:e of Palibothra to be the fame with that of Patna;
Memoirs, p. 49-54. Some of the objecions which might
be made to thrs supposition he has foreseer, and endeavoured
to obviate, and after all that I have added to them, 1 shall
not be surprised , if, in a geographical difcufion , my
ieaders are disposed to prefer his decision to mine.

NOTE XIV. SECT. I. p. 35.

I do r.ct mention a short inroal into India by Antiochus

the Great, about one hundred and ri:;ety-feven years poilcrior
to the i.vafion of his ancestor Seleucus. W\e know nothing
more of this transaction, than that :he Syrian monarch , after
finishing the -war he carried on against the two revolted pro-
vinces of Partha ard Bactria, entered India. and corclu.
ding a peace uith Sop! agaferus. a king of the country. receiv-
ed from him a number of elephants, and a fum of money;
Pohb. lib. x. p. <97, &c lib. xi. p. 6,i. edit. Cafaub.
Juftin lib. xv. c. 4. Ea)er's lllt. Regn. Gracor. Buclr.
p. 69, &c.

NOTE XV. SECT. T. . 37.

A FACT cursorily related by Strabo. anrd \l-;ch Ihar efcped
the icquifitive irdultry of 1l. de Guignrcs, coirCides

remarkably with the narrative of the Chinere writers, and
confirms it. The Greeks, he fays, were deprived of Bac.
tria by tribes or hordes of Scythian Nomades, who came
from the country beyond the Jaxartes, and are known by
the names of Afij, Pafiani, Tachari, and Sacarauli; Strab.
lib. xi. p. 779. A. The Nomades of the ancients were
nations who, like the Tartars, subsisted entirely, as shep-
herds, without agriculture.

NOTE XVI. SECT. I p. 39.

As the diltance of Arfinoe, the modern Suez, from the

Nile, is considerably less than that between Berenice and
Coptos, it was by this route that all the commodities im.
ported into the Arabian Gulf, might have been conveyed
with most expedition and least expense into Egypt. But the
navigation of the Arabian Gulf, which even in the present
improved state of nautical science is flow and difficult, was
in ancient times confidered by the nations around it to be
so extremely perilous, that it led them to give such names
to several of its promontories, bays, and harbours, as
convey a striking idea of the imprelfion which the dread
of this danger had made upon their imagination. The entry
into the Gulf they called Babhelmandeb, the gate or port of
affdiion. To a harbour not far distant, they gave the name
of Mlete , i. e. Death. A headland adjacent they called
Gardefan, the Cape of Burial. Other denominations of
similar import are mentioned by the author to whom I am
indebted for this information. Bruce's Travels, vol. i.
p. 442, &c. It is not surprising then, that the staple of
Indian trade should have been transferred from the north.
ern extremity of the Arabian Gulf to Berenice, as by this
change a dangerous navigation was greatly Ihortened. This
seems to have been the chief reason that induced Ptolemy
to eltablilh the port of communication with India at Bere.
nice, as there were other harbours on the Arabian Gulf
which were conliderably nearer than it to the Nile. At a

later period, after the ruin of Coptos by the Emperor
Dioclerian, we are informed by Abulieda, Defcripr. Egypt.
edit. .ichaeis, p. 77, that Indian commodities were con.
veyed from the Red Sea to the Nile, by the shortest route,
viz. from Coffeir, probably the Philotcras Portus of Ptolemy,
to Cous, the Vicus Apollinis, a journey of four davy.
The fame account of the distance was given by the na.
tives to Dr. Pococke, Travels, vol. i. p. 87. In confe.
quence of this, Cous, from a finall village, became the
city in upper Egypt next in magnitude to Foftat, or Old
Cairo. In process of time, from causes which I cannot
explain, the trade from the Red Sea by Cofeeir removed
to Kene, farther down the river than Cous, Abulf. p. 1;.
77. D'Anville Egypte, 196-2oo. In modern times, all
the commodities of India imported in Egypt, are either
brought by sea from Gidda to Suez, and thence carried
on camels to Cairo, or are conveyed by land carriage by
the caravan, returning from the pilgrimage to Mecca,
Niebuhr Voyage, tom. i. p 224. Volney, i. t88, &c.
This, as far as I have been able to trace it, is a com.
plete account of all the different routes by which the pro-
dudions of the East have been conveyed to the Nile,
from the first opening of that communication. It is singular
that P. Sicard, Mlem. des Millions' dans le Levant. tom. ii.
p. I 7, and fame other respectable writers, should suppose
Coffeir to be the Berenice founded by Ptolemy,' although
Ptolemy has laid down its latitude at 21; So', and Strabo
has described it as nearly under the fame parallel with that
of Syene, lib. ii. p. 19 , D. In co!.fequence of this mif-
take, Pliny's computation of the dillarce between Berenice
and Coptos, at two hundred and fiftv-eight miles, has
been deemed erroneous. Pococke, p. ?7. But as Pliny
not only mentions the total diftalce. but names the differ-
ent stations in the journey, and specifies the number of
miles between each; and as the lPinerarv of Antoninus
coincides exactly with his account, D'Anvi'le Egypte, P-

r, there is no reason to call in question the accuracy
of it.

NOTE

NOTE XVII. SECT. I. p. 41.

MAJOR RENNELL is of opinion, "' that under the Pto-

lemies , the Egyptians extended their navigation to the ex-
treme point of the Indian continent, and even failed up
the Ganges to Palibothra, " now Patna. Introd. p. xxxvi.
ltut had it been usual to fail up the Ganges as high as
Patna, the interior parts of India mutl have been better
known to the ancients than they ever were, and they
would not have continued to derive their information con-
cerning them from Megafthenes alone. Strabo begins his
description of India in a very remarkable manner. He re-
quests his readers to peruse with indulgence the account
which he gives of it, as it was a country very remote, and
few persons had visited it; and of there, many having seen
only a small part of the. country, related things either
from hear-say, or, at the belt, what they had hastily re-
marked while they passed through it in the course of mili.
tary service, or on a journey. Strabo, lib. xv. p. xoos. B.
He takes notice that few of the traders from the Arabian
Gulf ever reached the Ganges. Ibid. o006. C. He asserts,
that the Ganges enters the sea by one mouth, ibid. ot ol. C.;
an error into which he could not have fallen if the
navigation of that river had been common in his time.
He mentions indeed the failing up the Ganges, ibid. itoo,
but it is cursorily in a single sentence; whereas, if such a
considerable inland voyage of above four hundred miles,
through a populous and rich country, had been customary,
or even if it had ever been performed by the Roman, or
Greek, or Egyptian traders, it must have merited a parti-
cular description, and must have been mentioned by Pliny
and other writers, as there was nothing similar to it in
the pratice of navigation among the ancients. It is observed
by Arrian (or whoever is the author of the Periplus Marin
Erythrai), that previous to the discovery of a new route to
India, which shall be mentioned afterwards, the commerce

p

with that country was carried on in finall vessels which failed
round every bay, p. ;2. Ap. luilf. Geogr. lin. Veffls
of such light conftrudtion, and which followed this mode
of failing, were ill fitted for a voyage so distant as that
round Cape Comorin, and up the bay of Bengal, to Patna.
It is not improbable, that the merchants whom Strabo
mentions as having reached the Ganges, may have travelled
thither by land, either from the countries towards the
mouth of the Indus, or from some part of the Malabar
coast, and that the navigation up the Ganges, of which
he casually takes notice, was performed by the natives in
vessels of the country. This opinion derives some con-
firmation from his remarks upon the bad ftrucrture of the
vessels which frequented that part of the Indian ocean. From
his description of them, p. io z2. C. it is evident that they
were veftels of the country.

NOTE XVIII. SECT. I. P. 42.

THE erroneous ideas of many intelligent writers of anti.

quity with refpec' to the Caspian Sea, though well known
to every man of letters, are so remarkable, and afford
such a striking example of the imperfection of their geo-
graphical knowledge, that a more full account of them
may not only be acceptable to Come of my readers, but
in endeavouring to trace the various routes by which the
commodities of the East were conveyed to the nations of
Europe, it becomes necessary to enter into some detail
concerning their various sentiments with respect to this
matter. i. According to Strabo, the Caspian is a bay, that
communicates with the great Northern ocean, from which
it issues at first, by a narrow strait, and then expands
into a sea extending in breadth five hundred stadia, lib. xi.
p. ?7. A. With him Pomponius Mela agrees, and de-
scribes the strait by which the Caspian is conneced with
the ocean, as of considerable length, and so narrow tha.
it had the appearance of a river, lib. iii. c. St

Pliny likewise gives a similar description of it, Nat. Hist.
lib. vi. c. 13. In the age of Justinian, this opinion con-
cerning the communication of the Caspian Sea with the
ocean, was still prevalent; Corm. Indicopl. Topog. Christ.
lib. ii. p. 138. C. 2. Some early writers , by a mistake
Rill more singular, have supposed the Caspian Sea to be
conneced with the Euxine. Quintus Curtius, whole igno.
rance of geography is notorious, has adopted this error,
lib. vii. c. 7. 3. Arrian, though a much more ju-
dicious writer, and who by residing for some time in the
Roman province of Cappadocia, of which he was go-
vernor, might have obtained more accurate information,
declares in one place, the origin of the Caspian Sea to be
fill unknown, and is doubtful whether it was connected
with the Euxine, or with the great Eastern ocean which
surrounds India; lib. vii. c. 16. In another place he as-
ferts, that there was a communication between the Caspian
and the Eastern ocean; lib. v. c. 26. These errors appear
more extraordinary, as a just description had been given
of the Caspian by Herodotus, near five hundred years before
the age of Strabo. " The Caspian," fays he , " is a Tea by
itself, unconneted with any other. Its length is as much
as a vessel with oars can fail in fifteen days, its greatest
breadth as much as it can fail in eight days;" lib. i. c. 20o,
Aristotle describes it in the fame manner, and with his
usual precision contends that it ought to be called a great
lake not a sea; Meteorolog. lib. ii. Diodorus Siculus
concurs with them in opinion, vol. ii. lib. xviii. p. 26r.
None of those authors determine whether the greatest length
of the Caspian was from North to South, or from East to
Weft. In the ancient maps which illustrate the geography
of Ptolemy, it is delineated, as if its greatest length
extended from East to Weft. In modern times the firit
information concerning the true form of the Caspian which
the people of Europe received, was given by Anthony
Jenkinfon, an English merchant, who with a caravan from
Russia travelled along a conliderable part of its coast in the
)ear i5s8; Hakluyt Collect. vol. i. p. 334. The accuracy

P

of Jenkinfon's description was confirmed by an actual Survey
of that sea made by order of Peter the Great, A. D. 1717,
and it is now ascertained not only that the Caspian is
unconnected with any other sea, but that its length from
North to South is considerably more than its greatest breadth
from East to X'eft. From this detail, however, we
learn how the ill-founded ideas concerning it, which
were generally adopted, gave rife to various wild schemes
of conveying Indian commodities to Europe by means of its
supposed communication with the Euxine sea, or with the
Northern ocean. It is an additional proof of the attention
of Alexander the Great to every thing conducive to the
improvement of commerce, that a short time before
his death he gave directions to fit out a squadron in the
Caspian, in order to survey that sea, and to discover
whether it was connected either with the Euxine or Indian
ocean; Arrian. lib. vii c. 16.

NOTE XIX. SECT. I. p. 5I.

From this curious detail, we learn how imperfect ancient

navigation was, even in its molt improved Rate. The
voyage from Berenice to Ocelis, could not have taken
thirty days, if any other course nad been held than that
offervilely following the windings of the coast. The voyage
from Ocelis to Mufiris would be (according to Major
Rennel) a fifteen days run for an European ship in the
modem ft-le of navigation, being about seventeen hundred
and fifty marine miles, on a fireight course; Introd. p. xxxvii.
It is remarkable, that though the Periplus Maris Erythraei
was written after the voyage of Hippalus, the chief object
of the author of it is to describe the ancient course along
the coafls of Arabia and Persia, to the mouth of the Indus,
and from thence down the western shore of the continent to
Mlufiris. I can account for this. only by supposing, that
from the unwillingness of mankind to abandon old habits,
the greater part of the traders from Berenice till continued

to follow that route to which they were accustomed. To
go from Alexandria to Mufiris, required (according to
Pliny) ninety-four days. In the year r78g, the Boddam,
a ship belonging to the English Eaft-India Company, of a
thousand tuns burden, took only fourteen days more to
complete her voyage from Portsmouth to Madras. Such are
the improvements which have been made in navigation.

NOTE XX. SECT. II. P. 53.

It was the opinion of Plato, that in a well-regulated

commonwealth the citizens should not engage in commerce,
nor the state aim at obtaining maritime power. Commerce,
he contends, would corrupt the purity of their morals,
and by entering into the fea-fervice, they would be accustomed
to find pretexts for jutifying a conduct so inconsistent with
what was manly and becoming, as would gradually relax
the ftridnefs of military discipline. It had been better for
the Athenians, he afterts, to have continued to fend annually
the sons of seven of their principal citizens to be devoured
by the Minotaur, than to have changed their ancient
manners, and to have become a maritime power. In that
perfect republic, of which he delineates the form, he
ordains that the capital ihould be situated at leaf ten miles
from the sea; De Legibus, lib. iv. ab initio. These ideas
of Plato were adopted by other philosophers. AriRotle
enters into a formal difcuflion of the question, whether a
State rightly contfituted should be commercial or not; and
though abundantly disposed to espouse sentiments opposite
to those of Plato, he does not venture to decide explicitly
with refpecd to it; De Repub. lib. vii. c. 6. In ages when
such opinions prevail, little information concerning com-
merce can be expected.

P a

NOTE XXI. SECT. II. p. 56.

Pliny, lib. ix. c. . Principium ergo culmenque

omnium rerum pratii Margarite tenenc. In lib. xxxvii.
c. 4. he affirms, Maximum in rebus humanis pr2tium, non
fi!um inter gemmas, habet \damas. These two passages
f.;-d in such dire& contradiction to one another, that it
is impolibtce to reconcile them, or to determine which is
most conformable to truth. 1 have adhered to the former,
because we have many iftance' of the exorbitant price of
pearls. but none, as far as I know, of diamonds having
been purchifed at a rate so high. In this opinion 1 am
cornrmed by a passage in Pliny, lib. xix. c a.; having
mentioned the exorbirant price of Areftos , he fays
" aeuat pratia excelientium Margaritarum; " which
impl-es, that he confidered them to be of higher price than
any other commodity.

NOTE XXII. SECT. II. . 7.

Pliny has devoted two entire books of his Natural

History, lib. xii. and xiii to the enumeration and description
of the spices . aromatics, ointments, and perfumes, the use
of which luxury had introduced among his countrymen.
As many of these were the produAions of India, or of
the countries beyond it, and as the trade with the East
was carried on to a great extent in the age of Pliny, we
may form some idea of the immense demand for them,
from the high price at which they continued to be fold in
Rome. To compare the prices of the fame commodities
in ancient Rome, with those now paid in our own country,
is not a gratification of curiosity merely, but affords a
flandard by which we may estimate the different degree of
success with which the Indian trade has been conducted
'in ancient and modern times. Many remarkable passage

in ancient authors, concerning the extravagant price of
precious stones and pearls among the Romans, as well as
the general use of them by persons of all ranks, are
collected by Meurfius de Luxu Romanorum, cap. a.; and
y Staniflaus Robierzyckius, in his treatise on the fame
fgbjed, lib. ii. c. i. The English reader will receive
sufficient information from Dr. Arbuthnot, in his valuable
Tables of ancient coins, weights , and measures,
p. 172, &c.

NOTE XXIII. SECT. II. p. 99.

M. Mahudel, in a memoir read in the academy of in-

scriptions and belles lettres in the year 1 719, has collected
the various opinions of the ancients concerning the nature
ard origin of silk, which tend all to prove their ignorance
with regard to it. Since the publication of M. Mahudel's
memoir, P. du Halde has described a species of silk, of
which I believe he communicated the first notice to the
moderns. " This is produced by small infeCts nearly
resembling snails. They do not form cocoons either round
or oval like the silk-worm, but spin very long threads,
which fasten themselves to trees and bullies as they are
driven by the winds. These are gathered, and wrought
into silk fluffs. coarser than those produced by domertic
silk-worms. The infects who produce this coarse silk are
wild. " Description de l'Empire de la Chine, tom. ii. folio,
p. 207. This nearly resembles Virgil's description,

Velleraque ut foliis depcetant tenuia Seres.

Georg. IL. it.

An attentive reader of Virgil will find, that, besides all
the other qualities of a great descriptive poet, he possessed
an extensive knowledge of natural history. The nature and
productions of the wild silk-worms are illustrated at greater
length in the large collection of Memoires concernant

P 4

I'Hiftoire, les Sciences, les Arts, &c. des Chinois, tom. ii.
p. ' -, &c.; and by Pere de Mlailla, in his voluminous
HifRory of China, tomr. xii. p. 434. It is a singular
circumntance in the history of silk, that on account of its
being an excretion of a Xorm , the Mahomedans confider
it as an unclean dress; and it has been decided, with
the unanimous assent of all the doctors, that a person
wearing a garment made entirely of silk, cannot lawfully
offer up the daily prayers enjoined by the Koran, Herbel.
Bibl. Orient. artic Harir.

NOTE XXIV. SECT. II. p. 60.

If the use of the cotton manufacures of India had been

common among the Romans, the various kinds of them
would have been enumerated in the Law de Publicanis et
Vecligaihus, in the fame manner as the different kinds of
spices and precious dtones. Such a specification would
have been equally ne.-.rfary for the direction both of the
merchant and of the tax-gatherer.

NOTE XXV. SECT. I. p. 6o.

Tiis part of Arrian's Periplus has been examined with

greac accuracy and learning by Lieutenant \'ilford;
and from his investigation i: is evident, that the Plithana
o' Arrian is the modern Pultanah, on the southern banks
of the river Golvery, two hundred and seventeen British
miles fujth from Baroach; that the position of Tagara is
the famr with that of the modern Dowlatabad, and the
high grounds across which the goods were conveyed to
Baroah . are the Ba'lagaut mountains. The bearings and
difnnces of these different places, as specified by Arrian,
arihrd an additional proof (were that necessary) of the
exact information which he had received concerning this
district of India; Afitic Researches, vol. i. p. 369, &c.

NOTE XXVI. SECT. II. p. 68.

Strabo acknowledges his neglect of the improvements in

geography which Hipparchus had deduced from astronomical
observations , and justifies it by one of those logical
subtleties which the ancients were apt to introduce into all
their writings. " A geographer, " fays he, (i. e. a
describer of the earth) " is to pay no attention to what
" is out of the earth; nor will men, engaged in condut-
" ing the affairs of that part of the earth which is inhabit-
" ed, deem the diltinction and divisions of Hipparchus
" worthy of notice" Lib. ii. 194. C.

NOTE XXVII. SECT. II. p. 68.

What a high opinion the ancients had of Ptolemy,

we learn from Agathemerus, who flourished not long after
him. " Ptolemy, " fays he, " who reduced geography
" into a regular system, treats of every thing relating to
" it, not carelessly, or merely according to ideas of his

own; but attending to what had been delivered by more

" ancient authors, he adopted from them whatever he
" found consonant to truth. " Epitome Geogr. lib. i.
c. 6. edit. Hudson. From the fame admiration of his
work, Agathodemon, an artist of Alexandria, prepared a
series of maps for the illustration of it, in which the
poficion of all the places mentioned by Ptolemy, with
their longitude and latitude, is laid down precisely accord-
ing to his ideas. Fabric. Biblioth. Grace. iii. 412.

NOTE'XXVIII. SECT. II. p. 69.

As these public Surveys and Itineraries furnished the

ancient geographers with the best information concerning
the position and distances of many places, it may be
proper to point out the manner in which they were
completed by the Roma.:s. The idea of a general survey
of the whole empire was first formed by Julius Cefar,
and, having been begun by him under authority of a
decree of the senate, was finished by Augustus. As Rome
was still far inferior to Greece in science, the execution of
this great undertaking was committed to three Greeks,
men of great abilities, and fkil!ed in every part of philo.
sophy. The survey of the eastern division of the empire
was finished by Zenodoxus in fourteen years five months
and nine days. That of the northern division was finished
by Theodotus in twenty years eight months and ten days.

The southern division was finished in twenty-five years

one month and ten days. JEthici Cofmographia apud
Geographos, editos a Hen. Stephano, <1X7. p. 107.
This was an undertaking worthy of those illustrious persons,
and suited to the magnificence of a great people. Betides
this general survey, every new war produced a new delineation
and measurement of the countries which were the feat of
it. We may conclude from Vegetius , Infit. Rei Iilitaris,
lib. iii. c. 6., that every governor of a Roman province
was furnished with a defcriprion of it; in which were
specified the distance of places in miles, the nature of the
roads, the bye-roads, the short cuts, the mountains, the
rivers, &c.; all these, fays he, were not only described
in words, but were delineated in a nap, that, in deliberat-
ing concerning his military movements, the eyes of a
general might aid the decisions of his mind.

1

NOTE XXIX. SECT. II. p. 70.

The consequence of this mistake is remarkable. Ptolemy,

lib. vii. c. t., computes the longitude of Barygaza, or
Baroach, to be 17' 2o/; and that of Cory, or Cape
Comorin, to be 1 ; 20/. which is the difference of four
degrees precisely; whereas the real difference between
thele two places is nearly fourteen degrees.

NOTE XXX. SECT. II. p. 70.

Ramufio, the publisher of the molt ancient and perhaps

the most valuable Collection of Voyages, is the first person,
as far as I know, who takes notice of this ltrange error
of Ptolemy; Viaggj, vol. i. p. 18 . He justly observes,
that the Author of the Circumnavigation of the Erythraean
Sea had been more accurate, and had described the
peninsula of India as extending from north to south;
Peripl. p. 24. 29.

NOTE XXXI. SECT. II p. 37.

This error of Ptolemy justly merits the name of enormous,

nhich I have given to it; and it will appear more fur-
prifing when we recollect, that he must have been acquaint-
ed, not only with what Herodotus relates concerning the
circumnavigation of Africa, by order of one of the Egyptian
kings, Lib. iv. c. 4., but with the opinion of Eratoft-
henes, who held that the great extent of the Atlantic ocean
was the only thing which prevented a communication
between Europe and India by sea; Strab. Geogr. lib. i.
P. 113. A. This error, however, must not be imputed

wholly to Ptolemy. Hipparchus, whom we may confider
as his guide, had taught that t1h earth is not surrounded
by one continuous ocean, but' that it is separated by
different isthmuses , which divide it into several large
barons; Strab. lib. i. p. r. B. Ptolemy, having adopted
this opinion, was induced to maintain that an unknown
country extended from Cattigara to Praffum on the south.
east coast of Africa; Geegr. lib. vii. c. 3 and I. As
Ptolemy's system of geography was universally received,
this error spread along with it. In conformity to it the
Arabian geographer Edriffi, who wrote in the twelfth
century, taught that a continued tract of land firetched
eaitward from Sofala on the African coast, until it united
nith some part of the Indian continent; D'Anville, Antiq.
p. 1g7. Annexed to the first volume of Gefta Dei per
Francos, there is an ancient and very rude map of the
habitable globe, delineated according to this idea of
Ptolemy. NA. Goffellin, in his map entitled Ptolemxi
Syflema Geographicum , has exhibited this imaginary trac'
of land which Pto'emy supposes to have connected Africa
with Aia; Geographie des Grecs analyfce.

NOTE XXXII. SECT. II. p. 74.

In this part of the Disquisition, as :ell as in the map

prepared for illustrating it, the geographical ideas of 1l.
D'Anville, to which Major Renneil has given the sanction
of his approbation, I:;trcd. p. xxxix. have been gener:dly
adopted. But M. GeCl'cllin has lately published , " The
" Geography of the G-eeks analyzed; or, the System of
' Eratosthenes, Strabo, and Ptolemy, compared with each
" other, and uith the Knowledge \xhich the Moderns have
c" acquired ;" a learned and ingenious work, in which he
differs from his countryman with refpec. to many of his
determinations. According to NA. GofTeUin, the Magnum
Promontoriim, which Al. D'Anville concludes to be Cape

Romania, at the southern extremity of the peninsula of
Mlalacca, is the point of Bragu, at the mouth of the great
river Ava; near to which he places Zaba, supposed by
M1. D'.nville, and by'Barros, Decad, ii. liv. vi. c. I. to
be situated on the itrait of Sincapura or Malacca. The
ilagnus Sinus of Ptolemy he holds to be the fame with
the Gulf of Martaban, not the Gulf of Siam, according
to M. D'Anville's decision. The position of Cattigara, as
he endeavours to prove, corresponds to that of Mergui,
a considerable port on the weft coast of the kingdom of
Siam, and that Thinxe, or Sinag Metropolis, which M.
l)'Anville removes as far as Sin-hoa, in the kingdom of
Cochin-China, is situated on the fame river with Mergui ,
and now bears the name of Tana-ferim. The Ibadij
Infula of Ptolemy, which M. D'Anville determines to be
Sumatra, he contends, is one of that cluster of small isles
which lie off this part of the coast of Siam; p. 137-148.
According to M. Goffellin's system, the ancients never
failed through the Straits of Malacca, had no knowledge
of the island of Sumatra, and were altogether unacquaint-
ed with the Eastern Ocean. If to any of my readers
there opinions appear to be well founded, the navigation
and commerce of the ancients in India must be circumfcrib-
ed within limits fill more confined than those which I
have allotted to them. From the Ayeen Akbery, vol. ii.
p. 7. we learn that Cheen was an ancient name of the
kingdom of Pegu; as that country borders upon Ava,
where M. Goffellin places the Great Promontory, this near
resemblance of names may appear, perhaps, to confirm
his opinion that Sinae Metropolis was situated on this coast
and not so far East as M. D'Anville has placed it.

As Ptolemy's geography of this eaftern.divifion of Aria

is more erroneous, obscure, and contradictory than in any
other part of his work, and as all the manuscripts of it,
both Greek and Latin, are remarkably incorrect in the two
chapters which contain the description of the countries be-
yond the Ganges, M. D'Anville, in his Memoir concerning
the limits of the world known to the ancients beyond the

Ganges, has admitted into it a larger portion of conjecture
than we find in the other researches of that cautious
geographer. He likewise builds more than usual upon the
resemblances between the ancient 'and modern names of
places', though at all times he discovers a propensity, perhaps
too great, to trace these, and to reft upon them. There
resemblances are often, indeed, very striking, and have
led him to many happy discoveries. But in perusing his
works, it is impossible, I should think , not to perceive
that some which he mentions are far-fetched and fanciful.
Whenever I follow him, I have adopted only such
conclusions as seem to be established with his accufomed
accuracy.

NOTE XXXIII. SECT. II. P. 78.

The Author of the Circumnavigation of the Erythrxan

Sea has marked the distances of many of the places which
he mentions, with such accuracy as renders it a nearer
approach, than what is to be found in any writer of
antiquity, to a complete survey of the coast from Alyos-
hormus, on the welft fide of the Arabian Gulf, along the
ihores of Ethiopia, Arabia, Persia, and Caramania, to the
mouth of the Indus, and thence down the weft coast of
the Indian Peninsula to Mlufiris and Barace. This adds to
the value of this short treatise, which , in every other
respect, poTeflfes great merit. It may be corfidered as a
remarkable proof of the extent and accuracy of this
Author's intelligence concerning India , that he is the
only ancient writer who appears in any degree to have
been acquainted wsith the great division of the country,
which still sublists, viz. Indoftan Proper. comprehending
the northern provinces of the Peninsula, and the Deccan,
comprehending the southern provinces. " From Baryga7a
" (fays he) the continent stretches to the south; hence
a that diitrijt is called Dachinabades, for, in the language

" of the country, the south is called Dachanos; " Peripl.
p. 29. As the Greeks and Romans , when they adopeted
;ny foreign name, always gave it a termination peculiar
to their own language, which the grammatical itrucAure of
both tongues rendered, in some degree, necessary, it is
evident that Dachanos is the fame with Deccan, which
word has fill the fame signification, and is still the name
of that division of the Peninsula. The northern limit of
the Deccan at present is the river Nerbuddah, where our
Author likewise fixes it. Peripl. ibid.

NOTE XXXIV. SECT. II. P. 87.

Though, in deducing the latitudes of places from obferva.

tions of the fun or stars, the ancient astronomers neglected
several corretions, which ought to have been applied,
their results were sometimes exad to a few minutes, but
at other times they appear to have been erroneous to the
extent of two, or even three degrees, and may perhaps
be reckoned, one with another, to have come within half
a decree of the truth. This part of the ancient geography
would therefore have been tolerably accurate, if there had
been a sufficient number of such determinations. These,
however, were far from being numerous, and appear to
have been confined to some of the more remarkable places
in the countries which surround the Mediterranean sea.

When, from want of more accurate observations, the

latitude was inferred from the length of the longest or
ihorteft day, no great degree of precision was, in any
care , to be expected, and least of all in the vicinity of
the Equator. An error of a quarter of an hour, which,
without some mode of measuring time more accurate than
ancient observers could employ, was not easily avoided,
might produce, in such situations, an error of four degree
in the determination of the latitude.

WYith rerpect to places in the torrid zone, there was

another resource for determining the latitude. This was
by ohferving the time of the year when the fun was vertical
to any place, or when bodies that flood perpendicular to
the horizon had no shadow at noon-day; the fun's dittance
from the Equator at that time, which was known from the
principles of astronomy, was equal to the latitude of
the place. We have irftances of the application of this
method in the determination of the parallels of Syene and
Aleroe. The accuracy which this method would admit
of, seems to be limited to about half a degree, and this
only on the supposition that the observer was stationary;
for if he was travelling from one place to another, and
had not an opportunity of correcting the observation of one
day by that of the day following, he was likely to deviate
much more confiderabiy from the truth.

With respect to the longitude of places, as eclipses of

the moon are not frequent, and cculd seldom be of use for
determining it, and only when there were afironomers to
observe them with accuracy, they may be left out of the
account altogether v. en we are examining the geography
of remote countries. The differences of the meridians of
places were therefore anciently ascertained entirely by the
bearings and distances of one place from another, and of
consequence all the errors of reckonings, surveys, and
itineraries, fell chiefly upon the longitude, in the fame
manner as happens at present in a ship which has no
method of determining its longitude, but by comparing
the dead-reckoning with the observations of the latitude;
though with this difference, that the errors, to which the
most skilful of the ancient navigators was liable, were far
greater than what the nioft ignorant ship.master of modern
times, povided with a compass, 'can well commit. The
length of the Mediterranean measured , in degrees of
longitude, from the Pillars of Hercules to the Bay of lffus,
is less than forty degrees; but in Ptolemy's maps .itis
more than fixcy, and, in general, his longitudes, counting
from the meridian of Alexandria, especially toward the

East,

East, are erroneous nearly in the fame proportion. It
appears , indeed, that in remote seas, the coasts were
often delineated from an imperfect account of the distances
failed, without the le.llt knowledge of the bearings or
direction of the ship's course. Ptolemy, it is true, used
to make an allowance of about one-third for the winding
of a ship's courf , Geogr. lib. i c. 12. ; but it is plain,
that the application of this general rule could seldom
lead to an accur.te conclusion. Of this there is a lnlking
inftanct in the form which that geographer has given to
the Peninsula of india. From the Barygazenum Promon-
toriurn to the place marked Locus unde folvunt in Chryfen
naviganres, that is, fiom Surat on the Malabar coast, to
about Narfapour on the Coromandel coast, the distance
measured along the sea.shore is nearly the fame with what
it is in reality; that is, about five hundred and twenty
!lcgues. But the nmifatke in the direction is aftonilhing,
for tle Malabar and Coromandel coaff, inltead of stretching
to the south, and intersecting one another at Cape Comorin,
in a very acute angle, aie extended by Ptolemy almost in
the famne straight line from welt to east, declining a little
to the south. This coall is, at the fame time, marked
with several bays and promontories, nearly resembling,
in 'their position , those which actually exist on it All
these circunlltaijces compared together, point out very
cieatly what were the materials from which the ancient
nl:p of India was conmpoed. The fliips which had visited
the coast of that country, had kept an account of the
time which they took to fail from one place to another,
and had marked, as they flood along shore, on what
hand the land lay, when they shaped their course across
a bay, or doubled a promontory. This.imperfed journal,
with an inaccurate account, perhaps, of the latitude of
one or two places, wa:s probably all the information con-
cerning the coats of India, which Ptolemy was able to
procure. That he should have been able to procure no
better information trom merchants who failed with no
particular view of exploring the coast, will not appear won-

Q

derfil, if we co.ficder tFat even the celebrated Perirlus of
Hanno ixo!ld not crna:e a gecgrapher to lay down the
coast of .Africa with more preciiion, than Ptolemy has
delineated that of India.

NOTE XXXV. SECT. II. p. 96.

The introduction of the fil!k.vorm into Europe, and the

effects which this produced, came under the view of llr.
Gibbon, in writing the hiitory of the Emperor Justinian,
and though it gas an incident of subordinate importance
only, amidst the multiplicity of great transactions which
must have occupied his attention, he has examined
this event with an accuracy, and related it with a
precision, which would have done honor to an author
who had no higher object of research. Vol. vii p. 74, &c.
Nor is it here only that I am called upon to ascribe
to him this merit. The subject of my inquiries has led me
several t;mes upon ground which he had gone over, and I
have uniformly received information from the industry and
difcerranent with which he has surveyed it.

NOTE XXXVI. SECT. III. p. loo.

This voyage, together ,with the observations of Abu

Zeid al Hafan of Siraf, -was published by Ml. Renaudot,
A. D. 1718, under the title of " Anciennes Relations des
' Indes, et de la Chine, de deux Voyageurs lMahometans,
"qui y allerent. dans 'e Neuvieme Siecle, traduikes de
" I'.fabe. avec des remarques fur les principaux endroits
' de ces Reltions. " As Al. Renaudot, in his remarks,
represents the literature and police of the Chinese, in colors
very different from those of the splendid descriptions mhich
a blind admiration had prompted the Jesuits to publi-h,

two zealous missionaries have called in question the authen.
ticitv of these Relations, and have asserted that tne
authors of them had never been in China; P. Preinare
Lettr. edifiantes et curicufes, tom. xix. p. 420, &c. P.
Parennin, ibid. tom. xxi. p. 1(8, &c. Some doubts
concerning their authent;city were entertained likewise
by several learned men in England, on account of M.
Renaudot's having given no notice of the manuscript which
he rranflated, but that he found it in the library of M. le
Comte de Seignelay. As no person had seen the manuscript
since that time, the doubts increased, and M. Renaudot
was charged with the crime of imposing upon the public.
But the Colbert Manuscripts having been deposited in the
King's Library, as (fortunately for literature ) most private
ctlledions are in France, M. de Guignes, after a long
search, discovered the identical manulcript to which Al.
Renaudot refers. It appears to have been written in the
twelfth century; Jourral des Scavans , Dec. t76s.,
p. ; s, &c. As I had not the French edition of M. Re-
naudot's book, my references are made to the Engiifh
translation. The Relution of the two Arabian Traveilets is
confirmed. in many points, by their countryman Malsoudi,
who published his treatile: on universal hiltory, to which he
gives the fantastical title of " Mleadows of Gold, and
"l Mines of Jewels, " a hundred and fix years after their
time. From him, likewise, x\e receive such an account of
India in the tenth century, as renders it evident that te
Arabians had then acquired an extcnlive knowledge of that
country. According to his description, the peninsula of
illia was divided into four kingdoms. The first was
composed of the provinces situated on the Indus, and the
rivers which fall into it; the capital of which was Moultan.
Tle capital of the second kingdom was Canoge, which ,
from the ruins of it Itill remaining, appears to have been
a very large city; Rennell's Memoirs, p. 54. In order
to give an idea of its populoufinefs, the Indian historians
aftert, that it contained thirty thousand shops, in which
beeinut was fold, and sixty thousand lets of musicians

Q.z

and fi-lers, who paid a tnx to governmert; Ferinlta,
trarfiattd by Dow, vol. i. p. ;:. The third kingdom
was Cancheni-eme. alast; , as f..r as I know, is the hrft
£u:Ihor o rn ren:;o.s tl'i pira.iile of India, of which he
gives a f:ort but jut deftr pion. The fuurth is the king.
dom of Gizerate, which he represents as the greatest and
mofi poswerful ; and he concurs wi:h the two Arabian
Tnvellers, in gi'.ing the fovercigns of it the appellation of
Balhara. " hat M'.ffoudi relates concerning India is more
worthy of notice, as he himf.lf had visited that country;
No:ices et Extrairs des 3lanufcrirs de la Bibliotheque du
Roi, tom i. p 9, o1. ilaTioudii confirms what the two
Arabian Travellers relate, concerning the extraordinary
proerefs of the Indians in 2fironomical science. According
to his account, a temple was built during the reigns of
Brahman, the first monarch of India, with twelve towers,
representing the twelve signs of the zodiac; and in which
-was delineated, a view of all the stars as they appear in
the heavens. In the fame reign was coinpofed the famous
Sind-Ilind, which seems to be the standard treatise of
Indian agronomy; No:ices, &c. tom. i. p. 7. Another
Arabian author, who wrote about the middle of the four-
teenth century , divides India into three parts. The nor-
thern, comprehending all the provinces on the Indus. The
middle, extending from Guzerate to the Ganges. The
southern , which he denominates Comar, from Cape
Comorin; Notices, &c. tom. ii. p. 46.

NOTE XXXVII. SECT. III p. p. 1.

The naval frll of the Chinese seems not to have been

superior to that of the Greeks, the Romans, or Arabians.
The course which they held from Canton to Siraf, near
the mouth of the Perlian Gulf, is described by their oan,
authors. They kept as near as possible to the shore until
they reached the island of Ceylon, and then doubling Cape
Comorin, they failed along the ueft fide of the Peninsula,

as far as the mouth of the Indus, and thence steered along
the coast to the place of their destination, lem. de Literat.
tom. xxxii. p. 367. Some authors have contended, that
both the Arabs and Chinese were well acquainted with the
mariners' compass , and the use of it in navigation; but it
is remarkable that in the Arabic, Turkish, or Persian
languages there is no original name for the compass. They
commonly call it Bo[/o'a, the Italian name, which shows
that the thing signified is foreign to them as well as the
word. There is not one single observation, of ancient date,
made by the Arabs on the variation of the needle, or any
infiruclion deduced from it, for the assistance of navigators.
Sir John Chardin, one of the modl learned and best
informed travellers who has visited the East, having been
consulted upon this point, returns for answer, " I boldly
" assert, that the Asiatics are beholden to tus for this
"wonderful instrument, w-ich they had from Europe a

long time before the Portuguese conquests. For, first,

" their compasses are exactly like ours, and they buy
" them of Europeans as much as they can, scarce daring
" to meddle with their needles themselves. Secondly, It

is certain that the old navigators only coasted it along,

" which I impute to their want of this instrument to guide
" and inftrud them in the middle of the ocean. We
" cannot pretend to fay that they were afraid of venturing

far from home, for the Arabs, the first navigators in

"the world, in my opinion, at least for the Eastern seas,
" have, time out of mind, failed from the bottom of the
" Red Sea, all along the coast of Africa ; and the Chinese
" have always traded with Java and Sumatra, which is a
" very considerable voyage. So many islands uninhabited
" and yet productive, so many lands unknown to the
" people I speak of, are a proof that the old navigators
" had not the aft of failing on the main sea. I have
"nothing but argument to offer touching this matter,
"having never met with any person in Persia or the Indies
" to inform me when the compass was firfl known among
" them, though I made inquiry of the most learned men

Q3

' in both countries. I have f.iircd from the Indies to
" Perlia in Ind an fiis, wshen no European h.is been
" abard Lur miif-if Ter pilots asere all Indians, and
" they uscd the fore-fLttf and quad'ant for thcir obferva-

" ions. These inltruments they have from us, and made
" by our artiits, and thes do not in the le.ift vary from
" ours, except th t the chAactcrs are Arabic. The Arabs
" aie the molt lki!iiul na3igators of all the Aliatics or
" ifrianss; but neither they nor the Indians make ule of
c" ch.rts; and 'hey do not much vant them: some th.ey
" hve , but they are copied from ours, for they ale
: altrgether ign(,rant of perspective. " Inquiry when the
Nli.iumcd.ins si;ft trered China, p. 141, &c. When
M Nichbuhr was at Cairo, he found a magneric needle
in t! e piffeifin of a .3l.iumedan, which se-vec to point
ourt the Kaba, and he gave it the name of El Mlagnatis,
a clear proof of its turopean origin. Vo)age en Arabie,
tom. i. p. 169.

NOTE XXXV111. SECT. 111. p. 104.

The progress of Chrfftlanity, and of Mlahomedanifm,

both inLhi. a ard Iddia. is attestcd by fucih evidence as
lt.eves no doubt v.i:i refaect to it. This evidence is
coilected by -iferianrnus, ,llicth. Orient. vol. iv. p. 4;-,
&;. ; l , &c; and by M Kenaudor, in two DiiTerrations
a'- xed to :ncienre Relations; a:.d bv M. de la Croze,
H !:oire du C'h, tianifmr s

des le In our om n age,

Fho.ever. ae kn.ow that the nunibcr of profei!res to eithcr
ot thc'e religionr is xrremelvy finil, efl.ccially in India.
A (enroo confidnrs all the distinctions an i privileges of
his call, as belnni:iog tl, him by an exclulive and incom-
municable rig it. To convert, or to be converted, are
ideas equalls repugnant to the principles moit deeply rooted
in !-i, mind; nor can eitlcr the Catholic or Proteitant
mnil!:'-aries in India baltt of having o'ercome there
prejudices, except amolg a few in the los eft ca.ts, or

of such as have loft their cast altogether. This last circum-
fiancc is a great obstacle to the progress of Chriflianity in
India. As Europeans eat the flesh of that animal which
the llindoos deem sacred, and drink intoxicating liquors,
in which practices they are imitated by the converts to
Christianity, this finks them to a level with the Pariars,
the most contemptible and odious race of men. Some
Catholic milfionarics were so fenlible of this, that they
affected to imitate the dress and manner of living of
Brahmins, and refused to associate with the Pariars, or to
admit them to the participation of the sacraments. But
this was condemned by the apostolic legate Tournon, as
inconlifient with the fpiric and precepts of the Christian
religion ; Voyage aux Indes Orientales, par M. Sonnerat,
tom. i. p. 58. note. Notwithstanding the labor of mif-
fionaries for upwards of two hundred years, ( fays a late
ingenious writer,) and the establishments of different
Chritlian nations, who support and protec them, out of,
perhaps, one hundred millions of Hindoos, there are not
twelve thousand Chriltians, and those almost entirely
(Iiicalas, or outcasts. Sketches relating to the history,
religion, learning, and manners of the Hindoos, p. 4g.
The number of Mahomedans, or Moors, now in Indoftan,
is fuppoled to be near ten millions ; but they are not the
original inhabitants of the country, but the descendants of
adventurers, who have been pouring in from Tartary,
Perlia, and Arabia, ever since the invasion of Mahmoud
Ls Gazna, A. D. oo2, the first Mahomedan conqueror
of India. Orme Hist. of Military Trarnfat. in Indoftan,
vol. i. p. 24 Ilcrbelot, Bliblioth. Orient. artic. Gaznaviah.
As the manners of the Indians in ancient times seem to
have been, in every respeCt, the fame with those of the
present age, it is probable, that the Christians and Mlaho-
niedans, said to be so numerous in India and China, were
chiefly foreigners, allured thither by a lucrative commerce,
or their descendants. The number of Mahomedans in
China has been considerably increased by a practice, com-

Q.4

mon among tl'c;m. of bu'. - chil Iren in years of famine,

horn t[l'.ec e a' Ire in [he iV.i(ahinomi.can religion. Hilt.
Gener. dc. V1oyaUs, tom. vi. p. 35j.

NOTE XXX1X. SECT. III. p. 108.

From the Chroricle of Andrew Dandolo, Doge of Venice,

xwho svas eitv.ited ro that high Itiio:n at a time sshen his
cu,.trrx men had eftablithed a regular trade with Alexandria,
and in:.orred From t ail the productions of the hall, it
. s ratural to expect f>,me information concerning their
ea,'l tr3ad- \sith that cournry; but, except an idle tale
concern;i:- some Veretian snips uhich had failed to Alexan.
d-, :I-'ur Lhe - ear ;2 , contrary to a decree of the tlate,
an,: Sich s"ole thence the body of St Markl; Murat.
Script. Rer. I-. vol. xi:. lib. S. . o.

. p. o.; I find no

other hint concernin. the communication between the two
c urrr.i . O)n the contrar , circumiatnces occur, which
fr.-' th th he resrrt of Fur-tpcans to Fgvpt had cealed,
aimtft en:ireiv, for some time. Prior to the seventh and
e;:hrh certuri.s, the g-earer part cf the publ,; deeds in
lt3ry , and in other countries of t urope, were written upon
piper fdbrica:ed of the Egyp:ian Papyrus; but after that
perioi, as Furopeans no lonenr q'Turrd to trade in
Alexandria, alnuft all charters anl orher dteds are written
upon parchme-t. 3Murat. Anti.L. Ial. ledii YEvi, vol. iii.
p. 8;2. I have been induced , both in the tex. and in
th.s noe , to (late these partiiclars concerning the inter-
rutnon of tra !e between the C!iiifti;ns and lalomnedans so
fu'v , in order to correct an error into sihich several
in iern authors have fallen, by supposing, that soon after
the fiit conquests of the Caliphs, the trade wirh India
returned into i;s ancient channels, and the merchants of
Eu-op_ erefort:ed ith the fame fieedom as formerly to the
ports of Egypt and S)ria.

NOTE XL. SECT. III p. o10.

It is proper to remark (fays Mr. Stewart) that the

Indians have an admirable method of rendering their
religion lucrative, it being usual for the Faquirs to carry
wiih them, in their pilgrimages from the fea-coaffs to the
interior parts, pearls, corals, spices, and other precious
articles, of small bulk, which they exchange, on their
return, for gold-duft, musk, and other things of a similar
nature, concealing them ealily in their hair, and in the
cloths round their middle, carrying on, in proportion to
thcir numbers, no inconsiderable traffic by these means.
Account of the Kingdom of Thibet, Philof. Transact. vol.
Ixvii. part ii. p. 48;.

NOTE XLI. SECT. III. p. 121.

CafTa is the most commodious flation for trade in the

Black Sea. While in the hands of the Genoese, who
kept polfeflion of it above two centuries, they rendered it
the feat of an extensive and flourishing commerce. Even
under all the difdvantages of its subjection, at present,
to the Tuklifnl government, it continues to be a place
of considerable trade. Sir John Chardin, who visited it
A. D. 16z , relates, that, during his residence of forty
dais there, above four hundred fhipR arrived at Caffa,
or failed from it. Voyages , i. 48. He ohferved there,
several remains of Genoeel magnificence. The number of
its inhabitants, according to M. Peyfonnel, amounts still
to eighty thousand. Commerce de la Mer Noire, tom. i.
p. 1 . He describes its trade as very great.

NOTE XLII. SECT. III. p. 122.

The rapacity and insolence of the Genoese fettled in

Conifantinople, are painted by Nicephorus Gregoras , an
eye-kitnefs of their conduct in. very striking colors.
" They,. fays he, " now," i. e. about the year 1340,
" dreamed that they had acquired the dominion of the
" sea, and claimed an exclusive right to the trade of the
" Euxine, prohibitirg the Greeks to fail to the lleotis,
" the Cherfonefu, or any part of the coast beyond the
" mouth of the Danube, without a licence from them.
" This exclusion they extended likewise to the Venetians,
"ar.d their arrogance proceeded so far as to form a scheme
" ofimpofing a toll upon every vessel pafling through the
' Bosphorus. " Lib. xvlii. c. 2. 1 i.

NOTE XLIII. SECT. III. p. 123.

A permifion from the Pope was deemed so necessary to

authorize a commercial intercourse with infidels, that long
after this period, in the year 14,4 , Nicolas V. in his
famous bull in favor of prince Henry of Portugal , among
other privileges , grants him a licence to trade with
Mjahomedns , and refers to similar concessions from Pope
Martin V., and Eogenius, to kings of Portugal. Leibnitz
Codex Jur. Gent. Diplomat. Pars I. p. 489.

NOTE XLIV. SECT. Il. p. i2;.

Neither Jovius, the profelred panegyrist of the Mledici,

nor io. !M. Brutus, their detractor, though both mention
the exoroikant \iealth of the family , explain the nature
of the traue by which it das acquired. Even Alachiavel,

whose genius! delighted in the invctigation of every circum-
Ihilce which contributed to aggrandize or depress nations,
seems not to hare viewed the commerce of his country as
a fu'jeCe that merited any elucidation. Denina, who has
entitled the firtl chapter of his eighteenth book, " The
" (rigin of the MediAi, and the Commencement of their
" Po er and Grandeur, " furnishes little information with
regurd to the trade carried on by them. This hilence of
so many authors is a proof that hi4torians had not yet begun
to view commerce as an object of such importance in the
political state of nations, as to enter into any detail con-
cerning its nature and effects. From the references of
different writers to Scipio Armmirato, Iftorie Fi,)rentine;
to P.ignini, Delle Decime ed altregravezze della lercatura
dei iuorentini, and to Balducci, Pratica dclla Mercatura,
I fiould imagine that something more fitisfa'tory may be
learned concerning the trade both of the republic and family
ot the Mledici, but I could nor find any of these books
either in Edinburgh or in London.

NOTE XLV. SECT. III. p. 126.

Leibnitz has preserved a curious paper, containing the

infiructions of the republic of Florence to the two ambaf-
fadors lent to the Soldan of Egypt, in order to negocijte
iihs treaty with him, together with the report of tfefe
ambafihdors on their return. The great object of the
republic was, to obtain liberty of trading in all parts of
the Soldan's dominions, upon the fame terms with the
Venetians. The chief privileges which they solicited, were;
i. A perfect freedom of admilfion into every port belonging
to the Soldan, protciion while they continued in it, and
liberty of departure at what time they chose. 2. Permiflion
to have a consul, with the fame rights and jurifdidion as
those: f the Venetians; and liberty to build a church, a
varchoufe, and a bath, in every place where they fettled.

a. That they should not pay for goods imported or exported
higher duties than were paid by the Venetians. 4. That
the effects of any Florentine who died in the dominions of
the Sol1an shou!d be consigned to the consul. S. That
the gu!d and silver coin of Florence should be received
in payments. All there privileges (which show on what
equal and liberal terms Christians and Mahomedans now
carried on trade) the Florentines obtained; but from the
caules mentioned in the text, they seem never to have
acquired an! considerable share in the commerce with
India. Leibnitz, Mantissa Cod. Jur. Gent. Diplom. Pars
aitcra, p. 16}.

NOTE XLVI. SECT. III. p. It .

The Eastern parts of Asia are now so completely ex.

rlored, that the first imperfect accounts of them, by
MIarco Polo, attract little of that attention which X as
originally excited bx the publication of his travels; and
fonte circunimtances in hi; narrative have induced different
authors to juft'tv this negle;t, by calling in question the
truth of X hat he relates, and even to assert that he had
never vi.ited thufe countries which he pretends to decfribe.
lie does not, fay they, ascertain the polition of any one
F!ae , by fpecifsing its longitude or latitude. lie gives
names to provinces and cities, particularly in his description
of CaIhay, which have no resemblance to those which they
now bear, \ e may observe, however, that as Marco
Polo seems to have been, in no degree, a man of science,
it k was not to be expected that he should fix the ptition
cf piacts with geographical accuracy. As he travelled
through China, either in the luite of the great Khan, or
in execution of his orders, it is probable that the names
which he gives to different provinces and cities, are those
by which they were known to the Tartars, in whose service
he was, not their original Chinese names. Some inac-

suracies which have been obrerved in the relation of his
travels, may be accounted for, by attending to one cir-
cunmftance, that it was not published from a regular journal,
which, perhaps, the viciflitudes in his situation, during
such a long fcries of adventures, did not permit him to
Lkep, or to preserve. It was composed after his return to
his native country, and chiefly from recollection. But
notwikhftanding this disadvantage, his account of those
regions of the East, towards which my inquiries have been
directed, contains information with .refped to several
particulars, altogether unknown in Europe at that time,
the accuracy of which is now fully confirmed. I shall
mention some of these, which, though they relate to
matters of no great consequence, afford the best proof of
his having visited there countries, and of his having
observed the manners and cultoms of the people witlh
attention. He gives a diftinc account of the nature and
preparation of Sago, the principal article of subsistence
among all the nations of Malayan race, and he brought
the first specimen of this singular production to Venice,
Lib. ii. c. 16. He takes notice, likewise, of the general
culfom of chewing Betel, and his description of the mode
of preparing it, is the fame with that still in use. Ramus.
Viaggj, i. p. S;. D. S6. B. He even descends into such
detail as to mention the peculiar manner of feeding horses
in India, which fill continues. Ramus. p. 53. F. What
is of more importance, we learn from him, that the
trade with Alexandria continued when he travelled through
India, to be carried on in the fame manner as 1 conjetur-
ed it to have been in ancient times. The commodities
of the East were fIill brought to the llalabar coast by
vessels of the country, and conveyed thence, together
with pepper, and other productions peculiar to that part
of India, by ships which arrived from the Red Sea. Lib.
iii. c. 27. This, perhaps, may account for the superior
quality which Sanudo ascribes to the goods brought to the
coast of Syria from the Persian Gulf, above those imported
inte Egypt by the Red Sea. The former were Ghofen

and purchased in the places where they grew, or where
they sere manufactured, by the merchants of Perlia,
who fii continued their voyages to every pare of the Ealt;
while the Egyp-ian merchants, in making up their cargoes,
decended upon the assortment of goods brought to the
Malabar coatt by the natives. To some persons in his own
age, what Marco Polo related concerning the numerous
armies and immense revenues of the Laltern princes,
appeared so extravagant, (though perfectly consonant to
what we now know concerning the population of China,
and the wealth of Indoitan ,) that they gave him the name
of )ile';er Ji.aOco JliEioni. Prefat. de Ramus p. 4. But
among perlons better informed, the reception he met
Aith was very different. Columbu , as well as the men
of science with whom he correlponded, placed such confi.
dence in the veracity of his relations, that upon them,
the speculations and theories, which led to the discovery
of the New World, were in a great measure founded. Life
of Columbus by his Son, c. 7, and 8.

NOTE XLVI. SECT. Ill p. i. 7.

In the year iloT, Joanna of Navarre, the wife of

Philip le Bel, king of France, having been some days in
Bruges, was so much struck with the grandeur and wealth
of that city , and particularly with the splendid aipeara.ce
of the citizens' wives, that she was moved ( {ys GLiccar-
dini) by female envy to exclaim with indignation, "I
" thought that I had been the only queen here, but I
" find there are many hundreds more. ' Defcriz. de'Paeli
Bassi, p. 408.

NOTE XLVII1. SECT. II. p. 139.

In the hitory of the reign of Charles V. vol. i. p. i6;.

I observed, that, during the war excited by the famous
League of Cambray, while Charles VIII. of France could
not procure money at a less premium than forty-two per
cent., the Venetians raised what fums they pleased at five
per cent. But this, I imagine, is not to be confidered
as the usual commercial rate of interest at that period,
but as a voluntary and public-fpirited effort of the citizens,
in order to support their country at a dangerous crisis.
Of such laudable exertions, there are several striking
instances in the history of the republic. In the year
1379, when the Genoese, after obtaining a great naval
victory over the Venetians, were ready to attack their
capital, the citizens, by a voluntary contribution, enabled
the senate to fit out such a powerful armament as saved
their country. Sabellicus, Hist. Rer. Venet. Dec. ii.
lib. vi. p. 85s 390. In the war with Ferrara, which
began in the year 1472, the senate, relying upon the
attachment of the citizens to their country, required them
to bring all their gold and silver plate, and jewels, into
the public treasury, upon promise of paying the value of
them at the conclusion of the war, with five per cent.
of interest; and this requisition was complied with cheer-
fully. Petr. Cyrneus de Bello Ferrar. ap. Murat. Script.
Rcr. Ital. vol. xxi. p. o16.

NOTE XLIX. SECT. III. . 140.

Two fads may be mentioned as proofs of an extraor.

dinary extension of the Venetian trade at this period. i.
There is in Rymer's Great Collection, a 'eries of grants
from the ki.igs of England, of various privileges and
immunities to Venetian merchants trading in England, as

enl as feveT! ccmmercia! tretties ; t'-.- reblic w '

rlin!lv i,.-Jicate a co-fideTabie i-.c:eafe f t'rr :ra.faiio-:
in '.atr cocr.trv. Tref: are irn-:i r.ed in thelr order by .Mr.
iAr -',f'.n, to u.-ce p;atie.t irluftr- anr.d fu'nd underftl.a-ri ,
ever. rerron erf;ged in ai- corr.mercial research .rr.;
hae frit himficl greatly indebted ol many occafiors.-2.
T'-e cstabiih.mert as a Ear.k by public au;; oriry, th:
credit cf s'iich was foun.dd en tFat of the stare. In a,
age ard ration so el acquainted with the advantgr.j
thich comrmerce derives frcm the irficution of banls, :
is un-eceffary to er.nmerate them. 1errcantile trarlfct3:rs
must have been rumcroLs and extensive before the utii:.
of such an i-.ftitution could be fully perceived, or ::e
principles of trade could be so fully understood as ;o
form the regulations proper for conducting it Aith success.
Verice may boast of having given the first example :o
Europe of an eftablifhrnrent altogether unknown to ;':e
art ie.ts, and which is the pride of the modern commercial
f\ft-m. The corftitution of the bank of Venice was
origirally founded on such just princi2pes, that it has
served as a. model in the establishment of banks in other
countries, ard the admirifiration of its affairs has been
condLcid with so much integrity, that its credit has never
been shaken. I cannot fpecifv the precise year in which
the bark of Venice was titabllhfed by a law of the State.
Anderson supposes it to have been A. D. r f7. Chron.
Deduct. vol. i. p. 84. Sandi Stor. Civil. Vencz. part 11.
vol. ii p. 768. Part IlI. vol. ii. p. 89:.

NOTE L. SECT. III. r. 141.

An Italian author of good credit, and a diligent inquire

into the arcicr.t hiltory (of its different governmcnts,
affirm;, that it the several Stares mi:'ch traded in the
ilediiterrar.e-an had united together, Venirc alone would

have

a'ie been superior to them all, in rmval power, and in
etesrt cr ccormcree. Derira Revolutions cl'talie traduits
par i' bb3 Jardin, lib. xviii. c. 6. tom. vi. p ,;9. About
t.e ?ear 142o, the Doge 3Iocenigo gives a view of the
n val force of t.e republic, which confirms this decision
of Denina. At thr time it confited of three thousand
trading vefTels, of various dimer lions, on board which were
emplo ed seventeen thousand sailors, of three hundred ships
of greater force, manned by eight thousand tailors; and of
fLr.-five large galeaf!es, or caracs, navigated by eleven
t'oufrdd fa:lour. In public and private arsenals sixteen
tnoufanr. carpenters were emploved. Mlar. Sanuto ite de'
DuJhi di Venezia, ap. A3ur. Script. Rer. Ital. vol. xxil,
P. 9i9

NOTE LI. SECT. III p. P. g.

When we take a view of the form and position of :he

habitJble parts of Alia and Africa, we thall fee good reafoils
for confidering the camel as the molt useful of all the
animals over hitch the inhabitants of these great continents
hive acquired dominion. In buth, some of the molt fertile
diftrichs are fcparated from each other by such extetlive
tracts of barren sands, tle feats of defulation and drought,
as leem to exclude the pufiibility of communication between
them. But as the ocean, which appears, at first view,
to be placed as an insuperable barrier between different
regions of the earth, has been rendered, by navigation,
fubfcrvient to tieir mutual intercourse ; so, by means of
the can;el, which the ;rabians emphatically call The Ship
o'' the DeJert, the mult dreary vltes are traversed, and
the nations which they disjoin are enabled to trade with
one another. Tlole painful journies, impracticable by any
oth;r animal, the camel performs uith astonishing dispatch.
l:;der heavy burdens of fix, seven, and eight hundred
weight, they can continue their march during a long period
of time, with little food or reft, and fumetimes without

R

tafrirgi water for eight or nine days. By the wife econonit
ot Provid ene., the camel leems formed of purpose to be
the beair u: barien in thc!e regions where he is placed,
and *,here l.'s feriice is moist wanted. In all the diftricds
of Afi: and Africa, where deserts are mrt frequent a:;d
extensive , the camel abounds. This is his proper station,
and beyond this the sphere of his activity does not exteni
far. He dreads alike the excefles of heat and of cold,
and does not agree even with the mild climate of our
temperate zone. As the first trade in Indian commodities,
of thich w\e have any authentic account, was carried
on by means cf camels, Genesis, xxxvii. 2 *, and as it
is by emp;Jiirg the at the conveyance of there com-
rnodities has been so xsidcly extended over Asia and
Africa, rhe particulars xhich I have mentioned concerning
this singular animal appeared to me necessary towards
illultraring this part of my subject. If any of my readers
desire m-re fu!l in;ormation, and ikifh to know how the
ingenuiry and art of man have seconded the intentions cf
Nature, in training the camel, from his birth, for that
life of exertion and hardihip to which he is destined , he
may consult Hiftoire Naturelle, by 31. le Comte de Bu!,'rn,
artic. i.,e;;razi! e Droiiirf.dre, one of the molt eloquent,
and. as far as I c-i j':ite s;on examining the authorities
v.hich he has quote J, oe of the iioft accurate descriptions
given by that celierated Ur;er. \1. Volneey, wl rfe accuracy
is well iknon, gives a tdl:ri:ion of the manner in which
the camel perrorm, its journ-e:,, whicil may he agreeable
to some of my readers. ' In tra;elling th!ough the desert,

c canmels are chicrty emii;'oyed , beo;urf they consume little,

"C <n carry a greac lu.d. IL:s ordinary burden is about
" f'.n hundred and tf:y poundls; his food, whatever is

c: :;se hini , ftra', t.ilis cs, the stones of dates, beans,
barice, i&c. \\ith a pound of food a day , and as

(' much 'aater, he k'ill travel for weeks. In the j.urney
" frcm Cairo to _uez, shi;h is forty or forty-fix hours,
" they ri-ckher eat nor drink, but there long fts , if
" often repeated, vear thelll out. Their ulual rate of

" travelling is very flow, hardly above two miles an hour;
" it is vain to push them , they will not quicken their
" pace, but, if allowed fume short reft, they will travel

fifteen or eighteen hours a day. " Voyage, tom. ii

" p. tSt.
P, 3R3'

NOTE LtI. SECT. IT. p. p19.

In order to give an adequate idea of the extenfire

circulation of Indian commodities by land carriage, it
would be neceff? y to trace the route, and to estimate the
number, of the various caravans by which they are con-
veyed. Could this be executed with accuracy, it would
be a curious object of geographical research b as well as a
valuable addition to commercial history. Though it is
inconsistent with the brevity which I have uniformly fludied .
in conduting this Difquilition, to enter into a detail of so
great length, it may be proper here, for illustrating this
part of my subject, to take such a view of two caravans
which visit Mecca, as may enable my readers to estimate
more justly the magnitude of their commercial tranfations.
The first is the caravan which takes its departure from
Cairo in Egypt, and the other from Damascus in Syria ;
and I feled there, both because they are the most con-
fiderable, and because they are described by authors of
undoubted credit , who had the belt opportunities of
receiving full information concerning them. The former
is composed not only of pilgrims from every part of
Egypt, but of those which arrive from all the fnall Ma-
homedan flates on the African coast of the Mediterranean,
from the empire of Morocco, and even from the Negroe
kingdoms on the Atlantic. When assembled, the caravan
confilts at least of fifty thousand persons, and the number
of camels employed in carrying water, provisions, and
merchandize, is still greater. The journey, which, in
going from Cairo and returning thither, is not completed

R 2

in Ilcs than a hundred davs, is Ferfurmred s hollv by land;
ard a th:e ru.r.; lies n:ltlv ti'rouLh fandv dtler':s, or
barren . L.. b:;ed

: v. llds, \hich seldom ati'rd ann uLbl;i.

en-e, a .. ere often nu lo.:rces cf \\s ter can be fuu:,rJ
the i :ii.s nl"a!d

uL.ergo rr.ih iatigue, and finc.n.s

mruit c:nrc incrcdr-le h.ir..ll'ip. An early and i'",:
defcrl-tion of this caravan is l.uo. tled by H.lluvt, vo!. ii.
p. 2oi, &c 3liii;et has entered into a nii.ute and
cu;r';c':s d t-il si;h ,eLr.l to it;; Iltlcript. de l'Etyprt,
f:art'. iir. 2 12, &c. Poc;,, k 1;-.s given a route, togct.rr
writh t-e lengths of eac-, da\'s n:arch , shich he receivd
fr-on a pcilor vli:o had been tYfouteen times at MCecca,
vcl. i pp I.

I 28. 6 i, &.-Tl e caraian from Damalfcus,

compacfed of pilgrims froni ahlnt every province of the
Turkish empi:c , is little infclitr to tie former in number,
and the conmirerce whiclh it carries on is hardly lcls
valsable. V.yaoe de \olney, tom. ii. p. 2s1, &c. This
pilgrimage wsa, performed in the -yar 1741 , by Il;ijeh
Abdulkurreenm, srhon I forrlicily n;erltioned, Note 1'.
p. i9G. He g:-es the usual route from Damascus to
3le:ca, computed by lih-rs, the common mode of
reckonirg a jourrne in the Ealt through countries little
frequented. According t tthe most moderate eltimate , the
diltdnce bet':een the tv o ciies , by his account, mlitt
be above a thocfand n;ies; a great part of the journey
is through a desert, a-.d the pilgrims not only endure
rruch fatigue, bu; are cLiin ex:pufd to great danger front
tl:e . il1 .Arrbs. Mlenoils, p. 4. , &c. It is a firgt;lar
Frc'p f of the Fred.rtory spirit of the Arabs, that although
r'l t'hir independernt tribes are eanlous ilahomedans, et
t're. :na;!e nro fcrupie of planderi;ng the caravans us
p :icin;R. shie crgaged in pFrtorniing one of the moll
i-nii.:'.- 1_l C duties t ti reir rLilgioi . Great as thlTe
c. r. .-'s are. * e nmuft r.otfuppolt: that all the pilcrii,,s
Vubo iSi; 'iec;t a belotng to the:n ; such corlidera'le additions
are received trom the txi;.live dmiihiuns of Lcrlid, f1rii
everv pro\ince of Indi.ii-.n, a'nd the countries to rhe
Eait of it, from Ab!liir.id, fionl vario.ls latcs on thi

Southern coast of Africa, and from all parts of Arabia,
t;it when the vwhole are al!mnbicd they have been coi-
putCe to a;Mount to two hunkred tloulhirl. I! fi)one
\ears the nu:mber is sarthe: increased by fi:all bands of
Fi'~rinlls fioni several i;tel or proviLcc s of Africa , the
nr.iiis and lituations of w hich a:re jult berinning to he
lno. vn i'n Europe. For this last fcet \e a.re inrlcbced to
t'he iAfoci;tion for promoting the Ifov

r of the terior

parts of Aft ca , formedl btv some Brit!h Gentlemen upon
principlcs so liberal, and with vices so public spirited,
as do honor to thenifelves and to their country. Proceed-
inrs, &c. p. 174.

In t!he iRcport of the Committee. of the Privy Council

ca the Sl!ive Trade, other particulars are contaied; and
it appears tha ththe commerce carried on by caravans in
the interior- parts of Africa is not only v idely ex:endcd,
but of considerable value. Betides the sreat caravan nhich
iroceeds to Cairo, and is joined by ?lahomnedn pilgrims
from every part of Africa, there are caravans which have
ro object but commerce, wshicd set out from Fez, Al-
giers, Tunis, Tripoli, and other States on the sea-coast,
and penetrate far into the interior country. Some of
then take no leTs than fifty days to reach the place of
thnir declination; and, as the medium of their rate of
tavelling may be eflimated at about cih:teen miles a day,
ti:e extent of their journey may be eily computed. As
both the time of tleir out-set, and their route, are
lno.wn, they are met by the people of all the countries
through vhich they travel, who trade uith them. Indian
gc(,'.s of every liind form a conliderable article in this
tra;ic, in exchange for which the chief commodity they
can give is Slaves. Part vi.

As the journeys of the caravans, which are purely com-

mercial, do not commence at fiated seasons, and their
routes vary accc:ding to the convenience or fancy of the
mcithalts of whom they are comyofed, a del'cription
c;rnuot ce given of them with tlhe fame degree of accuracy.
But Ly attendiig to the accounts of fnce authors, and

!l3

the occasional hints of others, sufficient information may
be gathered to f.tisfy us, that the circulation of Eastern
go,,is by these caravans is very extensive. The fame
inter,)oJrle :iich xa, anciently kept up by the pro-
v;ice; in the North.ea't us

, fia v.ith Indoflan and China,

and uhichi I formerly described, still fubfits. Among all
the numerous tribes of Tartars, even of those which
retain their pastoral manners in greatest purity , the
dimadr for the productions of these two countries is
ve:r cooii'erable. Voyages de Pallis, tom. i. p. 3;7,
&c. toni. ii. p. 4 2. In order to supply them uith
theft, caravans set out annually from Boghar, (Hakluvt,
vol. i. p ;:.) Samarzand , Thibet, and several other
place; and return iith Ilrge cargoes of Indian and
Cciiefe goods. Eut the trade carried on between Russia
and Crina in this part of Asia is by far the molt extensive
ani b- known. Some connexion of this kind, it is
Frobabie , was kept up between them from the earliest
yerod , but it iizrrerafed greatly after the interior parts of
Rul'i 'were re:;dered more acce:'ble by the conquests of
Znais Khan and Tamerlane. The commercial nations of
Europe uere so uell acquainted 'xith the mode of carruing
on this trade, that s.on after the Portuguese had opened
the communication i ith the Ealt by the Cape of Good
hi.pe , a: attempt a;ss made in order to diminish the
avaintages shi h they derived from this discovery, to
prevail on the Rullians to ccnvey Indian and Chinese
commodi:ies throujh the x hole extent of their empire,
partly by land-carriage and partly by means of navigable
ri'-ers, to fJme' port on the Baltic, from which they
mig'nt be distributed through ever) part of Europe.
Ramufio, Racco'ta di Viaggj , vol. i. p. 374. B. This
scheme, too zreat for the monarch then on the throne of
Ruilia to carry into execution, was rendered pradicable
by the conqulfis of Ivan Bafiloiitz, and the genius of
Peter the Great. Though the capitals of the two empires
were situated at the immense diltance of fix thousand three
hundrel and fcventy-eght miles from each other, and
the route lay fur above four hundred miles through an

uninhabited desert, (Bell's Travels, vol. ii. p. 167.)
caravans travelled from the one to the other. But though
it had been stipulated when this inter-ourfe was establish.
ed, that the number of persons ir. each caravan should
not exceed two hundred, and tl'ough they were shut
up within the walls of a Caravanserai during the short
time they remained in Peliin, and were allowed to deal
only with a few merciants, to . horn a monopoly of the
trade with them had been granted; yet, notwithltanding
all there restraints and precautions , the jealous
vigilance with which the Chinese government excludes
foreigners fiom a free intercourse with its fubjecs was
alarmed, and the admiflion of the Ruflin caravans into
the empire was fjon prohibited. After various negocia-
tions, an expedient was at length devised, by which the
advantages of mutual commerce were secured, without
infringing the cautious arrangements of Chinese policy.
On the boundary of the two empires, two small towns
were built almost contiguous, the one inhabited by Ruffians,
the other by Chinece. To these all the marketable pro.
ductions of their refpecive countries are brought by the
fubjecs of each empire; and the furs, the linen and
woollen cloth, the l-ather, the glars, &c. of Rufia, are
exchanged for the silk, the cotton, the tea, the rice,
1thE toys, &c. of Ch.ina. By some well-judged concessions
oi the sovereign now. feated on the throne of Ruflia,
vl.ofe enlarged mind is superior to the illiberal maxims
c:f some of her predcceffors, this trade is rendered so
fiourilliing, that its amount annually is not lets than eight
hundred thousand pounds fIerling, and it is the only
trade wi:h China carried on almost entirely by barter.
BIr. Coxe, in his account of the Ruffian discoveries, has
collected, with his usual attention and discernment, every
thing relative to this branch of trade, the nature and
extent of which were little known in Europe. Chap. ii.
iii. iv. Nor is this the only place where Russia receives
Chinese and Indian commodities. A considerable supply
of both is brought by caravans of independent Tartars

R

Tartars to Orenburch, on the river Jaik, Voyage de Pa!la,
torn.i p. l; , &c. to Troit7kdia, o.i the river Oui,
and to other places tshioh I mrght mention. I hive
c-tered into thi, lhtg detail cnncernirig the mode in 1l -ch
the prodLchons in 1 :dia and Ci-ina are circulated thr(ollh
RuiliA, as it a'ords the molt ft.;iking initance, I k.;ow,
of -he creit extcnt to i hic1i valuable commodities may be
ccnve!ed by land-carriage.

NOTE LIII. SECT. IV. p. 16;.

The o-lv r^*-2,e oF discovery in the Atlant;c Ocean

ton ards the South, lv any of the ancient co'nmercial
t..:es n the lelditerra,'ean, is that of Hanno, undertaken
bK order of the republic of Carthage. As the fi:uation of
that. city . so rmuLh nearer the Straits than 'I re, Alexan-
dria. and the other feats rs ancient trade which I have
mr.t:o-et . rave it more inir..ciiare access to the oce..n
that circuni'': e, t-,iether vi'h the varinus settlements
mhi.h th-e C '-haginins had rrade in diit'ceenr provinccs
of 'Rain, natur..lls\ fu'ecic- to them ths en'erp-ifi . and
aiffirddc triem rhe prospect of co.,ii !eranle s;rvai-ta,;es from
its luccef. The vo.:age of H-inno , inst.d of invalidcatin,
seems to confi-m the juil-efs of the rejaf s x.hich I have
given , hy n: similar attempt nas made by the other
commercial stades in the iMediterranean.

NOTE L1V. SECT. IV. p. 165.

Though the intelligent authors whom I have quoted

confidered th:s vocge of the Pheriiians as tahulcus
Herodotus mentrri;o a circumstance concerning it, which
faems to Frove that it had rcally been performed. " The

" Pheniciins," savs he, " affirmed that, in failing ro.nd
" Africa, they had the lun on their right hand, which to
" me appears not to be cred;ble, though it may be
" deemed so by others. " Lib iv. c. 4-. This, it is
certain, must have happened, if they rea'ly accollumlifhed
such a voyage. The science of altronlomy, hd.vever,
vas in that early period so imperfect, that it was by
experience only that the PheniLians could come at the
kl-oulcdge of this fict ; they durst not, x; rhonu this,
lih,'e ventured to aftert vhlat would has- app .ae'l t to be
an improbable fidion. Even after what they related,
1lHrodotus disbelieved it.

NOTE LV. SECT. IV. P. 174.

Xotwkithfanding this increased demand for the pro-

d'ii)onns d' India, it is remarkable, that duri.ig the
fi::cn!.th century some commodilies which are now the
ci-:ef articles of importation from the taft, were either
a', gether unknown, or of lirtle account. Tea, the
importation of which, at present, far exceeds that of any
other production of the Ealt, has not been in general
use, in any country of Europe, a full century; and yet,
during that fliort period, from some fligular caprice of
tae , or pos er of faflion , the ilfuficn of a leaf brought
from the f.rtheft extremity of the ejrth, of which it is
perhaps the highell praise to fay t'lit it is i-noxious, has
bccnle almoll a neceflfry of life in several parts of
Europe, and the pallion for it dcfeends from the moSt
elevated to the lowest orders in society. In i',i: it was
computed that the whole quantity of tea imporrrd into
Europe from Chi-a was about nineteen millions of poiunds,
of which it is conjectured that twelve millions were con-
fumecd in Great Britain ai'rl the dominions depending upon
*. Dodiley's Annual Register for 1-84 and 178;, p i(6.
The porcelan of China, now as common in many parts

of Europe as if it were of domeRfic manufadure, was not
known to the ancients. Mlarco Polo is the fidt among the
moderns *xho mentions it. The Portuguese began to
import it not long after their first voyage to China, A. D.

ll 7; but it was a considerable time before the use of it
became cxtenfive.

It

# APPENDIX.

A P P E N D I X.

I SHALL now endeavour to fulfil an engage-
ment which I came under ', to make some obfer-
vations upon the genius, the manners, and infli-
tutions of the people of India, as far as they can
be traced from the eailieft ages to which our
knowledge of them extends. Were I to enter upon
this wide field with an intention of surveying its
whole extent; were I to view each objec which
it presents to a philosophical inquirer, under all
its different afpeds, it would lead me into researches
and fpeculationc, not only of immense length,
but altogether foreign from the subjed of this
Disquisition. My inquiries and reflecions fliall
therefore be confined to what is intimately con-
neded with the design of this work. I Ihall
collec the fads which the ancients have transmit-
tcd to us concerning the institutions peculiar to the

See page. 22.

natives of India, and, by comparing them with
·what we knrowv of that country, endeavour to
deduce such conclusions as tend to point out the
circumnifances which have induced the reft of
mankind , i: every age, to carry on commceicial
intercourse to so great an extent with that country.

Of tils intercourse there are conspicuous proofs

in the earliert periods concerning which hilltoy
affords information. Not only the people conti.
guous to India, but reriote nations, seem to have
been acquninted , from tile immemlorial, with its
commid.ties, and to have v.ilued them so highly,
that in order to procure them they undertook
fatiguing, expensive , and dangerous journeys.
Whenever mren give a decided preference to the
commodities of any particular country, this must
be owinT either to its polkfinnr some valuable
natural produclions peculiar to its foil and climate,
or to foine fiperior progrefi which its inhabitants
have made in indiifrv , art, and ele.-anc.. It is not
to any peculiar excellence in the natural produc-
tions of India that we muli afcrib- entirely the
predileclion of ancient ;ations for its commodities;
for, pepper exceptd , an article, it must be
allowed. of gre. t ini'portanc , they are little
difi:-rent from thofc of otlier tropical countries;
and Ethiopil or Arabia might have fully supplied
the Phenician , and other trading people of
antiquity, with the spices, the perfumes, the
precious stones, the gold and silver, which formed
the principal articles of their commnerce.

Whoever then wifles to trace the commerce
with India to its source, must search for it, not
so much in any peculiarity of the natural produc-
tions of that country, as in the superior improve.
ment of its inhabitants. Many fadts have been
tranfinittcd to us, which, if they arc examined
with proper attention, clearly demonfirate, that
the natives of Indii: were not only mere early
civilized, but had made greater progress in civili-
zation than any other people. These I flall
cndeavour to enumerate, and to place them in
such a point of view as may serve both to throw
light upon the institutions, manners, and arts of
the Indians, and to account for the e3gernefs of all
nations to obtain the productions of their ingenious
indultry.

By the ancient Heathen writers, the Indians
were reckoned among those races of men which
they denominated Autochthones or Aborigines,
whom they confidered as nativesiof the foil,
whose origin could not be traced '. By the
inspired writers; the wisdom of the East (an ex-
pression whlch is to be understood as a description
of their extraordinary progrels in science and arts
was early celebrated '. In order to illustrate and
confirm these explicit testimonies concerning the
ancient and high civilization of the inhabitants of
India, I fiall take a view of their rank and con-
dition as individuals; of their civil policy; of

Diod. Sic. lib. ii. p. ,Iz.
I Kings, iv. 3 1.

their laws and judicial proceedings; of their useful
and elegant arts; of their sciences; and of their
reiigious inflitutions; as far as information can be
gathered from the accounts of the Greek and
Roman writers, compared with what fill remains
of their ancient acquirements and inflitutions.

I. From the inoft ancient accounts of India we

learn, that the ditlinction of ranks and separation
of profeflions were completely efiablifled there.
TL- : . , ;

. ..

...; -

it. ,,. of

iociety co'ciderabiv c

aadvanced in its pogirefA. Arts

in the early stages of fociai ife are so few, and so
r.__l- .__ .. . r 1- . n -

the natives of India, but the perpetuity of it was
secured by an inffitution which mulf be con-
fidered as the fundamental article in the fyflem of
their policy. The whole body of the people was
divided into four orders or casts. The members
of the first, deemed the most sacred, had it for
their province, to study the principles of religion;
to perform its functions; and to cultivate the fcien-
ces. They were the priefis, the inftrudors, and
ih,'c;.:,ic:r; ot t8ice nati)ol. '1 ne erntr.tiers of the
second order were intrusted with the government
and( defence of the Rtate. In peace they were its

natives of India, and, by comparing them with
what we know of that country, endeavour to
deduce such conclusions as tend to point out the
circumstances which have induced the reft of
mankind, in every age, to carry on commercial
intercourse to so great an extent with that country.

Of this intercourse there are conspicuous proofs

in the earliest periods concerning which history
affords information. Not only the people conti-
guous to India, but remote nations, seem to have
been acquainted, from time immemorial, with its
commodities, and to have valued them so highly,
that in order to procure them they undertook
fatiguing, expensive, and dangerous journeys.
Whenever men give a decided preference to the
commodities of any particular country, this must
be owing either to its pofeffing fomc valuable
natural producions peculiar to its foil and climate,
or to some superior progress which its inhabitants
have made in industry, art, and elegance. It is not
to any peculiar excellence in the natural produc-
tions of India that we must ascribe entirely the
prediletion of ancient nations for its commodities;
for, pepper excepted, an article, it mufl be
allowed, of great importance, they are little
different from those of other tropical countries;
and Ethiopia or Arabia might have fully supplied
the Phenicians, and other trading people of
antiquity, with the spices, the perfumes, the
precious tlones, the gold and silver, which formed
the principal articles of their commerce.

Whoever then wishes to trace the commerce

with India to its source, must search for it, not
so much in any peculiarity of the natural produc-
tions of that country, as in the superior improve-
ment of its inhabitants. Many fads have been
transmitted to us, which, if they are examined
with proper attention, clearly demonforate, that
the natives of India were not only more early
civilized, but had made greater progress in civili-
zation than any other people. These I fliall
endeavour to enumerate, and to place them in
such a point of view as may serve both to throw
light upon the institutions, manners, and arts of
the Indians, and to account for the eagerness of all
nations to obtain the productions of their ingenious
induitry.

By the ancient Heathen writers, the Indians

were reckoned among those races of men which
they denominated Autochthones or Aborigines,
whom they confidered as natives'of the foil,
whose origin could not be traced '. By the
inspired writers; the wisdom of the East (an ex-
pression which is to be understood as a description
of their extraordinary progress in science and arts V
was early celebrated '. In order to illustrate and
confirm these explicit testimonies concerning the
ancient and high civilization of the inhabitants of
India, I shall take a view of their rank and con-
dition as individuals; of their civil policy; of

Diod. Sic. lib. ii. p. ixl.
' Kings, iv. 31.

their laws and judicial proceedings; of their useful
and elegant arts; of their sciences; and of their
religious inffitutions; as far as information can be
gathered from the accounts of the Greek and
Roman writers, compared with what still remains
of their ancient acquirements and infitutions.

I. From the most ancient accounts of India we

learn, that the diftindion of ranks and separation
of profelions were completely eftabliffed there.
This is one of the most undoubted proofs of a
society considerably advanced in its progress. Arts
in the early stages of social life are so few, and so
simple, that each man is sufficiently master of
them all, to gratify every demand of his own
limited desires. A savage can form his bow, point
bis arrows, rear his hut, and hollow his canoe,
without calling in the aid of any hand more
skilful than his own '. But when time has aug-
mented the wants of men, the productions of art
become so complicated in their structure, or so
curious in their fabric, that a particular course of
education is requisite towards forming the artist
to ingenuity in contrivance and expertness in
execution. In proportion as refinement spreads,
the diftindion of professions increases, and they
branch out into more numerous and minute sub-
divisions. Prior to the records of authentic history,
and ev:n before the most remote era to which
their own traditions pretend to reach, this fepara-
tion of professions had not only taken place among

iER of Amer. voL iii. I5.

the natives of India, but the perpetuity of it was
secured by an institution which mull be conr
fidered as the fundamental article in the fyflem of
their policy. The whole body of the people was
divided into four orders or casts. The members
of the first, deemed the moRl sacred, had it for
their province, to study the principles of religion;
to perform its fundions; and to cultivate the fcien-
ces. They were the priests, the inflrudors, and
philosophers of the nation. The members of the
second order were intruded with the government
and defence of the state. In peace they were its
rulers and magiRfrates, in war they were the soldiers
who fought its battles. The third was composed
of husbandmen and merchants; and the fourth of
artisans, laborers, and servants. None of these can
ever quit his own cast, or be admitted into another '.
The tation of every individual is unalterably
fixed; his destiny is irrevocable; and the walk of
life is marked out, from which he muff never
deviate. This line of reparation is not only efab.
lified by civil authority, but confirmed and
fanaioned by religion; and each order or call is
said to have proceeded from the Divinity in such
a different manner, that to mingle and confound
them would be deemed an a& of moR daring im-
piety '. Nor is it between the four different tribes

s Ayeen Alrbery, iii. 81, &c. Sketches relating to the
History, &c. of the Hindoos, p. 107, &c.

'See NOTE I.

alone that such ir.nfuperable barriers are fixed; the
member. of each cast adhere invariably to the
profeflion of their forefathers. .From generation
to generation, the fame families have followed,
and will always continue to follow, one uniform
line of life.

Such arbitrary arrangements of the various

members which compose a community, seer, at
firtl view, to be adverse to improvement either in
science or in arts; and by forming around the
different orders of men, artificial barriers, which
it would be impious to p.,s , tend to circumscribe
the operations of the human mind within a
narrower sphere than nature has allotted to them.
VWhen every man is at full liberty to direcd his
efforts towards those objects and that end which
the impulse of his own mind prompts him to
prefer, he may be expected to attain that high
degree of eminence to which the uncontrouled
exertions of genius and industry naturally conduct.
'The regulations of Indian policy, with refped to
the different orders of men, mutl necessarily, at
orne times, check genius in its career, and confine
to the funcions of an inferior cast, talents fitted
to ihine in a higher sphere. But the arrangements
of civil government are'made, not for what is
extraordinary but for what is common; not for
the few, but for the many. The object of the
first Indian legislators was to employ the molt
effecual me.ns of providing for the fublillence,
the fccurity, and happiness of all the members of
the community over which they presided. With

this

this view they set apart certain races of men for
each of the various professions and arts neceifary
in a well-ordered society, and appointed the
exercise of them to be traafmitted from father to
son in fucceflion. This fyfltm, though.etremely
repugnant to the ideas which we, by being placed
in a very different state of society, have formed,
will be found, upon attentive inrpedion, better
aSapted to attain the end in view, than a carclef
obfcrver is, on a first view, apt to-imagine. The
human mind bends to the law of necessity, and
is accuflowed, not only to accommodate idfcK to
the restraints which the condition of its Nature, or
the institutions of its country, impose, but to
acquiesce in them. From his entrance into life,
an Indian knows the station allotted to him, and
the unations to which he is destined by his birth.
' he objects which relate to these are the first
that present themselves to his view. They occupy
his thoughts, or employ his bands; and, from
his earliest years, he is. traed :to the babi. of
doing with ease anddafure that which he- i:t~
continue through life t. do. To this mai er
ascribed that high degree of perfedjon confpi~;.us
in ,nany of the Indian m-nufaCures; and t oIP
veneraion for the pracices of their ancefoi y

my

check the spirit of invention, yet, by adhheriR gto
these, they acquire such an expertness and delicacy
of hand, that Europeans, with all the advantages
of superior science, and the aid of more complete
instruments, have never been able to equal the
exquisite execution of their workmanihip. While

S

tlis high improvement of their more curious
manufaitures excited the admiration, and attracted
the commerce, of other nations, the reparation of
proefions in India, and the early distribution of
the peile into caffes, atttahed to particular kinds of
labor, secured such abundance of the more cor..
mon ad uTeful commodities, as not only supplied
their own wants, but ministered to those of the
countries around them.

To this early division of the people into carts,

we must likewise ascribe a Rriking peculiarity in
the ffate of India; the permanence of its inftitu.
tions, and the immutability in the manners of its
inhabitants. What now is in India, always was
there, and is likely fill to continue: neither the
ferocious violence and illiberal fanaticism of its
Mahomedan conquerors, nor the power ss its
European masters, have effeaed any considerable
alteiation '. The fame diftindions of condition
take place, the famer arrangements in civil and
dorieftic focicty irian , the fame maxims of
religion are held in vei ation, and the fame

ieiincCs and arts are klcivated. Hence, in all

jiges, the trade with India has been the fame;
gold and ilver have uniformly been carried thither
in oeder to purchase the fame commodities with
'which it now supplies all nations; and from the
age of Pliny to the present times, it has been
always confidered and. execrated as a gulf which

See NOTE I.

swallows up the wealth of every other country, tbax
flows incessantly towards it, and from which it
never returns '. According to the accounts which
I have given of the cargoes anciently imported
from India, they appear to have confifed of
·nearly the fame articles with those of the invefl.
ments in our own times; and whatever diferpcg
we may observe in them seems to have arian,
not so much from any diversity in the nature of
the commodities which the Indians prepared for
sale, as from a variety in the tafles, or in the
wants, of the nations which demanded them.

IL Another proof of the early and high civii-

zation of the people of India, may be deduced
from confidering their political constitution and
form of government. The Indians trace back the
hitlory of their own country through an immenfI
fucceflion of ages, and assert, that all Asia, from
the mouth of the Indus on the weft, to the con-
fines of China on the eafit and from the mountains
of Thibet on the north, to Cape Comorin on the
south, formed a vast empire, fubje& to one
mighty sovereign, under whom ruled several hce
reditary Princes and Rajahs. But their chronology,
which measures the life of man in ancient imes
by thousands of years, and computes the length
of the several periods, during which it supposes
the world to have existed, by millions, is so
wildly extravagant, as not to merit any serious

See NOTE III

;,·»

discussion WVe most reft satisfied, then, until
some more certain information is obtained with
refpe~ to the ancient history of India, with taking
the first accounts of that country, which can be
deemed authentic, from the Greeks, who served
under Alexander the Great. They found king.
doms of considerable magnitude established in that
country; The territories of Porus and of Taxiles
comprehended a great part of the Panjab, one of
the moR fertile and best cultivated countries in
India. The kingdom of the Prafij, or Gandaridxe,
itretched to a great extent on both fides of the
Ganges. All the three, as appears from the ancient
Greek -writers, were powerful and populous.

This description of the partition of India into

states of such magnitude, is alone a convincing
proof of its having advanced far in civilization.
In whatever region of the earth there has been
an opportunity of observing the progress of men
in social life, they appear at first in small independ-
ent tribes or communities. Their common wants
prompt them to unite; and their mutualjealoufies,
as well as the necessity of securing subsistence,
compel them to drive to a distance every rival
who might encroach on those domains which they
confider as their own. Many ages elapse before
they coalesce, or acquire sufficient foresight to
provide for the wants, or sufficient wisdom to
condud the affairs, of a numerous society. Even
under the genial climate, and in the rich foil of
India, more favorable perhaps to the union and
increase of the human species than any other part

of the globe, the formation of such extensive
states, as were eldablifhed in that country when
first visited by Europeans, must have been a
work of long time; and the members of them
mull have been long accustomed to exertions of
useful industry.

Though monarchical government was eftablifled

in all the countries of India to which the know-
ledge of the ancients extended, the sovereigns
were far from possessing uncontrouled or despotic
power. No trace, indeed, is discovered there of
any assembly or public body, the members of
which, either in their own right, or as reprefen-
tatives of their fellow-citizens, could interpose in
enating laws, or in superintending the execution
of them. Institutions destined to assert and guard
the rights belonging to men in a social (late, how
familiar soever the idea may be to the people of
Europe, never formed a part of the political con.
ftitution in any great Asiatic kingdom. It was
to different principles that the natives of India
were indebted for reftridtions which limited the
exercise of regal power. The rank of individuals
was unalterably fixed, and the privileges of the
different casts were deemed inviolable. The
monarchs of India, who are all taken from the
second of the four classes formerly defcrihed,
which is intrufled with the functions of govern-
ment and exercise of war, behold among their
fubjeds an order of men far superior to themselves
in dignity, and so conscious of their own pre-
eminence, both in rank and in fandity, that they

S3

would deem it degradation and pollution, if they
were to eat of the fame food with their fovereijrn '.
Their persons are sacred, and even for the most
heinous crimes they cannot be capitally punished;
their blood must never be sied '. To men in
this exalted station monarchs must look up with
relped, and reverence them as the ministers of
religion, and the teachers of wisdom On important
occasions, it is the duty of sovereigns to consult
them, and to be direced by their advice. 1 heir
admonitions, and even their censures, murf be
received with fubmiflive refpec This right of
the Brahmins to offer their opinion with refpe&
to the administration of public affairs was not
unknown to the ancients "; and in some accounts
preserved in India of the events which happened
in their own country, princes are mentioned,
who, having violated the privileges of the cafs,
and disregarded the remonltrances of the Brah-
min-, were deposed by ther authority, and put
to death ".

While the sacred rihts of the Brahmins opposed

a brrer zzaiaft dte cro n-rn of reea paoer
o one hand, i was circu-carind on tde oc er

* £iE v*rs. L p-, 1 9r Sitii. & -. p. -.
1 C% st 9es Li, sk 1 is

& 275.
sl:, 6-

" SIEh . 18. IT. - ;.9. C.

AS'ssaz

I F sec Qvatre mSsi i a -g

Predfry te

& hS to e Coac c-ft6 LGi, ps ei.
M4d cL

by the ideas which those who occupied the highest
stations in society entertained of their own dignity
ald privileges. As none but the members of the
cafl next in rank to that which religion has
rendered sacred, could be employed in any funac
tion of the fate, the Sovereigns of the extensive
kingdoms anciently eftablilhed in India, found
it necessary to intrufl them with the fuperintenL
ence of the cities and provinces too remote to be
under their own immediate infpedion. In these
stations they often acquired such wealth and
influence, that offices conferred during picafure,
continued in their families, and they came gra-
dually to form an intermediate order between the
sovereign and his subjects; and by the vigilant
jealousy with which they maintained their own
dignity and privileges, they confirained their
Tulers to refped them, and to govern with eqy.

N.or were the benefits of these reftiant up~a

the power of the sovereign confined w y to
the two fiaperr ordes in the fate; they xtead-
ed, in soed degree, to the third cabs e~a yed
in mgriclmre. The labors of that He
and ieial body of ~ are o cffmntid t the
preiv-aton ad ha p of focieiy, t t the
rcex atie~ non was paid to render tdeir colioion
fecare and comfaork According to tde idea
wih prevailed among the nairves of India (as
we arc informed by the fit Iuropes who
vificed their coun;y), the fovcrcizn is confideed as
she foe univerfBl prprieor of al the lad in his
d simo~s, and rom him i dsired ca speces

4

of tenure by which his fubjeds can hold it. These
lands were let out to the farmers who cultivated
them, at a stipulated rent, amounting usually to a
fourth part of their annual produce paid in kind ".
In a country where the price of work is extremely
low. and where the labor of cultivation is very
inconsiderable, the earth yielding its producions
almost spontaneously. where subsistence is amaz-
inglv cheap. where few clothes are needed. and
houses arc built and furnilbed at little expense,
this rate cannot be deemed exorbitant or oppref.
five As long as the husbandman continued to
pay the eftablilhed rent. he retained possession of
the farm, which descended, like property, from
father to son.

1 hefe accounts given by ancient authors of the

condition and tenure of the renters of land in
india, agree so perfefly with what now takes
place, that it may be confidered almost as a
deicriptin of the present Ctate of its cultivation.
In every part of India, where the native Hindoo
Princes retain dominion, the RyotJ, the modern
name by which the renters of land are distinguish-
ed, hold their possessions by a lease, which may
be confidered as perpetual, and at a rate fixed by
ancient surveys and valuations. This arrangement
has been so long eftabilhed, and accords so well
with the ideas of the natives, concerning the
diftindions of cafls, and the funcions allotted to
each, that it has been inviolably maintained in all

" Strabo, liv. x. p. aoi0. A. Diod. Sic. lib. ii. p. 53.

the provinces subjed either to Mabomedans or
Europeans; and, to both, it serves as the basis on
which their whole fyflem of finance is founded ".
In a more remote period, before the original
inflitutions of India were subverted by foreign
invaders, the industry of the husbandman, on
which every member of the community depended
for subsistence, was as secure as the tenure by
which he held his lands was equitable. Even war
did not interrupt his labors or endanger his pro-
perty. It was not uncommon, we are informed,
that while two hostile armies were fighting a
battle in one field, the peasants were ploughing
or reaping in the next field in perfed tranquillity ".
These maxims and regulations of the ancient
legislators of India have a near resemblance to
the system of those ingenious modern speculators
on political economy, who represent the produce
of land as the sole source of wealth in every
country; and who confider the discovery of this
principle, according to which they contend that
the government of nations Ihould be conduced,
as one of the greatest efforts of human wisdom.
Under a form of government, which paid such
attention to all the different orders of which the
society is composed, particularly the cultivators
of the earth, it is not wonderful that the ancients
Thould describe the Indians as a most happy race
of men; and that the most intelligent modern

'+ See NOTE IV.
" Strab. lib. xv, p. 1030. A.

observers mbould celebrate the equity, the human-
ity, and mildnes of Indian policy. A Hindoo
Rajah, as I have been informed by persons well
acquainted with the state of India, resembles more
a father presiding in a numerous family of his
own children, than a lovereign, ruling over
inferiors, subjed to his dominion. He endeavours
to secure their happiness with vigilant solicitude;
they are attached to him with the moRt tender
affection and inviolable fidelity. We can hardly
conceive men to be placed in any state more
favorable to their acquiring all the advantages de-
rived from social union. It is only when the mind
is perfecly at ease, and neither feels nor dreads
oppression, that it employs its adive powers in
forming numerous arrangements of police, for
fecurirg its enjoyments and increaring them. Many
arrangements of this nature the Greeks, though
accuflomed to their own institutions, the most
perfec at that time in Europe, observed and
admired among the Indians, and mention them as
inrfances of high civilization and improvement.
There were efablilbed among the Indians three
diftind classes of officers, one of which had it in
charge to infped agriculture, and every kind of
country-work. They measured the portions of
land allotted to each renter. 1 hey had the custody
of the Tazks, or public reservoirs of water, without
a regular diitribution of which, the fields in a
torrid climate cannot be rendered fertile. They
marked out the course of the highways, along
which, at certain distances, they erected stones,

to measure the road and direct travellers ". To
officers of a second class was committed the
inspection of the police in cities, and their funCions,
of course, were many and various; some of which
only I shall specify. They appropriated houses
for the reception of firangers; they protetedthem
from injury, provided for their subsistence, and,
when seized with any disease, they appointed
physicians to attend them; and, on the event of
their death, they not only buried them with
decency, but took charge of their effects, and
restored them to their relations. They kept exadc
registers of births and of deaths. They visited
the public markets, and examined weights and
measures. The third class of officers superintended
the military department; but, as the objects to
which their attention was direced are foreign
from the subjed of my inquiries, it is unnecessary
to enter into any detail with refpet to them ".

As manners and cutomrs in India descend

alrnof without variation from age to age,
many of the peculiar inRitutions which I have
enumerated still fubfit there. There is still the
fame attention to the conftrudion and prefer-
vation of tanks, and the ditfribution of their
waters. The diretion of roads, and placing
stones along them, is till an objet- of police.
Choultries, or houses built for the accommodation
of travellers, are frequent in every part of the

" See NOTE V.
7Strabo, lib. xv. p. 103 4. A. Diod. Sicul. lib. ii p. i 4.

country, and are useful as well as noble monument.
of Indian munificence and humanity. It is only
among men in the most improved tlate of society,
and under the belf forms of government, that we
discover inflitutions similar to those which I have
described; and many nations have advanced far in
their progress, without eftablilfing arrangements
of police equally perfect

IlL In estimating the progress which any nation

has made in civilization, the objed that merits
the greatest degree of attention, next to its political
constitution, is the spirit of the laws and nature
of the forms by which its judicial proceedings are
regulated. In the early and rude ages of society,
the few disputes with respect to property which
arise, are terminated by the interposition of the
old men. or by the authority of the chiefs in every
small tribe or community; their decisions are
dictated by their own discretion, or founded on
plain and obvious maxims of equity. But ascon-
troverfies multiply, cafes similar to such as have
been formerly determined must recur, and the
awards upon these grow gradually into precedents,
which serve to regulate future judgments. Thus,
long before the nature of property is defined by
positive statutes, or any rules prescribed concern-
ing the mode of acquiring or conveying it, there
is gradually formed, in every state, a body of cuf-
tomary or common law, by which judicial pro-
ceedings are directed, and every decision conform-
able to it is submitted to with reverence, as the

result of the accumulated wisdom and experience
of ages.

In this R(ate the administration of justice seems

to have been in India when first viited by
Europeans. Though the Indians, according to
their account, had no written laws, but deter-
mined every controverted point, by recollecing
what had been formerly decided "; they aftert,
that justice was dispensed among them with great
accuracy, and that crimes were most severely
puniflied ". But in this general observation is
contained all the intelligence which the ancients
furnish concerning the nature and forms of judicial
proceedings in India. From the time of Megaft-
henes, no Greek or Roman of any note appear
to have resided long enough in the country, or
to have been so much acquainted with the cuflos
of the natives, as to be capable of entering into
any detail with refpeot to a point of so much
importance in their policy. Fortunately, the
defects of their information have been amply
supplied by the more accurate and e;tenfive
researches of the moderns. During the course of
almost three centuries, the number of persons who
have resorted from Europe to India has been
great. Many of them, who have remained long in
the country, and were persons of liberal education
and enlarged minds, have lived in such familiar
intercourse with the natives, and acquired So

Strabo, lib. xv. zoa;. D.
' Diod. Sicul. lib. ii. p. 154.

competent a knowledge of their languages, as
enabled them to observe their institutions with
attention, and to describe them with fidelity.
Refpcdable as their authority may be * I shall
not, in what I offer for illustrating the judicial
proceedings of the Hindoos, reft upon it alone,
but fball derive my information from sources
higher and more pure.

Towards the middle of the sixteenth century,

Akber the sixth, in descent from Tamerlane,
mounted the throne of Indotan. He is one of
'te few sovereigns entitled to the appellation both
of Great and Good, and the only one of Maho-
medan race, whose mind appears to have risen
so far above all the illiberal prejudices of that
fanatical religion in which he was educated, as to
ie capable of forming a plan worthy of a monarch
who loved his people, and was solicitous to render
them happy. As, in every province of his excen-
five dominions, the Hindoos formed the great
body of his fubjets, he labored to acquire a
perfect knowledge of their religion, their sciences,
their laws and institutions; in order that he might
condn~ every part of his government, particularly
the administration of justice, in a manner as much
accommodated as possible to their own ideas .
In this generous undertaking he was seconded
with zeal by his vizier Abul Fazel, a minister
:-wofe understanding was not less enlightened than
that of his master. By their assiduous researches,

'' See NOTE VL

and consultation of learned men ", such informa
tion was obtained as enabled Abut Fazel to
publi(h a brief compendium of Hindoo jurifprud-
ence in the Ayeen Akbery ', which may be
confidered as the first genuine communication of
its principles to persons of a different religion.
About two centuries afterwards, the illuatrious A D. t77a
example of Akber was imitated and furpafed by
Mr. Hastings, the Governor General of the Britifi
Settlements in India. By his authority, and under
his infpeation, the most eminent Pundits, or
Brahmins learned in the laws, of the provinces
over which he presided were assembled at Calcutta;
and, in the course of two years, compiled, from
their most ancient and approved authors, sentence
by sentence, without addition or diminution, a
full code of Hindoo-laws"; which is, undoubtedly,
the most valuable and authentic elucidation of
Indian policy and manners that has been hitherto
communicated to Europe.

According to the Pundits, some of the write!c

upon whose authority they found the decrees
which they have inserted in the Code, lived several
millions of years before their time ,*; and they
boast of having a fu'ceffion of expounders of their
laws from that period to the pIfdent. Withiodt
entering into any examination of Wliat is 'l

t Ayeen Akbery, A. vol. ii. p. 95.
" Vol. iii. p. 197, &c.
' Preface to the Code, p. xq
' ,a. p. w......

extravagant, we may conclude, that the Ilindoos
have in their poffefilon treatises concerning the
laws and jurisprudence of their country, of more
remote antiquity than are to be found in any
other nation. The truth of this depends not upon
their own testimony alone, but it is put beyond
doubt by one circumstance, that all these treatises
are written in the Sanflreet language, which has
not been spoken for many ages in any part of
IndoRan, and is now understood by none but
the most learned Brahmins. That the Hindoos
were a people highly civilized, at the time when
their laws were composed, is most clearly establish-
ed by internal evidence contained in the Code
itsel. Among nations beginning to emerge from
barbarism-, the regulations of law are extremely
simple, and applicable only to a few obvious
cafes of daily occurrence. Men must have been
long united in a social Rate, their tranfgtions
must have been numerous and complex, and
judges mufl have determined an immense variety
of controversies to which these give rife, before
the system of law becomes so voluminous and
comprchenfive as to dired the judicial proceedings
of a nation far advanced in improvement. In that
early age if the Roman republic, when the laws
of the Twelve Tables were promulgated, nothing
more was required than the laconic injun'dions
which they contain for regulating the decitions of
courts of jufice ; but, in a later period, the body
of civil law, ample as its contents are, was
found hardly sufficient for that purpose. To the

jejune

jejune brevity of the Twelve Tables, the Hindoo
Code has no resemblance, but with refped to the
number and variety of points it confiders, it will
bear a comparison with the celebrated digest of
Jufinian; or with the systems of jurisprudence in
nations most highly civilized. The articles of
which the Hindoo Code is composed, are arrang-
ed in natural and luminous order. They are
numerous and comprehensive, and investigated
with that minute attention and discernment which
are natural to a people diftinguilhed for acuteness
and fubtility of underitanding, who have been
long accustomed to the accuracy of judicial pro-
ceedings, and acquainted with all the refinements
of regal practice. The decisions concerning every
point (with a few exceptions occasioned by loctl
prejudices and peculiar customs) are founded upon
the great and immutable principles of jutice which.
the human mind acknowledges and refpeds, in
every age, and in all parts of the earth. Whoever
examines the whole work , cannot entertain ,a
doubt of its containing the jurisprudence of an
enlightened and commercial people. Whoever
looks into any particular title, will be surprised
with a minuteness of detail and nicety of diftinc-
tion, which, in many inflances, seem to go
beyond the attention of European legislation; and
it is remarkable that some of the regulations which
indicate the greatest dgree of refinement, were
eftablilhed in periods of the most remote antiquity.
" In the first of the sacred law-tracts," (as is obfer-
ved by a person to whom Oriental literature,

T

in all its branches, has been greatly indebted,)
" which the Hindoos suppose to have been revealed
& by Menu some millions of years ago, there is
C a curious passage on the legal interest of money,
c and the limited rate of it in different cafes,
c with an exception in regard to adventures at sea,
Q an exception which the sense of mankind approves,
a and which commerce absolutely requires, though
" it was not before the reign of Charles 1. that
a our Eng!ifh jurisprudence fully admitted it in
C refpe& of maritime contra&si"." It is likewise
worthy of notice, that though the natives of
India have been diftinguilhed in every age for the
humanity and mildness of their disposition, yet
bfch is the solicitude of their law-givers to preserve
the order and tranquillity of society, that the
punihments which they inflid on criminals, are
(agreeably to an obfcrvation of the ancients
already mentioned) extremely rigorous. " Punish-
" ment " (according to a lriking personification in
the Hindoo code) ' is the magistrate; punishment
U is the infpircr of terror; puni[hment is the nou-
" rilher of the fubjeds; punifiment is the defender
* from calamity; punishment is the guardian of
a those that sleep; punilhment, with a black
a aspect, and a red eye, terrifies the guilty . "
1V As the condition of the ancient inhabitants

0f India, whether we confider them as individuals,
_ " S'ir Wmiliam Jones's Third Discourse, Afat. Research.

p .
4 g.

" Code, c.. xi. S 8.

or as members of society, appears, from the
preceding invefRigation, to have been extremely
favor.ible to the cultivation of useful and elegant
arts; w are naturally led to inquire, whether
the progress which they actually made in them,
was such as might have been expeaed from a
people in that situation. In attempting to trace
this progress, we have not the benefit of guidance
.equal to that which conducted our researches con-
-cerning the former articles of inquiry. 'Ihe
ancients, from their slender acquaintance with the
interior (late of India, have been able to commu-
nicate little information with refpecd to the arts
cultivated there, and though the moderns, during
their continued intercourse with India for three
centuries, have had access to observe them with
greater attention, it is of late only, that by

lfudying the languages now and formerly spoken
in India, and by consulting and translating their
molt eminent authors, they have begun to enter
into that path of inquiry which leads with certainty
to a thorough knowledge of the state of arts
cultivated in that country.

One of the first arts which human ingenuity

aimed at improving, beyond what mere nectility
requires, was that of building. In the brief remarks
which the subjet of my inquiries leads me tp
make on the progress of this art in India, I (hall
confine my attention wholly to those of highest
antiquity. The mnot durable monuments of human
industry are public buildings. 1 he productions of
art, formed for the common purposes of life, waste

T2

and perish in using them; but works defined for
the benefit of pofteriry fubfit through ages, and
it is according to the manner in which these are
executed, that we form a judgment with refped
to the degree of power, skill, and improvement
to which the people by whom they were erected
had attained. In every part of India monuments
of high antiquity are found. These are of two
kinds, such as were consecrated to the offices of
religion, or fortresses built for the security of the'
country. In the former of these, to which Europe-
ans, whatever their Rirudture may be, give the
general name of Pa9odas, we may observe a
diverity of style, which both marks the gradual
progress of architecture, and throws light on the
general state of arts and manners in different pe-
riods. The most early Pagodas appear to have
been nothing more than excavations in mountain-
ous parts of the country, formed probably in
imitation of the natural caverns to which the first
inhabitants of the earth retired for safety during
the night, and where they found hlelter from the
inclemency of the seasons. The mol celebrated,
and, as there is reason to believe, the most ancient
of all there, is the Pagoda in the island Elephanta,
at no great dirtance from Bombay. It has been
hewn by the hands of man out of a solid rock,
about half way up a high mountain, and formed
into a (pacious area, nearly 12o feet square. In
order to support the roof, and the weight of the
mountain that lies above it, a number of massy
pillrs, and of a form not inelegant, have been

cut out of the fame rock, at such regular distances,
as on the first entrance presents to the eye of the
spectator an appearance both of beauty and of
tlrength. Great part of the inside is covered with
human figures in high relief, of gigantic size as
well as singular forms, and diftinguifed by a
variety of symbols, representing, it is probable,
the attributes of the deities whom they worfaipped,
or the actions of the heroes whom they admired.
In the isle of Salfette, still nearer to Bombay, are
excavations in a similar style, hardly inferior in
magnificence, and destined for the fame religious
purposes.

These (tupendous works are of fich high anti-

quity, that as the natives cannot, either from
history or tradition, give any information concern-
ing the time in which they were executed, they
universally ascribe the formation of them to the
power of superior beings. From the extent and
grandeur of these subterraneous mansions, which
intelligent travellers compare to the most celebrated
monuments of human power and art in any part
of the earth, it is manifest that they could not
have been formed in that stage of fociat life where
men continue divided into small tribes, unaccu-
tomed to the efforts of persevering industry. It is
only in States of considerable extent, and among
people long habituated to subordination, and to
adC with concert, that the idea of such magnificent
works is conceived, or the power of accomplii-
ing them can be found.

T3

" and which commerce absolutely requires, though
" it wa not before the reign of Charles I. tti.i

our Tngii;n lurifprudence iuiiy admitted it i;

" respect ot maritime contracdts"." It is likewif[
worthy of notice, that though the natives of
India have been diltinguifhed in every age for tlih
humanity and mildness of their disposition, vet
such is the solicitude of their law-givers to prest rye
the order and tranquillity of society, that the
punishments which they inflict on ciiminals, are
( agreeably to an obfrrvation of the ancients
already mentioned ) extremely rigorous. " Pulnif.
" ment " (according to a firiking personification in
the Hindoo code) " is the magiflrate; punifhmen;
" i the irfpirer of terror; punifiment is the nout
" rifs:r of the fubjr-ctd puninmmert is the defender
" from caljnity; puniflrnent is the guard!an of
" thoce that sleep, puiifhment, with a black
" artc , and a red eye, terrifies the guilty '."

IV Xs the condition of the ancient inhabitants
ps India, whether we confider them as individuals,

" Sir W'illiam Jones's Third Discourse, Afiat. Research,
p. 4:8.

" Code, ch. xxi § 8.

tini progref, we have not the benefit of guidance
,eIlil to that which conducted our researches con-
cerninr the former al-tids of inquiry. 'I he
ancients, from their slender acquaintance with the
interior slate of India , have been able to commu-
nieate little information with rcfpect to the arts
cul.ivated there, and though the moderns, during
their continued intercourse with India for three
centuries, have had access to observe them with
greater attention, it is of late only, that by
ftu:lying the languages now and formerly spoken
in India , and by consulting and translating their
molt eminent authors, they have begun to enter
into that path of inquiry which leads with certainty
to a thorough knowledge of the state of arts
cultivated in that country.

Oi:e of the first arts which human ingenuity
ained at improving, beyond what mere neciffity
r luire, was that of building. In the brief remarks
which the fubjedt of my inquiries leads me tp
make on the progress of this art in India, I Ihall
cot:ine my attention wholly to those of highelt
anuiquity. The mrat durable monuments of human
iid(lulrv are public buildings. 1 he productions of
art, tufned for the common purposes of life, waste

T

aid perif: in ufir! them; but works deflincd for
the benieit of poitcri'y subsist through ages, and
it is according to tile manner in viwhich these are
exccuted , that we form a judgment with respect
to the degree of power, 1ill , and improvement
to which the people by whom they were erected
hAd attained. In every part of India monuments
of high antiquity are found. These are of two
kinds, such as were conlecrated to the offices of
religion, or fortrcffes built for the security of the
cou.trv In the former of these, to which Europe.
ans, wx-htever their firucture may be, give the
genciAl name of r'c,,.!s , we may observe a
diversity of ftvle, which both marks the graduial
piogrefs of architec&ure, and throws light on the
general state of arts and manners in different pe-
riods. The most early Pagodas appear to have
been nothing more than excavations in mountain-
ous p.rts of the country, formed probably in
imitation of the natural caverns to which the fiit
inhabitants of the earth retired for safety during
the night, and where they found (felter from the
inclemency of the seasons. The molt celebrated,
and, a, there is reason to believe, the molt ancient
of all these, is the Pagoda in the island Elephanta,
at no great diCtance from Bombay. It has been
hewn bv the hands of man out of a solid rock,
about half wa.y up a high mountain, and formed
into a spacious area, nearly 12o feet square. In
order to support the roof, and the weight of the
mountain that lies above it, a number of massy
pilldrs, and of a form not inelegant, have been

cut out of the fame rock, at such regular ditance,
as on the first entrance prefcnts to the eye of the
spectator an appearance both of beauty and of
tlrength. Great part of the inside is covered with
human figures in high relief, of gigantic size as
well as singular forms, and distinguished by a
variety of symbols, representing , it is probable,
the attributes of the deities whom they worshipped,
or the actions of the heroes whom they admired.
In the isle of Salfette, still nearer to Bombay, are
excavations in a similar style, hardly inferior in
magnificence, and destined for the fame religious
purposes.

Thcfe flupendous works are of such high anti-
quity, that as the natives cannot, either from
history or tradition, give any information concern-
ing the time in which they were executed, they
universally ascribe the formation of them to the
power of superior beings. From the extent and
grandeur of these subterraneous mansions, which
intelligent travellers compare to the molt celebrated
monuments of human power and art in any part
of the earth, it is manifelt that they could not
have been formed in that Itage of social life where
men continue divided into small tribes, unaccuf-
tomed to the efforts of persevering industry. It is
only in States of considerable extent, and among
people long habituated to subordination, and to
act with concert, that the idea of such magnificent
works is conceived, or the power of accomplish-
ing them can be found.

T3

That some such powerful late wac eflablifhed

in India at the time wvhen the excavations in t!,e
islands of lephanta and Salfette were formed, is
not the only conclusion to be drawn from a survey
of them; the ft le in which the sculptures with
wvltih they are adorned i, executed, indicate a con.
fiderable improvement in art at that early pt rlid.
Sculpture ic the imitative art in whi h man feerms
to have male the first trial of hi, own talentc.
But even in those countries where it his attained
to the hgh.ft deviee ot pertection , its progr fs
has been extremely flow. Whoever has attend d
to the hiltor ot tih'i art in Greece, knowt. how
f.r removed the t ift rude effav to represent the
human form, was fiom any complete dtl.ncation
of it '. But the d.ti.rcnt groupes of figures whihd
still remain entire in the Pagoda of H leph.lnta,
howeveer low they mult rank if they be compartd
with the more elegrant works of Grecian or ev en
Ertican artirt;, are tinified in a flyle confider.ibly
superior to the hard ii: xpreflive malnner of the
Egyptians, or the figures in the celebrated p.!.,ce
of Verfcpol s. In thi- light they i.ave appeared to
ptrfons abundantly qu.lified to appr ti.ite their
merit, and fron different drrvwings p.irticulrly
those ot ,NiebLihr. a traveller equ:ily accurate in
ohfcrviing, and faithful in deferibing, we murt
form a favorable opinion of the state of arts in
India at that period.

" Winkelman's Hill. de l'Art chez lea Anciens, tom, i.
p. 32, &C.

It is worthy of notice, that although several of
the figures in the caverns at Elephanta be so
different from those now exhibited in the Pagodas
as objecis of veneration, that some learned Europe-
ans have imagined they represent the rites of a
religion more ancient than that now eRtablilhed
in Indotan, yet by the Hindoos themselves the
caverns are confidered as hallowed places of their
own worIhip, and they still resort thither to p r-
form their devotions, and honor the figures there
in the fame manner with those in their own
Pagodas. In confirmation of this, I have been
informed by an intelligent person, who vifiecd
this fnbterraneous sanctuary in the year 178z, that
lie was accompanied by a sagacious Brahmin, a
native of Benares, who, though he had never
been in it before that time , was well acquainted
with the parentage, education, and life of every
deity or human figure there rcprefented, and
explained with fluency the meaning of the various
symbols by which the images were distinguished.
'his may be confidered as a clear proof that the
fytlem of mythology now prevalent in Benares,
i, not differenit from that delineated in the caverns
of Elephanta. Mr. Hunter, who visited Elephanta
in the year 1784, seems to confider the figures
there as representing deities who are fill objects
of worship among the Hindoos ". One circur-
Itance serves to confirm thejultnefs of this opinion.
Several of the molt conspicuous personages in

"Archaeologia. vol. vii. p. 286, &c.

T4

the grotpes at Elephlinta are decorated with the
Z rnar, the ftrred itring or corA peculiar to the
ord r of Br..hinins, an authentic evidence of the
difl;nctlon of casts having been efablifhed in India
at t!e time wihen these works were finished.

2. Instead of c.averns, the original places of

wvorfip, which could b. fnrmcd only in particular
situation;, the devotion of the people soon began
to raise temples in honor of their deities in other
parts of India. 1 hie fructure of these was at tirft
extremely fimp'e. They were pyramids of large
dimcnl'on, and had no light within but what came
frnm a small door. Alter having been long accuf-
tnrmed to perform a'l the rites of religion in the
gloom of caxernr, the Indians were naturally led
to confider the solem:n d.rknnefs of such a mansion
ai sacred. Some Pazoda, in this first style of build.
inz Still remain in Indoftan. Drnwings of two of
thtfe at Deogur, and of a third near Tanjore in
the Carna-ic. all fabric, of great antiquity, have
been publiflied by Mr. Hlodges ", and though
they are rude ftrucures. they are of such magni.
tude as mult have required the power of some
considerable state to rear them.

3. In proportion to the progress of the different

countries of Inidia in opulence and relinement, the
flructure of their temples gradually improved.
1-iom plain buildings they became highly orna-
mented fabrics, and. both by their extent and
rragnificence, are monuments of the power and

' N' VI.

t:ifte of the people by whom they were erected.
In this highly finished style there are Pagodas of
great antiquity in different parts of Indoftan,
particularly in the Southern provinces, which
were not exposed to the deftrudive violence of
Mlahomedan zeal ". In order to aflift my readers
in forming such an idea of these buildings as may
enable them to judge with refped to the early
slate of arts in India, I ihall briefly describe two,
of which we have the molt accurate accounts.
T he entry to the Pagoda of Chillambrum , near
Porto Novo, on the Coromandel coast, held in
high veneration on account of its antiquity, is by
a llatclir gate under a pyramid a hundred and
twenty-two feet in height, built with large tfones
above forty feet long, and more than five feet
fiuare, and all covered with plates of copper,
Adorned with an imrenfe variety of figures neatly
executed. The whole firuture extends one
thounfnd three hundred and thirty two feet in one
direction, and nine hundred and thirty-fix in
another. Some of the ornamental parts are finifled
with an elegance entitled to the admiration of the
most ingenious artists "'. The Pagoda of Sering-
lam , superior in fancity to that of Chillambrum,
surpasses it as much in grandeur; and, fortunately,
I can convey a more perfed idea of it by adopting
the words of an clcgant and accurate historian.

See NOTE VII.

'" i1mn. d- Literat. tom. y.xx:i. p. 44, &c. Voy. de
M. Sonnerat, tom. i. F. 217.

This Pagoda is situated about a mile from the
western extremity of the ifltnd of Seringham,
formed by the division of the great river Caveri
into two channels, " It is compored of seven
" square inclofures, one within the other, the
" walls of which are twenty-five feet high and
" four thick. These inclofures are three hundred
"and fifty feet diflant from one another, and

each has four large gates with a high tower;
which are placed, one in the middle of each

" fide of the inclofure, and opposite to the four
" cardinal points. The outward wall is near four
"miles in circumference, and its gateway to the
" South is ornamented with pillars, fcveral of
" which are single stones thirty-three feet long,

and nearly five in diameter; and those which
form the roof are still larger: in the inmost

c inclofures are the chapels. About half a mile
" to the East of Seringham, and nearer to the
" Caveri than the Coleroon, is another large
"Pagoda, called Jembikifma; but this has only
"one inclofure. The extreme veneration in which
" Seringham is held, arises from a belief that it
" contains that identical image of the god

W" \ifchnu, which used to be worshipped by

"the god Brahma. Pilgrims from all parts of the
"peninsula come here to obtain absolution, and
" none come without an offering of money; and
"a large part of the revenue of the island is
' allotted for the maintenance of Brahmins who
' inhabit the Pagoda; and these, with their
"families, formerly compostd a multitude not less

" than forty thousand fouls, maintained, without
c, labor, by the liberality of superstition. Here,
" a in all the other great Pagodas of India, the
" Brahmins live in a subordination which knows
"no reliftance, and flutber in a voluptuoufilcfs
" which knows no wants . "

r he other species of public buildings which
I mentioned, were those ereced for the defence
of the country. From the immense plains of Indoftan
there arise, in different parts, eminences and rocks
formed by nature to be places of lirength. Of
these the natives early took possession, and forti-
fying them with works of various kinds, rendered
them al:noft impregnable station.. 'I'here seems
to have been in some distant age, a period of
general turbulence and danger in India, when such
retreats were deemed eflentially necetfary to puL'c
faetv ; for among the duties of magifirates pre-
fcribed by the Pundits, one is, " that he (hall erec
"a tirong fort in the place where he chufes to
" reside, and .flill build a wall on all the f-ur
" ides of it, with towers and battlements, and
" fn.dl make a full ditch around it '. " Of these
fortretfes several remain, which, both from the
appearance of the buildings, and from the tradition
ot the natives, mull have been conftruded in
very remote times. Mlr Hodges has published
vicws of three of these, one of Chunar Gur,

Orme's Hist. of Alilit. Transact. of Indoflan, vol. i.
p. I-8.

" Introd. to Code of Gentoo Laws, p. cxi.

situated upon the river Ganges, about sixteen
miles above the city of Benares '; the second, of
Gwallior, about eighty miles to the south of
Agra "; the third of Bidjegur, in the territory
of Benares ". They are all, particularly Gwallicr,
works of considerable magnitude and fIrength.
The fortresses in Bengal, however, are not to be
compared with several in the Decan. Affccrgur,
Burhampour, and Dowlatabad, are deemed by
the natives to be impregnable '"; and I am assured,
by a good judge, that AfTeergur is indeed a mot
Stupendous work, and so advantageously situated
that it would be extremely difficult to reduce it
by force.

Nor is it only from surveying their public works

that we are juflified in assenting the early profi-
ciency of the Indians in elegant and useful arts:
we are led to form the fame conclusion by a view
of those productions of their ingenuity, which
were the chief articles of their trade with foreign
nations. Of these the labors of the Indian loom
and needle have, in every age, been the molt
celebrated; and fine linen is conjectured, with
some probability, to have been called by the
ancients Sindon, from the name of the river Indus
or Sindus, near which it was wrought in the
highest perfedion ". The cotton manufactures
of India seem anciently to have been as much

"' N' I. t N' II.
' N' III.

Rennel. lem. p. l;;. 1;9.
' Sir \ iiliam Jones's Third Discourse, p. 42S.

admired as they are at present, not only for their
delicate texture, but for the elegance with which
some of them are embroidered, and the beautiful
color of the flowers with which others are adorned.
From the earliest period of European intercourse
with India, that country has been distinguished
for the number and excellence of the fubflances
for dying various colors, with which it abounded ".
The dye of the deep blue color in highest estimation
among the Romans bore the name of Indicum ".
From India too, the substance used in dying a
bright red color, seems to have been imported ";
and it is well known that both in the cotton and
silk stuffs which we now receive from India, the
blue and the red are colors of moR conspicuous
luitre and beauty. But however much the ancients
may have admired these produCtions of Indian art,
sone circumstances, which I have already men-
tioned, rendered their demand for the cotton-
manufadures of India, far inferior to that of
modern times; and this has occasioned the infor-
mation concerning them which we receive from
the Greek and Roman writers to be very imperfet.
We may conclude, however, from the wonderful
resemblance of the ancient state of India to the
modern, that, in every period, the productions of

" Strab. lib. xv. p. ioi8 A. 1024 B.
" Plin. Nat. Hit. lib. xxxv. c. 6. § 27.
7 Salmafius Exercit. Plinianae in Solin. o80, &c. 81o.

Salmafus de Homionymis Hyles Jatrica, c. 107. bee
NOTE VIII.

their looms were at various as beautiful. The
ini-eernuty of the Indians in othir kinds of work.
rn.:!fhip, p.rticularly in metals and in ivory. is
mentioned with pra.ise by ancient authors, but
without any particular description of their nature ".
Of these early productions of Indian artists, there
are now fulme specimens in Europe, from which
it appears that they were acquainted with the
method of engraving upon the hardest sones and
gems; and, both in the elegance of their designs
and in neatness of execution, had arrived at a
considerable degree of excellence. An ingenious
writer maintains, that the art of engraving on
gems was probably an Indian invention, and cer.
tainly was early improved there, and he supports
this opinion by several plausible arguments ".
The Indian engraved gems, of which he has
published descriptions, appear to be the work-
manlhip of a very remote period, as the legends
on them are in the San(kreet language ".

But it iC not onlv frrcm the improved state of

mechanic art- in India, that we conclude it, inha-
bitints to have been highly civilizedl; a proof of
this, still more convriiiin . m.v be deduced from
the early and extraordinary productions of their
genius in the fine arts. This evidence is rendered

Strabo, liv. xv, p. o104. B Dionyf. Periegies, verf. iol6.

" asp:'s Introd. to Taflie's Delcripc. Catal. of engraved
Gems, &c. p. xii. &c.

"Ibid. vol. i. p. 74. vol. ii. plate xiii.

more interesting, by being derived from a source
of knowledge which the laudable curiosity of our
countrymen has opened to the people of Europe
within these few years. That all the science and
literature possessed by the Brahmins, were con-
tained in books written in a language, understood
by a few only of the molt learned among them,
is a fad which has long been known; and all the
Europeans fettled in India during three centuries,
have complained that the Brahmins obflinately
refused to inflrud any person in this language.
But at length, by address, mild treatment, and a
persuasion, that the earnestness with which inftruc-
tion was solicited, proceeded not from any intention
of turning their religion into derision, but from
a desire of acquiring a perfect knowledge of their
fclences and literature, their scruples have been
overcome. Several Britilh gentlemen are now
completely masters of the Sanfkreet language.
The mysterious veil, formerly deemed impene-
trable, is removed; and, in the course of five
years, the curiosity of the public has been gratified
by two publications as singular as they were
unexpected., The one is a translation, by Mr.
Wilkins, of an Episode from the Mahabarat, an
Epic poem. in high estimation among the Hindoos,
composed , according to their account, by Kreefhna
Dwypayen Veias, the most eminent of all their
Brahmins, above three thousand years before the
Christian era. The other is Sacontala, a dramatic
poem, written about a century before the birth
of Christ, translated by Sir William Jones. 1 shall

endeavour to give my readers such a view of the
subject and co lpofition of each of these, as may
enable them to elimate the degree of merit which
they pofTefs.

i he 7,lahabarat is a voluminous poem, consist-

ing of upwards of four hundred thousand lines.
lMr. Wilkins has translated more than a third of
it; but only a short episode, entitled Baghvat.
Geeta, is hitherto published, and from this fpeci-
men we muff form an opinion with respect to the
whole. The subjec of the poem is a famous
civil war between two branches of the royal house
of Bhaurat. When the forces on each fide were
formed in the field, and ready to decide the contest
by the sword, Arjoon, the favorite and pupil of
the god Kreefhna, who accompanied him in this
hour of danger, requested of him to cause his
chariot advance between two hostile armies. He
looked at both armies, and beheld, on either fide,
none but grandsires, uncles, cousins, tutors, sons,
and brothers, near relations or bofom.friends; and
when he had gazed for a while, and saw these
prepared for the fight, he was seized with extreme
pity and compunction, and uttered his sorrow in
the following words: -- " Having beheld, 0
" Kreeshna! my kindred thus waiting anxious for
" the fight, my members fail me, my countenance
" withereth, the hair standeth an end upon my
" body, and all my frame trembleth with horror!
" Even Gandtev, my bow, efcapeth from my
"hand, and my skin is parched and dried up. -
" When I have destroyed my kindred, {hall I

"longer

c longer look for happiness ? I wish not for
" victory, A'iteshna; I want not dominion; I want
" not pleasure; for what is dominion and the
"enjoyments of life, or even life itself, when
" those for whom dominion, pleasure, and enjoy-
" ment were to be coveted, have abandoned life
"and fortune, and fInd here in the field ready
" for the battle. Tutors , sons, and fathers, grand.
" fires and grandsons, uncles, nephews, cousins,
"kindred, and friends! Although they would
" kill me, I wilh not to fight them; no not even
" f.r the dominion of the three regions of the
"universe, much less for this little earth ". " In
order to remove his scruples, Kreefhna informs
him what was the duty of a prince of the Chehteree,
or military cast, when called to ad in such a
fitation, and incites him to perform it by a
variety of moral and philosophical arguments, the
nature of which I flall have occasion to confider
particularly in another part of this Dissertation.
In this dialogue between Kreefhna and his pupil,
there are several pafflages which give a high idea
of the I enius of the poet. The speech of Arjoon
I have luoted, in which he expresses the anguili
of his foul, muln have firuck every reader as
beautifi I and pathetic; and I lliall afterwards
produce a description of the Supreme Being, and
ofthe reverence wherewith he should be worflip-
ped, which is sublime But while these excite our
admiration, and confirm us in the belief of a high

Baghvat Geeta, p. 30, 31.

V

degree of civilization in that country where such
a work was produced , we are surprised at the
defect of taste and of art in the manner of introdu.
cing this Epifole. Two poweiful armies are drawn
up in battle-array, eager for the fight; a young
hero and his inlructor are described as standing
in a char:ot of war between them; that surely
was not the moment for teaching him the principles
of philcfonphy. and deiiveiing eighteen letures of
metaphylics and theology.

\Withl regard , however, both to the dramatic

and epic poetry of the llindoos, we labor under
the disadvantage of being obliged to form an
opinion from a single specimen of each, and that
of the latter, too, (as It iS only a part of a large
work,' an imperfect one. Btlt if, from such scanty
materials, we may venture upon any decision, it
must be, that of the two, the drama seems to
have been conducted with the most correct taste.
This will appear from the observations which I
now proceed to make upon Sacontala.

It is only to n:ntionq considerably advanced in

refinement, that the dii-.ma is a favorite entertain-
ment. The Greeks had been for a good time a
poliflled people; Alceiru and Sappho had compos
ed their Odes, and 1 ha!le and Anaximander had
opened their schools, before Tragedy made its
first rude efll, inl the cart of Thespis; and a good
time elapsed before it attained to any considerable
degree of excellence. |i-om the drama ofSacontala,
then, we mufi form an aldvantageous idea of the
state of improvement in that society to whose

taste it was suited. In eflimating its merit, how-
ever, we mult not apply to it rules of criticifmr
drawn from the literature ai:d talte of nations with
which its author was altogether unacquainted; we
mult not expedt the unities of the Greek theatre;
we must not measure it by our own standard of
propriety. Allowance must be made for local
customs, and singular manners, arifingfrom a state
of domestic society, an order of civil policy, and
a system of religious opinions, very different from
those established in Europe. Sacontala is not a
regular drama, but, like some of the plays early
exhibited on the Spanifl and Englih theatres, is
a history in dialogue, unfolding events which
happened in different places, and during a series
of years. When viewed in this light, the fable is
in general well arranged, the incidents are happily
chosen and the vicifitudes in the situation of the
principal personages are sudden and unexpeded.
The unravelling of the piece, however, though
some of the c rc'!iftances preparatory to it be
introduced with lkll, i, it la.t brought about by
the intervention ,,f superior beings, which has
always a b.id ffect , and discovers some want of
art. But as Saicontala was descended of a celestial
nymph, and und(r the protection of a holy
hermit, this heavenly interpolftion may appear less
marvellous. and is extremely agreeable to the
Oriental tafle. In many places of this drama it is
simple and tender, in some pathetic; in others
there is a mixture of comic with what is more
serious. Of each, examples might be. given. I

V

shall select a few of the firtf, both because fimplicily
and tenderr.cfs are the characderific beauties of the
piece, and because they so little resemble the
extravagant imagery and turgid style of Oriental
poetry.

Sacontala, the heroine of the drama, a princess

of high birth, had been educated by a holy
hermit in a hallowed grove, and had passed the
early part of her life in rural occupations and
pastoral innocence. When ihe was about to quit
this beloved retreat, and repair to the court of a
great monarch, to whom The had been married,
Cana, her fofter-father, and her youthful compa.
nions, thus bewail their own loss, and express
their wishes for her happiness, in a strain of senti.
ment and language perfectly suited to their pastoral
character.

U Hear, 0 ye trees of this hallowed forest, hear
and proclaim that Sacontala is going to the

"palace of her wedded lord; she, who drank
" not, though thirsty, before you were watered;
" fie, who cropped not, through affection for
" you, one of your fresh leaves, though she would
" have been pleased with such an ornament for
" her locks; she, whose chief delight was in the
" season when your branches are spangled with
" flowers! "

Chnrus of Wood Nymphs - " May her way

", be attended with prosperity! May propitious
a breezes sprinkle, for her delight, the odoriferous
" dust of rich blossoms. MIay pools of clear water,
c" green with the leaves of the lotos, refresh her

a as fle walks; and may shady branches be her
" defence from the scorching sun-beams! "

Sacontala, just as the was departing from the
grove, turns to Cana: " Suffer me, venerable
" father! to address this ladhavi-creeper, whose
" red blossoms inflame the grove. " - Cana,
" ly child I know thy affecion for it. " -
Sacont. " 0 most radiant of flining plants, receive
"my embraces, and return them with thy flexible
" arms ! from this day, though removed at a fatal
" distance, I shall for ever be thine. - 0 beloved
" father, confider this creeper as myself! " As
flie advances, she again addresses Cana: "Father!
" when yon female antelope, who now moves
" slowly from the weight of the young ones with
"which [he is pregnant, bhall be delivered of them,
" fend me, I beg, a kind message with tidings
"of her safety. - Do not forget." - Cana.
" My beloved! I will not forget it. "- Sacont.
[stopping.] " Ah! what is it that clings to the
" skirts of my robe, and detains me? " - Cana.
" It is thy adopted child, the little fawn, whose
" mouth, when the sharp points of Cufa-grafs had
" wounded it, has been so often smeared by thee
" with the healing oil of Ingudi ; who has been
" so often fed by thee with a handful of Synmaka-
" grains, and now will not leave the footsteps of
" his protedrefs. " - Sacont. " Why dost thou
" weep, tender fawn, for me who muff leave our
"common dwelling-place? - As thou waft
"reared by me when thou hadst loft thy mother,
" who died soon after thy birth, so will my softer.

V 3

i' father attend thee , when we are separated, with
" anxious care. - Return, poor thing, return
" - we muff part. " [ She burjis into tears.] -
Cana. "Thy tears, my child, ill suit the occasion,
" we shall all meet again; be firm; fee the direct
"road before thee, and follow it. When the big
"tear lurks beneath thy beautiful eye-lashes, let
" thy resolution check its firfl efforts to dlfengage
" itself. - In thy passage over this earth, where
"the paths are now high, now low, and the
" true path seldom distinguished, the traces of thy
" feet mufl needs be unequal; but virtue will press

thee right onward ".
From this specimen of the Indian drama, every

reader of good taste, I should imagine, will be
satisfied, that it is only among a people of polished
manners and delicate sentiments that a compolition
so simple and corret could be produced or
relished. I observe one inltance in this drama of
that wild extravagance so frequent in Oriental
poetry. The monarch, in replacing a bracelet
which had dropped from the arm of Sacontala,
thus addresses her: " Look, my darling, this is
" the new moon which left the firmament in honor
' of superior beautv, and having descended on
" your enchanting wrist, hath joined both its

horns round it in the shape of a bracelet t.

But this is the speech of an enraptured young
man to his mftrefs, and in every age and nation

Act I'. p. 47, , c.
" At 11. F. 36.

exaggerated praise is expected from the mouth of
lovers. Dramatic exhibitions seem to have been
a favorite amusement of the Hindoos as well as of
other civilized nations. " The tragedies, comedies,
"farces, and musical pieces of the Indian theatre,
" would fill as many volumes as that of any nation
"in ancient or modern Europe. They are all in
·' verse where the dialogue is elevated, and in
"prose where it is familiar; the men of rank and
' learning are represented speaking pure Sanfcrit,
' and the women Pracrit, which is little more
" than the language of the Brahmins, melted
' down by a delicate articulation to the softness
"of Italian; while the low persons of the drama
"speak the vulgar dialecd of the several provinces

which they are supposed to inhabit *' "
V. The . tainments of the Indians in science,

furnifl an additional proof of their early civiliza-
tion. By every person who has visited India in
ancient or modern times, its inhabitants, either in
trnnfadions of private business , or in the conduc
of political affairs, have been deemed not inferior
to the people of any nation in sagacity, acute-
ness of underltanding, or address. From the
application of such talents to the cultivation of
science, an extraordinary degree of proficiency
might have been expedted. The Indians were,
accordingly, early celebrated on that account,
and some of the most eminent of the Greek

" Preface to Sacont. by Sir Willianl Jones, p. ix. See
NOTE IX.

V4

philosophers travelled into India, that, by converr.
ing wi:h the Iages of that country, they might
acquire some portion of the knowledge for which
they were distinguished '. ThP accounts, however,
wh:ch we receive from the Greeks and Romans,
of the sciences which attracted the attention of the
Indian ph:lofophers, or of the discoveries which
they ha madc in them, are very imperfeCt. To
the refearche< of a f-w intelligent persons, who
have visited Indi, during the course of the three
last centurie,, we are indebted for more ample
and authentic i.frmn.tion 3BtTrnm the reluctance
with which the Rrahr:nils communicate their sciences
to strangers, an:d the inability of lurlpeans to
acquire much knowledge of them, while, like the
mvfterieo of their relg!ioii, they were concealed
from vulgar eves in .1 unknown tongue, this
information was acqu.red slowly and with great
difficulty. The f.ime observation, however,
which I made concerning our knowledge of tle
state of the fine arts among the people.of India,
is applicable to that es iheir plogrtfs in science,
and the present age is the firfl furnished with
fuff:ient evidence uponl which tn found a decisive
judgment with rcfpect to eihler.

Science, when viewtd ac disjoined from religion,

the consideration of which I ref'rrvc for another
h-ad, is emrrploved in contemplating either the
operations of the undcretanding, the excrcire of
our moral powers, or the natuie and qualities of

* Bruckeri liir. Philoroph. vol. i. p. 190.

external objefds. The firtf is denominated logic;
the second ethics; the' third physics , or the
knowledge of nature. With refped to the early
progress in cultivating each of these sciences in
India, we are in pofeflion of fads which merit
attention.

But, prior to the consideration of them, it is

proper to examine the ideas of the Brahmins with
refped to mind itself, for if there were rnt jult,
all their theories concerning its operations mutt
have been erroneous and fanciful. The distinction
between matter and spirit appears to hive been
early known by the philosophers of India, and
to the latter they ascribed many powers, of which
they deemed the former to be incapable; and when
we recolled how inadequate our conception;s are
of every objet that does not fall under the cog-
nizance of the senses, we may affirm (if allowance
be made for a peculiar notion of the Iindoos
which (llall be afterward'l explained) that no de-
scription of the human foul is more suited to the
dignity of its nature than that given by the author
ot the IMahabarat. " Some," fays he, " regarl
" the foul as a wonder, others hear of it with
" aflonifihnent, but no one knoweth it The wea-
" pon divideth it not; the fire burneth it not;
"the water corrupteth it not; the wind driscth it
"not away; for it is indivisible, inconsumable ,
" incorruptible; it is eternal, univerfl, permanent,
" immoveable; it is invisible, incnnceiv.,ble, and
" uLiaterable ". " After this view of the sentiments
"B aghvat-Geeta, p. 37.

of the Brahmin? concerning mind itself, we may
proceed ro confider theiridea* with rcfpedt to each
of the science , in that tripartite arrangement
v h!..h I mentioned.

ift. logic anid lletaphyfics. On no subjed

i\;: :;ie Fu':-. n underftunding been more exercised
tha2 ,n aaals zmg its own operations. The various
pow.rs of the mind have been examined and
den.ed The origin and progress of our ideas
hkive been traced; and proper rules have been
prefer'bed, of proceeding from the obfcrvation of
sa.cs to the cftahlihmnent of principles, or from
the knowledge of principles to form arrangement3.
of fience;. The philolophers of ancient Greece
were highly celebrated for their proficiency in
these abstruse speculations; and, in their difcnultons
and arrangements , discovered such depth of
thought, and acuteness of discernment, that their
systems of Logic, particularly that of the Perila.
tetic School, have been deemed most diflinSuifnled
efforts of human reason.

But since we became acquainted, in some degree,

with the literature an! science of the Ilindoos,
we find that as ftont as men arrive at that flage
in social life, when they can turn their attention
to fpecu!ative inquirics, the human mind will, in
every region of the earth, display nearly the fame
powers, and proceed in its inveltigtions and di.
coveries by nearly similar steps. From Abul
Fazels compendium of the philosophy " of the

Ayeen Akbery, vol. iii p. 95, &c.

Hindoos, the knowledge of which he acquired,
as he informs us, by associating intimately with
the most learned men of the nation; from the fpe-
cimen of their logical discussions contained in that
portion of the Shafter publilhed by Colonel Dow ",
and from many passages in the Baghvat-Geeta, it
appears that the fame speculations which occupied
the philosophers of Greece had engaged the atten-
tion of the Indian Brahmins; and the theories of
the former, either concerning the qualities of
external objects, or the nature of our own ideas,
were not more ingenious than those of the latter.
To define with accuracy, to diltingui(h with
acuteness, and to reason with subtlety, are charac-
teriftics of both; and in both, the fame excess of
refinement, in attempting to analyze those opera-
tions of mind which the faculties of man were not
formed to comprehend, led sometimes to the most
false and dangerous conclusions. That sceptical
philosophy, which denies the existence of the
material world, and asserts nothing to be real
but our own ideas, seems to have been known in
India as well as in Europe"4; and the fages of
the East, as they were indebted to philosophy for
the knowledge of many important truths, were
not more exempt than those of the Weft from its
delusions and errors.

4 Dissertation, p. xxxix, &c.
' Dow's Dissertation, p. Ivii. Ayeen Albery, vol. iii.
P. 128.

2d, Ethics. This science, which has for its

objec, to ascertain what diflinguifhes virtue from
vice, to invefsigate what motives should prompt
men to at, and to prescribe rules for the conduct
of life, as it is of all other the mout interesting,
seems to have deeply engaged the attention of
the Brahmins. Their sentiments with refped to
these points were various, and, like the philofo.
phers of Greece, the Brahmins were divided into
feets, diftinguillied by maxims and tenets often
diametrically opposite. That fed with whose
opinions we are, fortunately, bcft acquainted,
had eltablifhed a system of morals, founded on
principles the molt generous and dignified which
unassisted reason is c.:pable of discovering. Iian,
they taught. was formed, not for speculation or
indolence, but for adion. lie is born, not for
himself alone, but for his fellow-men. The
happiness of the society of which he is a member,
the good of mankind, are his ultimate and
bigheft objecds. In chufing what to prefer or to
reject, the justness and propriety of his choice are
the only considerations to which he flould attend.
The events which may follow his adions are not in
his own power, and whether they be prdfperous
or adverse, as long as he is satisfied with the pu-
rity of the motives which induced him to ad, he
can enjoy that approbation of his own mind,
which conflitute genuine happiness, independent
of the power of fortune or the opinions of other
men. " "IPan (fays the author of the Mahabarat)
" enjoyeth not freedom from adion. Every man

" isnvoluntarily urged to aA by those principles
, which are inherent in his nature. He who
"reftraineth his acive faculties, and fitteth down
" with his mind attentive to the objects of his
" fenCes, may be called one of an astrayed foul.
" The man is praised, who having subdued all
"his paflions, performeth with his acive faculties
" all the functions of life unconcerned about the
" event '. Let the motive be in the deed, and
" not in the event. Be not one whose motive
" for adcion is the hope of reward. Let not thy
" life be Ipent in ination. Depend upon applica-
" tion, perform thy duty, abandon all thought
" of the consequence, and make the event equal,
"whether it terminate in good or in evil; for
"such an equality is called 'Tog [i. e. attention
" to what is spiritual]. Seek an asylum then in
"wisdom alone; for the miserable and unhappy
"are so on account of the event of things. Men
" who are endued with true wisdom are unmind-
"ful of good or evil in this world. Study then
"to obtain this application of thy understanding,
"for such application in business is a precious art.
" Wife men who have abandoned all thought
" of the fruit which is produced from their actiogs,
"are freed from the chains of birth; and go to
"the regions of eternal happiness ". "

From these, and other passages which I might

have quoted, we learn that the diftinguilhing
doctrines of the Stoical School were taught in

" Baghvat-Geeta, p. 44 " Ibid. p. 4e.

India many ages before the birth of Zeno, and
inculcated with a persuasive earnestness nearly
rcfin b!ing that of Epitetus; and it is not without
aPoilonment that we find the tenets of this manly
adive phiiofophy, which seem to be formed only
for men of the molt vigorous spirit, prescribed
as the rule of conduct to a race of people more
eminent for the gentleness of their disposition than
for the elevation of their minds.

3d, Physics. In all the sciences which contribute

towards extending our knowledge of nature, in
mathematics, mechanics, and astronomy, Arith-
metic is of elementary use. In whatever country
then we find that such attention has been paid
to the improvement of arithmetic as to render its
operations molt easy and correct, we may presume
that the sciences depending upon it have attained
a superior degree of perfection. Such improve-
ment of thii science we find in India. While,
amorg the Greeks and Romans, the only method
used for the notation of numbers was by the
letters of the alphabet, which necessarily rendered
arithmeti:al ca!culation extremely tedious and
operose, the Indian- had, from time immemorial,
employed for the fame puipofe the ten ciphers,
or figures, now universally known, and by means
of them performed every operation in arithmetic
with the greatest facility and expedition. By the
happy invention of giving a different value to
each figure according to its change of place , no
more than ten figures are needed in calculations
the molt complex, and of any given extent; and

arithmetic is the most perfect of all the sciences.
The Arabianc, not long after their fettiement ir
S,^in , introduced t'.i, mode of notarion into
Europe, and were candid enough to ackn,-wl^dle
that they had derived the knowledge of it f,;T
the Iniians. Though the advantages of this inon.-
of notation are obvious an i great, yet fr flow),-
do mankind adopt new inventionl, that the cife
of it was for some time confined to fcienre; by
degrees, however, men of bufifefs relinqidihed
the former cumbreifome method of computation
by letters, and the Indian arithmetic came into
general use throughout Europe ". It is now so
familiar and simple, that the ingrnnity of dhe
people, to whom we are indebted for the inven-
tion, is less observed and lels celebrated than it
merits.

The Astronomy of the Indians' is a proof fill
more conspicuous of their extraordinary progress
in science. The attention and fucc:fs with which
they studied the motions of the heavenly bodies
were so little known to the Greeks and Romans
that it is hardly mentioned by them but in the
most cursory manner ". But as soon as the iliFho-
medans eftablified an intercourse with the natives
of India, they obf.'rved and celebrated the fupe-
rioritv of their astronomical knowledge Of the
Europeans who visited India. after the communica-
tion with it by the Cape of Good Hope was

" Montucla, HIif. des Mathemat. tom. i. p. 6o, &c.
" Strabo, lib. xv. p. 1047 A. Dion. Pi'ieg. v. 1173.

discovered, A1. Bernier, an inquisitive and philo.
fophical traxeiler, was one of the first who
learned that the Indians had long applied to the
ftiL!y of atronomy, and had made considerable
progress in that science ". His information, how.
ever , seems to have been very general and
imperfect. We are indebted for the first scientific
proof of the great proficiency of the Indians in
aftronoinical knowledge, to M. de la Loubere,
who, on his return from his embassy to Siam,
brought with him an extrac from a Siamese
manutcript, which contained tables and rules for
calcul.lti!,g the places of the fun and moon. The
manno-r i which these tables were conftruded
rendered the principles on which they were founded
extremely ocfcure, and it required a commentator
as converfint in aftronomic.d calculation as the
celebrated Cassini, to explain the meaning of this
curious fragme:nt. The epoch of the Siarmefe tables
correfponids to the -.[t of March, A. D. 638.
Another set of tables was tranfinitted'from Chris.
nabouram, in the Carnatic, the epoch of which
answers to the loth of March, A. D. 1491.
A third set of tables came from Narfapour, and
the epoch ot them goes no farther back than
A. D. 1509). I he fourth and molt' curious set
of tables was publ sied by M1. le Gentil, to whom
they were communicated by a learned Brahmin
of Tirvalore, a finull town on the Coromandel
coast, about twelve miles weft of Negapatam.

Voyages, tor. ii. p. 145 , &c.

The

The epoch of these tables is of high antiquity,
and coincides with the beginning of the celebrated
era of the Calyougham or Collee Jogue, which
comnmenced, according to the Indian account,
three thousand one hundred and two years before
the birth of Chrft ".

Thcfe four sets of tables have been examined

and compared by Ml. Bailly, who with singular
flicity of genius has conjoined an uncommon
degree of eloquence with the patient researches
or an astronomer, and the profound investigations'
of a geometrician. His calculations have been
veriiied, and his reasonings have been illustrated
atnd extended by A1. Playfair, in a very maflerly
Dissertation, published in the Tranfadions of the
Royal Society of Edinburgh ".

Instead of attempting to follow them in reason-
ings and calculations, which, from their nature,
are often abltrufe and intricate, I shall satisfy
myself with giving such a general view of them
as is suited to a popular work. This, I hope,
may convey a proper idea of what has been
publiifed concerning the aflronQmy of India, a
fubjcct too curious and important to be omitted
in any account of the slate of science in that
country; and, without interposing any judgment
of my own, I fliall leave each of my readers to
form his own opinion.

It may be confidered as the general result of all

" See NOTE X.
" Vol. ii. p. 35.

x

the inquiries, reasonings, and calculations, with
refped to Indian aflroi-omnv, which have hitherto
been made public, " That the motion of the
" heavenly bodies, and more particularly their
" situation at the commencement of the different
"epohs to which the four sets of tables refer,
" are ascertained with great accuracy; and that
" many of the elements of their calculations,
" especially for very remote ages, are verified
" by an astonishing coincidence with the tables
" of the modern aflronomy of Europe, when
" improved by the lat-'t and most nice deductions
" from the theory of gravitation." These conclu.
sions are rendered peculiarly interesting, by the
evidence which they afford of an advancement in
science unexampled in the history of rude nations.
The Indian Brahmins, who annually circulate a
kind of almanac, containing astronomical predic.
tions of some of the more remarkable phenomena
in the heavens, such as the new and full moons,
the eclipses of the fun and moon, are in possession
of certain methods of calculation, which, upon
examination, are found to involve in them a
very extensive system of astronomical knowledge.
I1. le Gentil, a French afironomer, had an
opportunity, while in India, of observing two
eclipses of the moon, which had been calculated
by a Br.hmin, and he found the error in either
to be very inconsiderable.

The accuracy of these results is lefT surprising

than the juftnelf and scientific nature of the prin-
ciples on which the tables, by which they calcu.

late, are conftruded. For the method of predicting
eclipses which is followed by the Brahmins, is
of a kind altogether different from any that has
been found in the possession of rude nations in
the infancy of afironomy. In Chaldaea, and even
in Greece, in the early ages, the method of cal-
culating eclipses was founded on the observation
of a certain period or cycle, after which the
eclipses of the fun and moon return nearly in the
fame order; but there was no attempt to analyze
the different circumstances on which the eclipse
depends, or to deduce its phenomena from a
precise knowledge of the motions of the fun
and moon. This last was reserved for a more
advanced period , when geometry, as well as
arithmetic, were called in to the assistance of
afironomy, and if it was attempted at all, seems
not to have been attempted with success before
the age of Hipparchus. It is a method of this
superior kind, founded on principles, and on an
analysis of the motions of the fun and moon,
which guides the calculations of the Brahmins,
and they never employ any of the grosser eftima.
tions, which were the pride of the first atfronomers
in Egypt and Chald:ca.

The Brahmins of the present times are guided

in their calculations by these principles, though
they do not now understand them; they know
only the use of the tables which are in their
polfeflion, but are unacquainted with the method
of their construction. The Brahmin who visited
M. le Gentil at Pondichcrry, and inftrudted himn

X

in the use of tr e

Idiof tn tblcs had! no klnowledge

of the I1.;la;i'c ( 4 hic art , a:id discovered no
cui olty cto:nriirninl tIe nature of 1\1. Ie Gentil's
obfervationr, or about the inftrumetit; whichi he
employed. -le xva ciinlly igrnorant with respect
to the authors of these tables; and wxhatever is to
be learnt, conceining the time or place of their
conftruclion, mtft be deduced from the tables
themfclve3. One set of these tables ( as was
formeiy iv cbfeived) profcfs to be an old as the
begimnin:g of the (alvoughaim or to go b.ack to
the vear 3132) before the Cihrifti.n era; but as
nothing (it m.v be supposcd ) is eatier than for
an afircnitmcr to give to hii tablec what date
he pleifcs , al d, by calcnl.*titg backwards , to
ettablifh an eponh ci ry a iiintd antiquity, the
pretensions ol the Indian alironomy to so remote
an origin are not to be admitted without ex-
amination.

That cyai;lnation ha; accordingly been infi.

tuted by 51. H.al!y , a;id hLe i.f[ilt ot hil inquiries
is afterted t,' be, that the ar(ronomy of India is
found-d on ol servations which catnnot be of a much
later date than the periord bove mentioned. For
the Indian tables reprcfent the .ate of the heavens
at that period with aflonifiing exdnefs ; and
there is between them and the calculations of
our modern astronomy ftch a conformity, with
refpecl to thofl ages, as could refilt from nothing,
but from the authors of the former having accu-
ra-ely cop;ed from nature, and having delineated
truly the face of the heavens, in the age wherein

they lived. In order to give some idea of the
hiih degree of accuracy in the Indian tables, I
full select a few instances of it, out of many
that might be prodlced. The place of the fun for
the aflronomical epoch at the beginning of the
C;lyough.im, as fLttcd in the tables of Tirvalore,
is only forty - fven minutes greater than by the
table of M1. (te la Caille, when correded by the
calculations of I. lde la Grange. The place of
the moon, in the fame tables, for the fame epoch,
is only thirty- seven minutes different from the
tables of Mlayer. The tables of Ptolemy, for that
epoch, are erroneous no less than ten degrees
with respect to the place of the fun , and eleven
degrees with rcfpcdt to that of the moon. The
acceleration of the noon's motion, reckoning from
the beginning of the Calyoughamn to the present
time, agrees, in the Indian tables, with those of
Ma.yer to a single minute. The inequality of the
fun's motion, and the obliquity of the ecliptic,
which were both greater in former ages than
they are now, as reprcfented in the tables of
Tirvalore, are almost of the precise quantity that
th- theory of gravitation afligns to them three
thtufand years before the Christian era. It is
accordingly for throfe very remote ages ( about
5000 years distant from the present) that their
aflronomy is accurate, and the nearer we come'
down to our own tines, the conformity of its
refilts with ours diminifies. It feemns reasonable
to suppose, that the time when its rules are most

X3

accurate, is the time when the observations were
made on which these rule; are founded.

In support of this conclusion, IM. Bailly main-

tains that none of all the astronomical fyftcms of
Greece or Persia, or of Tartary, from some of
which it might be fufpeced that the Indian tables
were copied, can be made to agree with them,
especially when we calculate for vtry remote ages.
The superior perfection of the Indian tables be-
comes always more conspicuous as we go farther
back into antiquity. This flhows, likewise, how
difficult it is to construct any astronomical tables,
which will agree with the state of the heavens
fur a period so remote from the time when the
tables were conftruded, as four or five thousand
years. It is only from astronomy in its molt
advanced state, such as it has attained in modern
Europe, that such accuracy is to be expected.

W'hen an estimate is endeavoured to be made

of the geometrical skill necelfary for the conftruc-
tion of the lidian tables and rules, it is found to
be very considerable, and, betide the knowledge
of elementary geometry, it muf have required
plain and spherical trigonometry, or something
equivalent to them. together with certain methods
of approximating to the values of geometrical
rnagnitu(les, which seem to rife very far above
the elements of any of those sciences. Some of
there lat mark also very clearly (although this
has not been obfcrved by MI. Bailly) that the
places to which there tables are adapted, must
be situated between the Tropics, because they are

altogether inapplicable at a greater distance from
the Equator.

From this long indution, the conclusion which

seems obviously to result is, that the Indian
afronomy is founded upon obfcrvations which
were made at a very early period;' and when
we confider the exad agreement of the places
which they assign to the fun and moon, and
other heavenly bodies, at that epoch, with those
deduced from the tables of De la Caille and
M\ayer, it fWrongly confirms the truth of the pofi-
tion which I have been endeavouring-to establish,
concerning the early and high state of civilization
in India.

Before I quit this subject, there is one circum-
fiance which merits particular attention. All the
knowledge which we have hitherto acquired of
the principles and conclusions of Indian astronomy
is derived from the southern part of the Carnatic,
and the tables are adapted to places situated
between the meridian of Cape Comorin and that
which passes through the eastern part of Ceylon ".
The Brahmins in the Carnatic acknowledge that
their science of astronomy was derived from the
North, and that their method of calculation is
denominated Fakiam, or New, to distinguish it
from the Siddantam, or ancient method eftablilhed
at Benares, which they allow to be much more
perfect; and we learn from Abul Fazel, that all
the astronomers of Indoftan rely entirely upon

' Bailly, Disc. Prelim. p. xvii.

X4

the precepts contained in a book called %oorei
S'dhar:, composed in a very remote period". It
is manifeftl from this book that the method to
which the Brahmins of the South gave the name
of Siddantam is taken. Benares has been from time
inmemorial. the Athens of India, the residence of
the molt learned Brahmins, and the feat both of
fclence and literature. There, it is highly proba-
ble, whatever remains of the ancient aflronomical
knowledge and discoverics of the Brahnhin;, is ftiil
preferred ". In an enlizhtened age ind nation,
and during a reign difRnguifhed bv a fuc.. fflTn
of the molt splendid and successful underrakinig
to extend the knowledge of nature, it is an obi ct
worthy of public attention, to taike meaf!11i' for
obtaining pofleflion of all that time hac; pr. d of
the philosophy and inventions of the n;cfl eariy
and molt highly civilized people of th. IFait It
is with peculiar advantages Great Bliamin may
engage in this laudable und.ertaking. Renare is
subject to its dominion; the confidence ot 'he
Brahmins has been so far gained as to r, nrer
them communicative; some of our countr ircn
are acquainted with that sacred language in vwh h
the mvfleries both of religion and of science are
recorded ; movement and activity has been given
to a spirit of inquiry throughout all the Britilh

A yeen Akbery, iii. p 8.
I M. Bernicr. in the year T66R, saw a la-ge hall

in RPna-es fille.l wi:h the works of the Indian philolophers,
physicians, and poets. Voy. ii. p. J48.

el'tbliflments in India; persons who visited that
country with other views, though engaged in
occupations of a very different kind, are now
carrying on scientific and literary researches with
ardor and success. Nothing seems now to be
wanting but that those intruded with the adminif-
tration of the Britilh empire in India, should
enable some person, capable, by his talents and
liberality of sentiment, of invefligating and explain-
ing the more abflrufe parts of Indian philosophy,
to devote his whole time to that important objec.
Thus Great Britain may have the glory of explor-
ing fully that extensive field of unknown science,
which the Academicians of France had the merit
of first opening to the people of Europe .

VI. The las evidence which I shall mention

of the early and high civilization of the ancient
Indians, is deduced from the consideration of their
religions tenets and pracices. The inflitutions of
religion, publicly eftablilhed in all the extensive
countries stretching from the Banks of the Indus
to Cape Comorin , present to view an' asped
nearly similar. They form a regular and complete
system of fuperfitition, flrengthened and upheld
by every thing which can excite the reverence
and secure the attachment of the people. The
temples, consecrated to their deities, are magnifi-
cent, and adorned not only with rich offerings,
hut with the molt exquisite works in painting and
sculpture, which the artists, highest in cftimation

See NOTE XL

among them, were capable of executing. The
rites and ceremonies of their wor(hip are pompous
and splendid, and the performance of them not
only mingles in all the tranfations of common
life, but constitutes an essential part of them. The
Brahmins, who, as miniflers of religion, preside
in all its functions, are elevated above every other
order of men, by an origin deemed not only more
noble, but acknowledged to be sacred. They
have established among thermelves a regular
hierarchy and gradation of ranks, which, by
securing subordination in their own order, adds
weight to their authority, and gives them a
more absolute dominion over the minds of the
people. This dominion they support by the corn.
mand of the immense revenues with which the
liberality of princes, and the zeal of pilgrims and
devotees, have enriched their Pagodas "

It is far from my intention to enter into any

minute detail with rtfpecl to this vast and com-
plicated system of fupertlition. An attempt to
enumerate the multitude of deities which are the
objects of adoration in India; to describe the
splendor of worship in their Pagodas, and the
immense variety of their rites and ceremonies; to
recount the various attributes and funcions which
the craft of priests, or the credulity of the people,
have ascribed to their divinities; especially if I
were to accompany all this with a review of
the numerous and often fanciful speculations and

" Roger. Porte Ouverte, p. 39. 209, &c.

theories of learned men on this subjed, would
require a work of great magnitude. I shall, there-
fore, on this, as on some of the former heads,
confine myself to the precise point which I have
kept uniformly in view, and by confidering the
Hate of religion in India, I shall endeavour not
only to throw additional light on the state of
civilization in that country, but I flatter myself
that, at the fame time, I {hall be able to give
what may be confidered as a sketch and outline
of the hiflory and progress of fuperfition and
false religion in every region of the earth.

1. We may observe, that, in every country,
the received mythology, or system of superstitious
belief, with all the rites and ceremonies which it
prescribes is formed in the infancy of society, in
rude and barbarous times. True religion is as
different from fuperflition in its origin, as in its
nature. The former is the offspring of reason
cherished by science, and attains to its highest
perfedion in ages of light and improvement. Igno-
lance and fear give birth to the latter, and it is
always in the darkerf periods that it acquires the
greatest vigor. That numerous part of the human
fpccies whose lot is labor, whose principal and
almolt sole occupation is to secure subsistence,
has neither leisure nor capacity for entering into
that path of intricate and refined speculation,
which conduds to the knowledge of the principles
of rational religion. When the intelletual powers
are just beginning to unfold, and their first feeble
exertions are direded towards a few objeds of

primary necemflty and u'e; when the faculties of
the mind are so limitei a; not to have formed
general and abstract ideas; when language is so
barren as to be deffitute of names to difliiguifl
any thing not perceivable by some of the fenfis;
it i; prcpofterous to expect that meni should be
c.p.tble of tracing the relation between effects and
their aufie ; or to suppose that they illould rife
from the contemplation of the former to the disco.
very of the latter, and form just conceptions of
one Supreme iBcl-ig, as the Creator and Governor
of the universe. 1 he idea of creation is so falili.r,
wherever the m;nd is enlarged by science, and
i!luminated by r-vcla.ion. that we fildom reflect
how profound and abf.rufe the ilea is, or confider
what progress man murf have made in observation
and research , before he could arrive at any diftint
knowledge of this elementary principle in religion.
But even in its rude slate, the human mind,
formed for rtlieion, opens to the reception of ideas
wh ch are destined , when corrected and refined,
to be the great source o. consolation amidst the
calamitice of life. These apprehensions, however,
are originally indiflinct and perplexed , and seen
to be fucggefed ratl er by the dread of impending
evil, than to flow from gratitude for bleflings
received. While nature holds on her course with
uniform and undiflurbed regularity, men enjoy the
benefits refuiting from it, without much inquiry
concerning its cause. But every deviation from
this regular course rouses and aftonifles them.
When they behold events to which they are not

accustomed, they search for the causes of them
with eager curiosity. ' heir understanding is often
tna.ble to d!fcover these, but imagination, a more
folward and ardent faculty of the mind, decides
without hesitation. It ascribes the extraordinary
occurrences in nature to the influence of invisible
being. , and supposes the thunder, the hurricane,
andl the earthquake, to be the immediate effete
of their agency. ' Alarmed by these natural evils,
andl xpofed , at the fame time, to many dangers
and difalters, which are unavoidable in the early
and uncivilized hate of society, men have recourse
for protection to power fiperior to what is human,
and the first rites or pracices which bear any
resemblance to ads of religion have it for their
object to avert evils which they susser or dread ".

11. As ftiperftition and false religion take their

rife, in every country, from nearly the fame
sentiments and apprenenfions, the invisible beings,
who are the first objects of veneration, have
every where a near resemblance. To conceive an
idea of one superintending mind, capable of
arranging and directing all the various operations
of nature, seems to be an attainment far beyond
the powers of man in the more early stages of his
progress. His theories, more suited to the limited

" In the second volume of the Hiifory of Anmerica,

p. 8; , of the fifth edition , 1 gave nearly a similar account
of the origin of tal(c religion. Inttead of laboring to
convey the fame ideas in diffiicent language, I have insetted
here fume paragraphs in the fame words 1 then used.

r

sphere of his own observation, are not so refined.
He supposes that there is a diltinc cause of every
remarkable effet, and ascribes to a separate power
every event which attracts his attention, or excites
hi; terror. He fancies that it is the province of one
deity to point the lightning, and, with an awful
found, to hurl the irresistible thunderbolt at the
head of the guilty; that another rides in the
whirlwind, and, at his pleasure, raises or stills
the tempet ; that a third rules over the ocean;
that a fourth is the god of battles; that while
malevolent powers scatter the feeds of animosity
and discord, and kindle in the breaR those angry
palfions which give rife to war, and terminate in
deftrution, others, of a nature more benign, by
inspiring the hearts of men with kindness and
love, Itrengthen the bonds of social union, aug.
ment the happiness, and increase the number of
the human race.

Without descending farther into detail, or

attempting to enumerate that infinite multitude of
deities to which the fancy or the fears of men have
allotted the direction of the several departments
in nature, we may recognise a ftriling uniformity
of features in the fyftcms of fuperfltion established
throughout every part of the earth. The less men
have advanced beyond the slate of savage life,
and the more slender their acquaintance with the
operations of nature, the fewer were their deities
in number, and the more compendious was their
theological creed; but as their mind gradually
opened, and their knowledge continued to extend,

the objects of their veneration multiplied, and the
ar'icles of their faith became more numerous. This
took place remarkably among the Greeks in
Europe, and the Indians in Asia, the two people,
in those great divisions of the earth, who were
most early civilized, and to whom, for that reason,
I Lhall confine all my observations. They believed,
that over every movement in the natural world,
and over every function in civil or domeflic life,
even the molt common and trivial, a particular
deity presided. The manner in which they arranged
the stations of these superintending powers, and
the offices which they allotted to each, were in
many refpets the fafhe. What is supposed to be
performed by the povyr of Jupiter, of Neptune,
of Eolus, of Mars, of Venus, according to the
mythology of the Weft, is ascribed in the East to
the agency of Agnee, the god of fire; Varoon,
the god of oceans; Vayoo, the god of wind ";
Cama, the god of love; and a variety of other
divinities.

The ignorance and credulity of men having
thus peopled the heavens with imaginary beings,
they ascribed to them such qualities and actions
as they deemed suitable to their character and
functions. It is one of the benefits derived from
true religion, that by setting before men a standard
of perfect excellence , which they should have
always in their eye, and endeavour to resemble,
it may be said to bring down virtue from heaven

3 Baghvat-Geeta, p. 9+.

to earth, and to form the human mind after a
divine model. In fabricating systems of false
religon the procedure is directly the reverse Alen
ascribe to the beings whom they have deified,
such actions as they themselves admire and cele-
brate. The qualities of the gods who are the
objects of adoration, are copied from those of the
'worflippers who bow down before them; and
thus many of the imperfections peculiar to men
have found admittance into heaven. By knowing
the adventures and attributes of any false deity,
we can pronounce, with some degree of certainty,
what must have been the .fate of society and
manners when he was elevated to that dignity.
The mythology of Greece plainly indicates the
character of the age in which it was formed. It
must have been in times of the greatet licentious-
ness, anarchy, and violence, that divinities of
the highest rank could be supposed capable of
perpetrating actions, or of being influenced by
pallions, which, in more enlightened periods,
would be deemed a difra.ce to human nature;
it must have been when the earth was still infefed
with deflructiie monsters , and mankind, under
forms of government too feeble to afford them
protection, were exposed to the depredations of
lawless robbers, or the cruelty of savage oppressors,
that the well-known labors of Hercules, by which
he was raised from earth to heaven, could have
been niceffary, or would have been deemed so
highly meritorious. The fame observation is appli-
cable to the ancient mythology of India. Mlany of

the

the adventures and exploits of the Indian deities
are suited to the rudest ages of turbulence and
rapine. It was to check disorder, to redress
wrongs, and to clear the earth of powerful oppref-
fors, that Vinlnou, a divinity of the highest
order, is said to have become fuccelTively incar-
nate, and to have appeared on earth in various
forms ".

III. The character and fundtions of those deities

which fuperltition created to itself as objects of its
veneration, having every where a near resemblance,
the rites of their wor(hip were every where ex-
tremely similar. Accordiigly as deities were difin-
guifhed, either by ferocity of character or licen-
tioufnefs of condut, it is obvious what services
mult have been deemed mol acceptable to them.
In order to conciliate the favor, or to appease
the wrath, of the former, fafis, mortifications,
and penances, all rigid, and many of them
excruciating to an extreme degree, were the
means employed. Their altars were always bathed
in blood, the most cofllv victims were offered,
whole hecatombs were slaughtered, even human
facritices were not ur known, and were held to
be the molt powerful expiations. In order to
gain the good-will of the deities of the latter de-
Icription, rec,,urse was had to institutions of a
very different kind, to splendid ceremonies, gay
festivals, heightened by all the pleafurec of poetry,
music, and dancing, but often terminating in

Voyage de Sonnerat. tom. i. p. i8, &c.

Y

fcencs of indulgence too indecent to be dcfcribed.
Of both these, inltanccs occur in the rites of
Greek and Roman worship, which I need not mer-
tion to my learned readers '. In the Ealt the
ceremonial of superstition is nearly the fame.
The manners of the Indians, though distinguished,
from the time when they became known to the
people of the W\'el, for mildness, seem , in a
more remote period, to have been, in a greater
degree, similar to those of other nations. Several
of thtir deities were fierce and awful in their
nature, and were represented in their temples under
the molt terrific forms. If we did not know the
dominion of superstition over the human mind,
we should hardly believe, that a ritual of worship
suited to the character of such deities could have
been ellablifed among a gentle people. Every
acd of religion, performed in honor of some of
their golds, seems to have been prescribed by
fear. iMortifications and penances ns rigorous, so
painful, and so lonz co.lillnud, that we read the
accounts of them with astonishment and horror,
were multiplied. Rcpugnant as it is to the feelings
of a Hindoo, to shcd the blood of any creature
th3t ha litc , many different animals, even the
molt utiful, the horse and the cow , were offered
up as v-itims upon the altars of some of their
gods "; and what is flill more firange, the Pago.

Strab. lib. v;ii. p. Ri. A. Lib. xii. p. 8l7. C.
Ayeen Ahkbery, vol. iii. p. 241. Roger. Porte
Ouverte, p. 25 .

das of the Ealt were polluted with human
facritices, as well as the temples of the Weft ".
ilut religious institutions, and ceremonies of a less
severe kind, were more adapted to the genius of
a people, formed, by the extreme sensibility both
of their mental and corporeal frame, to an immo.
derate love of pleasure. In no part of the earth
was a connexion between the gratification of
sensual desire and the rites of public religion,
dilplayed with more avowed indecency than in
India. In every Pagoda there was a band of
women set apart for the service of the idol honored
there, and devoted from their early years to a
life of pleasure; for which the Brahmins prepared
them by an education which added so many elegant
accomplishments to their natural charms, that
what they gained by their profligacy, often brought
no inconsiderable acceflion to the revenue of the
temple. In every function performed in the Pago-
das, as well as in every public procelifon, it is
the office of there women to dance before the
idol, and to sing hymns in his praise; and it is
dilficult to f:y, whether they trespass most against
decency by the geflures they exhibit, or by the
velfes which they recite. 1 he walls of the Pagoda
are covered with paintings, in a style no less
indelicate "; and in the innermofltrecefs of the

7 tleeto-pades, p. 185-132z. Afiat. Researches, p.
26;. Voyage de Sonnerat, vol. i. p. 207. Roger. p. 2si.

Voyage de Gentil. vol. i. p. 244. 260. Preface to
Code of Gentoo Laws, p. Ivii.

Y

temple, for it would be profane to call it the
fandluary, is placed the L!nyam, an emblem of
productive power too gross to be explained ".

IV. How absurd soever the articles of faith may

be which fuperfition has adopted, or how unhl-l
lowed the rites which it prescribes, the former are
received in every age and country with unhefitat-
ing assent, by the great body of the people, and
the latter observed with scrupulous exaciiefs. In
our reasonings concerning religious opinions
and practices which differ widely from our
own, we are extremely apt to err. Having been
instructed ourselves in the principles of a religion,
worthy in every refpedc of that divine wifdomr
by which they were dictated, we frequently
express wonder at the credulity of nations in
embracing ffltems of belief which appear to us
so directly repugnant to right reason, and some-
times fufpett that tenets so wild and extravagant
do not really gain credit with them. But experience
may satisfy us, that neither our wonder nor fufpi.
cions are well founded. No article of the public
religion was called in queflion by those people of
ancient Europe with whose history we are belt
acquainted, and no pradice which it enjoined
appeared improper to them. On the other hand,
every opinion that tended to diminish the reverence
of men for the gods of their country, or to alienate

' Roger. Porte Ouverte, p. ? 7. Voyage de Son.

Perat, vol. i. p. 4r. i75. Sketches, p. 168. Hamilton's
Tray. vol. i. p. 379.

them from their worship, excited among the
Greeks and Romans, that indignant zeal which is
natural to every people attached to their religion,
by a firm perlfuafion of its truth. 'I he attachment
of the Indians, both in ancient and modern times,
to the tenets and rites of their ancestors, has
been, if pollible, still greater. In no country, of
which we have any account, were precautions
taken with so much solicitude, to place the great
body of the people beyond the reach of any tempt-
ation to doubt or disbelief. They not only were
prevented, (as I have already observed the great
bulk of mankind must always be in every coun-
try, ) from entering upon any speculative inquiry,
by the various occupations of ac'ive and laborious
life, but any attempt to extend the sphere of their
knowledge was expressly prohibited. If one of
the Sooder cast, by far the most numerous of the
four into which the whole nation was divided,
presumed to read any portion of the sacred books,
in which all the science known in India is con-
tained, he was severely punished; if he ventured
to get it by heart, he was put to death ". To
aspire after any higher degree of knowledge than
the Brahmins have been pleased to teach, would
be deemed not only presumption but impiety.
Even the higher Carts depended entirely for inflruc-
tion on the Brahmins, and could acquire no portion
of [cience but what they deigned to communicate.
By means of this, a devout reverence was

Code of Gentoo Laws, ch. xxi. S 7.

Y3

uriverfally maintained for those inflitutions which
were confidered as sacred; and, though the faith
of the Hindoos has been often tried by severe
persecutions, excited by the bigotry of their
Ilahomedan conquerors, no people ever adhered
with greater fidelity to the tenets and rites of
their ancestors "

V. W\e may observe, that when science and

philosophy are diffused through any country, the
system of fuperflition is fubjecded to a ferutiny
from which it was formerly exempt, and opinions
spread which imperceptibly diminlfh its influence
over the minds of men. A free and full examina-
tion is always favorable to truth, but fatal to
error. What is received with implicit faith in ages
of darkness, will excite contempt or indignation
in an enlightened period. The history of religion
in Greece and Italy, tile only countries of Europe
which, in ancient times, were diftinguiflied for
their attainments in science, confirms the truth of
this observation. As soon as science made such
progress in Greece as rendered men capable of
discerning the wifdomr, the foresight , and the
goodness displayed in creating, preserving, and
governing the world, they must have perceived,
that the characters of the divinities which were
proposed as the objects of adoration in their
temples, could not entitle them to be confidered
as the presiding powers in nature. A poet might
address Jupiter as the father of gods and men,

' Orme's Fragment, p. o1:. Sonnerat vol. i. p. 194.

who governed both by eternal laws; but, to a
philosopher, the son of Saturn, the flory of whose
life is a series of violent and licentious deeds,
which would render any man odious or defpica-
ble, must have appeared altogether unworthy of
that tfation. The nature of the religious service
celebrated in their temples inuft have been no
less offensive to an enlightened mind, than the
charader of the deities in honor of whom it was
performed. lnftead of institutions, tending to
reclaim men from' vice; to form or to ftrenghten
habits of virtue, or to elevate the mind to a sense
of its proper dignity, fuperflition either occupied
its votaries in frivolous, unmeaning ceremonies,
or prescribed rites, which operated, with fatal
influence, in inflaming the pafions and corrupting
the heart.

It is with timidity, however, and caution,

that men venture to attack the eltablifhed religion
of their country, or to impugn opinions which
have been long held sacred. At first, some philo-
fophers endeavoured, by allegorical interpretations
and refined comments, to explain the popular
mythology, as if it had been a description of the
powers of nature, and of the various events and
revolutions which take place in the fyltem of the
material world, and endeavoured, by this expe-
dient, to palliate many of its absurdities. By
degrees, bolder theories concerning religion were
admitted into the schools of science. Philosophers
of enlarged views, sensible of the impiety of the
popular superstition, formed ideas concerning the

Y 4

perfections of one Supreme Being , the Creator
and Ruler of the univcrfe, as jult and rational as
have ever been at'aincd by the unalfilted powers
of the human mind.

If from Europe we now turn to Aria, we fiall

find, that the obfcrvation which I have made
upon the hiftorv of false religion holds equally
true there. In India as well as in Greece, it was
by tultivating science that men were first led to
examine and to entertain doubts with refped to
the establishcd systems of superstition; and when
,ve confider the great difference between the
ecclefi ftical conffitution (if 1 may use that expref-
sion) of the two countries, we are apt to imagine
that the eflablffhed system lay more open to
examination in the latter than in the former. In
Greece there was not any diftind race or order
of men set apart for performing the funcions of
religion, or to serve as hereditary and interelted
guardians of its tenets and inflitutions. But in
India the Brahmins were born the ministers of
religion, and they had an exclusive right of pre-
fiding in all the numerous rites of worship which
superstition prescribed as neceffTry to avert the
wvrath of Heaven, or to render it propitious.
These diflindions and privileges secured to them
a wonderful ascendant over their countrymen;
and every confiderarion that can influence the
hurmin mind, the honor, the interefl. the power
of their order, called upon then to support the
tenets, and to maintain the institutions and rites,

with which the preservation of this ascendant was
so intimately connected.

But as the molt eminent persons of the cast

devoted their lives to the cultivation ps science,
the progress which they made in all the branches
of it (of which I have given some account) was
great, and enabled them to form such a just idea
of the system of nature, and of the power, wisdom,
and goodness displayed in the formation and
government of it, as elevated their minds above
the popular superstition, and led them to acknow-
ledge and reverence one Supreme Being, "the
" Creator of all things (to use their own expref-
" sions), and from whom all things proceed"."

This is the idea which Abul Fazel, who

examined the opinions of the Brahmins with the
greatest attention and candor, gives of their
theology. " hey all," fays he, " believe in the
" unity of the Godhead, and although they hold
" images in high veneration, it is only because
" they represent celestial beings, and prevent their
" thoughts from wandering ". " t he sentiments
of the most intelligent Europeans who have visited
India, coincide perfectly with his, in refped to
this point. The accounts which IM. Bernier re-
ceived from the Pundits of Benares, bo:h of their
external worship, and of one Sovereign Lord
being the sole objec of their devotion, is pre-

y, Baghvat- Geeta , p. 84.
7 Ayeen Akbery, vol. iii. p. 3.

cifely the fame with that given by Abul Fazel "
?1. \Vi lknls, better qualified perhaps than any
TEuropean ever was to judge with rcfpedt to this
subject , represents the learned Brahmins of the
present times as Theiits, believers in the unity
of God ". Of the fame opinion is IMl. Sonnerat,
vho resided in India seven years in order to
inquire into the manners. sciences, and religion
of the Hindoos". The Pundits, who translated
the Code of Gentoo Laws, declare, "that it was
"the Supreme Being, who, by his power, formed
'" all creatures of the animal, vegetable, and
'm material world , from the four elements of fire,
' water, air, and earth, to be an ornament to
" the magazine of creation; and whose compre.
" henfive benevolence selected man, the centre of
" knowledge, to have dominion and authority

over the reft; and, having betlowed upon this

"favorite objcd judgment and undeiftanding,
'gave him supremacy over the corners of the
' world 7. "

Nor are these to be regarded as refined senti-

ments of latter times. The Brahmins being confi-
dered by the Mlahomedan conquerors of India as
the guardians of the national religion, have been
so studiously depressed by their fanatical zeal, that
the modern members of that order are as far

Voyage, ton. ii. p. 199.
" Preface to B.gkvat Geeta, p. 24-

Voyage, tom. i. p. 9R.
"Prelim. Difcourf. p. Ixxiii.

inferior to their anceflors in fciencc as in power.
It is from the writings of their ancient Pundits
that th :' derive the molt liberal sentiments which
they entertain at prefcnt, and the wisdom for
which they are now celebrated has been tranf-
mitted to them from ages very remote.

I hat this assertion is well founded we are

enabled to pronounce with certainty, as the moftl
profound iyfteries of Hindoo theology, concealed
with the greatest care from the body of the people,
have been unveiled by the translations from the
Sanfkreet language lately publilhed. The principal
design of the Baghvat-Geeta, an episode in the
Mahabarat, a poem of the highest antiquity, and
of the greatest authority in India, seems to have
been to eflablifh the dodrine of the unity of the
Godhead, and from a just view of the divine
nature, to deduce an idea of what worship will
be molt acceptable to a perfect Being. In it,
amidst much obscure metaphysical difcuflion, some
ornaments of fancy unsuited to our taste, and
some thoughts elevated to a trad of sublimity
into which our habits of judgment will find it
difficult to pursue them ", we find descriptions
of the Supreme Being entitled to equal praise
with those of the Greek philosophers which I
have celebrated. Of these I shall now produce one
which 1 formerly mentioned, and refer my readers
for others to the work itself: " mighty Being,"

" Mr. Hastings's Letter, prefixed to the Baghvat.Geeta,
P. 7.

fiy; Arjoon, " who art the prime Creator, eternal

God of Gods, the World's Mansion. Thou art

' the incorruptible Being, distinct from 1ll things
' transient. ' hou art before all Gods, the ancient
" P.I roJh, [ i. e. vital foul ], and the Supreme

Supporter of the universe. Thou knowtft all

" things, and art worthy to be known; thou art
"the Supreme Jlanfion, and by thee, O infinite
" Form, the universe was spread abroad. - Re.
" verence be unto thee before and behind; reve.
" rence be unto thee on all fides; O thou who
" art all in all. Infinite is thy power and thy
" glory. -- '1hou art the father of all things,
"animate and inanimate. Thou art the wife in-
" fructor of the whole, worthy to be adored.
" There is none like unto thee; where then, in
" the three worlds, is there one above thee?
" Wherefore I bow down; and, with my body
" profrate upon the ground, crave thy mercy,
" Lord! Worthy to be adored; for thou shouldest
" bear with me, even as a father with his son, a
" friend with his friend, a lover with his be-
"loved ". " A description of the Supreme Being
is given in one of the ficred books of the Hin.
doon, from which it is evident what were the
general sentiments of the learned Brahmins con-
cerning the divine nature and perfections: " As
" God is immaterial, he is above all conception;
" as he is invisible, he can have no form; but
" from what we behold of his woxks we may

" Baghvat-Geeta, p. 94. 9*.

" conclude, that he is eternal, Omnipotent, know-
" ing all things, and prcrent every where. "

To men capable of lorming such ideas of the
Deity, the public service in the Pagodas muff
have appeared to be an idolatrous worship of
images, by a superstitious multiplication of frivo-
lous or immoral rites; and tiley must have seen
that it was only by fanCity of heart, and purity
of manners, men could hope to gain the approba-
tion of a Being perfect in goodnef. 'This truth
Veias labors to inculcate in the Mlahabarat, but
with the prudent reserve, and artful precautions,
natural to a Brahmin, studious neither to offend
his countrymen, nor to diminish the influence of
his.own order. His ideas concerning the mode of
worshipping the Deity, are explained in many
inrking palfages of the poem, but, unwilling to
multiply quotations, I satisfy myself with referring
to them ".

When we recolled how slowly the mind of
man opens to abflrad ideas, and how dilliculc
(according to an observation in the ldahabarat)
an invisible path is to corporeal beings, it is
evident that the Hindoos must have attained a
high degree of improvement before their fenriments
rose so far superior to the popular fuperflition of
their country. The different fates of Greece hid
fubilfted long, and had made considerable progress
in refinement, before the errors of false religion

Dow's DifTert. p. xl.
Baghvat-Geeta, p. 55. 67. 75. 97. 119.

began to be deteted. It was not until the age of
Socrates, a:id in the school of philosophy cflab.
liled by his difciplcs, that principles adverse to
the tenets of the populdr fupcriiitioni were much
propag atcd.

A longer period of time elapsed before tlie

Romans, a nation of warrior; and ftatefcenc, were
enlightened bv science, or ventured upon any free
difquifirion concerning the object, or the rites of
wvorfhip authorized by their ancestors. But in India
the happy effects of progress in science were much
more early confpicuoui. W\ithout adopting, the
wild computations of Indian chronology, accord-
ing to which, the Alahabarat was composed above
four thoifland years ago, we must allow, that it
is a work of very great antiquity, and the author
of it discovers an acquaintance with the principles
of theology, of moralk, and of metaphyics, more
jufl and rational, th.,n seems to have been at-
tained , at that period, by any nation wvhofe
history is known.

But so unable are the limited powers of the

human mind to form an adequate idea of the
perfections and operations of the Supreme Being,
that in all the theories concerning them , of the
most eminent pbilofophers in the molt enlightened
nations, we find a lamentable mixture of ignor-
ance and error. From these the Brahmins were
not more exempt than the fages of other coun-
tries. As they hld that the fvlIem of nature was
not only originally arranged by the power and
wifdor of God, but that every event which

happened was brought about by his immediate
inte position, and as they could not comprehend
how a being could aft in any place unless where
it was present, they supposed the Deity to be
a vivifying principle diffused through the whole
creation, an universal foul that animated each
part of it". Every intelligent nature, particularly
the fouls of men, they conceived to be portions
separated from this great spirit "', to which, after
fillilling their destiny on earth, and attaining a
proper degree of purity, they would be again
reunited. In order to efface the slains with which
a foul, during its residence on earth, has been
defiled, by the indulgence of sensual and corrupt
appetites, they taught that it must pass, in a long
fuccefflon of tranfinigrations, through the bodies
of different animals, until, by what it fuffcrs and
what it learns in the various forms of its exist-
ence, it shall be so thoroughly refined from a'l
pollution as to be rendered meet for being ab-
sorbed into the divine essence, and returns like a
drop into that unbounded ocean from which it
originally issued ". These doctrints of the Brah-
mins, concerning the Deity, as the foul vwhich
pervades all nature, giving activitv and vigor to
every part of it, as well as the tinal reunion of

" Baghvat-Geeta, p. 6;. 78. 8;. Bernier, tor, ii.
p. 16 .

' Dow's DifTert. p. xliii.
" Voy. de Sonnerat, vol. i. p. 19. 2oo. Baghvat-
Geeta, p. ;9. Ir;. Dow's DilTert. p. xliii.

all intelligent creatures to their primeval source,
coincide perfecly with the tenets of the Stoical
School. It is remarkable, that after having ob-
served a near resemblance in the most sublime
sentiments of their moral docrine , we flould
likewise discover such a finnilarity in the errors *f
their theological speculations '.

The human mind, however, when destitute of

superior guidance, is apt to fall into a practical
error with refpecl to religion, of a tendency flill
more dangerous. When philosophers , by their
attainment in science, began to acquire such just
ideas of the nature and perfections of the Supreme
Being, as convinced them that the popular system
of superstition was not only absurd but impious,
they were fully aware of all the danger which
might arise from communicating what they had
discovered to the people, incapable of compre-
hending the force of thole reasons which had
swayed with them, and so zealously attached to
eflablifhed opinions , as to revolt against any
attempt to detect their falfhood. Instead, there-
fore, of allowing any ray of that knowledge
which illuminated their own minds to reach them,
they formed a theory to juflify their own conduct,
and to prevent the darkness of that cloud which
hung over the mind, of their fellow-men from
being ever d spelled. The vulgar and unlearned,
they contended, had no right to truth. Doomcd

" Liplii Phxfiol Szoico-. lib. i. difTert. viii. xxi. Seneca,
Antoninus, Epictetus, passim.

by

by their condition to remain in ignorance, they
were to be kept in order by delusion, and allured
to do what is right, or deterred from ventur-
ing upon what is wrong, by the hope of those
imaginary rewards which fuperflition promises,
and the dread of those punilhments which it
threatens. In confirmation of this. I might quote
the doctrine of molt of the philosophic fees, and
produce the words of almost every eminent Greek
and Roman writer. It will be sufficient, however,
to lay before my readers a remarkable passage in
Strabo, to whom I have been so often indebted
in the couife of my researches, and who was no
Icf qualified to judge with refped to the political
opinions of his contemporaries, than to describe
the countries which they inhabited. " What is
" marvellous in fable, is employed," fays he,
" fometinmcs to please, and sometimes to inspire
"terror, and both these are of use, not only
" with children, but with persons of mature age.
" To children we propose delightful fictions, in
" order to encourage them to adt well, and such
: as are terrible, in order to reftrail them from
"evil. Thus when men are united in society,
" they are incited to what is laudable, by hearing
"the poets celebrate the splendid adions of fabu-
" Ions. fory, such as the labors of Hercules and
"Theseus, in reward for which they are now

honored as divinities, or by beholding their illus-
"trious deeds exhibited to public view in paint-
"ing and sculpture. On the other hand, they
"are deterred from vice, when the punilhments

z

" ir+ficdb by the gods upon evil-doers are re-

latcd, ai;d threats are denounced against them
" in av./ui wxords. or iepr-fented by frightful

rigiurrcs, anti when men believe that these threats
"have been really executed upon the guilty. For

it is impollible to conduct women and the gross
'multitude, and to render them holy, pious,
" and upright, by the precepts of reason and
" philosophy ; fuperflitioii, or the fear of the
"; gd, ,niuft be callie in; aid, the influence of
"which is fou:!ded cin ti ions and prodigies For
a the tlhunder ot Jupiter , the ;c.is of Mlinerva,
'- the trident of Neptune, the toiches and snakes
, of the furies, the fipeai. tf the gods, adorned
" with ivy, and the xv!:tuc antcieit theology, are
" all fables, which the leiilators who formed
" the political confitittiion of flates employ as
' bugbear, to overawe the credulous and fim-

pie ".

. "

I heft idean of the phi.lfophers of Europe were

precifeiy the fame which the irahl;inis had adopted
m India, and according to which they regulated
tbeir coi.riul with rtfpcct to the great body of
the pteo.le. A, their o;!der bhtd an exclusive right
to read the fcred boo;s , to cultivate and to
teach fcicnce, they could moec efiectually prevent
all who xvwee ;it mcnicters cf it from acquiring
any portin of inforin3tion beyond what they
were pleased to impart. \\hen the free circula-
tiou of knowk'dge is not circumscribcd by such

Strabo, lib. i. p. ;6. 3.

reflridlions, the whole community derives bene-'
fit from every new acquisition in science, the
influence of which, both upon sentiment and
conduct, extends insensibly from the few to the
many, from the learned to the ignorant. But
wherever the dominion of false religion is com-
pletely eftablilhed, the body of the people gain
nothing by the greatefl improvements in know.
ledge. Their philofopcrs conceal from them,
with the utmolt folicitltde, the truths which they
have discovered, and labor to support that fabric
of superstition which it was their duty to have
overturned. They not only enjoin others to re-
fpre the religious rites prescribed by the laws of
their country, but conform to them in their own
practice, and, with every external appearance of
reverence and devotion, bow down before the
altars of deities, who must inwardly be the objects
of their contempt. Instead of resembling the teach-
ers of true religion in the benevolent ardor with
which they have always communicated to their
fellow-men the knowledge of those important
truths with which their own minds were enlight-
ened and rendered happy, the fages of Greece,
and the Brahmins of India, carried on, with
studied artifice, a scheme of deceit, and, accord-
ing to an emphatic expression of an inspired
writer, they detained the truth in unrighteous-
ness ". They knew and approved what was true,

" Rom. i. 18.

Z-

but among the reft of mankind they labored to
support and to perpetuate what is false.

Thus I have gone through all the particulars

whih I originally proposed to examine, and have
endcav,,crc. to discover the state of the inhabit-
ants of India with refped to each of them If I
had aimnedl at nothi;ig eife than to dcfcribe the
civil policy, the arts, the sciences, and religions
institutions of one of the onoft ancient and mofl
numerous races of men, that alone would have
led me into inquiries and difcuflions both curious
and infirucive. I own, however, that I have all
along kept in view an object more interefling,
as well as of greater importance, and entertain
hopes, that if the account which I have given of
the early and high civilization of India, and of
the wonderful progress of its inhabitants in elegant
arts and useful science, flall be received as just
and well-eftdbiifhed, it may have some influence
upon the behaviour of Europeans towards that
people. Unfortunately for the human species, in
whatever quarter of the globe the people of Europe
have acquired dominion, they have found the
inhabitants not only in a state of society and
improvement far inferior to their own, but differ-
ent in their complexion , and in all their habits
of life. ilen in every stage of their career are so
satisfied with the progrefi made by the community
of which they are members, that it becomes to
them a standard of perfecion, and they are apt
to regard people, whose condition is not similar,
with contempt, and even aversion. In Africa and

America, the dissimilitude is so conspicuous, that, in
the pride of their superiority, Europeans thought
themselves entitled to reduce the natives of the
former to slavery, and to exterminate those of
the latter. Even in India, though far advanced
beyond the two other quarters of the globe in
improvement, the color of the inhabitants, their
effeminate appearance, their unwarlike spirit, the
wild extravagance of their religious tenets and
ceremonies, and many other circumstances, con-
firmed Europeans in such an opinion of their own
pre-eminence, that they have always viewed and
treated them as an inferior race of men. Happy
would it be if any of the four European nations,
who have, successively, acquired extensive territo-
ries and power in India, could altogether vindicate
itself from having acted in this manner. Notshing,
however, can have a more dired and powerful
tendency to inspire Europeans, proud of their
own superior attainments in policy, science, and
arts. with proper sentiments concerning the people
of India, and to teach them a due regard for
their natural rights as men, than their being
accustomed, not only to confider the Hindoos of
the present times as a knowing and ingenious race
of men, but to view them as descended from
ancestors who had attained to a very high degree
of improvement, many ages before the least ftep
towards civilization had been taken in any part
in Furope. It was by an impartial and candid
inquiry into their manners . thtr the e mperor
Akber was led to confider the Hindoo.s as no less

Z 3

entitled to protedion and favor than his other
subjes , and to govern them with such equity
and mildness, as to merit from a grateful people
the honorable appellation of " The Guardian of
"' Mankind. " It was from a thorough knowledge
of their characer and acquirements, that his Vizier,
Abul Fazel, with a liberality of mind unexampled
among Mlahomedans, pronounces a high enco-
mium on the virtues of the Hindoos, both as
individuals and as members of society, and cele.
brates their attainments in arts and sciences of
every kind ". If I might presume to hope that
the description which I have given of the man-
ners and institutions of the people of India could
contribute in the smallest degree, and with the
moll remote influence, to render their character
more reSpecable, and their condition more bappy,
1 flihll close my literary labors w-th the fatisfac-
tion of thinking that I have not lived or written
in vain.

Ayeen Akbery, vol. iii. p. 2. gr. 9 ,

# NOTES TO THE APPENDIX.

N O T ES

r o T 1I E
A PP E N D I X.

NOTE I. p. 2,,.

A CCORDING to all the writers of antiquity , the
Indians are said to be divided into seven tribes or cafrs.
Strabo, lib. xv. p. 10o9. C, &c. Diod. Sicul. lib. ii.
p. i ;, &c. Arrian. Indic. c. o. They were led into
this error, it is probable, by conrisering some of the
subdivisions of the casts, as if they had been a diftint,
independent order. But 'that there were no more tl'an
four original casts, we learn from the concurrent tcftimony
of the best informed modern travcile-s A most diftinc&
account of thele we have in " La Porte Ouverte, ou
" la vraic Representation de la Vie, des ilceurs, de la
" Religion, & du .ervice des Branins , *ui demeurent
" fur les C6tes de Coromandel, ' &c. This was pom-
piled, before the middle of the last century, by Abraham
lobr, chaplain of the Dutch factory at Pullicate. By
gaining the confidence of an intel!igent Bahmin, he
acquired information concerning the manner; and religion

Z 4

of the Indians, more authentic and extensive than was
knonvn tc Euroneans prior to the late tra flations from
the Sanskreet larngage. I mention this book , because
it seems to be less known than it deserves to be. There
remains now no doubt with refpeC either to the number
or the fur tons of the casts, as both are ascertained
from the molt ancient arid lacred bo-oks of the hi;:doos,
and corfinmcd by the accounts of their ow n in.fitutions,
given by Brahmin, eminent for their learning. According
to them, the diffe-ent calls proceeded from Brahma. the
immediate agent of the creation under the Supreme Power,
in the follioing man.ner, which eftjb'ifhes b-,th the rank
shii-h they were to hold, and the office which they were
required to perform. ·
The Bra.hi:in . from the mouth ( wisdom): To pray, to

read, to infiruct.
The C!'etteree, from the arms (strength): To draw the

bow, to figl:t, to goiemn.
The Bice. from the belly or thighs (nourishment): To

p'nv;de the necclTaiies of lite by agiiculhure and
traffi,
The Sos.ier, from the feet C fubjeclion): To labor, to

fev e.

The prercribed occupations of all there claftes are

eff.ntial in a *e'l-rcgulated frite. Sbuor:inate to them
is a fE'th, or adventitious class, denominated Bnrrvii
S';ikser, supposed to be the cffspti', of an unlawful
ur;nn between perfuns of dfferent casts. These are nm'll!y
dealers in petty articles or retail trade. Pre.ace to 'he
Cc:le of Gentoo La;cs, p. xlvi. and xcix. This advtnti-
tin.'t cast is not mentioned, as far as I know, by any
Eurorean author. The difitirci.nn was too nice to he
rbferved by them, and they seem to confider the members
of :hs cast, as teionring to tl-e Sooder Belides ;Lefe
ai C le

gcdlr calls, there ij a race of unhappy men,
denominarted, on the Cnronmandel coast, Paiari, and,

in other parts of India, ('Chanda!ar. These are out-cafls
from their original order, who, by their mifcondut,
have forfeited all the privileges of it. Their condition is,
undoubtedly, the lowest degradation of human nature.
No person of any catl will have the least communication
with them. Sonnerat, tom. i. p. S , s6. If a Pariar
approach a Nayr , i. e. a warrior of high cast , on the
Ilalabar coast, he may put him to death with impunity.
W..ter or milk are confidered as defiled even by their
thad,)w puffing over them,. and cannot be used until
they are pur;fied. Ayecn Akbery, vol. iii. p. 24?. It is
almost impoflible for words to express the sensation of
vileness that the name of Pariar or Chandala conveys to
the mind of a Hindoo. Every Hindoo who violates the
rules or institutions of his cast finks into this degraded
situation. This it is which renders Hindoos so resolute
in adhering to the institutions of their tribe, because the
loss of cast is, to them, the loss of all human comfort
and refpedahility; and is a punishment, beyond com-
parison, more severe than excommunication, in the mofd
triumphant period of Papal power.

The four original casts are named, and their functions

described in the Mahabarat, the molt ancient book of
the Hindoos, and of higher authority than any with
which Europeans are hitherto acquainted. Baghvat-Geeta,
p. -io. The fame diftincion of calls was known to the
author of Heeto. pades, another work of considerable
antiquity, translated from the Sanskreet, p. 25r.

The mention of one circumltance respecting the diftinc-

tion of casts has been omitted in the text. Though the
line of separation be so drawn, as to render the aCcent
fium an inferior to a higher cast absolutely impoflible,
and it would be regarded as a most enormous impiety,
if one in a lower order should presume to perform any
funtion belonging to those of a superior cast; yet, in
certain cites , the Pundits declare it to be lawful for
persons of a high class to exercise some of the occupa-
tions allotted to a class below their own, without loling

their cast by doing so. Pref. of Pundits to the Code of
Gentoo Laws, p. zoo. Accordingly we find Brahmins
employed in the service of their princes, not only as
ministers of Rate, Orme's Fragments, p. 207, but in
subordinate fRations. Most of the officers of high rank
in the army of Sevagi, the founder of the Mahratta
slate, were Brahmins, and some of them Pundits or
learned Brahmins. Ibid p. 97. Many Seapoys in the
service of the Falf India Company, particularly in the
Bengal presidency, are of the Brahmin cast.

Another sac concerning the calls deserves notice. An

immense number of pilgrims, amounting, in some years,
to more than I o,ooo, visit the Pagoda of Jaggernaut,
in Orissa, (one of the most ancient and most revered
places of Hindoo worship, ) at the time of the annual
feifival in honor of the deity to whom the temple is
consecrated. The members of all the four caRs are
allowed promifcuoully to approach the altar of the idol,
and fearing themselves without diftiitnlion , eat indifcrinii.
nately of the fame food. This seems to indicate some
remembrance of a state prior to the inititution of catls,
when all men were confidered as equal. I have not such
information as enables me to account for a pradice so
repugnant to the first ideas and principles of the Hindoos,
either sacred or civil. Bernier, torn. ii. p. loz. Tavernier,
book ii. c. 9. Anquetil. Disc Prelim. p. 81. Sketches,
p. 96.

Some of my readers must have obferwed, that I have

given no account of the numerous orders of Indian
devotees , to all of whom European writers give the
appellation of Faquirs; a name by which the Mahomed-
ans distinguish fanatical monks of their own religion. The
light in which I have viewed the religious inflirutions
of the Hindoos, did not render it necessary that 1 should
confider the Indian Faquirs particularly. Their number,
the rigor of their mortifications, the excruciating penances
which they voluntarily undergo, and the high opinion
which the people entertain of their fandity, have struck

all travellers who have viflted India, and their defcrip-
tions of them are well known. The powerful influence
of enthusiasm, the love of distinction, and the desire of
obtaining Come portion of that reverence and those honors
which the Brahmins are born to enjoy, may account for
all the extraordinary things which they do and susser. One
particular concerning them merits notice. This order of
devotees appears to have been very ancient in India. The
description of the Germani , which Strabo takes from
MegaRhenes, applies, almost in every circumstance, to
the modern Faquirs. Lib. xv p. 1040. B.

NOTE 11. p. 258.

What I have afterted in the text is in general well.

founded. It is the opinion, however, of gentlemen
who have seen much of India, and who observed all
they saw with a discerning eye, that the conquests both
of the Mahomedans and of the Europeans have had some
effect upon the manners and cultoms of the natives. They
imagine that the dress which the Hindoos now wear,
the turban, the jumniah, and long drawers, is an imita-
tion of that worn by their Mahomedan conquerors. The
ancient dress of the Ind;ans, a^lefcribed by Arrian,
Hilt. Indic. c. 16. was a muslin cloth thrown loosely
about their floulders, a muslin shirt reaching to the
middle of the leg, and their beards were died various
colors; which is not the fame with that used at present.
The custom of secluding women, and the strictness with
which they are confined, is likewise supposed to have
been introduced by the Mahomedans. This supposition
is in some measure confirmed by the drama of Sacontala;
translated from the Sanfkreet. In that play, several
female characers are introduced, who mingle in society,
and converse as freely with men, as women are ac-
cultomed to do in Europe. The author, we may presume,
describes the manners , and adheres to the customs of

his own age. But while I mention this remark, it is
proper, likeuife, to observe. that, from a passage in
Strabo, there is reason to think. that, in the age of
Alexander the Grear, women yi India were guarded with
the fame jealous attention as at present- " ' hen their
" princes," (. fays he, copying Mlegafthenes, ) " set
c, out upon a public hunt, they are accompanied by a
a number of their women, but along the road in which
" they travel, ropes are rfetched on each fide, and if

a3ny man approach near to &hem he is instantly put to

"' death. " L:b. xv. p 103 . A. The influence of
Eurwoean manners begins to be apparent among the
Hindoos who reside in the town of Calcutta. Some of
them drive about in English chariots, fit upon chairs,
and furnish their houses with mirrors. Many circumstances
might be mentioned, were this the proper place, which,
it is rrobable, will contribute to the progress of this
spirit of imitation.

NOTE I. p. . 59.

It is amusing to observe how exactly the ideas of an

intelligent Afiadic coincide with those of the Europeans
on this fubjecl. " In reflecting, " fays he, " upon
" the poverty of Turan [the countries beyond the Oxus]
' and Arabia, 1 was at first at a loss to assign a reason
" hy these countries have never been able to retain
" wealth, ushilft, on the contrary, it is daily increasing
"in Indoftan. Timour carried into Turan the riches of
" Turkey, Persia, and Indoftan, but they are all diffi-
" pated; and, during the reigns of the four first Caliphs,
" Turkey, Persia, part of Arabia, Ethiopia, Egypt, and
c Spain, were their tributaries; but fill they were not
".rich. It is evident, then, that this dissipation of the

(' riches of a state, muff have happened either from
" extraordinary drains, or from ibme defect in the
"government. Indoltan has been frequently plundered
" by foreign invaders, and not one of its kings ever
" gained for it any acquilirion of wealth, neither has
" the country many mines of gold and silver, and yet
"Indoftan abounds in money and every other kind of
" wealth. The abundance of specie is undoubtedly owing
" to the large importation of gold and silver in the ships
" of Euroee, and other nations, many of whom bring

ready money in exchange for the manufactures and

<' natural productions of the country. If this is not
" the cause of the prosperous slate of Indoftan, it

must be owing to the peculiar blefliig of God."

Memoirs of Khojeh Abdul - kurreem , a Cilhmeerian of
diftindion, p. 42.

NOTE IV. p. 266.

That the monarchs of India were the sole proprietors

of land, is affe ted in most explicit terms by the ancients.
The people ( fay they ) pay a land-tax to their kings,
because the kingdom is regal property. Straho, lib xv.
p. solo. A. Diod. Sicul. lib. ii p. .1- This was not
peculiar to India. In all the great monarchies of the
East, the sole property of land seems to be vested in
the sovereign as lord paramount. According to Chardin,
this is the state of property in Persia, and lands were
let by the monarch to the farmers who cultivated them,
on conditions nearly resembling those granted to the Indian
Ryots. Voyages, tom iii .

p. 9. &c 4to. M. Volney

gives a similar account of the tenure by which lands
are held in one of the great provinces of the Turlkifh
empire. Voy. en Svrie, &c. tom. ii. p. 69, &c. The
precise mode, however, in which the Ryots of Indoftan
held their possessions, is a circumitance in its ancient

political conftitutinn, with refpecd to which gentlemen of
superior discernment, who have resided long in the coun.
try, and tilled some of the highelt stations in government,
have formed very different opinions Some have imagined
that grants of land were made by the sovereign to villages
or small communities, the inhabitants of which, under
the direction of their own chiefs or heads-men, labored
it in common, and divided the produce of it among
them in certain proportions. Defcript. de l'Inde, par
lI. Bernoulli, tom. ii. p. 22&, &-c. Others maintain, that
the property of land has been transferred from the crown
to hereditary officers of great eminence and power, de.
norinated Zemind)r s, who collete the rents from the
Ryots, and parcel out the lands among them. Others
contend, that the office of the Zemindars is temporary
and miniflerial, that they are merely coliectors of revenue,
removeable at pleasure, and the tenure by which the
Ryots hold their pofieffions is derived immediately from
the sovereign. This lalt opinion is supported with great
ability, by Mr. Grant, in an Inquiry into the Nature of
Zemindary Tenures in the landed Property of Bengal, &c.
This question still continues to be agitated in Bengal, and
such plausible arguments have been produced in support
of the different opinions , that although it be a point
extremely interesting, as the future system of Britilh finance
in India appears likely to hinge, in an essential degree,
upon it, pcrfons well acquainted with the state of India,
have not been able thoroughly to make up their minds
upon this subjea. Capt. Kirkpatrick's Introd. to the Infti.
tutes of Ghazan Khan. New Asiatic Mifcell. N 11l. p. izo.
Though the opinion of the Committee of Revenue, com-
posed of persons eminent for their abilities, leans to a
conclusion against the hereditary right of the Zemindars
in the foil, yet the Supreme Council, in the year t786,
declined, for good reasons, to give any decisive judgment
on a fubjedt of such magnitude. This note was sent to
the press before I had it in my power to peruse
MIr.,Roufe's ingenious and inftrucaive Dissertation concerning

the landed property of Bengal. In it he adopts an opinion
contrary to that of Mlr. Grant, and maintains, with that
cindor and liberality offentiment which are always conspicuous
wnere there is no other object in view but the discovery
of truth, that the Zemindars of Bengal poflefs their landed
property by hereditary right. Did I possess such knowledge,
either of the ltate of India, or of the system of adminifC
tration etablifhed there, as wou d be requisite for com-
paring there different theories, and determining which of
them merits the preference, the subjed of my researches
does not render it necessary to enter into such a difquifi-
tion. 1 imagine, however , that the state of landed
property in India might be greatly illustrated by an ac-
curate comparison of it with the nature of feudal tenures;
and I apprehend that there might be traced there a
succession of changes taking place, in much the fame
order as has been observed in Europe, from which it
might appear, that the possession of land was granted at
firit during pleasure, afterwards for life, and at length
became perpetual and hereditary property. But even under
this lalt form, when land is acquired either by purchase
or inheritance, the manner in which the right of pro-
perty is confirmed and rendered complete, in Europe by
a Charter, in India by a Suninud from the sovereign,
seems to point out what was its original state. According
to each of the theories which I have mentioned, the
tenure and condition of the Ryots nearly resemble the
description which' have given of them. Their state,
according to the accounts of intelligent observers, is as
happy and independent as falls to the lot of any race
of men employed in the cultivation of the earth.' The
ancient Greek and Roman writers, whose acquaintance
with the interior parts of India was very imperfec, re-
present the fourth part of the annual produce of land as
the general average of rent paid to the sovereign. Upon
the authority of a popular author who flounfhed in India
prior to the Chriltian era, we may conclude that a sixth
part of the people's income was, in his time, the usual

portion of the fovereifn. Sacontala, Ad V. p. (;. It is
now known that what the sovereign receives from land
varies greatly in different parts of the country, and is
regulated by the fertilitv or barrenness of the foil, the
nature of the climate, the abundance or scarcity of water,
and many other obvious circumstances. By the account
giv.n of it, I should imagine that, in some diltricts, it
has been raised beyond its due proportion. One circum-
stance with respect to the administration of revenue in
Bengal merits no:ice, as it redounds to the honor of the
Emperor Akber, the wisdom of Xhofe government 1 have
often had rccafion to celebrate. A general and regular
aifTelmentr of revenue in Bengal was formed in his reign.
All the lands were then va!ued, and the rent of each
inhabi:a-t and of each village ascertained. A regular
gradation of accounts w s e.t2bi'fhed. The rents of the
different inhabitants who lived in one neighbourhood being
collected t.,gether, formed the account of a village, the
rents of several villages being next collected into one
view, formed the accounts of a larger portion of land.
The aggregate of these accounts exhibited the rent of a
district, and the fum total of the rents of all the diftrics
in Bengal formed the account of the revenue of the
whole province. From the reign of Akber to the govern-
ment of Jaffeer Ali Cawn , A. D. I7-, , the annual
amount of revenue, and the modes of levying it, con-
tinued with little variation. But in order to raise the
fum which he had stipulated to pay on nis elevation, he
departed from the wife arrangements of Akber; many
new rrodes of assessment were introduced, and exations
multiplied.

NOTE V. p. 267.

I shall mention only one instance of their attention to

this useful regulation us police. Lahore, in the Panjab,
is distant from Agra, the ancient capital of Indoftan,

five

fire hundred miles. Along each fide of the road between
tblefe two grcut cities, tilcre is planted a c-. tiiu-l .,ow
ot hlid retcs, f.rminig ai avenue, to w:ich twhriter1
we conlider its exrc;t, it. beauty, or utiii:y in a hot
climatr:) there is noihi.lg fimilir in any country. Kennel's
lilemoir, p. 69.

NOTE VI. p. 270.

We cannot place the equitable and mild government

cf lkber ili a point of view more advantageous, than
by cotitrifting it with the conduct of other Mathomedim
princes. Irt no courty dii trhs c;ntrafl ever appear inore
ftrikilg th-n in Indla. In the thoulan.h y .r otf the
Chr;tiana e . !hh:iiul of G7lazna, to wahoe doiinion
were fubjictcdt the tli;ne cuiiniries which tobrmie th e ancie.t
k;r.g loin of BaF3tri. , invaded that country. Every lt.p of
his prugrelf i. it was marked with blood and defilation.
lhe molt celebrated pagodas, tl:c ancient monuments of
Liidoo devotion and riiaign;fielcnce, were deltroyed, the
mrii itters of religion were mailacred, and with unjiftii-
guiPniiig ferocity tie country uwa; laid waste, and the
ciies piundered and burnt. About four hundred years
after ld!lnmuil , Timur or Tamncrlane, a conqueror of
higher faine, turned his irrefiltible arms againit lndoftan,
and, though born in an age more improved, he not or;ly
elua:led, but often tb far surpassed tne cruel deeds of
R'.,imlud, as to be ju!tly branded with the odious name
of the " Dellro.ing IPrince," which vas given to him by
the llindaos, the undeferving vicims of his rage. A rapid
but elegant dilcriptiol of their devastations may be found
in Mr. Urnie's Dill'citaion on the Eitblifhnments made by
the Mlahomedan conquertrs in Indoftan. A more full ac-
count of them is given by /1r. Gibbon, vol. x. p. 197.
vol. xi. p. 28 , &c Tne arrogant contempt with which
bigotted. Mahonmedans view ail the nations who have not

Aa

embraced the religion of the prophet, will account for the
inr c;-l .i tieor of Y.%h::ud and Ti.ur towards the
ll].2) ss, and greatly enhances the merit of the tolerant
fri-i. a:.d moderation iii:h which rabcr governed his sub-
jects. \X ht impreflion the miid adni iftration of Aliber
made upon the Hindoos, we learn from a beautiful letter
of Jeff'Tant Sing, Rajah of Joudpore, to Aurengzebe, his
fanati.al and perlecuting successor. " Your royal ancestor,
" Akber, x.hole throne is now in heaven, conducted the
" affairs of th;s empire in equity and firm security for the
; space of fifty- tw o years, prefeilvng every tribe of men
" in ease and happinels ; whether they were followers of
" Jesus, or of Moses, of David, or of Alahomed; were
" they Brahmins, were they of the fee of Dharians,
" which denies the eternity of matter, or of that which

afc-ibes the existence of the world to chance, they all

" equally enjoyed his countenance and favor; insomuch
" that his people, in gratitude for the indiscriminate
s protection which he afforded them, distinguished him by
" the appellation of Juggut Gr-on-, Guardian of Mlankind.-
" If your Majesty places any faith in those books, by
" diftincrion called divine, you Xill there be instructed,
" that God is the God of all mankind, not the God of
" Mahomedans alone. The Pagan and the Mussulman are
" equally in his presence. Distinctions of colors are of
" his ordination. It is He who gives existence. In your
" temples, to his Name, the voice is raised in prayer;
" in a houre of images, where the bell is shaken, still
" He is the object cf adoration. To vilify the religion and
" cufl irns if other men, is to set at naught the plealure
" of -he 'irighty. \\. hen we deta e a picture, we natur-
a alls ircur the refe.tment of the Faintrr; and juflly has
" the Poet aid, " Presume not to arraign or to scrutinize
" the various w.orks of Power Di,i e. " For this valuable
communication we are indebted to Mr. Orme. Fragments,
notes. p. xcvii. I have been assured by a gentleman who
has read this letter in the original , that the tranllation is
not only faithful but elegant.

NOTE Vll. p. 28t.

T have not attempted a description of any subterraneous

e:..v .io.:s but thufe of klephanta, because none of
t!;. ,ihave been f, ')fcn visited, or so carefully infpcded.
Ir, 1.vcral parts of India, there are, however, fupendous
u :',s of a similar n'tu-e. The extent and m;:gniicence
o; the ex.avations in the island of Salfette are such, that
the artft employed by Governor Boon to make drawings
of them, allfTrte that it would require the labor of ftrty
tioufanJi men for firty years to finish them. Aichaeologia,
vl. vii. p. 3 ;6. l.oose as this mode of estimation may be,
it co.lveys an idea of the impression which the view of
them midle upon his mind. The Pagodas of Ellore,
e:ghteen miles from Aurungabad, are likewise hewn *,ut
of the fulid rock, and if they do not equal those of
Elephanta and Salfette in magnitude, they fuipafs them
far in their extert and number. M. Thevenoc, who first
gave any description of thele singular mansions , alTerts ,
that for above two leagues all around the mountain
nothing is to be seen but Pagodas. Voy. part. iii. ch. 44.
They were examined at greater leisure and with more
at·ent'on by M. Anquetil du Perron, but as his long
dercription of them is not accompanied with any plan or
drawing, I cannot convey a distinct idea of the whole.
It is evident, however, that they are the works of a
powerful pe:ple, and among the innumerable figures in
sculpture with which the wvalls are covered, all the
present obTedts of Hindoo worship may be diitingu;lhed.
Zend-avelta. Disc. Prelim. p. 23 . There are remarkable
excavations in a mountain at iMavalipuram near Sadras.
This mountain is well known on the Coromandel coast
by the name of the Seven Pagodas. A good description
of the works there which are magnificent and of high
antiquity is given. Afiat. Researches, vol. i. p. 14 , &c.
Many other inliances of similar works might be produced
if it were necessary. What I have asserted, p. 281.
concerning the elegance of some of the ornaments in

Aa 2

Indian bidi-gc , is c rfiumed by Colonel C: , chief
erz,.-eer at ',Ai-:, , uho uriCes this as a prc of of tI;e
earv and hign ,i;iijaIioi l of the lildiais. It may f, fclv
" he prorounced ," fays he, " that no part of the world
" has rrore ma,.s ot antiquity for a:ts, sciences, ai,d
c civil:z iion , than the pcninfula of Irdia, tiom the
' Garges to Cape Cumorin. I thi:nk the carvings on
" forme of the Pagodas and Choultries, as \ell as the
" grandeur of the xwok , exced, any thing execured
" now-a days, not onls for the delizacy of the cliti,
" bur the experfe of corntrLCt.on, confidering, in many
i' infances, to uhat d,ftances the con:ponent rarrs mere
" carried, ad to what heights raf£ed. " Philuiphical
Trnfctlions, vol. Iiii. p. 3S4.

NOTE VIII. p. 2S5.

India, fv.^ Strebo. produces a variety of substances

vl':ch dse tne m(:' adniir-ibe colors. That the Jiitiitui;,
which produced the bea.:tiful blue color, is the fame
,uith the lii.Ug or the maderrs, o e r.;i conclude not
only fom the refenmblance of the name, ard the lirilarity
of the effects. but from ti.e description given by Pliny
in the patlge hkich 1 l;ave quotcd in the text. He knew
that it xwas a preparation of a vegetable substance, though
he was ill-informed both concerning the plant itself, and
the process b', xhi-.h it was fitted for use, which will
not aFear surprising when we recollect the strange igno-
rance of the ancients with repecc to the origin and
prenara:ion of fi:k From the color of Indio , in the
f rm in ki::h it was imported, it is denominated by
fcme authors , A{t-aie;nt';il ;i,Jic:t;; , and litiCwon
yigius, , Salmaf 1 xercit. p. iSo, and is mentioned
under the laftR f these names, among the articles of
importation from InJia. Peipl. \lar. Er'thr. p. ::. The
color of the modern Indigo, when undiluted, resembles

that of the ancient Indicum, being so intensely colored
at to appear black. De!rtval',s xperin. Inquiry iito ,he
C ,fe of the Chianges of Colors, Pr-f. p. xxiii. 'I he
(,oe, Lacca, uscd in dying a red color, wa, likewise
kniowui to the ancients, and by the fnle name which it
now bears. SaxlmiF. xtercit. p. 8 to. This valuable sub-
fiance, of such extcnfive utiliy in pintintg , d i:g,
j rpinning, v.rn:ifiing, and in the manufacture of fealing-
wax, is the prudl, ctiou' of a very minute ii icct. These
infccts fix themlelve upon the succulent exriemitics of
the branches of cert.iin trces, and are fron gluec to the
place on which they fettle, by a thick, pellucid liquid
,ihich exudes from their bodies, the gradual accumulation
of which forms a complete cell for each infect, which
is the tomb of the parent, and the b'rth placc of its
offspring. This glutinous fubilarce, with hich the
b-anches of trees are entirely corer:d, is the Gum-lacca.
An account of its formation, nature, and use. is given
in the Philof. Tranf vol. Ixxi. part ii .

p. -4. in a

concise, accurate, and fatisfactoy manner. C:fTia seems
to hive received an account tolerably dilti:¢Ct of the
infect by wh;ch t-e Gum - lacca is produced, and cele-
b-.les the beauty of tl'e color which ;- dyes. Excerpta
ex. Indic. ad caic. Hero ot F c. \F ;Xi' 7 ; g. p. h o.
iJ.li.li Dy,;-s \;wa the ar'ccrnt name oi ti,,ile who dved
tither the fi-e blue or the fine red, which points cut
the cou!:try whence the materials they ustd were hrought.
Salmnaf. lb. p. 81o From their d)ing cotton - stuff with
difl rent colors, it is evident that the ancient I.dians

!nft h:tve m ile some co:fiderab!e pFr ficiency in chemical

kn(,Al rge. P'iny, :b. xxxv c. ii. 5 42. gives an account
of thi, art as far as it was known ancienrly. It is
preciftly the fame wiLh that now pratlfed in callico-
printing.

Aa )

NOTE IX. p. :95.

As Sarfkl'et lterasure is altorether a new acquisition

to Europe, lti: vt-G-cta . tre si ft trarnflion trum that
]an.utrSe, hvi- g been nuhilh'i. f,1, l! tr as -X. D. i7:c,
it is ijnmat:rl co,nrned- wti. :he fuhbj-c of my inquiries,
3nd m.-v aT rd ent:r' .inr.e:5. :o tome of my readers,
af:hr having r. ic.e i in td-e text, \i h a gre,.t.r degree
of crcl .'te ,,t , the ti.o wanfkreet works nmoft worthy
.f r.rt ce. ro gis i-c re a fuccir ct .ccount of other com-
po:i.,,;n i.i rt-kat t.- : ith ':h. h we I:ave been made
acq'ji-te '1 h -lh . I:cive ue e f the Sanfkreet language
i, a .i cun'ftj.cc v..-ihll mcriis p.trticular a::ention. " The

'l cr. n foirce of Indin literature," t fuys Mr. Hlalhed,

the si;lt (, ll]man huho acquired tht khilmle.lge of
Sa l-rcet ' the parent of almost every didlect from
'' the Perl;an cu!f to the China seas, ih the S irfkreer, a
c, l.,g,;'ae of the m,)s venerable and unfathmanible anti-
" ouiv ; uihich, a:irouh at ,

a t

peen, ih up in the

" I:h-a'es of Erihmi.:s, and appropriated foleiy to the
" rccorJs cf ti..ir rti'gion, appears to have bc.n cijrrlit
"i o:.- n:uf of the Or)iental w',r!d; a-.d tradcs of its
"c- G-: ai ';t;rrt mnay uiiil be di'ntvcre in almr.t cevery

' 2rii,.t ft' .Af3i. 1 1 vc beeln sitcn aitu--::',ed to fil
t' te s:i!s tuie ,C .tSa' i'.reet vt.rd. \xmi- ti.e of P.' li..l
a o-.d \r.>tii. and cden of L-in a!d (r;:e ; a.d tine

' :.,r: in tch;::i;il and rmeraphnrical t rr-s, vlhich t e
T' r--:t;un of i si..ci ;,art a':d iminroved Ilmanneris ci;' t
" h.jc occtisirmJdi.y i,'(l:.!.c-:J , b,:t is the ground-vork
'"- r ij.:.urje, i:i norosix!ab's, ii the ramns cf nunmbers,
'' aidl t' arpc!'dtirns of fi:h tlhic-r aT \iould he first
"' difcrini n .-cd ,n t',e i.nn'm .idat d.n of civifi7a.irin.
" The refen tbia e c.-ich n-av be ohfr:.;e:i in the charac-

"ters on ti;e n.c' , i a:-d li. -e:s ,i' va rious diic of

As3, tc j lt [vC 1i I!;:'. rc ipr cr::y rt ri- c uron each

'' ,th. r, a-: t.-c c .rerl ana!hv hich rliL all bear to
"tte IdmeC granj i i:ctvpe, afford anotner amplc tield

for curiosity. The coins of AfTam, Napaul, Cafhmeere,

"and many other kingdoms, are all ftimped with Sanfkreet
" characters , and mostly contain allusions to the old
"Sanfkreet mythology. The fame conformity I have
" observed on the impreflin of feals from Bootan and
' Thibet. A collateral inference may likewise be deduced
" from the peculiar arrangement of the Sanfkreet alphabet,
" so very different from that of any other quarter of
' the world. This extraordinary mode of combination still
"exists in the greacrft part of the Ea(t, from the Indus
"to Pegu, in dialets now apparently unconnected, and
" in characters completely dillimilar; and it is a forcible
"argument that they are all derived from the fame
" source. Another channel of speculation presents itself in
" the names of persons and places, of titles and dignities,
" which are open to general notice, and in which, to
" the farthest limits of Asia, may be found manifest
" traces of the Sanfkreet. " Preface to the Grammar of
the Bengal Language, p. 3. After this curious account of
the Sanlkreet tongue. 1 proceed to enumerate the works
which have been translated from it, betides the two men-
tioned in the text. - i. To Mr. Wilkins we are indebted
for eeto-pailes or Amicable I2nflrtrtion, in a series of
connected fables, interspersed with moral, prudential, and
political maxims. This work is in such high esteem
throughout the East, that it has been tiarfllated into every
language spoken thcee. It did not eccape the notice of
the Emperor Alber, attentive to every thing th;t could
contribute to promote useful knowledge. He directed his
Vizier, Abul Fazel, to put it into a fiyle suited to all
capacities, and to illufirate the (.bfcure pafnages in it,
kvhich he accordingly did, and gave it the title of,
The Criterion of lJ'ijioir. At lengt! , these fables made
their way into Europe, and h ve been circulated there
u ith additions and alterations, under the names of Pilpay
and .fop. ,lany of the Sanfkleet apologues are ingenious
and beautiful, and have bten ccpied or imitated by the
fabulists of other nations. But in ofme of them the

Aa 4

charcrters of the an:mlli inro(duceJ are very iil fuflaincd;
to n tlribc a :2:'r as e\tr'nicly dcvout, and practting
ch-':i , and ohecr reliiousL dutie. , p. 16. or an old
rnmor. ! eil rto4 in the ).'.e Sa'-;-s, i. r. Systems of
rnor.J!ir and policy, p. :4 ; a cit who read re!igions
b u'-, p. ;,, &c.. ,if ov-rs a wsnt i,f rate , an - an
i-at:: .;on to propri:tv. .3any of the moral fa irg; , if
co-s' ;ed

s dea

che d

a rnails , are founded ipon a

thor s-J, .r(rmledge of lI:e and ma:,ners , and convey
irfrtp tion si;h elegant fimpticitv. But tre arterpt of
the d:arhor t) form his uorih into a connecled firies of
I,.tI;. and his muoe of interweaving with trilci such a
nr'T -r of mn-al rttlec? ,,is in pri'c . n in ve-fe, rende's
th: it. cture of the unri t si;, rt fic;al that t'-e oe ufril cf
it benonrcs otren u-picatit. ikb-r s\as so fer!l.ie of
this. t'-at, ar.on cither ,nli''ilons, le advires his V;zi-r
t art:i:.-e the lunE r!;rc.:r..nr in thi - wrk. Bv tliefe
fr.:ci ei it is f r t-om nrm intnti;in to cetract in the
l--Jlle: deeerec f o.n the merit ot M!r. \Xi'lns lis courry
is r.,ucbh rdbtci to i n for havi-<t opened a lew
fourc of fcierce and t:fte. The cel-br;t' t' the Hle:ro-
F:, !- . st ell as its i-rrin',c n:cr; . riirrwith landing the
d.r -C: v i:h I have mert:r-e , j itry his choice of it,
a- n .irki vostr. of bri g mja.'e k-os n to Eur.pe in its
fjigi;,l ft-n.. rom rec.i:n, th- a ;d his Irier tranf itions,
r, a

r ill r-s

" i hl ref m t:rt r. cfe, teo : hiih he moefll!y

cr-ti' < i; F e ie ire -.,, " of hL. :' dran3: a piciure
" hichi- v.e fDji',fe tn he a cue I L .ie;', .ithough we

'ae unacqLai-t-ce ai;h the ork;! na! Pr. i. . xv.

2 . the fi-i' nLmtntr of tie N:w rAi.'.ic Vifcllarnv, -e

a-dec a tidnflatiorl of a celebrated coinp r fition in t'e Eali,

:ri.w:. }h t;l title of the Five (;rins. It conlifts of
f: -zas bv fi.e p'rts

. ho atte:ded the court of Ab;flura,

].: e of Brenal. Some of these ftarzas are fimiple andt
- ar t. - 1. n o e trar.fia:ed f o-n \ulli ; in which
ti-rt extravar-nae oth fr-,

ar the fr-fet:hed and
unnatural cuncics , shich fl often disgust ELropeans with

the poetical compnritons of the Ealt, abouid too much.
The editor has not i"formed us to whose k-ouledge of
the Sanfkreet we are indebted for the'e two tra-flldons.
4. Somle original gr!rits of land, of very ancient ditez,
tranflited by Mr. \Vtlii,,s. It mav fce.n odd , th l a
charter of legil conveyance of property Ihoull be ranked
aimnng the lierary compolitions of any pon)ple. Blit so

id.ly) do the manners of the H;ndoos diffzr from rhore
of Europe, that as our lawyers multiply words aid claufGs,
in orde, ro render a grant complete, and to guard against
every thing that may invalidate it. the Ptaiits f em to
dilpatch the legal part of the deed with brevity, but, in
a lng preamhle and conclusion, make an extraordinary
dil'iaity of their owi learning, eloquence, and powers of
cumpolition, both in prose and in verle. The preamble
t) one of there deeds is an encomium of the monarch
wio gratis rhe land, in a bold ltrain of Faftern exaggera-
tion: W' ien his innumerable army marched, the heavens
''were so filled with the dutl of their feet that the birds
" of the air could reft upon it. " " His elephants
' niov-l like walking mountains, and the earth, oppressid
" b their weight, mnouldered into dust. ' It concludes
witl derouncing veng ance against rhofe who should ven-
ture to infi mge this grant: " Riches and the life of man
" are as trantient as drops of water upon a leaf of the
" lous Learnirg this truth, O man, do not attempt
"to deprive another cf his property. " Aftitic Researches,
vl. i. p. t 2 , &c. The other grant, which appears to
b' still more ancient, is not leCs remarkable. Both were
tfjd'd engraved on plltes of copper. Ib. p. I;7 &c.-
s. The tranllition of part of the Shafter, pubifhei by
Clo'el lDow, in the year t76-, ought perhaps to have
b-en firlt mentioned. But as this tfanfl.tion was not
m.le by him from the San!fkreet, but taken from the
n: ):rh of a Brahmin, who ex;lained the Shafter in Persian,
o, in the vulgar lI ngujge of Begal , it will fall more
properly under notice when we come to inquire into the

state of science among the Hindoos, than in this place,
where we are endeavouring to give some idea of their
tate in composition.

NOTE X. p. 3o0.

As many of my readerr may be unacquainted with the

extfaveaint length of the four eras or periols of Inaian
chronology, it may be proper to give an account of them
from Mr. Halhed'h Preface to the Code of Gentoo Laws,
p. xxxvi.

x. The Snrt:J .Jogue (or age of purity ) is said to have

lastei three million two hundred thousand years, and they
hold that the life of man was extended in that age to
one hundred thousand years, and that his stature was
twenty-one cubits.

2. The Tir:ah Jogtze (in which one thirl of mankind

wa, corrup:ed) they suppose to have confilted of two
million four huidre thousand years, and that men lived
to the age if ten tnouiand years.

3. The Drap.aar .Jcrgue ( in which half of the human

race became dep-aved) endured one million fix hundred
thoufaid years , and the life of man was then reduced to
a thoufCnd years.

4. The Col.ee JoPee ( in which all mankind are cor.

rupted, or rather lcifened , for that is the true meaning
of (o,'re') is rhe prcf:nr era, which they suppose ordained
to subsist four hundred thoufCnd years, of which near five
thousand are already nift, and the life of man in that
peiiod is liiited to one hundred years.

If we fuppjf; the con1putr3ion of time in the Indian

chronology cJ be mde by filar or even by lunar years,
nothing can be inore extravagant in itself, or more
repugnant to our mode of calculating the duration of the

world, founded on sacred and infallible authority. Some
attempts have been made by learned men, particularly
,b hi. Bailly, in a very ingenious difTertation on that
futject, to bring the chronology of the Hindoos to accord
fnm''what better with that of the Old Testament; but, as
I could not explain the principles upon which he founds
h:s conclusions, without entering into long and intricate
difculfions foreign from the fubjedt of this Dissertation,
and as 1 cannot afTent to some of his opinions, I shall
relf satisfied with referring to his Altron. Indienne, Disc.
Prelim. p. Ixxvii. and leave my readers to judge for
theife!ves. I am happy to observe that a Memoir on the
Chronology of the llindoos will be published in the Second
Volume of the Tranfddlons of the Society of Bengal,
and 1 hope that some learned member of that body will
be able, from his acquaintance with the languages and
hi!tory of the country, to throw light upon a subjet
which its connexion with religion and science renders
extremely intereting. From one circumstance, however,
which merits attention, we may conclude, that the infor-
mation which we hive hitherto received concer-ing the
chronology of the llindocs is very incorrect. We have,
as far as I know, only five original accounts of the
different jogues or eras of the Hindoos The first is
given by 3M. Roger, who received it from the Brahmins
on the Coromandel c.,ast. Accordi:g to it, the Suttee
Jcgue is a period of one million seven hundred and
twetnty -eight thousand yeas ; the Tirtah Jogue is one
millio!n two hundred and ninety-fix thousand years; the
I)wapaar Jogue is eight hundiel and fixty-four thousand.
ihe duration of the Collee Jogue he does not specify.
Torte Ouverte, p. 179. The next is that of M. Bernier,
who received it from the Brahmins of Benares. According
to him, the duration of the Suttee Jogue was two mil-
lim iive hundred thousand years ; that of the Tirtah
J.lgue one mill:on two hundred thousand years; that of
the 1)wapaar Jogue is eight hundred and fixty-four thousand

yeare. Concernngl the period of the Collee Joeue, he,
likeA.ife , is fileit. \ovaues , t r. ii. p t60. The third
is that of Colonel Duw. acc.,reling to \hich the Suttee
J,,gue is a pceiod of fourteen mill:nn cf 'ea-s; the Tirtah
Jr.'u-e one milli n c;ht! thoufapd; the D iapaar J gue
.ver-ty - tao thousand; and the Collee Jogue thirty' -1ix
thtul:n' d !ears. Hist. of Hlin-ict. vol. i. p. ^. The
fourth acc:;u:,t is that of 1. Le Gencil, who received
it from the Brah;nins of the Coromandel co ft, and as
his infomarion was a:rui-e:! in th famine part of India,
and derived from the fame source xith th t of 31. Roger,
it aeSeezs ith his in eve, c

paricular. i1em. de l'\cadem.

ee- >.icnces pour i--2, tom. ii. part i. p. I-6. 'ihe
fif'i is the account of Ylr. Hdlhed, shich I have already
given. From th;i difcrepar.c , rot only of the rrtal
nunt-ers, but of manv of the ar:icles in the different
accounrs, it is maniftct that our irf rmation concerniig
In.l;an chronoogv is hitkerto as uncertain as the whole
fxft m of it is u ild an:i fabulous. To me it appears
h g'; probhb!-, thbt vwhen we underitnd more tho-
roughly, the prin-i-les upon h;ch tlhe ficitious eras
or J :'ues of the Hi doos have been forme. , that we

7r-. be more ab'e to reconcile their chrnology to the

tre rn,,' .C cnmnui:irg tinie, f.tun.lel on the authority
of the 0Ot Tcifj.m..t; and mai li kcife find rcafon to
co-.c';.uc , that r'- acc)-a-t gi'.:C by their aft.onomers
of -e

si, at'un of the heavenl- bo'i ,is at the begin-i:g

of t'e CrIlee Jg;ic . is not elbitlhed by actual obher.
vaion , but the result of a retrofifctive calculation.
V hotever u-.lertakes to invefri, ?t farther the chronology
of the -H:tl'd .u w.1 deiive great aliisiane from A
lenoir of Mr. A:arfien on that fubjct , in which hd
has exlained the nature of their year, and the ftveral
eras in use am -, them , si:h much ingenuity and
precision. Philof. Transact. vol. Ixxx. part ii. p. 560.

NOTE XI. p. 313.

In the public buillings of India. we find proofs and

mortiniu ts of the pificierncy o(f the B:ahmins in science,
particuialy of rthii atteniton to aftrononical obfervat:on.
Their religion tinj'irs, that the four fides of a Pagoda
Thould f.:ce the four cardinal poihts. In order to execute
this with accuracy, they take a method described by
\1. Ie Gentil, which discovers a corfiderable dtgree of
science. He carefully examined the position of one of
their Pagodas, and found it to be perfeCtly exact.
Voy. tom.i. p.

p 1 , &c. As tome of their Pagodas

are very ancient, they must h..ve early attained tuch
a p,,rtion of knowledge a6s was requisite for placing them
prorpe ly. On the ceil;nrs of Choultries, and other ancient
edifices, the twelve signs of the zodiac are often de-
lineated; and , from their resemblance to those which
are now univcrfally usJd, it is highly probable that the
knowledge of there atbitrary fynbols was derived from
the East. Colonel Call has publiflled a drawing of the
signs *:f the zodiac, which he found on the ceilig
of a Chnul'lry at Ver'apettah, in the Madura country.
Phil. Trunfact. vol. Ixii. p ; . I have a drawing
of them in my po(,Tiiion, differing from his in fime
of the figures , but I cannot fay in what particular place
it was tbunrl. Sir Robert Barl;r describes an obfer-
vatory at Benares, which he visited A. D. 1772. In
it he found instruments for aftronornical ohfervation, of
very large di;nenfions , and conltructtd with great ikill
and it;genuitv. Of all these he has publirhed drawings.
Phil. Tranlact. vol. Ixvii. p. s98. According to tra-
ditionary account, this observatory was built by the
Imperor Akber. The view which Sir Robert took of
it was a hasty one. It merits a rmre attentive infpec-
tion, in order to detcrnine whelfer it was conftrueted
by Akber , or erected in some more early period. Sir.

Rrbert int:rntes, that none but Brahmins who under.
ft ,d the bSI.-reet, and coi.ld cunfult the astronomical
tables written in that language, \-ere capable of calcu-
lating eclinfes. P. Ti ffenthaler describes, in a very
cu-tr- manner, two observatories furnished with inltru-
ments of extraordinary magnitude, at Jepour and Ougein,
in the :uuntry of Mlalwa. Bernoulli, tom.. i .

p. 16.
347. but these are modern firudures.

# NDEX.

N D E X.

A.
.. BUL FAZEL, minifterto Akber, sovereign of Indoftan,

publishes the Ayeen Akbery, 270. and Heeto-Pades ;S9.
Acefines, a city built on that river by Alexander the

Great, 201.
,Eras of Indian cbronology, explained, 362. remarks on

;6;.
Africa, general idea of the continent of, and of its trade,

is6. origin of the slave- trade, 178.
Agathemerur, his account of the island of Taprobana, 81.

his Charadter of Ptolemy the geographer, 217.
Agatbuir4eon, illustrates the geography of Ptolemy, by

maps, 217.

Akber, sovereign of Indoftan, his character, 270. 354.
Albiuqerqite AIplionfo, the Portugueze admiral, seizes

the island of Ormus, iSo. his operations in the Red
Sea, isi.
Alexander the Great, his extensive views respecting India,

12. his expedition to India, Ir. his war with Porus,
16. how reduced to relinquish his enterprie , .7.
his measures for opening a maritime communication with
India, 18. his account of India confirmed by modern
observations, zr. his political views in exploring that
country, 24. his measures to unite his European and
Asiatic fubjeds, 25. consequences of his death,_.o.

the sufferings of his army from the periodical rains,
196. his surprise at the tides of the Indian octen,
19i. ci.ies built by him in ldiia, zoo. 202. interded
a Iurtvev of the C;.;ipln sea, ;12.
Alex-zaiia, lo.g the chief feat ut commerce with India,

;. the ligh,hotLe on the Pharus erected by Ptulcmy
L.gus, S. mode of conducting the lilk trade at that
poet, i.; the Venetians tiade there for i:k. 122. and
the Flurentines. 126. is subjected to the Turks, iis.
Aidb.,d.id, the modern name of the ancintt c'ty ot Puli.

bothra, ; . account of this city by i'icgafthenes, 3 .
remarks on M1ajor Rennel on this [ubjed, 204.
A;nzezna, d:foovercd bh Christopher Ci4limbus , 142. the

iafi inr.rci trade a cortinual drain frun its lilver mines,
i-S. cr:gin us the fiave-trade, 179 contra.t betteen
the na:ives of Xmerica and of India :.nen hrft discovered,
iSo. the traJe of Eurcpe with each compared, 18.
-as obliged to be clonrized, in order to be improveJ,
1S4. fup,!ies Europe iilth its products, in return tor
m-r.uFactures, liz'i.

A;itibtu',t tie Gie.,', his i'lroad into India, 206.
liito;:ui:;,s ,Aa cus, enetror, norices of an embassy Cent

by hira to the enmeri r of China, -6.
dAnrxtrp , greatly tcr;;:hed by becoming the staple of the

Hanleatic leagLe, I ;S.
Ai-iLza;is, arciently grear dealers in rpices from the Fast,

5 4 great a]rterri't-s arie d in their m;rrners by the
religion outs 9-vmed, 98 t' cv conluer gypt and 'erlia,
z.'. a 'i;ux ot their commercial nav:garion, 1oo. are the
fitt i r.o mlt:tn porcelan and tea, so2. derived the
kiiticdj, or tte nariner's coiiiipls frin Europe. 229.
rnml;e ro scruple to plunder tle caravan travelling to
belcca, 244.
Aii.:.tle, h.s political advice to Alexander the Great, =2.

his ju:: dcfc:iFticn of the Caspian sea, z1I. doubted
the expcdieney ot cmmrerce in a well- regulated itate,
21].
Aroimzaies, why much used by the ancients, 54.

A rian,

Arrian, charader of his History of the Indian expedition

or Alexander the Great, 21. his account of the com-
merce of the ancients, 59. inquiry into his geographical
knowledge of India, 63. is the first ancient writer who
had any knowledge of the Eastern coast of the great
peninsula of India, 65. his account of Alexandes
Indian fleet corroborated, 196. character of his Indian
History, 19-. his account of the Caspian sea, 211.
his Periplus compared with modern names and situations,
216. 222.

Arts and Sciences, where first cultivated, 2.
lsbeflto, its extravagant price among the Romans, 214.
I.jidiroomy , teltimonies of the great proficiency of the

Indoftans in, ;o;.
A:igsbzirgb, greatly enriched by becoming a mart for Indian

commodities , 1 38.
Augutzfir, emperor, reduces Egypt to a Roman pro.

vince, 44.
A3een Al'bery, account of the intercourse of the East

Indians by water from, 197. See Sanmkreet literature.

B

Babelmandeb, derivation of the name, 207.
Baclria, rife of the kingdom of, and its acquilitions in

India, ;5. is overwhelmed by the Tartars, 36. 207.
Bagbvat- Geeta , the pure theology taught in that poem,

3;I.
Bailly, M. his examination into the antiquity of affronomy

in India, 308.
Bank of Venice, the first eftabliflment of that kind formed

in Europe, 240.
Barygta,, a considerable emporium on the coast of ancient

India, its situation ascertained, 60.

Baobra, the city of, founded by the Caliph Omar, 99.
Benares, the peculiar feat of indoltan science and literaturc,

312. account of the observatory there, 365.

i b

Berenice, the city of, founded to facilitate the trade

betc-en. Alexandria and India, ;9.

Berziier, .M. his account of the Indian chronology, 363.
Boddai . East India Ship, remarkable speedy voyage of,

from Portsmouth to Madras, 213.
Brabzmin, in India, their sacred rights and high privile-

ges, :6z. inquiry into the slate of scientific knowledge
among them, 29T. their religious hierarchy and worship,
3 14. their great learning taught them a theology superior
to the popular superstition, 329. their doctrines coincide
with the tenets of the Stoical School, 336. fudioufly
concealed religious truths from the people, 340.
Bruce, the infight his travels afford into the maritime

expeditions of king Solomon, 1o.
Bruges , made the staple of the trade of the Hanseatic

league, 129. is greatly enriched, 138.
Burrun Sunker, a class among the Hindoos, described,

344.
Byzantine historians, a character of, og8.

C

Caj.g:, the great trade carried on there, 23t.
Cairo, account of the caravan that travels from thence to

Mecca, 243.
Calicitt, reception of Vasco de Gama in that country,

145.
Cal, colonel, his general opinion of the antiquity of arts

and sciences in India, 356.
Camel, the valuable properties of that animal, 3. is

peculiarly formed for traversing sandy delerts, 24r.
Candak/ar, under what name known to Alexander the

Great, I .
Canton, in China, a factory fettled there by the early

Arabs, 102.
Cape of Good Hope, circumRfances that led to the discovery

of a passage to India that way, 143. is said by Herodo.
tus to have been pafled by rome Phenician ships, 164.

Importance of the discovery of this passage by the
Portugueze, 186.
Cara:-a;s, the origin oF, 3. were protected and encouraged

under the Roman dominion, 7S. great commercial use
of, in the EaR, i . account of the caravans which
viilt Mecca, 24,. a considerable nave-trade carried on
by the African caravans, 24g.
CaJpian tea, erroneous opinion of the ancient geographers

concerning, 43. 21o. by whom first described in modern
times, 21i.
Casts, or orders of society among the native Gentoos,

described, 254. remarks on the policy and tendency
of this arrangement, 2 5. their peculiar names, ranks,
and offices described, 344.

Cathay, the ancient name of China, x1o.
Ceylon , supposed to be the island described by ancient

geographers under the name of Taprobana, 82. Christian
churches planted there by Persian missionaries, o13. is
visited by Marco Polo the Venetian, 131.
Ckardin, Sir John, his testimony that the Orientals derived

the use of the mariner's compass from the Europeans,
229. his account of the trade of Caffa, 233.

Chillamibrum, description of the pagoda there, 28i.
Cbina, the only country from whence the Romans obtained

silk, s9. through what medium they received it, 62.
how the silk-worm was conveyed from thence to Europe,
94. is traded to by the Arabians, Ior. first mention
of porcelan and tea, o02. the Christian religion pro.
pagated there by Persian missionaries, o10. how the silk
of, was conveyed to Conttantinople, after the Greeks
were excluded from the port of Alexandria, 104. estimate
of the Chinese pracice of navigation, 228. how the
number of Mahomedans increase in China, 2r1. a
commercial intercourse, by land, opened between that
country and Russia, 246. amazing exportation of tea
from, to Europe, 249. '
Chronology, Indian, the four eras of, 362. remarks on

363.

Bb 2

C!er.ltra, value of her famous pearl ear- rings, S.
Co.tL'j;, the ancient pearl fishery there, till carried on

by the Dutch, 6;.

Co'.rs, Indian, for dying, account of, 3 6.
Cozuiizbzi;, his views in that voyage by which he discovered

America, 141. his reliance on the authority of Marco
Polo, the Venetian traveller, ;8. See Ganma.
Commerce. the extension of, abated the hostile sentiments

which actuated one n,:ion against another, I:g. unfavor-
able op;nion of Plato concerning, I ;.

Con;lmon liav, the origin of, traced, 268.
Co;;:cri;z, Cape, is accurately described by Arrian, 6;.
Comr.fl-s, mariner's, was unknown by the ancient Chinese

and Arabs, 229.
Cnfi.lnt:niple, taken and plundered by the crusaders,

iS. subversion of the Latin empire there, X-o. is
conquered by the Turks, and made the feat of their
government, I 1.
Conzey.acing, specimen of the ancient Indian style of,

;61.
Corwiiadel coalt, the inhabitants of, always great traders,

89.
Corina;r Indicof!eritles, some account of, and of his Christian

topography, go. his account of the island of Taprobana,

91.
Cotton manufactures, evidence of their not being common

among the Romans, 216.
Crusades to the Holy Land, the origin of, traced, and

their commercial effects, 1lo. the crusaders acquired
the policy and arts of the people whom they subdued,
114. brought different nations acquainted with each
ether, 2-5.

D
D.anr:fc;, account of the caravan that travels from thence

to Mecca, 244.

Damask, the name of that species of silk manufacture,

whence derived , 1I6.

Daizdolo , Andrew, charater of his Venetian Chronicle,
D'Anville, AM. his opinion as to the courre pursued in

the trading voyages of king Solomon's ships, 1o. his
corredions of Ptolemy's geography of India, 70. corro-
borates Nearchus's account of India, 2oo. his geography
of India controverted by MI. Goflellin, 220.
Darizs, the son of Hyftafpcs, king of Perlia, his researches

into, and conquefis in India, II.

Deccant, the ancient Dachanos of Arrian, 222.
Delta of the Indus, the general state of the weather there,

195.
Diamionds, not so highly esteemed by the Romans as pearls,

214.
Diodorrrs Siciltt, his history of the Indian expedition of

Sefoftris examined, I92.
Dow-, colonel, account of his tranfation of the Shafter,

299. 36i. his account of the Indian chronology,
364.

Dowlatabad, the fame with the ancient Tagara, 216.
Diu Halde, his description of a peculiar species of silk,

215.
Dutch states, became the first rivals of the Portugueze in

the trade to India, r :6.
Dyes, Indian, the excellence of, 3 6.

E
Ejft, the regions of, where arts and sciences were firRl

cultivated, 2. the intercourse between different countries
how first carried on, ;. the first maritime communica-
tion with, from the Weft, 5. See India.

Ecliffcs, how calculated by the Brahmins of India, 307.
Eegypt, ancient prejudice of the inhabitants against any

intercourse with foreigners, 5. how the Egyptians be-
came a commercial people, 6. the city of Alexandria

Bb ;

built, x . the feat of government fixed there by
Ptolemy Lagus, ;S. intercourse between the city of
Eerenice and India, 19. its opulence derived from its
cormmerce with the East, 41. is reduced to a Roman
province. 44. manner of conducting the silk trade at
the port of Alexandria, 58. conquest of, by the Arabs,
98. the Venetians resort to Alexandria for silk , 22.
and the Flcrenunes, iX:. commercial view of the
countries, 1;6. is subdued by the Turks, I; . how
the Indian trade has been conducted through that coun-
try at different times, 207.

E'ag ^ius, the first Roman emperor who wore silk, I7.
I',p7ran5a, ifiand, account of the ancient pagoda there,

2-6.

Eli&.-e, general account of the pagodas there, ;5;.
.ditps fables, the origin of, traced, 3,9.
E:hzc;. ltate of. in India, 300.
t:'rope a review of the state of, at the time of the

f'bve: rnn of the Greek empire, 1 2. extensive operation
of the commercial genius of, x80. the Europeans receive
the prodLcts of America, and supply it with manufactures,
i84. the exportation of silver to India how beneficial
to Europe. 186. importance of the discovery of the
passage to India round the Cape of Good Hope, ibid.

F
Faqtirr of India, unite trade with devotion in their pil-

grimages, II-. 235. brief account of, 346.

Figures, arithmetical, originally derived from India, 30o.
Fte( Gems , an ancient Sanfkreet poem, account of, 360.
Florence, rife of the state of, by manufactures and the

banking bufGefs, 124. a commercial treaty concluded
with Egypt, i zs. summary of the initruCtions to their
ambassadors to the Soldan, 23 5.

G

Gama, Va[co de, his voyage from Lisbon to India, 144.
Ganges, account of that river by Major Rennel, 204.
Genoa, motives that stimulated the Genoese to assist in

fubvertng the Latin empire at Conttantinople, r2o. the
great advantages they derived from this measure, 121.
characer of the Genoese government, 1i2. the Genoese
expelled from all their Grecian settlements by the Turks,
1;2. character of, by Nicephorus Gregoras, 234.
Gentil, M. le, his account of the Indian chronology,

164.

Gentoor, fee Brahmins, and Hindoor.
Gibbon, Mr., the Roman historian, testimony in favor of

his accuracy, 226.
GoJiJin,, AM., characer of his geography of the Greeks

analyzed , 220.
Greeks, their national pride at the time of Alexander the

Great, 24. how they attained the breeding of filk-wnrms
under the emperor Justinian, 95. are shut out from the
port of Alexandria by the Mahomedan Arabs, 98. the
Greek empire conquered by Mahomet II., 132. how
they were deprived of Bacria, 207. origin of the ancient
mythology of, 320.
Gum Lacca, natural history of, and its uses in manun

facture, 3 57.

H
Halhed , Mr. , his account of the Sanfkreet literature,

359.
Hanno, commanded the only voyage for discovery under-

taken by any of the ancient itates in the Mediterranean,
248.
Hanseatic league, formed, and the staple fixed at Bruges,

129.

Bb 4

J-afingrs, Mr., gnvernor-general of Bengal, his attention

to forming a Code of Hindoo laws, 271.
Heeto. Pa.in, or Amicable Inftrucion, an ancient Sanfkreet

composition, account and character of, ;(9.
Hfro.iot s, affirms the Cape of Good Hope to have been

palTed by some Phenician vessels, 16¢. his history of
Sefoftris examined, 19a. his unfatisfacdory account of
the tides in the Red Sea, 199. his jult description of
the Caspian sea , 21.
iHindoos, that people exactly described in the account of

the Indian expedition of Alexander the Great, 22. their
inflexible adherence to their religion, and casts, 2;0.
their four orders, or casts, described, 2 ,4. remarks
on the policy and tendency of this popular arrangement,
2 6. their high antiquit. , and nature of their inftitu-
tions, ;-2. character of tileir judicial code. 27;. state
of fc ences among them, :96. their religious tenets and
practices, 1 ;. thje names, ranks, and offices of their
several cafls described, ;A i.
Hira;ii, king of Tyre, afflirs king Solomon in his naval

undertaking, 9.
Hipralus , captain of an Egyptian efTel , avails himrelf

of the monsoons, in failing from the Arabian gulf to
ti;e .alabar coast, .o.
Hrii, cl'iU, the first who attempted to make a catalogue

of the liars, 67.
H.I;ory, authentic, the period of, extremely limited, I.

is minute in the records of blood, but silent as to the
progress of useful arts , .o.
H-Jdafesr. river. ahumerous fleet railed there by Alexander

the Great, 18.
Hy3TIJ;fi, river, the utmost limit of Alexander the Great's

progress in India, 17.

J
Jenrazr , a city built on that river by Alexander the

Great, zol.

Jcnkinfon, Anthony, the first modern traveller who gives

a jult description of the Carpian sea, 211.
Jef ront Sing, his letter, to Aurengzebe, containing a

chara1er of sultan Akber, 3 4.
Jevels, their great use, and high estimation among the

ancients, 6.
Jerrr, when they effected a commercial intercourse with

India, 9. inquiry into the maritime commerce of king
Solomon, lo. their commercial effort limited to his
reign, 1 .
India , the first naval communication with, from the

Weft, S. the trade of the Phenicians with, how con-
duced, 7. naval expedition of the Persians to, i r.
conquests of Darius Hyvtafpes in, 12. Alexandria, for
many centuries the chief feat of trade with, I;. expe-
dition of Alexander the Great to, 14. flourishing fate
of the country at that time, l . Alexander's voyage
down the Indus, 16. political slate of the country at
that time, 21. Alexander's views in this expedition, 21.
expedition of Seleucus, the successor of Alexander, t 1.
embassy of Megafthenes to, 3 *. conquests of the Bacrian
princes in, 36. remains afterwards undisturbed by
Europeans, until the Cape of Good Hope was doubled
by the Portugueze , 7. a commercial intercourse
established with Egypt, 38. how Rome was suppled
with Eastern commodities, 46. advantage taken of the
monsoons, in failing from the gulf of Arabia to the
Malabar coast, So. its commodities articles of luxury,
;,. spices and aromatics, 54. precious stones, 56.
silk, s-. general view of its exports and imports, 19.
comparison between the ancient and modern trade with
india, 6 . D'Anville's correcions oF Ptolemy's geography
of, 70. the trade by caravans protected and encouraged
by the Romans, 7s. the inhabitants of the Coromandel
coast always great traders, 89. the account given of
India by Cofinas Indicopleuftes, 91. the Romans rivalled
in the India tr;,de by the Persians, 92. the Italian
states engage in the Indian trade, 1o8. account of the

India trade by MIarino Sanudo, 126. comparative view
of the India trade, as carried on by different nations at
different times, x 4. a direct vovage to India effected
bv the Portugueze, 144. the taple of the Portugueze
trade, established at the city of Malacca, 148. a com-
mercial empire established in the East, by the Portugueze,
1 4. how it came to pass, that the discovery of a direct
navigation, to India was reserved for modern times,
162. the conduct of ancient and modern navigators to
the Eat, compared, i6S. the prices of Indian commo-
dities greatly reduced by the opening a direct commu-
nication with India, 168. the India trade a continual
drain of American silver from Europe, 177. natives of
India and America, when first discovered, 80. the
trade of Europe with each, compared, iSr. the silver
exported to India contributes to enrich instead of impo-
verifhing Europe, i8g. importance of the discovery of
the passage to India round the Cape of Good Hope, to
Europe, i16. examination of the improbabilities attend-
ing the supposed expedition of Sefoltris to India, 191.
remarks on the weather there, 195. remarks on the
naval expedition of Nearchus, 196. peculiarities in the
Indian tides, 197. aversion of the natives of the East
to the sea, 20o. Major Rennel's account of the river
Ganges, 204. endeavours to ascertain the situation of
the ancient city of Palibothra, ibid. how the Indian trade
has been carried on through Egypt at different times,
207. erroneous descriptions of the Caspian sea by ancient
writers, .o. Deccan, the ancient Dachanos of Arrian,
222. the use of the mariner's compass learned by the
Easterns from the Europeans, 229. the Gentoos inflexible
in their relgion, 230. computed number of Mahomedans
in India, 2 1i. extensive circulation of Eastem goods by
the caravans, 246. the natives of India the earliest
known people who were civilized, 25;. their division
into casts, 254. the perfection of Indian manufactures
accounted for, 2 7. the general tenure of land there,
264. character of the Hindoo code of laws, 273. general

account of the pagodas, 276. fortreftes, 29;. mechanic
arts, 284. literature, 286. their sciences, 295. their
religious tenets, ; ;. origin of superstition, 3 8. the
pure theology of the Brahmins, 129. general refletions
formed on the preceding review of the Eastern nations,
; 9. the manners and customs of the natives influenced
by the bMahomedan and European intruders, ;47. ac-
count of the Sanlkreet literature, t g8. the Heeto-Pades,
3s9. the Five Gems, 360. Ode from Wulli, ;6r.
specimen of Indian conveyancing, ibid. the four eras of
Indian chronology, explained, 362.
Indicum of the ancients, the fame with modern Indigo,

356.
Indus, river, pafled by Alexander the Great, i . his

voyage down that river, g8.
Institutions of India, the permanency of, accounted for,

}(8.
Interelf of money, the most exad standard of commercial

profits, tt9. chronological review of, ibid.
Joanna of Navarre, her exclamation at the wealth of the

city of Bruges, 218.
Italy, rife of the commercial fates of, 1o7. they import

the productions of India, xo8. the profits they reaped
from the crusades, i x. See Venice, Genoa, &c.

Itinerarier of the Roman empire, how formed, 218.
Julius Ctfar, his magnificent present to Servilia, the

mother of Brutus, 7,. his ignorance of the British tides,
199. a general survey of the whole Roman empire
undertaken by him, 218.
Jrufin, observations on his account of the progress made

by Seleucus in India, 203.
Jufjtinian, emperor, how he introduced the silk-worm into

the Greek empire, 94.

L
Land, the general tenures of, in India, 264. 349. fpeci-

men from an ancient grant of, 36i.

Latitudes, how ascertained by the ancient geographers, 87.

were more readily determined by them than longitudes,
86. 2:;.
La'ryers, European, the fvyle of, compared with that

of the Eastern Pundits, 36r.
Leil'ni:t , his account of the inftrudions given to the

Florentine ambassadors to the Soldan of Egypt, 2;5.

Logic and l1etaph.fics, state of. in India, 298.
Longituder of places, how determined by ancient geogra-

phers , 84. 224.
Mage7lan, effects a passage to the East Indies Westward

from America, 174.
Makal'arat, an ancient Indian epic poem, account of,

2Sg. extracts from 297. 300. 3;.
Mahabmrlod of Gaznah, the vast fleet that opposed his

invasion of India, 197.
saiomnr.t, rapid spread of his religion, and the great
effects produced by it, 97. contributed greatly to extend
the commerce of Asia and Africa, Ij 7.
Mabomet I. emperor of the Turks, subdues the Grecian

empire, i;i.
.AIaudel, M1., his proofs of the ignorance of the ancients

as to the nature of silk, 215.
Malab.ar coast, probable derivation of its name, 9r.

how mentioned by the Arabian writers, o12.
Aaiac/ca, the city of, rendered the flaple of the trade

carried on in the East, by the Portugueze, 148.

Allallie HlIands, probable derivation of their name, 9r.
Man, a review of his progress in social life, 260.
Mant.,riacures, Indian, the perfection of, accounted for
Jfapr, none knonn prior to those formed to illustrate

Ptolemy's geography, SW.
Marco Polo, the Venetian, account of his travels, x3o.

objecticns to his relations, 236.

Iarfeiller, opens a trade with Constantinople for Indian

commodities, 109.

.IMaJjudi, the Arabian, his account of India, 228.
AMecca, the temple there visited as well by commercial as

by devout pilgrims, i1 . the pilgrimages to, contributed
greatly to facilitate trade, 157. account of the caravans
which visit the temple there, 243.
lMedici, Cosmo di, a Florentine merchant, negociates a
commercial treaty with Egypt, in favor of his country-
men, 12s.
Alediterranean sea, the chief feat of ancient commerce,

161.
Alegaflbenes, his embassy from Seleucus, king of Macedo-

nia, to India, 32. his account of India, 33.
AIocenigo, doge of Venice, in the fifteenth century, his

account of the naval strength of that republic, 241.

Alonkisb annalists, a character of, lo8.

lonfoons , the first application of them in voyages to
India, so.
Alofer, the books of, the most ancient and genuine record

of the early ages of the world, x.
Alufiris, a port on the coaf of Malabar, frequented by

ancient navigators in the Indian trade, So.
Mytbology of the Greeks, the natural origin of, 320.

N

Nadir Shah, general review of his Indian expedition, 196.
Nagara of Ptolemy, its latitude according to D'Anville, 78.
Navigation, origin of, traced, 4. where first cultivated,
* $. how introduced among the Egyptians, 6.
Neurchrs, commands the naval expedition of Alexandec

the Great down the Indus, g8. remarks on, 198.
Nicephorus Gregora , his character of the Genoese at

Constantinople, 2 4.
Niebbuhr, his evidence in favor of the European origin of

the mariner's compals, 2}o.

0

Omar , caliph, founds the city of BafTora, 99.
Ornuw, the island of, seizd by the Porcugueze , Io0

p
Pagodas of India, general account of, 276. 3 5. are placed

with astronomical precifon, ;16.
Palibothra, endeavours to afccrtain the situation of that

city, 206.
Palmya, by whom, and on what occasion built, 47. its

stupendous ruins, 48. its present state, so.
Panjab, progress of Alexander the Great through that

country, 16.
Pap)rus, occasion of its being disused for writing on,

2z2.
parchment, when firit used for the record of charters and

deeds, 2;2.
Pariars, the most contemptible race of men in India,

2;3. 34;-
patna, evidences of its not being the ancient city of

Palibothra, 2o;.
Pearls, their high estimation among the Romans, 56.

were dearer than diamonds, 2r4.
Pera, the chief suburb of Constantinople, granted to the

Genoese on the subversion of the Latin empire there,
12o. the Genoese expelled by the Turks, ia2.
Perfa, how the commerce between that country and India

was conducted, 41. vigorous cultivation of the India
trade, 92. the flk trade engrossed by the Persians, 94.
their extortions introduce the filk-worn to Europe, 9;.
is conquered by the Arabs, 98. Neftorian churches
planted there, 1o4. amount of the revenue of the
Persian monarchs from Herodotus, 194. initances of
their ancient aversion to the sea, 2ol.

Phalanne, Macedonian, how formed by Alexander the

Great, 27.
phenicians, how they opened a commercial intercourre

with India, 7. are said by Herodotus to have passed the
Cape of Good Hope, 16S.

Pbiiofoplby, the cure for superstition, 326.
Pilgrimages to the Holy Land, undertaken as well from

commercial as from pious motives, i x. account of the
pilgrimages to Mecca, 243.

pilpay's fables, the origin of, traced, ;q9.
Plato, his political objections to commerce in a well

regulated commonwealth, 213.
Pliny the elder, his slender knowledge of India, 66. his

account of the island of Taprobana, 8o. observations
on his account of the progress of Seleucus in India

201.
Pomponiur iMela, his account of the island of Taprobana,

go. and of the Carpian sea, 210.
Porcelain, the first mention of, by Arabian travellers,

102.
Port:ugal, circumfances that led the Portugueze to the

discovery ot the Cape of Good Hope, x14. vigorous
exertions of the Portugueze to cultivate the Eastern trade,
14i. they aim at a monopoly of the trade to the East,
149. establish a commercial empire in the Eaf, 154.
their activity in exploring the Eastern countries, 165.
they drive the Venetians out of the European markets,
by reducing the prices of India goods, 169. how they
remained so long in the exclufre poffeflion of the India
trade, 17;. are rivalled at length in the Indian ocean
by the Dutch, 176. and by the English, ibid. repulse
the efforts of Solyman the Ilagnificent, to drive them
from India, 189. their intercourse with infidels licensed
by a Papal bull, 2 4.
Porus, opposes the progress of Alexander the Great in

India, 16. remains steady to the Macedonian interest,
31.

Poto/;, the discovery of the silver mines of, the firt

permanent source of wealth derived by Spain from
America, 182.
Ptolemy , the geographer, eRimate of his fciertifical

knowledge, 66. established geography upon its proper
principles, 68. his accounts of the continent of India
examined, 69. his geography of India correced to
modem times by M. D'Anville, 70. inflances. of his
exactness, 77. his account of the island of Taprobana,
79. his character, by Agathemerus, 217. his geographi-
cal errors, ^18. from what materials he composed his
geography of India, 224.
Ptolemy Lagus , elablilhes the feat of the Egyptian

government at Alexandria, and erects the light-house on
the Pharos, 38.
Ptoiemy Pbiladelpbus , projects a grand canal to facilitate

the intercourse between Egypt and India, 8. founds
the city of Berenice, ;9.
Puitanab, the ancient Plithania of Arrian, 216.

R
_Ramnfo, detects the geographical errors of Ptolemy,

219.
Raynal, Abbe, character of his hiflory of the East and

'eft Indies, 187.
Red Sea, derivation of the name, and the different appli-

cations of it by the ancients and the moderns, 200.

Reiigion and fuperftiton, discriminated, ;1(.
.enaudot , M., his translation of the Eastern voyage of

two Mahomedans, from the Arabic, vindicated from the
charge of imposition, 226.
Brtniel , Major, his illufirations of the Indian expedition

of Alexander the Great, 20. his account of the river
Ganges, 204. remarks on his account of the situation
of the city of Palibothra, ibid. his opinion of the
Egyptian navigation examined, 209.

Rbinorolur a,

fRhinocoltra, the ancient port of communication between

Phenicia and India, 8.

Roger, M., his account of the Indian chronology, 36;.
Rome, rife of the rower of, 44. how supplied with Indian

commodities, ibid. its imports from thence articles
of luxury, S;. spices, 54. precious stones, 6. silk,
s7. remained ignorant of the nature or production of
silk, s8. how the breeding silk-worms was introduced
into the Eastern empire, 94. confequenccs of the Roman
empire being dissolved by the Barbarians, 127. how the
itineraries of the empire were formed, 218.
Rujtfa, a commercial intercourse by land opened between

that country and China, 246.
Ryots of Indoftan. inquiry into the tenure by which they

hold their possessions, 349.

S
Sacontala, an ancient Indian dramatic poem, account of,

290.
Sacotecas, the mines of, in Mexico, importance of the

discovery of, to Spain, 182.
Saint Croix, Baron de, observations on his Criticue des

Hiftoriens d'Alexandre le Grand, 202.
Samarcand, by what name known to Alexander the Great,

14. its latitude, as ascertained by D'Anville, 78.
Sandrarotbis, an Indian prince, his revolt against, and

treaty with Seleucus king of Macedonia, t .
Sanskreet literature, a new acquisition, 3 8. Mr. Halhed's

account of, ibid.
tanutdo, Marino, his account of the Venetian trade with

India in the fourteenth century, 126.
Sciencer and Arts, where first cultivated, 2. a view of the

Rate of, in India, 269.
Scylax of Caryandra, his naval expedition to India, ir.

gives fabulous accounts of the country, 12. why his
voyage is not mentioned by Arrian, 197.

Cc

rapoys , modern, established upon the fame principle

with the phalanx of Persians formed by Alexander the
Great, 2-.
Seleucta, the successor of Alexander, his expedition to

India, t i. observations on, zo0.
Selim, sultan, the conquleror of the Mameluks, his atten-

tion to the advantages of the Indian commerce, 178.
Semiramir, the vast fleet that opposed her invasion to

India. 196.
Ser-a Metropolis, of Ptolemy, its latitude according to

D'Anville , 78.

Serigihan, description of the pagoda there, 289.
Sefoifri , king of Egypt , the firR who rendered the

Egyptians a commercial people, 6. improbabilities
attending his supposed expedition to, and conquest of
==dia, 9gr.

SkafRer, some account of, 299. ,6r.
Sieieaiia, account given of this island, by Cofmas Indico.

pleuftes, 92.
Si i;, its high estimation among the Romans, q7. the

trade for, engrossed by the PerGans, 94. flk- worms
obtained and cultivated by the Greeks, 9;. account of
the Venetian and Florentine tade for silk, xz2. ignorance
of the ancients as to its production, 2ai. why diliked
by the Turks, 216.
Silver, is continually drained from Europe to carry on

the Fast India trade, 177. Europe, bow enriched by
this exportation, g86.
Sin, Metropolis, of Ptolemy, endeavours of ML D'Anville

to ascertain its situation, 7;.
Slave.trade. modern, the origin of, 179. is largely carried

on by the African caravans, 221.
Solomon, king of Judea, inquiry into his maritime corn.

merce, 9. builds Tadmor in the desert, 47.
Solynan the Magnificent, his efforts to drive the Portuguezo

from India. g88.
$onu, description of, from the Mahabrat, 297.

Sparit, how that country happened to have the advantage

and honor of discovering America, 14t. gold and silver
the only profitable articles they first found in America,
182. are obliged to colonize in order to improve their
discoveries, 18;.
Spices, and aromatics, why much used by the ancients,

(4. vast modern conCumption of them, 172.
St,-abo, his obscure knowledge of India, 6s. his account

of the island of Taprobana, 79. denies that Sefoftrls
ever entered India, 19 . evidences of his slender
knowledge of India, 209. his account of the Caspian
sea, 2 o. how he justifies his neglect of Hipparchus,
217. his free exposition of ancient theology, 337. his
account of the ancient dyes, 1;6.
Sumatra, the island of, visited by the early Arabians,

101.
Superflition and religion, discriminated, i . origin of

superstition, 316. progress of, 21z. picture of Oriental
superstition, 322. philosophy fatal to, 326.
S.ya, vast quantities of spices consumed in his funeral

pile, 54.

T
Tadnmor in the dcfert, by whom built, and for what

purpose, 47. its stupendous ruins, 48. its present tate,
Tamerlale , his judicio's choice of the season for hi,

Indian campaign, 196.
Taprobana, Strabo's account of that island, 79. Pliny's

account of it, 80. Ptolemy's account, g1. appears to
be the island of Ceylon, 82. account given of this
island by Cofmas Indicopleultes, 91.
Tatta, great drought there, r965 vast numbers of veflels

for water.carriage there, 197.
Tea, has within a century become a neceffiry of life in

many parts of Europe, 249. amazing annual importation
of, ilid.c

Cc -

Te,-tree, firR mention of, by Arabian travellers, oz2.
Tides of the Indian ocean, peculiarities in, 199.
Trade, how at sift conducted between different countries,

;. between Egypt and lania, ;3. expoits and imports
of India, 4.
Tranlnigration of fouls, the Eastern dodcine of, explained,

nM-

Tior, their scruples against the wearing of silk, 216.
Tyre, the belt account of the commerciil tranlidions of

that city, to be found in the prophet Lzekiel, 194.

V
Veicer, f£rt rife of, as a commercial itate, 1o.. Conftan-

inop'e taken, in conjunction with the crusaders, 117.
Venetians ergdge largely in the trade and manufacture
of fiG!, i g. the Latin empire in the East fubverred,
120. the Venezians supplanted in the trade with Conftan-
tinople by toe Genocle, 122. they fettle a trade with
Alexandria, 12;. accoun: of the Venetian trade with
India in the fourtec;i;h century, 126. travels of Marco
Polo, lo. their trade e:xended by the Turks subduing
trie Greek empire, i r. remarks on their trade for
InJian goods, s;,. evidences or the ereat wealth they
acuit;rci by this trade, I;8. alarm taken at the direc
vu}age to Ealilndia, by Vasco de Gama. 146. mearures
prosecuted by the Veneti.ns to checl; the progress rs the
Portagueze in the Ecft, i, . tie Portugueze tupplant
them in the European rarket, by reducing the prices
tf Indi3 gods, 169. of the great extern of their trade,
219. the bink of Venice the tirft formed of any in
tLioUpe, 240. amount of the Venetian naval strength
in the fifteenrh century, 24t.

Ulug Beg, his aitrunomical tab!es, -8.
Virgil, a good natural historian, as well as a descriptive

poet, 21j.
J'ohey, hM., his account of the camel, 242. and of the

cairvan from Damaft;us to Alccca, 244.

W
Wilford, lieutenant, his examination of Arrians's Periplul

by modern names and situations, 2 6.
Wilkins, Mr., account of his translation of the Heeto.

Pades, I 9.

Witfli, charader of an ode translated from, 361.
2emindars, their offce in the government of Indolfan,

TH ENDo.
THE END.

# BOOKS Printed and fold by J. J. TOURNEISEN.

BOOKS printed and fold by J, J. TOURNEISES.
BoLNlogBORE's Letters on the Use and Study of Hilfory,

i voL
GIBBON'S History of the Decline and Fall of the Roman

Empire, 14 vol.

ROBERTSON'S Hiltory of the Emperor Charles V. 4 vol.
BLAIR'S Letures on Rhetoric and Belles Lettres, ; vol.
KIPPIS' Life of Captain James Cook, 2 vol.
FERGUSON'S Essay on the History of Civil Society, x vol.
KEATE'S Account of the Pelew-lflands, a vol.
IlulME'S History of England, 12 voL
GILLIES' History of Ancient Greece, S vol.
ROBERTSON'S History of America, 3 voL
MIDDLETON'S Life of Cicero, 4 vol.
SHAFTESBURY'S Charadteriftics, ; vol.
SMITH'S Inquiry into the Nature and Causes of the Wealth

of Nations 4 vol.
FERGUSON'S History of the Progress and Termination of

the Roman Republic 6 vol.
ROBERTSON'S History of Scotland during the reigns of

Queen Mary, James VI. &c. ; vol.

ROBERTSON'S Disquisition concerning India, i vol.
DELOLME'S Constitution of England, I vol.
BURKE'S Inquiry into the Sublime, i vol.

Speedily vrill be publisbed.

BERKIsGTON'S History of Abelard and Heloifa, z vol.
BERRINGToN's History of Henry I14 of England, 2 vol.
WATSON'S History of Phiilip li ; vol.
WATSON'S History of Philip 1II 2 vol.
HUME's Eflays and Treatises.
SMITH'S Theory of Moral Sentiments, z voL

..* -'--"'-*

-L___ I ::

b

t t i R:

4 1

i  ,P
i ? s i' P g

O 503Bd

tj
r ii Ci

ir

r
Y I

,r 4
ab i  a

"

iP

r
,O

tt

d a
4 4

.. :

i · "JE;:

r r
:

z .9ire h

'rr ·I .·

v v· 5 ii ht
jr;

·

i L·:
4;i J b rrC 7 I si

'u
.C i!

t El i

i·
yY' 3 4·15 k

j
----·h_ 3 s"

L I

a j'iPi 53 ir'
Ii
i " \· a

r

w ,

Y; Ad

B /ji

t3 d' ica
,r :tJ"

;·

`s+ P ·Js

: `4· \t

ir *

i:
ib

i L

b·

i

I t' ,
i ca Z1 -1

r* r,
/ I

\tr ·/

Y
B S·i

HJ Is a i

i i

i I

c
·r r

 o

·K

ii. 1.4 j

LLLa'

-7t

rre

sl

?
;i J- 1

1 i,

X i

ca.D

--1-- it
4;

a i,

S

i
Lt

i qr)*IsY
:: P·

i:.
'ci·j·i ?;

I
s

pcl -R

11"0;:iiozl j. i e I
T; ;)i

I
54k ,, JI

S

i'l ih 6rs IL
B

1

o-- ----

t la

r


i/"  ;r-a";  t? ·h

B o

d B i- )Y

b
i

s LC

'I: \ s r
ii c:'
1,

w r ;ri
P

I 8` i S rh 1Ct
JC 'OI  I;

a

 d
L, t.

CIi

: I 3' tc · IJ 1.L i
1 E 

41 L? 10 O

i5sci· i5
i · * i;

1 3n;ZIV;Y

W

k

I- +r_

I si :
1 =t
' ' L'C, ui%."·,

a r i ·ci

h  9b" j6

2: r
·--

e, eSz t-

--\-

s.\

B

r

-i-- -?$··
R 50- "sr .*

ij5s_

Ib ., i· I 5

6Y: I
G--

. i


icz g

$ i ,P
3 --fi)T n s

1

I i eYj
ktt gr o

i- r  L-


i '-"=J="`------i

Z
c- rii

a d

;a
:--.- i: - ·; I--.-/i

: 1; 'i·I i

-'S2r"iz ··-: i blii1N31' ;ict:

i.
;; · -· _ P7 r;C- ·- I I ::

ili
1QP:  ·?

 :: .

jSEl ljl r
i

i

,P
$I /" I,·t""_OP P-· ij

.sl- i$
:·r

'r .;;; c,
s

oC'

P

8- --' -
'$ P

Llj b;

md

m

d·iek i $i
i ed

L" is' ·· . 

ti ,t7 -;·

·-·

r,
rl

·\

:·- br'
·Q tb ._-1lrl

t:-_----i, i
ssb

a .I

`p 'i C)
Qa jp C

O ·a
I, ; a : I . 4

'r4 s. i A

Ik I I
·C

`s
2- -·'·'

Y'

-i ;3 IC
E';3T s-

L

F*- 9' 1
·';

-r

ti li
a B ·r;

rR.
--- at -:i

 h

iT S 1
Cy 'y:

i ·ii - ii·?;·:····::

b ·,

I k I
p a%

e;r
1 CI Y

4 5

4L3

c
tz 1

R cs
B

i --
i :a ;·,4IZI

", I:,
CLPid 1:

b

\ .$' ce 9· ::
c . i o

L,
i`Llii·3S

" : ;

x- -bsFi:
'-Q j

P in
P PPi

j-
\ 1

r

//
st

·:'% "
__ 1. 1.: . .. ..·-' i . ,,,
