THE
HISTORY

OF

AM ERI CA.

By WILLIAM ROBERTSON, D.D.
PkINCIPAL OF THE UNIVERSITY OF EDINBURGH,

HISTORIOGRAPHER TO HIS MAJESTY

FOR SCOTLAND,
AND MEMBER OF THE ROYAL ACADEMY OF

HISTORY AT MADRID.

THE EIGHTH £EDITION,
In ewhich is included the Pofihumous Volume,

CONTAINING

THE HISTORY OF VIRGINIA,TO THE YEAR 1688;
AND OF NEW ENGLAND, TO THE YEAR 1652.

IN THREE VOLUMES,

VOL. II.

LONDON:

P:nrzed by A. S5r, an, Printcrs-Sltret,
TOR T. CADELL JUN. AND W. DAVISS, S'IRAND,

AND E. BALFOUP, EDINBURCGI.

8co.

# THE HISTORY OF AMERICA. BOOK IV. Continued.

THE
HISTORr OF AMERICA.

B 0 0 K IV. Continued.
IV. FR~OM the domestic state of the Amen-

cans, the transition to the consideration

of their civil government and political inflitutions
is natural. In every inquiry concerning the
operations of men when united together in so-
ciety, the first objea of attention should be
their mode of subsistence. Accordingly as that
var;es, their laws and policy muff be different.
The inltitution suited to the ideas and exigencies
of t ibes, which fubfif chiefly by fishing or hunt-
ing, and which have as yet acquired but an im-
perfet conception of any species of property,
will be much more simple than those which
mut take place when the earth is cultivated
with regular industry, and a right of property
not only in its produ&ions, but in the foil it-
self, is completely ascertained.

All the people of America, now under re-

view, belong to the former class. But though they
may all be comprehended under the general de-
nomination of savage, the advances which they
had made in the art of procuring to themselves
a certain and plentiful subsistence, were very un-

VOL. 11. D equal

equal. On the extensive plains of South Ame-
rica, man appears in one of the rudest Rates in
which he has been ever observed, or, perhaps,
can exif. Several tribes depend entirely upon
the bounty of Nature for subsistence. They dif-
cover no solicitude, they employ little foresight,
they scarcely exert any induRry, to secure what
is necessary for their support. The Topayers
of Brasil, the Guaxeros of Tierra Firme, the
Caiguas, the Moxos, and several other people of
Paraguay, are unacquainted with every species
of cultivation. They neither sow nor plant.
Even the culture of the manioc, of which
caffada bread is made, is an art too intricate for
their ingenuity, or too fatiguing to their indo.
lence. The roots which the earth produces
spontaneously, the fruits, the berries, and the
feeds, which they gather in the woods, together
with lizards and other reptiles, which multiply
amazingly with the heat of the climate in a fat
foil moistened by frequent rains, supply them
with food during some part of the year a. At
other times they subsist by fishing; and Nature
seems to have indulged the laziness of the South
American tribes by the liberality with which
she ministers, in this way, to their wants. The
vatl rivers of that region in America abound
with an infinite variety of the molt delicate filh.
The lakes and marshes formed by the annual
overflowing of the waters, are filled with all the

* Nieuhoff. Hilf. of BrasiL Church. Coll. ii. 134.

Simon, Conquifta de Tierra Firme, p. 166. Tccho, Ac-
count of Paraguay, &c. Church. vi. 78. Lettr. Edif. z3.
354. to. 190. Lozano, Defcrip. del Gran Chaco, p. S.
Ribas, Hiifid. dc ls 'riumfos, &c. p. 7.

different

different species, where they remain shut up, as
in natural reservoirs, for the use of the in-
habitants. They swarm in such (hoals, that
in some places they are catched without art or
industry b. In others, the natives have dif.
covered a method of infecting the water with
the juice of certain plants, by which the fish are
so intoxicated, that they float -on the surface,
and are taken with the hand'. Some tribes
have ingenuity enough to preserve them without
salt, by drying or smoking them upon hurdles
over a flow fired. The prolific quality of the
rivers in South America induces many of the
natives to resort to- their banks, and to depend
almost' entirely for nourifhnent on what their
waters supply with such profusion . In this
part of the globe, hunting seems not to have
been the first employment of men, or the first
effort of their invention and labour to obtain
food. They were fishers before they became
hunters; and as the occupations of the former
do not call for equal exertions of ativity, or
talents, with those of the latter, people in that
tate appear to possess neither the fame degree
of enterprise nor of ingenuity. The petty na-
tions, adjacent to the Maragnon and Orinoco,
are manieftly the most inaftive and least intel.
ligent of all the Americans.

None but tribes contiguous to great rivers

can sustain themselves in this manner. The
greater part of the American nations, dispersed

b See NOTE LIV. See NoTE LV.
d Condamn. 59. Gumilla, ii. 37. Lettr. Edif. 14. 399.
23 3z8. Acugna, Relat. de la Riv. des Armat. 38.

c Barrer, Rclat. deFr. Equi. p. 155.

B z over

over the forests with which their country is
covered, do not procure fubfiftegce with the
fame facility. For although these forests, es-
pecially in the southern continent of America,
are frored plentifully with ganmef, considerable
efforts of activity and ingenuity are requisite
in pursuit of it. Necessity incited the na-
tives to the one, and taught them the other.
Hunting became their principal occupation;
and as it called forth ltrenuous exertions of
courage, of force, and of invention, it was
deemed no less honourable than Aeceffary. This
occupation was peculiar to the men. They were
trained to it from their earliest youth. A bold
and dexterous hunter ranked next in fame to the
distinguished warrior, and an alliance with the
former is often courted in preference to one with
the latter . Hardly any device, which the in.
genuity of man has discovered for ensnaring or
destroying wild animals, was unknown to the
Americans. While engaged in this favourite
exercise, they shake off the indolence peculiar to
their nature, the latent powers and vigour of
their minds are routed, and they become active,
persevering, and indefatigable. Their sagacity
in finding their prey, and their address in killing
it, are equaL Their reason and their senses be-
ing conftantlv diredted towards this one object,
the former displays such fertility of invention,
and the latter acquire such a degree of acutenefb,
as appear almost incredible. They discern the
footllcps of a wild beast, which escape every
other eye, and can follow them with certainty

f P. Martyr, ecad. p. 324. Gumilla, ii. 4, &c Acugn3
L Xj6. t Clarcv. Hiftoire de la N. Frnce, iii. 11 j.

through

through the pathless forest. If they attack their
game openly, their arrow seldom errs from the
mark h; if they endeavour to circumvent it by
art, it is almost impossible to avoid their- toils.
Among several tribes, their young men were nof
permitted to marry, until they had given such
proofs of their skill in hunting as put it beyon4
doubt that they were capable of providing for a
family. Their ingenuity, always on the itretch
and sharpened by emulation, as well as necessity,
has struck out many inventions, which greatly
facilitate success in the chafe. The most fingulay
of these is the difcqvery of a poison in which
they dip the arrows employed in hunting. The
lightest wound with those envenomed ihafts is
mortal. If they only pierce the skin, the blood
fixes and congeals in a moment, and the strongest
animal falls motionless to the ground. Nor
does this poison, notwithifanding its violence
and subtlety, insea the flesh of the animal which
it kills. That may be eaten with perseet safety,
and retains its native relish and qualities. All
the nations situated upon the banks of the Mas
ragnon and Orinoco are acquainted with this
composition, the chief ingredient in which is
the juice extra&ed from the root of the curare,
a fpecics of withe i. In other parts of America,
they employ the juice of the manchenille for the
fame purpose, and it operates with no less fatal
a&ivity. To people pofleffed of those secrets,
the bow is a more deftrutive weapon than the

h Biet. Voy. de France Equin. 357. Davies' Difcov.
of the River of Amaz. Purchaf. iv p. Ip. 7.

' Gumiila, ii. . &c. Condam. 20o. Recherch. Phil£f
'i. 23j. Bancroft's Nat. Hil. of Guigna, 28x, &c.

musket,

mnulet, and, in their skilful hands, does great
execution among the birds and beats which
abound in the forests of America.

But the life of a hunter gradually leads man to

a state more advanced. The chafe, even where
prey is abundant, and the dexterity of the hunter
much improved, affords but an uncertain mainte-
nance, and at some seasons it must be suspended
altogether. If a savage truafs to his bow alone
for food, he and his family will be often reduced
to extreme diflrcfs k. Hardly any region of the
earth furnishes man fpontaneoafly with what his
wants require. In the mildest climates, and molf
fertile foils, his own industry and foresight must
be exerted in some degree, to secure a regular sup-
ply of food. Their experience of this surmounts
the abhorrence of labour natural to savage na-
tions, and compels them to have recourse to cul-
ture, as subsidiary to hunting. In particular
situations, some small tribes may subsist by fish-
ing, independent of any produaion of the earth,
raised by their own industry. But throughout
all America, we fcarccly meet with any nation
of hunters, which does not pra&ise some species
of cultivation.

The agriculture of the Americans, however,

is neither extensive nor laborious. As game and
fish are their principal food, all they aim at by
cultivation, is to supply any occasional defect of
these. In the southern continent of America,
the natives confined their industry to rearing a
few plants, which, in a rich foil and warm
climate, were easily trained tomaturity. The chief
of theLe is Maize, well known in Europe by the

k See NOTE LVII

name

name of Turkey or Indian wheat, a grain Cex-
tremely prolific, of simple culture, agreeable to
the tafe, and affording a itrong hearty nourish-
ment. The second is the Manioc, which grows
to the size of a large shrub, or small tree, and
produces roots somewhat resembling parsnips.
After carefully squeezing out the juice, these
roots are grated down to a fine powder, and
formed into thin cakes, called Cafada bread,
which, though insipid to the taite, proves no
contemptible food'. As the juice of the manioc
is a deadly poison, some authors have celebrated
the ingenuity of the Americans, in converting a
noxious plant into wholesome nourishment. But
it should rather be confidered as one of the def.
perate expedients for procuring subsistence, to
which necessity reduces rude nations; or, per.
haps, men were led to the use of it by a progress,
in which there is nothing marvellous. One
species of manioc is altogether free of any poi-
fonous quality, and may be eaten without any
preparation but that of roasting it in the embers.
This, it is probable, was first used by the Ame.
itcans as food; and necefiity haying gradually
taught them the art of separating its pernicious
juice from the other species, they have by ex-
perience found it to be more prolific as well
as more nourishing m. The third is the plantain,
which, though it rifes to the height of a tree, is

l Sloane Hil. of Jam. Introd. p. x1. Labat. i. 394.

Acofta Hilt. Ind. Occid. Natur. lib. iv. c. 17. Ill!aa, i.
6z. Aublet Mem. fur le Magnioc. Hist des Plaitecs
torn ii. p. 65, &c. m Martyr, Decad solt
L-bat. i. 411. Gumilla, iii. 19z, Mibhuch Milic
Indiana, 164. See NOTE LVIl.

of

of uch quick growth, that in less than a year it
rewards the industry of the cultivator, with its
fruit. This, when roasted, supplies the place o-
bread, and is both palatable and nourilhing".
The fourth is the potatoe, whose culture anc
qualities are too well known to need any de.
scription. The fifth is pimento, a fiall tree:
yielding a strong aromatic spice. The Ameri
cans, who, like other inhabitants of warm cli
mates, delight in whatever is hot and of poignani
flavour, deem this seasoning a necessary of life
and mingle it copiously with every kind of food
they take °.

Such are the various produtions which were

the chief object of culture among the hunting
tribes on the continent of America, and with E
moderate exertion of active and provident in
duftry, these might have yielded a full supply tc
the wants of a numerous people. But men, ac
customed to the free and vagrant life of hunters
are incapable of regular application to labour:
and confider agriculture as a secondary and in.
ferior occupation. Accordingly, the provifior
for subsistence, arising from cultivation, Iwa fc
limited and scanty among the Americans, that,
upon any accidental failure of their usual fuccef:
in hunting, they were often reduced to extreme
distress.

In the islands, the mode offuhfifting was con.

fiderably different. None of the large animal:
which abound on the continent were known
there. Only four species of quadrupeds, belides
a kind of small dumb dog, existed in the illands,

a See NOTE LVIII. GumiUa, iii. 171,
-.Co'at ib, it) ic. C20.,

the biggest of which did not exceed the size of
a rabbit P. To hunt such diminutive prey, was:
an occupation which required no effort either of
acivity or courage. The chief employment of
a hunter in the isles was to kill birds, which oa
the continent are deemed ignoble game, and
left chiefly to the pursuit of boys . This want
of animals, as well as their peculiar fitiuation, led
the islanders to depend principally upon fishing
for their fubfitence r. Their rivers, and the sea
with which they are surrounded, supplied them
with this species of food. At some particular
seasons, turtle, crabs, and other fhell-fiih,
abounded in such numbers, that the natives
could support themselves with a facility in which
their indolence delighted'. At other times,.
they ate lizards, and various reptiles of odious
forms . To fishing, the inhabitants of the
ifands added some degree of agriculture.
Maize n, manioc, and other plants, were culti-
vated in the fame manner as on the continent.
But all the fruits of their industry, together
with what their foil and climate produced fpon-
taneoufly, afforded them but a scanty mainte-
nance. Though their demands for food were
very sparing, they hardly raised what was sus-
ficient for their own consumption. If a few
Spaniards fettled in any diftri&, such a small ad.
dition of supernumerary mouths soon exhausted
their scanty stores, and brought on a famine.

P Oviedo, lib. xii, in proem. q Ribas Hilt. de
los Triumpb. p. 13. De la Potherie, ii. 33. iii. 20.

r Oviedo, lib. xiii. c. I. Gomara, Hilt; Gener. c. z8.
· Gomara Hist. Gentr. c. 9. Labat. ii. z2 , &e.
' Oviedo, lib. ziii. c- 3. U S' NOTE LIX.

VOL. II. C TIw

Two circumstances, common to all the savage

nations of America, concurred with those which
I have already mentioned, not only in rendering
their agriculture imperfe&, but in circumscribing
their power in all their operations. They had
no tame animals; and they were unacquainted
with the useful metals.

In other parts of the globe, man, in his rudest

state, appears as lord of the creation, giving
law to various tribes of animals, which he has
tamed and reduced to fubje&ion. The Tartar
follows his prey on the horse which he has
reared; or tends his numerous herds, which fur-
nilh him both with food and clothing; the Arab
has rendered the camel docile, and avails himself
of its persevering strength; the Laplander has
formed the rein-deer to be subservient to his will;
and even the people of Kamchatka have trained
their dogs to labour. This command over the
inferior creatures is one of the noblest preroga-
tives of man, and among the greatest efforts of
his wisdom and power. Without this, his do-
minion is incomplete. He is a monarch, who
has no fubjecLs; a master, without servants, and
must perform every operation by the strength of
his own arm. Such was the condition of all the
rude nations in America. Their reason was so.
little improved, or their union so incomplete,
that they seem not to have been conscious of the
superiority of their nature, and suffered all the
animal creation to retain its liberty, without
eftabliffing their own authority over any one
species. Mot of the animals, indeed, which
have been rendered domestic in our continent,
do not exist in the- New World; but those eI=-
L** * c>^>i~r

culiar to it are neither so fierce, nor so formid-
able, as to have exempted them from servitude.
There are some animali of the fame species in
both continents. But the rein-deer, which has
been tamed and broken to the yoke in the one
hemisphere, runs wild in the other. The bion
of America is manifestly of the fame species
with the horned cattle of the other hemifpherex.
The latter,, even among the rudest nations in
our continent, have been rendered domestic; and,
in consequence of his dominion over them, man
can accomplish works of labour with greater
facility, and has made a great addition to his
means of subsistence. The inhabitants of many
regions of the New World, where the bifoa
abounds, might have derived the fame advan-
tages from it. It is not of a nature so indocile,
but that it might have been trained to be as
fabfervient to man as our cattle Y. But a savage,
ja that uncultivated state wherein the Americans
were discovered, is the enemy of the other ani-
mals, not their superior. He wates and destroys,
but knows not how to multiply or to govern
them2.

This, perhaps, is the most notable diftinEion

between the inhabitants of the Ancient and New
Worlds, and a high pre-eminence of civilized
men above such as continue rude. The greatest
operations of man in changing and improving
the face of nature, as well as his molt confider-
able efforts in cultivating the earth, are accom.

X Buffon, Artic. Bif"n. Y Nouv. Decouverte par

Hennepin, p. x92. Kalm. i. 207. Z Buffon Hist.
Nat. ix. 85. Hist. Phi;of. et Polit. des Etabliffem. des
slurop. dans les deux Indes, vi. 364. .. /

c z plihed

plifhed by means of the aid which he receives
from the animals whom he has tamed and em.
ploys in labour. It is by their strength that he
subdues the stubborn foil, and converts the de.
fert or marsh into a fruitful field. But man,
in his civilized state, is so accustomed to the
service of the domestic animals, that he feldem
refleas upon the vast benefits which he derives
from it. If we were to suppose him, even when
modt improved, to be deprived of their useful
ministry, his empire over nature must in some
measure cease, and he would remain a feeble
animal, at a loss how to subsist, and incapable of
attempting such arduous undertakings as their
assistance enables him to excute with ease.

It is a doubtful point, whether the dominion

of man over the animal creation, or his acquir-
ing the use of metals, has contributed most to
extend his power. The ara of this important
difeovery is unknown, and in our hemisphere
very remote. It is only by tradition, or by dig-
ging up some rude instruments of our forefathers,
that we learn that mankind were originally un-
acquainted with the use of metals, and endea-
vooured to supply the want of them by employ-
ing flints, shells, bones, and other hard sub-
flances, for the fame purposes which metals serve
among polished nations. Nature completes the
formation of some metals. Gold, silver, and
copper are found in their perseEt fate in the
lefts of rocks, in the fides of mountains, or the
channels of rivers. These were accordingly the
rretals first known, and firit applied to use.
But iron, the most serviceable of all, and to
which man is most indebted, is never discovered

in

in its perfrct form; its gross and stubborn ore
mufl feel twice the force of fire, and go through
two laborious processes, before it become fit for
nfe. Man was long acquainted with the other
metals, before he acquired the art of fabricating
iron, or attained such ingenuity as to perse& an
invention, to which he is indebted for those in.
ifruments wherewith he subdues the earth, and
commands all its inhabitants. But in this, as
well as in many other refpets, the inferiority of
the Americans was conspicuous. All the savage
tribes, scattered over the continent and islands,
were totally unacquainted with the metals which
their foil produces in great abundance, if we
except some trifling quantity of gold, which
they picked up in the torrents that descended
from their mountains, and formed into ornaments.
Their devices to supply this want of the service-
able metals, were extremely rude and awkward.
The moit simple operation was to them an un,
dertaking of immense difficulty and labour. To
fell a tree with no other inltruments than hatchets
of ifone, was employment for a month a. To
form a canoe into shape, and to hollow it, con.
fumed years; and it frequently began to rot
before they were able to finish it . Their
operations in agriculture were equally flow and
defe&ive. In a country covered with woods of
the hardest timber, the clearing of a small field
destined for culture required the united efforts
of a tribe, and was a work of much time and
great toil. This was the business of the men,
and their indolence was satisfied with performing

a Gumilla, iii. I96. b Borde Relat. des Ca-aihes,
p. a.

C3 it

it in a very slovenly manner. The labour of cul.
tivation was left to the women, who, after dig.
ging, or rather stirring the field, with wooden
mattocks, and flakes hardened in the fire, sowec
or planted it; but they were more indebted foi
the increase to the fertility of the foil, than te
their own rude indufiry c.

Agriculture, even when the strength of man

is seconded by that of the animals which he has
fubjeded to the yoke, and his power augmented
by the use of the various instruments with which
the discovery of metals has furnished him, is fill
a work of great labour; and it is with the sweat
of his brow that he renders the earth fertile. It
is not wonderful, then, that people deftitutc oi
both these advantages should have made so little
progress in cultivation, that they must be con-
fidered as depending for fubfiltence on sithing
and hunting, rather than on the fruits of their
own labour.

From this description of the mode of fubfiff.

ing among the rude American tribes, the form
and genius of their political institutions may be
deduced, and we are enabled to trace various
circumstances of diffincion between them and
more civilized nations.

j. They were divided into finall independent

communities. While hunting is the chief source
of subsistence, a valt extent of territory is requi-
lite for supporting a small number of people. In
proportion as men multiply and unite, the wild
animals, on which the- depend for food, diminish,
or fly at a greater distance from the haunts of
their enemy. The increase of a society in this

c Guiila, iii. 166, &c, Lettr. Edif. xii. Io.

itate

state is limited by its own nature, and the mem-
bers of it must either disperse, like the game
which they pursue, or fall upon some better
method of procuring food, than by hunting.
Beasts of prey are by nature solitary and un-
social, they go not forth to the chafe in herds,
but delight in those recesses of the forest where
they can roam and destroy undisturbed. A na-
tion of hunters resembles them both in occupa-
tion and in genius. They cannot form into large
communities, beeaufe it would be impossible to
lind fubfiRence; and they muff drive to a dif-
tance every rival who may incroach on those
domains, which they confider as their own.
This was the state of all the American tribes,
the numbers in each were inconsiderable, though
scattered over countries of great extent; they
were far removed from one another, and engaged
in perpetual hostilities or rivalhip d. In Ame-
rica, the word nation is not of the fame import
as in other parts of the globe. It is applied to
small societies, not exceeding, perhaps, two or
three hundred persons, but occupying provinces
greater than some kingdoms in Europe. The
country of Guiana, though of larger extent
than the kingdom of France, and divided
among a greater number of nations, did not
contain above twenty.five thousand inhabit-
ants e. In the provinces which border on the
Orinoco, one may travel several hundred mil'e
in different diretions, without finding a single
hut, or observing the footsteps of a humafh

Lozano, Defcrip; del Cran Chaco, g9. 62. Fernandez,

Relac. Hilt. de los Chijuit. l6z. ¢ Voyages de Mar-
,ais, iv. 353.

creature

creature f. In North-America, where the cli-
mate is more rigorous, and the foil less fertile,
the desolation is still greater. There, journeys
of some hundred leagues have been made through
uninhabited plains and forests g. As long as
hunting continues to be the chief employment
of man to which he trusss for subsistence, he can
hardly be said to have occupied the earth h

2. Nations which depend upon hunting are,

in a great measure, strangers to the idea of pro.
perty. As the animals on which the hunter
feeds are not bred under his infpeaion, nor
nourished by his care, he can claim no right to
them, while they run wild in the forest. Where
game is so plentiful that it may be catched with
little trouble, men never dream of appropriating
what is of small value, or of easy acquisition.
Where it is so rare, that the labour or danger of
the chafe requires the united efforts of a tribe,
or village, what is killed is a common flock, be-
longing equally to all, who, by their {kill or their
courage, have contributed to the success of the
excursion. The forest, or hunting-grounds, are
deemed the property of the tribe, from which it
has a title to exclude every rival nation. But
no individual arrogates a right to any diefri& of
these, in preference to his fellow-citizens. They
belong alike to all; and thither, as to a general
and undivided store, all repair in quest o ffite-
nance. The fame principles by which they re-
gulate their chief occupation, extend to that
which is subordinate. Even agriculture has not

f Camilla, i; Io. g M. Fabry, quoted by Buffun,

il 4SS. Lafi:ao ii. 179. Boffu, Traveis through Loui-
iaca i, Ii;. Sc NOTE LX. l See NOTE LXI.

introduced

introduced among them a complete idea of-pro-
perty. As the men hunt, the women labour
together, and after they have (hared the toils
of the seed-time, they enjoy the harvest in com-
mon i. Among some tribes, the increase of
their cultivated lands is deposited in a public
granary, and divided among them at itated times,
according to their wants k. Among others,
though they lay up separate stores, they
do not acquire such an exclusive right of pro-
perty, that they can enjoy superfluity, while
those around them susser want . Thus the
diftinEtions ariling from the inequality of pof,
fefflons are unknown. The terms rich or poor
enter not into their language, and being strangers
to property, they are unacquainted with what
is the great objet of laws and policy, as well
as the chief motive which induced mankind tb
establish the various arrangements of regular
government m.

3. People in this Itate retain a high sense of

equality and independence. Wherever the idea
of property is not eftablified, there can be no
distinCtion among men, but what arises from
personal qualities. These can be conspicuous
only on such occasions as call them forth into
exertion. In times of danger, or in affairs of
intricacy, the wisdom and experience of age are
consulted, and prescribe the measures which
ought to be pursued, When a tribe of savages

iDr. Fergufoi's Essay, Iz5. k Gunrill2, i. 165,
r:ck-ll, Hilt. of N. Carol. 3z7. See NOTE LXII.
* D.r.s, Hist. Natur. ii. 392, 3;3. m p. Martyr,

Dec'-. p. 45. Veneg. Hitl. of Califarn. L 66. Lery, N4-
v.g. in Biafil. c. 17.

take"

takes the field against the enemies of their
.country, the warrior of most approved courage
.leads the youth to the combat ". If they go
forth in a body to the chafe, the mofi expert
and adventurous hunter is foremost, and directs
their motions. But during seasons of tranquil.
lity and inacion, when there is no occasion to
display those talents, all pre-eminence ceases.
Every circumfiance indicates, that all the mem-
bers of the community are on a leveL They are
clothed in the fame simple garb. They feed on
the fame plain fare. Their houses and furniture
are exactly smilar. No difiinition can arise from
the inequality of possessions. Whatever forms
dependence on one part, or conflitutes fuperi.
onty on the other, is unknown. All are free.
men, all feel themselves to be such, and aflert
with firmness the rights which belong to that
condition 0. This Sentiment of independence is
imprinted so deeply in their nature, that no
change of condition can eradicate it, and bend
their minds to servitude. Accustomed to be
absolute mailers of their own conduEt, they dif-
dain to execute the orders of another; and
having never known controul, they will not
fubmut to correction P. Many of the Americans,
when they found that they were treated as
slaves by the Spaniards, died of grief; many
deitroyed themselves in despair q.

a Acoffa, Hit I;b. vi.'c .19. Sd;ur, Hi. Brasil, lib. i.

c. 13. De Bry, iii. p. 1-. Bier. ^36. ' Labat.
vi. 1r4. Brickell, Hit. ,f Carol. : o. See NOTZ
LXIII. q (Cvico, ::b. ii. c. 6. p. 97. Vega,
Conquift de la Florida, i. Ac. ii. 416. Labat. ii. 138.
Benzo, Hilt. Nov. Orb. lib. ir . 25.

4. Among

4. Among people in this state, government

can assume little authority, and the sense of civil
subordination muit remain very imperfec. While
the idea of property is unknown, or incom-
pletely conceived; while the spontaneous pro-
ducions of the earth, as well as the fruits of
inducry, are confidered as belonging to the
public flock, there can hardly be any such
fubhje of difference or discussion among the
members of the fame community, as will require
the hand of authority to interpose in order to
adust it. Where the right of separate and ex-
clufive possession is not introduced, the great ob-
ijt of law and jurifdifion does not exist. Whe
!he members of a tribe are called into the field,
either to invade the territories of their enemies,
or to repel their attacks, when they are engaged
together in the toil and dangers of the chafe,
they then perceive that they are part of a po-
litical body. They are conscious of their own
I connection with the companions in conjunction
with whom they as; and they follow and
reverence such as excel in condu& and valour,
But, during the intervals between such common
e!tirts, they seem scarcely to feel the ties oft
political union r. No visible form of govern-
ment is ellablifhed. The names of magijrate
and fJbjeS are not in use. Every one. seems to
enjuy his natural independence almost entire. If
a scheme of public utility be proposed, the mem-'
bcrs of the community are left at. liberty. to.
clJuofe whether they will or will not assist in
carrying it into execution. No flatute impofcs

r Lozano, Defer. del Gran Chaco, 93. Melendez Te-
fJ:Js VerJtdcrJi, ii, Z3. ice Nor LXIV.

any

any service as a duty, no compulsory laws oblige
them to perform it. All their resolutions arn
voluntary, and flow from the impulse of thei
own minds '. The first ftep towards eftablifnine
a public urifdilion has not been taken in those
rude societies. The right of revenge is left in
private hands r. If violence is committed, o0
blood is (hed, the community does not assume
the power either of inflidcing or of moderatino
the punishment. It belongs to the family and
friends of the person injured or fain to avenge
the wrong, or to accept of the reparation offered
by the aggrefor. If the elders interpose, it is
to advise, not to decide, and it is seldom their
counsels are lifiened to; for as it is deemed
pnfillanimous to susser an offender to escape with
impunity, resentment is implacable and everlaft.
ing a. The obje& of government among savages
is rather foreign than domestic. They do not
aim at maintaining interior order and police by
public regulations, or the exertions of any per-
manent authority, but labour to preserve such
union among the members of their tribe, that
they may watch the motions of their enemies,
and aa againit them with concert and vigour.

Such was the form of political order efta-

blifhed among the greater part of the American
nations. In this state were almost all the tribes
spread over the provinces extending eastward of
the Miffifippi, from the mouth of the St.
Laurence to the confines of Florida. In a

' Char!e. Hifi. N. France, iii z66, 268. ' Herrera

dec. 8. lib. iv. c. 8. Charley. Hist. N. France;
i/. 271, z.7a. Lafit. i 486. Cafli, His. de Nuevo
Ryn' dec Graada, 2f6.

similar

similar condition were the people of Brasil,
the inhabitants of Chili, several tribes in Para-
guay and Guiana, and in the countries which
itretch from the mouth of the Orinoco to the,
peninsula of Yucatan. Among such an infinite
number of petty associations, there may be pe-
culiarities which conititute a diftincion, and mark
the various degrees of their civilization and im-
provement. But an attempt to trace and enu-
merate these would be vain, as they have not
been observed by persons capable of discerning
the minute and delicate circumifances, which
serve to discriminate nations resembling one an-
other in their general charater and features.
The description which I have given of the po-
litical institutions that took place among those
rude tribes in America, concerning which we
have received most complete information, will
apply, with little variation, to every people, both
in its northern and southern division, who have
advanced no farther in civilization, than to add
some slender degree of agriculture to fishing
and hunting.

Imperfe& as those inifitutions may appear,

several tribes were not so far advanced in their
political progress. Among all those petty na-
tions which trusted for subsistence entirely tew
filhing and hunting without any species of cul-
tivation, the union was so incomplete, and their
sense of mutual dependence so feeble, that hardly
any appearance of government or order can be
dilcerned in their proceedings. Their wants are
few, their objects of pursuit simple, they form
into separate tribes, and as together, from in-
ittnct, habit, or conveniency, rather than fromn

YvQ. II. D any

any fornal concert and association. To this
class belong the Californians, several of the
small nations in the extensive country of Para-
guay, some of the people on the banks of the
Orinoco, and on the river St. Magdalene, in the
new kingdom of Granada .

But though among these laft-mentioned tribes

there was hardly any shadow of regular govern.
ment, and even among those which I first de-
fcnribed, its authority is slender and confined
within narrow bounds, there were, however,
some places in America where government was
carried far beyond the degree of perfeEtion
which seems natural to rude nations. In fur-
':.ying the political operations of man, either in
his savage or civilized slate, we discover singular
and eccentric inffitutions, which start as it were
from their flation, and fly off so wide, that'we
labour in vain to bring them within the genera]
laws of any system, or to account for them by
those principles which influence other commu.
nities in a similar situation. Some instances ol
this occur among those people of America,
whom I have included under the common de
nomination of savage. These are so curious and
important that I shall describe them, and attempt
to explain their origin.

In the New World, as well as in other parts

of the globe, cold or temperate countries appeal
to be the favourite feat of freedom and inde.
pendence. There the mind, like the body, i!
firm and vigorous. There men, conscious ol

x Venega, i. 68. Lettr. Edif. ii. 176. Techo Hist

of Parag. Churchill, vi. 75. Hili. Gen dec Voy/age
giv. 7+.

the!'

their own dignity, and capable of the greatest
efforts in asserting it, aspire to independence,
and their stubborn spirits stoop with reluctance
to the yoke of servitude. In warmer climates,
by whose influence the whole frame is {o much
enervated, that present pleasure is the supreme
felicity, and mere repose is enjoyment, men
acquiesce, almost without a ftniggle, in the do-
minion of a superior. Accordingly, if we pro-
ceed from north to south along the continent of
America, we shall find the power of those velfed
with authority gradually increasing, and the
spirit of the people becoming more tame and
pailive. In Florida, the authority of the fa-
cherns, caziques, or chiefs, was not only per.
mznent, but hereditary. They were diftinguilhed
by peculiar ornaments, they enjoyed prerogatives
of various kinds, and were treated by their sub.
jetSs with that reverence, which people accuf.
tnrned to fubjeEtion pay to a masterY. Among
the Natchez, a powerful tribe now extina, for.
merly situated on the banks of the Miffffippi, a
difference of rank took place, with which the
northern tribes were altogether unacquainted.
Some families were reputed noble, and enjoyed
hereditary dignity. The body of the people was
confidered as vile, and formed only for fubje&ion.
This diftintion was marked by appellations
which intimated the high elevation of the one
fate, and the ignominious depression of the other.
The former were called RefpeSable ; the latter,

7 Cardenas y Cano Enfayo ChronoL i la Hilt. de Florida,

p.46. Le Moyne de Morgues Icones Florida. Ap. de
Bry, p. 1. 4, &c. Charley. Hitt. N. France, iii. 467, 468,

D Z the

the Stinkardr. The great chief, in whom th
supreme authority was vested, is reputed to be
being of superior nature, the brother of the Sun
the sole objet of their worihip. They approac
this great chief with religious veneration, an
honour him as the representative of their deity
His will is a law, to which all submit with in
plicit obedience. The lives of his fubjefts are f
absolutely at his disposal, that if any one has ii
curred his displeasure, the offender comes wit
profound humility and offers him his head. N
does the dominion of the chiefs end with the
lives; their principal officers, their favourit
wives, together with many domestics of inferio
rank, are sacrificed at their tombs, that the
may be attended in the next world by the famr
persons who served them in this; and such is th
reverence in which they are held, that thoi
vidtims welcome death with exultation, deemin
it a recompence of their fidelity, and a mark o
diftin&ion, to be fele&ed to accompany their de
ceased matler '. Thus a perfet despotism, wit
its full train of superstition, arrogance, and cruelty
is etablilhed among the Natchez, and by a fin
gular fatality, that people has tatied of th
worst oalamitics incident to polished nations
though they themselves are not far advance
beyond the tribes around them in civility and
improvement. In Hispaniola, Cuba, and th
larger ilands, their caziques or chiefs poffeffe
extensive power. The dignity was transmitted
by hereditary right from father to son. Its ho

' Dmaont Memoir. Hit. far Louifiane, i. 171

Charlev. Hist. N. France, iii. 4rg, &c. Lettr. Edii
D0 16. i I1,

nour

nours and prerogatives were considerable. Their
fubjeas paid great refpeE to the caziques, and
executed their orders without hesitation or re-
serve a. They were diftinguithed by peculiar
ornaments, and in order to preserve or augment
the veneration of the people, they had the address
to call in the aid of superstition to uphold their
authority. They delivered their mandates as the
oracles of heaven, -and pretended to possess the
power of regulating the seasons, and of dif-
pensing rain or funrhine, according as their sub.
jeAs flood in need of them.

In some parts of the southern continent, the

power of the caziques seems to have been as
extensive as in the isles. I-n Bogota, which is
now a province of the new kingdom of Granada,
there was fettled a nation, more considerable in
number and more improved in the various arts
of life, than any in America except the Mexicans
and Peruvians. The people of Bogota subsisted
chiefly by agriculture. The idea of property
was introduced among them, and its rights, fe-
cured by laws, handed down by tradition, and
obfcered with great care b. They lived in towns
which may be termed large, when compared with
those in other parts of America. They were
clothed in a decent manner, and their houses
may be termed commodious, when compared
with those of the small tribes around-them. The
effects of this uncommon civilization were con-
fpicuous. Government had assumed a regular
form. A jurisdiction was established, which took

Hcerrera, dec. I. lib. i. c. 16. Ib. ii. c. 44. p. 8.

Life of Columb. ch. 32. b Piedrabita Hifl. de las
Conuift. del N. Rayno de Gran. p. 46.

D 3 cognizance

cognizance of different crimes, and punished them
with rigour. A diffinfion of ranks was known;
their chief, to whom the Spaniards gave the titlt
of monarch, and who merited that name or
account of his splendour as well as power,
reigned with absolute authority. He was at.
tended by officers of various conditions; he
never appeared in public without a numerou
retinue; he was carried in a fort of palanquin
with much pomp, and harbingers went before
-him to sweep the road and strew it with flowers.
This uncommon pomp was supported by presents
or taxes received from his fubje&ts, to whom their
prince was such an objec of veneration, that
none of them presumed to look him direcly in
the face, or ever approached him but with an
averted countenance c. There were other tribes
-on the fame continent, among which, though
far less advanetd than the people of Bogota ih
their progress towards refinement, the freedom
and independence, natural to man in his savage
state, was much abridged, and their caziques had
assumed extensive authority.

It is not easy to point out the circumstances,

or to discover the causes which contributed to
introduce and establish among each of those
people a form of government so different from
that of the tribes around them, and so tepug.
nant to the genius of rude nations. If the.per.
sons who had an opportunity of observing them
in their original slate, had been more attentive
and more discerning, we might have received in-
formation from their conquerors sufficient to

c Herra, dec. 6. lib. i. c. z. lib. v. c. 56. Piedrahita,
c. 5 P.p. , &c. Gomaril Hi&L c. .7z

guide

guide us in this inquiry. If the tranfa&ions of
people, unacquainted wvith the use of letters,
were not involved in impenetrable obscurity, we
might have derived some information from this
domestic source. But as nothing fatisfaatory
can be gathered, either from the accounts of the
Spaniards, or from their own traditions, we
muff have recourse to conjectures, in order to
explain the irregular appearances in the political
state of the people whom I have mentioned.
As all those tribes which had loft their native
liberty and independence were feated in the
Torrid Zone, or in countries approaching to it,
the climate may be supposed to have had some
influence in forming their minds to that servitude,
which seems to be the destiny of man in those
regions of the globe. But though the influence
of climate, more powerful than that of any
other natural cause, is not to be overlooked;
that alone cannot be admitted as a solution of
the point in question. The operations of men
are so complex, that we must not attribute the
form which they assume, to the force of a single
principle or cause. Although despotism be
confined in America to the Torrid Zone, and to
the warm regions bordering upon it, I have al-
ready observed that these countries contain
various tribes, some of which possess a high
degree of fieedom, and others are altogether
unacquainted with the restraints of government.
The indolence and timidity peculiar to the in-
habitants of the islands, render them so incapable
of the sentiments or efforts necessary for main-
taining independence, that there is no occasion to
search for any other catife of their tame fubmif-

sion

sion to the. will of a superior. The fubjecion of
the Natchez, and of the people of Bogota, feenu
to have been the consequence of a difference in
their late from that of the other Americans.
They were fettled nations, residing constantly in
one place. Hunting was not the chief occupa.
tion of the former, and the latter fcem hardly
to have trusted to it for any part of their sub.
fiftence. Both had made such progress in agri.
culture and arts, that the idea of property was
introduced in some degree in the one community,
and fully etablifhcd in the other. Among
people in this irate, avarice and ambition hare
acquired objects, and have begun to exert their
power; views of interest allure the felifhi; the
desire of pre-eminence excites the enterprising;
dominion is courted by both; and paiiions un.
known to man in his savage ilate prompt the
interested and ambitious to encroach on the rights
of their fellow-citizens. Motives, with which
rude nations are equally unacquainted, induce
the people to submit tamely to the usurped au.
thority of their superiors. But even among na.
tions in this Rate, the spirit of subjects could not
have been rendered so obsequious, or the power
of rulers so unbounded, without the intervention
of superstition. By ito fatal influence, the human
mind, in every stage of its progress, is depressed,
and its native vigour and independence subdued
Whoever can acquire the direction of this for.
midable engine, is secure of dominion over his
species. Unfortunately for the people whose
inflitutions are the fubjeet of inquiry, this power
was in the hands of their chiefs. The caziqucs
of the isles could put what responses they pleased

into

into the mouths of their Cemir or gods ; and it
was by their interposition, and in their name, that
they imposed any tribute or burden on their
people d. The fame power and prerogative was
exercised by the great chief of the Natchez as
the principal minilter as well as the representative
of the Sun, their deity. The refpet which the
people of Bogota paid to their monarchs was
likewise inspired by religion, and the heir ap-
parent cf the kingdom was educated in the inner-
moit recess of their principal temple, under such
austere discipline, and with such peculiar rites,
as tended to fill his fubjeds with high sentiments
concerning the fanCtiLy of his chara&er, and the
dignity of his station '. Thus superstition,
which, in the rudcft period of society, is either
altogether unknown, or waftes its force in child.
ifh unmeaning pra&ices, had acquired such an
ascendant over those people of America, who
had made some little progress towards refine-
ment, that it became the chief inftriment of
bending their minds to an untimely servitude,
and subjected them, in the beginning of their
political career, to a despotism hardly tefs rigor-
ous than that which awaits nations in the lat
stage of their corruption and decline.

V. After examining the political.inftitutions

of the rude nations in America, the next obje&c
of attention is their art of war, or their provision
for public security and defence. The frnall tribes
dispersed over America are not only independent
and unconne&ed, but engaged in perpetual
hostilities with one another f. Though mostly

d Henera, dec. I. lib. ili. c. ;. e Piedrahita, p 27.
f Ribas, Hit. de los Triumph. p. 9.

strangers

lrangers to the idea of separate property vefte
in any individual, the rudest of the America
nations are well acquainted with the rights c
each community to its own domains. This righ
they hold to be perfet and exclusive, entitling
the possessor to oppose the encroachment a
neighbouring tribes. As it is of the utmol
consequence to prevent them from destroying o
disturbing the game in their hunting-ground&
they guard this national property with a jealou
attention. But as their territories are extensive
and the boundaries of them not exactly afcer
tained, innumerable subje&s of dispute arise
which seldom terminate without bloodshcd
Even in this simple and primitive Itate of focietv
interelt is a source of discord, and often prompt
savage tribes to take arms in order to repel o
puni/h such as encroach on the forests or plains
to which they trust for subsistence.

But interest is not either the most frequent o

the moif powerful motive of the incessant hoftili
ties among rude nations. These mutl be im
puted to the passion of revenge, which rage
with such violence in the breast of savages, tha
eagerness to gratify it may be confidered as thi
diitlnguuihing characteristic of men in their uncivi
lized late. Circumstances of powerfulinfluence
both in the interior government of rude tribes
and in their external operations against foreigi
enemies, concur in cherinhing and adding ftrengtt
to a passion fatal to the general tranquillity
When the right of redrefling his own wrong
is left in the hands of every individual, injurne
are felt with exquisite sensibility, and vengeance
exercised with unrelenting rancour. No time

cax

can obliterate the memory of an offence, and it,
is seldom that it can be expiated but by the
blood of the offender. In carrying on their
public wars, savage nations are influenced by the
fame ideas, and animated with the fame spirit,
as in prosecuting private vengeance. In small
communities, every man is touched with the
injury or affront offered to the body of which
he is member, as if it were a personal attack
upon his own honour or safety. The desire of
revenge is communicated from breast to breast,
and loon kindles into rage. As feeble societies
can take the field only in small parties, each
warrior is conscious of the importance of his
own arm, and feels that to it is committed a con-
fiderable portion of the public vengeance. War,
which between extensive kingdoms is carried on
with little animosity, is profecnted by small tribes
with all the rancour of a private quarrel. The
resentment of nations is as implacable as that of
individuals. It may be dissembled or suppressed,
but is never extinguished; and often, when least
expected or dreaded, it bursts out with re-
doubled fury g. When polished nations have
obtained the glory of vitory, or have acquired
an addition of territory, they may terminate a
vvar with honour. But savages are not satisfied
u;n:il they extirpate the community which is the
objet, of their hatred. They fight not to con-
quer, but to destroy. If they engage in hofti-
lities, it is with a resolution never to fee the face

c Boucher, Hifl. Nat. de N. France, p. 93. Charlevy

Ehfi. Gc N. France, iii. z15. 2z5. Lern ap. de Bry, iii. 0o4.
Creil. Hist. Car.ad. p. 72. Lozano, Defer. del Gran Chaco,

E5. . 'r.nep, MCzCrs dcs Sauv. 0o.

of

of the enemy in peace, but to prosecute the
quarrel with immortal enmity h. The desire of
vengeance is the firit, and alioft the only prin.
ciple, which a savage instils into the minds of
his children i This grows up with him as he
advances in life; and as his attention is dire&dcd
to few objects, it acquires a degree of force un.
known among men, whose passions are diflipated
and weakened by the variety of their occupations
and pursuits. The desire of vengeance, which
takes poffffion of the heart of savages, resembles
the inltinclive rage of an animal, rather than
the passion of a man. It turns, with un-
discerning fury, even againlt inanimate obje&s.
If hult accidentally by a stone, they often seize
it in a transport of anger, and endeavour to
wr-ak their vengeance upon it k. If struck with
an arrow in battle, they will tear it from the
wound, break and bite it with their teeth, and
dash it on the ground 1. With refpet to their
enemies, the rage of vengeance knows no bounds.
When under the dominion of this palfion, man
becomes the most crud of all animals. He nei-
ther pities, nor forgives, nor spares.

The force of this passion is to well understood

by the Americans thenafcves, that they always
apply to it, in order to excite their people to
take arms. If the elders of any tribe at-
tempt to rouse their youth from sloth, if a chief
wiefs to allure a band of warriors to follow

h Charlev. Hill. N. Fr. i;;. z2r. Colden, i. 10,.

i;. tz6. BarerC, p. 170. 173. Charlev. Hi;.
N. Fr. ii.. 3z6. Lcry ap. deBfy, iii. z36. Lozano, H.(.
dc Parag. i. 144. k Lety ap. de Bry, iii. Iaq.

i . L.i. I.i, z HC aca, dcc . ib.
. i. c, 8,

h1;n

im in invading an enemy's country, the most
erfuafive topics of their martial eloquence are
rawn from revenge. " The bones of our
ountrymen," fay they, " lie uncovered ; their
bloodv bed has not been wafled clean. Their
spirits cry againit us; they must be appeased;
Let us go and devour the people by whom they
Eere slain. Sit no longer ina&ive upon your

ats ; lift the hatchet, console the spirits of
the dead, and tell them that they shall be
avenged m."

Animated with such exhortations, the youth

Snatch their arms in a transport of fury, raise
te song of war, and burn with impatience to
embruc their hands in the blood of their enemies.
|Privatc chiefs often assemble small parties, and
invade a holtile tribe, without consulting the
rulers of the community. A single warrior,
pnrompted by caprice or revenge, will take the
fiecd alone, and march several hundred miles to
surprise and cut off a straggling enemy ". The
exploits of a noted warrior, in such solitary ex-
curtions, often form the chief part in the history
ui an American campaign °; and their elders
connive at such irregular sallies, as they tend to
Ierilh a martial spirit, and accustom their people
to enterprise and danger P. But when a war is
national, and undertaken by public authority,
the deliberations are formal and flow. The elders
affcmble, they deliver their opinions in solemn
peeches, they weigh with maturity the nature

'' Charley. Hist. N. Fr. iii. 216, 2i7. Lery ap. de Briy
.1:. z-4. See NOTE LXV. ° See NOTE
XVl. P Boffu, i. 140. Lcry ap. de Bry, z15.
Il-r.cren, Mccurs dcr Sauv. 4r. Lafitau, ii. 169.

VOL. n1. E of

of the enterprise, and balance its beneficial
disadvantageous consequences with no incol
fiderabic portion of political discernment c
sagacity. Their priests and soothsayers are cot
fulted, and sometimes they ask the advice eve
of their women q. If the determination be fc
war, they prepare for it with much ceremonm
A leader offers to conduct the expedition, an
is accepted. But no man is constrained to so
low him; the resolution of the communitv t
commence hostilitics, imposes no obligation upo
any member to take part in the war. Each ir
dividual is frill mailer of his own conduct, an
his engagement in the service is perfectly volur
tary .

The maxims by which they regulate the

military operations, though extremely differcr
from those which take place among more civilize
and populous nations, are well suited to the:
own political state, and the nature of the countr
in which they at. They never take the field i
numerous bodies, as it would require a greate
effort of forelight and industry, than is ufu;
among savages, to provide for their fubfiftencs
during a march of some hundred miles throug
dreary forests, or during a long voyage upo
their lakes and rivers. Their armies are not er
cumbered with baggage or military frores. Eac
warrior, besides his arms, carries a mat and
small bag of pounded maize, and with these i
completely equipped for any service. While a
a distance from the enemy's frontier, they dil
perse through the woods, and support them

q Charicy. Hist. N. Fr. 7.15. z68. Bict. 367. 380.
Char!c. HilL N. Fr. z21, zi8.

fcl:-

felvcs with the game which they kill, or the
fifn which they catch. As they approach nearer
to the territories of the nation which they intend
to attack, they collet their troops, and advance
with greater caution. Even in their hottest and
moit active wars, they proceed wholly by strata-
gcm and ambuscade. They place not their glory
in attacking their enemies with open force. To
surprise and destroy is the greatest merit of a
commander, and the ligheft pride of his follow.
ers. War and hunting are their only occupa.
tions, and they conduct both with the fame
spirit and the fame arts. They follow the track
of their enemies through the forest. They en.
deavour to discover their haunts, they lurk in
some thicket near to these, and, with the pa-
tience of a sportsman lying in wait for game,
will continue in their station day after day, until
they can rush upon their prey when molt secure,
and least able to resist them. If they meet no
liraggling party of the enemy, they advance to-
wards their villages, but with such solicitude to
conceal their own approach, that they often creep
on their hands and feet through the woods, and
paint their skins of the fame colour with the
withered leaves, in order to avoid detection '.
If so fortunate as to remain unobserved, they
set on fire the enemy's huts in the dead of
night, and massacre the inhabitants, as they fly
naked and defenceless from the flames. If they
hope to effect a retreat without being pursued,
they carry off some prifoncr;, w.hom they reserve
for a nmore dreadful fate. But if, notwithliand-

Charley. Hilt. N. Fr. iii. 237, 238. Hennep. Mourn
dIs Sauv. p. 49.

E Z ing

ing all their address and precautions, they fine
that their motions are discovered, that the ene
my has taken the alarm, and is prepared to op
pose them, they usually deem it most prudent t(
retire. They regard it as extreme folly to mee
an enemy who is on his guard, upon equa
terms, or to give battl in an open field. Thl
most distinguished success is a disgrace to;
leader if it has been purchased with any confider
able loss of his followers ; and they never boai
of a vicory, if stained with the blood of their owl
countrymen U. To fall in battle, instead of beins
reckoned an honourable death, is a misfortune
which fubjets the memory of a warrior to t},
imputation of rashness or imprudence x.

This system of war was universal in America

and the fiall uncivilized tribes, dispersed througi
all its different regions and climates, display mon
craft than boldness in carrying on their hoftili
ties. Struck with this conduc, so opposite t
the ideas and maxims of Europeans, several au
thors contend that it flows from a feeble am
dastardly spirit peculiar to the Americans, whicl
is incapable of any generous or manly exertion r
But when we reflet that many of these tribes.
on occasions which call for extraordinary efforts
not only defend themselves with obstinate reio
lution, but attack their enemies with the moil
daring courage, and that they possess fortitudi
of mind superior to the sense of danger or the

I See NTEr LXVII. u CharIlv. Hilt. N. Fr
iii . 3G. 307 B.et. 3Si. Las.:ad, MNcursde Saav. ii. 243

CharKev.. i. 76. Se N.-.Tr LXViHl. r Rehe.

ches Phdlof far ts A.mrcn. i. IJS. Voyatg de Marc:.
iv. 4:0.

fez

fear of death, we muff ascribe their habitual
caution to some other cause than constitutional
timidity z. The number of men in each tribe
is so frnall, the difficulty of rearing new members,
amidst the hardships and dangers of savage life,
so great, that the life of a citizen is extremely
precious, and the preservation of it becomes-a
capital objet in their policy. Had the point
of honour been the fame among the feeble
American tribes as among the powerful nations
of Europe, had they been taught to court fame
or victory in contempt of danger and death, they
nmuit have been ruined by maxims so ill adapted
to their condition. But wherever their commu-
nities are more populous, so that they can at
with considerable force, and can sustain the loss
of several of their members, without being fen-
fiblv wveakened, the military operations of the
Americans more nearly resemble those of other
nations. The Brafilians, as well as the tribes
situated upon the banks of the river De la Plata,
often take the field in such numerous bodies,
as dcfcrve the name of armies a. They defy
their enemies to the combat, engage in regular
battles, and maintain the conflit with that def-
ptrate ferocity, which is natural to men, who,
having no idea of war but that of exterminating
their enemies, never give or take quarter b. In
the powerful empires of Mexico and Peru, great
armies were assembled, frequent battles were
fought, and the theory as well as praAice of
war were different from what took place ii

z Lafitau, Mceurs des Saov. ii. 242, 249. Charlev. N.

Fr. iii. 3c7. a Fabri Veriff. Decfrip. India ap de
Bry, vii. p. 42. b See NoT- LXIX.

E 3 thofc

those petty societies which assume the namn
of nations.

But though vigilance and attention are th

qualities chiefly requisite, where the object (
war is to deceive and to surprise; and though th
Americans, when a&ting singly, display an ama;
ing degree of address in concealing their ow
motions, and discovering those of an enemy, y)i
it is remarkable that, when they take the figl
in parties, they can seldom be brought to ob
serve the precautions most effcntial to their omw
security. Such is the difficulty of accuttomin
savages to subordination, or to aE in concert
such is their impatience under reitraint, and fuc
their caprice and presumption, that it is rarel
they can be brought to conform themfelvcs t
the counsels and direcions of their leader
They never station centinels around the plac
where they reft at night, and after marchin
some hundred miles to surprise an enemy, ar
often surprised themselves, and cut off, whil
funk in as profound sleep as if they were nc
within reach of danger c.

If, notwithstanding this negligence and si

curity, which often frustrate their most artfu
schemes, they catch the enemy unprepared, the
rush upon them with the utmost ferocity, and
tearing off the scalps of all those who fall vi&im
to their rage d, they carry home those itrang
trophies in triumph. These they preserve a
monuments, not only of their own prowess, bhu
of the vengeance which their arm has inflited

Chrtev. N. Fr. iii. 236, 237. Lettr. Edif. 17. 3cS

2o. t3'. Lafit. Maur ,
B. 247. Lazonun,ii. 176.

4 Se N.T-E LXX.

up(c

u:pon the people who were objefts of public re-
fentment e. They ale still more solicitous to
fcize prisoners. During their retreat, if they
hope to effet it unmolested, the prisoners are
commonly exempt from any insult, and treated
with some degree of humanity, though guarded
with the most itrie attention.

But after this temporary suspension, the rage

of the conquerors rekindles with new fury. As
soon as they approach their own frontier, some
of their number are dispatched to inform their
countrymen with refpet to the success of the
expedition. Then the prifoncrs begin to feel
the vwretchedncfs of their condition. The wo-
men of the village, together with the youth who
have not attained to the age of bearing arms,
alccr.ble, and forming themselves into two lines,
through which the prisoners must pass, beat and
bruifc them with iticks or Htones in a cruel man-
ner f. After this firit gratification of their rage
againit their enemies, follow lamentations for the
luos of such of their own countrymen as have
fallen in the service, accompanied with words
and actions which seem to express the utmoit
anguish and grief. But, in a moment, upon a
iignal given, their tears cease; they pass, with
a sudden and unaccountable transition, from the
depths of sorrow to transports of joy; and begin
to celebrate their vicory with all the wild ex-
ultation of a barbarous triumph g. The fate of
the prisoners remains still undecided. The old
r.en deliberate concerning it. Some are destined
to be tortured to death, in order to satiate the

Lafitau, Mceurs, ii. 256. Lahontan, ii. 184.
Charke. Hist, N. Fr. iii. 241. Lafitau, Meurs, ii. z.6.

revenge

revenge of the conquerors; some to replace th,
members which the community has loft in tha
or former wars. They who are reserved for thi
milder fate, are led to the huts of those whos
friends have been killed. The women meet ther
at the door, and if they receive them, their fui
ferings are at an end. They are adopted int
the family, and, according to their phrase, ar
feated upon the mat of the deceased. The
affurre his name, trey hold the fame rank, an
are treated thenceforward with all the tender
ness due to a father, a brother, a husband, or
friend. But, if cither from caprice, or an unre
lenting dcfire of revenge, the women of any f,
mily refufc to accept of the prisoner who i
offered to them, his doom is fixed. No powe
can then save him from torture and death.

While their lot is in firfpenfc, the prisonei

thernfelves appear altogether unconcerned abou
w.hat mav befal them. They talk, they eal
they seep, as if they were perfectly at ease, an
no danger impending. When the fatal fentenc
is intimated to them, they receive it with a
unaltered countenance, raise their death-fong, ar.
prepare to susser like men. Their conqueror
assemble as to a solemn festival, resolved to pu
the fortitude of the captive to the utmost proo:
A scene enrfues, the bare dcfcription of which I
enough to chill the heart with horror, wheretv
rnn have been accustomed, by milder inftitL
tions, to rfpect their species, and to melt int
tenderness at the fight of human sufferings. Th
prisoners are tied naked to a ilake, but so a, t
be at liberty to move round it. All who ar
prfrent, men, women, and clildren, rush upo

thr.

them like furies. Every species of torture is
applied that the rancour of revenge can invent.
Some burn their limbs with red-hot irons, some
mangle their bodies with knives, others tear
their flesh from their bones, pluck out their nails
bv the roots, and rend and twilt their sinews.
They vie with one another in refinements of tor.
ture. Nothing sets bounds to their rage but
the dread of abridging the duration of their
vengeance by hatening the death of the sus-
ferers; and such is their cruel ingenuity in tor-
menting, that by avoiding induptrioufly to hurt
any vital part, they often prolqng this scene of
anguish for several days. In spite of all that
they susser, the victims continue to chant theit
death-fong with a firm voice, they boast of their
own exploits, they insult their tormentors fo'r
their want of skill in avenging their friends and
relations, they warn them of tie vengeance
which awaits them on account of what they are
now doing, and excite their ferocity by the
most provoking reproaches and threats. To
display undaunted fortitude in such dreadful
situations, is the noblest triumph of a warrior.
To avoid the trial by a voluntary death, or to
f.rink under it, is deemed infamous and cowardly.
If any one betrays symptoms of timidity, his
tormentors often dispatch him at once with conA
tempt, as unworthy of being treated like a
man h. Animated with those ideas, they en-
dure, without a groan, what it seems almost im-
possible that human nature should fuitain. They
;:;ppar to be not only insensible of pain, but to
cuurt it. " Forbear," said an aged chief of the

t De le Potherie, ii. 237. iii. 48.

Iroquois,

Iroquois, when his insults had provoked one c
his tormentors to wound him with a knife

forbear thcfe ifabs of your knife, and rathe

let me die by fire, that those dogs, your alliem
from b-eor.d the sea, may learn by my exarnpl
to fuiecr like men i." This magnanimity, c
shich there are frequent inflanccs among th
American warriors, iiltead of exciting admin
tion, or caiii;g forth sympathy, exafperatcs th
ferce spirits of t!hir torturers to frefl acts o
cruelty k. L 'eary at length of contending wit]
men, ixhufc conflancy of mind they cannot var
quilh, su.e chief in a rage puts a period to thei
fuffcr-ngs, by dirpatching them with his dagge
or club 1

This barbarous scene is often succeeded by on

no less shocking. As it is impossible to appear
the fell spirit of revenge which rages in th
heart of a savage, this frequently prompts th
Americans to devour those unhappy persons
vrho have been the vi&tims of their cruelty
In the arcien.t world, tradition has prefervec
the memory of barbarous nations of cannibals
who fed on human flesh. But in every part o
the New W,'t2ld there were people to whom thi!
custom was familiar. It prevailed in the
southern coL:nent ", in several of the iflandj n

* Coldcn, Hi; . of Five Nations, i. 2co. k VoyVage

de Laor.t. i. 236. 1 Chariey. Hist. N. Fr. iii. 24
&c. ;S-. Larirau, Mceurs, ii. 265. Creuxij, Hlif. Cara:.
p. 73. Hc.nrp. Maeurs ces Sauv. p. 64, &c. Lah, n-.
i. z33, &c. 'I ertr, li. 4c5. De ia i'othcrie, ii. 22, &c.

ra tudlus ap. cr Er;, iii. 13. Le'y, ibid. zic. B ce

384. Le:tr. Ldif. z3..31 Pifo, 8. Condam. 84. 9-.
R.it.aS, Hist. e los Triumph. 473. " Life of Coiunib.
529. Mar-. Dec. p. i . Te;rt, ii. 405.

and

and in various diftrits of North America o. Even
in those parts, where circumstances, with which
we are unacquainted, had in a great measure
abolished this practice, it seems formerly to have
been so well known, that it is incorporated into
the idiom of their language. Among the Iro-
q.uois, the phrase by which they express their
resolution of making war against an enemy is,
" Let us go and"eat that nation." If they so--
licit the aid of a neighbouring tribe, they invite
it to " eat broth made of the flesh of their ene-
mies P." Nor was the pratice peculiar to rude
unpolifhed tribes; the principle from which it
took rife is so deeply rooted in the minds of the
Americans, that it subsisted in Mexico, one of
the civilized empires in the New World, and
relics of it may be discovered among the more
mild inhabitants of Peru. It was net scarcity
of food, as some authors imagine, and the im-
portunate cravings of hunger, which forced the
Americans to those horrid repasts on their
felldw-creatures. Human flesh was never used
as common food in any country, and the various
relations concerning people who reckoned it
among the stated means of fubfiflence, flow
from the credurlty and mistakes of travellers.
The rancour of revenge first prompted men to
th;s barbarous adion q. The tierceit tribes de-
voured none but prisoners taken in war, or such

O Dumont, Mcm. i. 254. Charley. Hifl. N. Fr. i. z59.

i.. 14. iii. z2. De la Potherie, iii. 50. P Charlev. Hi-l.
N Fr. z.c3, 209. Le:tr. Edif. z3. .. 77 De laPotherie,
i;. 298. See NOTE LXXI. q Biet. 39l. Blanco,
Con'crfion de Piritu, p, z8. Bancroft, Nat. Hii. of
Cubana, p. 259, . kc.

a;

as they regarded as enemies . Women and
children who were not the objecs of enmity, if
not cut off in the fury of their first inroad into
an hostile country, seldom suffered by the de-
liberate effects of their revenge s.

The people of South America gratify their

revenge in a manner somewhat different, but
with no less unrelenting rancour. There pri-
foners, after meeting at their first entrance with
the fame rough reception as among the North
Americans t, are not only exempt from injury,
but treated with the greatest kindness. They
are fearled and carefled, and some beautiful
young women are appointed to attend and
solace them. It is not easy to account for this
part of their conduct, unless we impute it to a
refinement in cruelty. For, while they seem
fludious to attach the captives to life, by sup-
plying them with every enjoyment that can
render it agreeable, their doom is irrevocably
fixed. On a day appointed, the victorious tribe
assembles, the prisoner is brought forth with
great solemnity, he views the prepartions for the
sacrifice with as much indifference as if he him.
self were not the vitlm, and meeting his fate
with undaunted firmness, is dispatched with a
single blow. The moment he falls, the women
seize the body, and dress it for the feait. They
hefmear their children with the blood, in order
to kindle in their bofums a hatred of their ene-
mies, which is never extinguished, and all join
in feeding upon the flesh with amazing greedi.

r Se NorE LXXII. ic.

Bie. 3. Bandin,

V-ia di Arr.rrco, S.. Tertre, 4e5. Fermin. DcfIrip.
Su - *. ' S:cii;, ap. de Bry, iii. p. 40. Iz;.

2r 1.(I:

ness and exultation 1. To devour the body of a
slaughtered enemy, they deem the most complete
and exquisite gratification of revenge. Wherever
this practice prevails, captives never escape death,
but they are not tortured with the fame cruelty
as among tribes which are less accufomed to
such horrid fasts x.

As the constancy of every American warrior

may be put to such severe proof, the great ob-
jed of military education and discipline in the
New World is to form the mind to fuflain it.
VWhen nations carry on war with open force,
defy their enemies to the combat, and vanquish
them by the superiority of their skill or courage,
soldiers are trained to be active, vigorous, and
enterprising. But in America, where the genius
and maxims of war are extremely different, pas-
fi.:e fortitude is the quality in highest estimation.
Accordingly, it is early the study of the Ame-
ricans to acquire sentiments and habits, which
wi!t enable them to behave like men, when their
refulution shall be put to the proof. As the
youth of other nations exercise themselves in
feats of acivity and force, those of America vie
with one another in exhibitions of their patience
under sufferings. They harden their nerves by
those voluntary trials, and gradually accustom
thcifelvts to endure the (harpeft pain without
complaining. A boy and girl will bind their
naked arms together, and place a burning coal
betwieen them, in order to try who sirs dilcovers
such impatience as to shake it offV. All the
trials, customary in America, when a youth is

u Stadius, ap. de Bry, iii. x2S, &c. Lery, ibid. 2ro.

See Note LXXIII. r Charley. Hilt . fr. iii. a,7.
VOL. It. s admitted

admitted into the class of warriors, or when
warrior is promoted to the dignity of captain o0
chief, are accommodated to this idea of manli.
ness. They are r.ot displays of valour, but oi
patience; they are not exhibitions of their ability
to offend, but of their capacity to susser. Among
the tribes on the banks of the Orinoco, if a
warrior aspires to the rank of captain, his pr,..
bation btgins with a long fall, more rigid than
any -c;r cbserved by the moil abstemious her.
mil. At the close of this, the chiefs assemble,
each gi:cs him three lafheis with a large whip, ap.
plied so x i;orou;ly, that his body is almost fiayed,
Li.d i f he betr-ay~ the least f mp-om of impatience
cr c-cn icr.t ..iity, lc is disgraced for exrr,
arid ri-jeced as unworthy of the honour
to :',. he afpirc. After fume intenal,
thc cr.iifancy of tile candidate i< proved by a
rmore excruciating trial. Ice is laid in a ham-
rr.oc v.::i i:i, hands bound fall, and an innumc-
r;ble nmu,.: n:ie of venomous ants, whose bite oc-
calii;., t:.:';uite pai:, and p:odiccs a violent in-
fi:ni;.mtiou!, are thrown upon tim. The judges
c. is nmrit stand around the hammoc, and,
v.-h:: thfct cruel infects faitcn upon the most
fe:.!;b;e yarts of his body, a sigh, a groan, an
ir.;vi uintav motion expressive of what he suffers,

cai(d exclude him fur eter frunm the rank of

c:. :a.n. Even after tl.i ecidei:ce of his forti-
t-c,:; i. n ot d-.med tobe completcl.. afctrtaintd,
!.Lt ;nuil itaid another tclt more dreadful than
a:.v .,e has i.ithcrto undergone. Hc is again
L'. : eided in his hammoc, and covered with

.'- ,f the palmetto. A fire of Itinking herjb
!. ki..Citd undrineathl, so as tie may feel its heat,

.a!.tl

and bt- involved in its smoke. Though scorched
snd almolt suffocated, he muff continue to en-
,,r ;ith the fame patient insensibility. Many
I .ri.l i'i this rude essay of their firmnnefs and cou-
r.lic, but such as go through it with applause,
r-ccive the enligns of their new dignity with
nmuch folen;iity, and are ever after regarded as
leaders of approved resolution, whose behaviour,
in the moit trying lituations, will do honour to
their country Z. In North America, the previ.
ous trial of a warrior is neither so formal, nor so
fLvere. Though even there, before a youth is
permitted to bear arms, his patience and forti-
tude are proved by blows, by fire, and by in-
fuilts, more intolerable to a haughty spirit than
both .

The amazing steadiness with which the Ame-

rica:,s endure the mlolt exquisite torments, has in-
duiced some authors to suppose that, from the
peculiar feebleness of their frame, their sensibility
is not so acute as that of other people; as
women, and persons of a relaxed habit, are ob-
served to be less affected with pain than robufi
men, whose nerves are more firmly braced. But
the conutitution of the Americans is not so dif-
ferent, in its texture, from that of the reft of
tile human species, as to account for this diver-
lity in their behaviour. It flows from a principle
of honour, inifilled early and cultivated with
f.ich care, as to inspire man in his rudest state
with an heroic magnanimity, to which philo.
fphy hath endeavoured, in vain, to form him,
", len more highly improved and polilhed. This

z Gumilia, ii. 286, &c. Biet. 376, &c.
* Char;ev. Hist. N. Fr. iii. 219.

r 2 invincible

invincible constancy he has been taught to confide
as the chief distinction of a man, and the hight!
attainment of a warrior. The ideas which influ
ence his conduct, and the passions which tak
possession of his heart, are few. They optrati
of course with more decisive effet, than whet
the mind is crowded with a multiplicity of ob.
je&s, or diffracted by the variety of its pursuits
and when every motive that acts with any force
in forming the sentiments of a savage, prompts
him to susser with dignity, he will bear what
might seem to be impossible for human patience
to sustain. But wherever the fortitude of the
Americans is not roused to exertion by their
ideas of honour, their feelings of pain are the
fame with those of the reft of mankind b. Nor
is that patience under sufferings, for which the
Americans have been so justly celebrated, an
universal attainment. The constancy of many
of the vicims is overcome by the agonies of tor-
ture. Their weakness and lamentations corn.
plete the triumph of their enemies, and reflect
disgrace upon their own country c.

The perpetual hostilities carried on among

the American tribes are productive of very fatal
effets. Even in fcafons of public tranquillity,
their imperfect indutiry does not supply them
with any superfluous store of provisions; but
when the irruption of an enemy desolates their
cultivated lands, or disturbs them in their hunt.
ing excirfions, such a calamity reduces a com-
munity, naturally unprovident and destitute of

b STe NOTE LXXIV. c Charlev. His. N. Fr.
iii. . 3. . .5. Dc U Pothllri iii. 48.

resources,

resources, to extreme want. All the people of
the diftrit that is invaded are frequently forced
to take refuge in woods or mountains, which
can afford theni little fubfillence, and where
many of them peri(h. Notwithstanding their
exceifive caution in conducting their military
operations, and the solicitude of every leader to
preserve the lives of his followers, as the rude
tribes in America seldom enjoy any interval of
peace, the loss of men among them is confider-
able in proportion to the degree of population.
Thus famine and the sword combine in thinning
their numbers. All their communities are feeble,
and nothing now remains of several nations,
which were once considerable, but the name d

Sensible of this continual decay, there are

tribes which endeavour to recruit their national
force when exhausted, by adopting prisoner3
taken in w ar, and by this expedient prevent their
total extinction. The pratice, however, is not
uriverfally received. Resentment operates more
powerfully among savages, than considerations
of policy. Far the greater part of their captives
was antiently sacrificed to their vengeance, and
it is only since their numbers began to decline
fail, that they have generally adopted milder
maxims. But such as they do naturalize, re-
nounce for ever their native tribe, and assume
the manners as well as passions of the people by
whom they are adopted C, so entirely, that they
often join them in expeditions against their own
countrymen. Such a sudden transition, and so

J Charley. Hid. N. Fr. iii. 202, w23. 429. Gumilla,ii.

227, &c. Charlev. Hilt. N. Fr. iii. 245, &c.
l.an:' ii3
3o3.

:' 3 repulgniant

repugnant to one of the most powerful inftint,
implanted by nature, would be deemed frange
among many people; but, among the members
of small communities, where national enmity is
violent and deep-rooted, it has the appearance
of being flill more unaccountable. It seems,
nowever, to result naturally from the principles
upon which war is carried on in America.
¥,hen nations aim at exterminating their ere-
mies, no exchange of prisoners can ever take
place. From the moment one is made a pri.
soner, his country and his friends confider him
as deadf. He has incurred indelible disgrace
by suffering himself to be surprised or to be taken
by an enemy; and were he to return home, after
such a stain upon his honour, his nearest relations
would not receive or even acknowledge that they
knew him g. Some tribes were still more rigid,
and if a prisoner returned, the infamy which he
had brought on his country was expiated, by
putting him inflantly to deathh. As the un-
fortunate czpt.ve is thus an outcast from his own
country, and the tics which bound him to it are
irreparably broken, he feels }ler reluctance in
forming a ne-w connection with people, who,
as an evidence of their friendly fentimcnts, not
only deliver him from a cruel death, but offer to
admit him to all the rights of a ftllow-citizen.
The perfcct limiianty of manners among savage
nations facilitates and completes the union, and
reduces a captive to transfer not only his allegi-
ance, but his aff.ction, to the community into
the b'fm-n of wlhiih he is reccived.

f 5S- NUT- LXXV. E Lahont. 1i 185, 186.
B HOc.-a dcc. j. lib. iv. c. 16,
,. 3j .

But

But though war be the chief occupation of

men in their rude state, and to excel in it their
highest diftin&ion and pride, their inferiority is
always manifest when they engage in competition
with polifned nations. Destitute of that fore.
iight which discerns and provides for remote
e-'ents, firangers to the union and mutual confi-
dence requisite in forming any extensive plan of
op', rations, and incapable of the subordination
no less requilite in carrying such plans into execu-
tion, savage nations may astonish a disciplined
e:emy by their valour, but seldom prove formid-
able to him by their conduc; and whenever the
conte-t is of long continuance, must yield to
superior arti. The empires of Peru and Mexico,
though their progress in cisilization, when mea-
fured by the European or Asiatic standards, was
inconsiderable, acquired such an ascendancy over
the rude tribes around them, that they sub-
jc-dtcd most of th em with great facility to their
power. When the people of Europe overran
the various provinces of America, this superiority
was ttill mmore conspicuous. Neither the courage
nor number of the natives could repel a handful
of invaders. The alienation and enmity, preva.
lent among barbarians, prevented them from
uniting in any common scheme of defence, and
while each tribe fought separately, all were sub-
dued.

VI. The arts of rude nations unacquainted

with the use of metals, hardly merit any attention
on thlir own account, but arc worthy of some
r.<,tice, as far as they serve to display the genius
aud manners of man in this Itage of his progress.

See NOTE LXXVI.

The

The first distress a savage must feel, will arise
from the manner in which his body is affected,
by the heat, or cold, or moiftlre, of the climate
under which he lives; and his first care will be
to provide tome covering for his own defence.
In the warmer and more mild climates of
America, none of the rude tribes were clothed.
To most of them Nature had not even suggested
any idea of impropriety in being altogether un-
covered k. As under a mild climate there was
little need of any defence from the injuries of the
air, and their extreme indolence shunned every
species of labour to which it was not urged by
absolute necefitv, all the inhabitants of the idles,
and a considerable part of the people on the con-
tinent, remained in this state of naked simplicity.
Others were satisfied with some flight covering,
such as decency required. But though naked,
they were not unadorned. Thet dressed their
hair in many different forms. They fastened
bits of gold, or shells, or shining stones, in
their
t heira heir nof, and cheeks. They
lained their skins with a great variety of figures;
and they spent much time, and submitted to
great pain, in ornamenting their persons in this
fantal!ic manner. Vanity, however, which finds
endless occupation for ingenuity and invention,
in nations where dress has become a complex
and intricate art, is circumscribed within so nar-
row bounds, and confined to so few articles
among naked savages, that they are not satisfied
with those simple decorations, and have a won-

kLery Navlgat. ap. de Bry, iii. p. 164. Life of Colum-
bus, c. 4z Venegas Hist. of Californ. p. 70.

Lry ?p. de Bry, iii. 163. Le:r. Ed;fiaLrei 20 223.

d r f.l

dcrful propensity to alter the natural form of
their bodics, in order to render it (as they ima-
gi:le) more perfect and beautiful. This practice
was universal among the rudest of the American
tribes. Their operations for that purpose begin
a; soon as an infant is born. By compressing the
bones of the skull, while fiill soft and flexible,
some flatten the crown of their heads; some
squeeze them into the shape of a cone; others
mould them as much as possible into a square
figure m; and they often endanger the lives of
their posterity by their violent and absurd efforts
tJ derange the plan of Nature, or to improve
upon her designs. But in all their attempts
either to adorn or to new-model their persons,
it seems to have been less the obje& of the
Americans to please, or to appear beautiful, than
to give an air of dignity and terror to their as-
pet. Their attention to dress had more refer-
ence to war than to gallantry. The difference
in rank and estimation between the two sexes
vw-s so great, as seems to have extinguiffed, in
fume measure, their solicitude to appear mutually
amiable. The man deemed it beneath him to
adr n his person, for the fake of one on whom
he v-as accustomed to look down as a slave. It
x;a: when the warrior had in view to enter the
courcil of his nation, or to take the field against
i:, enrmii-, that he assumcd his choicest orna-
rr.::; , and decked his person with the nicest

' Oviedo, Hit. lib. iii. c. 5. Ulloa, i. 3g9. Voyage dc

I.:., ii 7,. Chaxievoi, iii. 323. Gunilia, i. 197,&c.
A. - :.a, Rhet. de la Riv. ds Amaz. ii. 3. Larvwon's
\.; age :o Caralina, p. 33.

care,

care ". The decorations of the women were few
and simple; whatever was precious or fplcndid
was reserved for the men. In several tribes the
women were obliged to spend a considerable part
of their time every day in adorning and painting
their husbands, and could bestow little attention
upon ornamenting thcmfelves. Among a race
of men so haughty as to despise, or so cold as
to neglct them, the women naturally became
careless and slovenly, and the love of finery and
ihew, which had been deemed their favourite
paflion, was confined chiefly to the other sex .
To deck his person was the diftinEtion of a war-
rior, as well as one of his most serious occupa.
tions P. In one part of their dress, which, at
firfl fight, appears the moil singular and capri.
cious, the Americans have discovered confider.
able sagacity in providing against the chief incon.
veniencies of their climate, which is often sultry
and moist to excess. All the different tribes,
which remain unclothed, are accustomed to
anoint and rub their bodies with the grease of
animals, with viscous gums, and with oils of
different kinds. By this they check that profuse
perspiration, which, in the torrid zone, waftcs
the vigour of the frame, and abridges the period
of human life. By this too, they provide a de-
fence against the extreme moisture during tli

n Waler's Voyage, p. 14z. Lery ap. de Bry, iii. 167.
Charlev. Hilt. N. Fran. iii. 216. 222.

o Charecv. Hist de la Nouv. France, iii. 27S. 327. La-

fitau, ii. 53. Kalm's Voyage, iii. 273. Lery ap. de Brj,
iii. 169, 170 , Parch. Pilgr. iv. 12S7. Ribas, Hifi. de iji
Triumph. &ec. 472. Sec NOTE LXXViI.

rainy

rainy fcafon q. They likewise, at certain seasons,
temper paint of different colours with those
unctuous substances, and bedaub themselves plen-
tifully with that composition. Sheathed with
this impenetrable varnilh, their lkins are not only
protected from the penetrating heat of the fun,
Lut, as all the innumerable tribes of insets have
:: a .ipathy to the smell or taste of that mixture,
;,i-v are deliveecd from their teazing persecution,
hliclh aindit foreits and marihes, especially in
tlie warmer regions, would have been altogether
iitoltrable in a state of perfec nakednefsr.

.'le next object to dress that will engage the

a;tCe:;lon of a favagc, is to prepare some habita-
t ,; \.!clic may afford him shelter by day, and
a i-lct at ni:git. Whatever is conncted with
1i, ideas of personal dignity, whatever bears any
,fcretrict to his military charater, the savage
uarrior deems an object of importance. What-
'. cr rL!dtC only to peaceable and inactive life, lie
ki.,.s with indifference. Hence, though finically
a;ttc.tive to dress, he is little solicitous about the
ckl-.aice or disposition of his habitation. Savage
I.atioi., far from that Rate of improvement, in
VilKich thl mode of living is conlidered as a mark
of distinction, and unacquainted with those
w;.nt, which require a variety of accommodation,
rculiate the conitruction of their houfcs ac-
ci,,ding to their limited ideas of necessity. Some
us tiht American tribes were so extremely rude,
and had advanced so little beyond the primeval
limnplicity of Nature, that they had no houses at
all. During the day, they take fhcltcr fromn

See NOTE, LXXVIII. ' Labat, ii. 73. Gunilla,
i. ji. 2z2. Bancroft, Nat. Hilt. ol Guiana, 81. 2S0.

I tile

the scorching rays of the fun under thick trees
at night they form a shed with their branche
and leaves s. In the rainy season they retin
into coves, formed by the hand of Natume, oi
hollowed out by their own industry '. Others,
w.ho have no fixed abode, and roam through
the forest in quetl of game, sojourn in temporary
huts, which they eleci with little labour, ar.d
abandon without any concern. The inhabitants
of those vast plains, which are deluged by the
overflowing of rivers during the heavy rains that
fall periodically between the tr-opic., raise houses
upon piles failcnrd in the ground, or place
them among the boughs of trees, and are thus
safe amidst that wide-extended inundation which
surrounds them ". Such were the fili essays
oftherudeft Americans towards providing them.
selves with habitations. But ecn among tribes
which arc more improved, and whose residence
is become al:ogether fixed, the dtrudture of their
houses is extremely mean and simple. They are
wretched huts, sometimes of an oblong and
fometires of a circular form, intended merely
for shelter, with no view to elegance, and little
attention to conveniency. The doors are so low,
that it is necessary to bend or to creep on the
hands and feet in order to enter them. Thev
are without windows, and have a large hole in
the middie of the roof, to convey out the smoke.

' See NOTE LXXIX. t Lettres Edif. v. 2-3.

Venegar, Hl. ol Calif ;r. i. 76. Loiano, Defcr;p. del Grin
Chaco, p. 5. Let:res Edif. ii. i76. Gumiila, i. 333.
Bar,crift N*'. Hi!t of Guiana, 277. u Gumi.:a, i.
225. HerICra, dCC. i. liDi ix. C. 6. Oviedo Sorzmnr,
P. 53, C.

To

To follow travellers in other minute circum-
fiances of their description, is not only beneath
the dignity of history, but would be foreign to
the object of my researches. One circumstance
merits attention, as it is singular, and illustrates
the character of the people. Some of their
houfis are so large as to contain accommodation
for fourfocre or a hundred persons. These are
built for the reception of different families,
which dwell together under the fame roofx,
and often around a common fire, without fepa-
rate apartments, or any kind of screen or partition
Letw en the spaces which they respectively oc-
cupy. As soon as men have acquired diftin&
ideas of property; or when they are so much
attached to their females, as to watch them
X ith care and jealousy ; families of course divide
and fettle in separate house , where they can fe-
cure and guard whatever they wish to preserve.
This singular mode of habitation among several
people of America may therefore be confidered
noet only as the effcat of their imperfcrt notions
croncerning property, but as a proof of inatten-
tian and indificrence towards their women. If
;:cy had not been accustomed to perfec equality,
fLch an arrangement could not have taken place.
If their sensibility had been apt to have taken
alarm, they would not have trusted the virtue
cf their women amidst the temptations and op-
porturaities of such a promiscuous intercourse.
.; the fame time, the perpetual concord which
r:;:;.s in habitations where so many families are
:,'.vx.cd together, is surprising, and affords a
rI.ki:d r evidence that they muff be people of

See NOTrE LXXX.
VOL. ii. c tither

either a very gentle, or of a very phlegmatic
temper, who, in such a situation, are unac.
quainted with animosity, brawling, and dif.
cord r.

After making some provision for his dress

and habitation, a savage will perceive the necef-
fity of preparing proper arms with which to assault
or repel an enemy. This, accordingly, has early
cxercifed the ingenuity and invention of all rude
nations. The fiti offensive weapons were doubt.
kss such as chance presented, and the first efforts
of art to improve upon these, were extremely
awkward and fimplc. Clubs made of some
heavy wood, stakes hardened in the fire, lances
whole heads were armed with flint or the bones
of omne animal, arc weapons known to the
rudelt nations. All these, however, were oi
life only in close encounter. But men wished
to annov their enemies while at a distance, and
the bow and arrow is the most early invention
for this purpose. This weapon is in the hand;
of people, whose advances in improvement are
extremely inconliderable, and is familiar to the
inhabitants of every quarter of the globe. It is
remarkable, however, that some tribes in Ame.
rica were so destitute of art and ingenuity, thz:
thicv had not attained to the discovery of th:i
simple invention , and seem to have been unac-
quainted with the use of any missive weapou.
The fling, though in its conltru.tion not mor:

7 Journ. de Grillet & Bechamel dans la Goyane, p. 6;.

Lafiau i Mcrurs, ii 4. Torqajem. Monarq. i. 247. Journ.,
Hi . de JuJtal, 217. Ler), Hilt. Brdlil, ap. de Bry, ;
%;^. Lozano, Defcr. del Gran Chaco, 67.

- P.car[bt, Conq. c-l Ncvu Ret)n, ix. i2.

Cm.^'

complex than the bow, and among many nations
of equal antiquity, was little known to the
people of North America3, or the islands, but
appears to have been used by a few tribes in the
southern continent b. The people, in tome pro-
vinces of Chili, and those of Patagonia, towards
the southern extremity of America, use a weapon
peculiar to themselves. They fasten flones,
about the size of a sift, to each end of a leather
thong, of eight feet in length, and swinging
thcfe round their heads, throw them with such
dexterity, that they seldom miss the object at
which they aim C.

Among people who had hardly any occupation

but war or hunting, the chief exertions of their
invention d, as well as industry, were naturally
directed towards these objets. With refpe&
to ever- thing else, their wants and desires were
i linited, that their invention was not upon the
stretch. As their food and habitations are per-
fcctly timple, their domeItic utenfis are few and
rude. Some of the southern tribes had discover-
ed the art of forming veflels of earthen ware,
and baking them in the fun, so as they could en-
dure the fire. In North America, they hol-
lowed a piece of hard wood into the form of a
kettle, and filling it with water, brought it to
boil, by putting red-hot stones into it '. These
vrTels they used in preparing part of their pro-
vilions; and this may be confidered as a ftep to-

' Nauf. de Alv. Nun Cabeca de vaca, c. x, p. 12.
b Piedrah. p. 16. See NOTE LXXXI, c Ovalle's

Relation of Chili. Church. Collea. iii. Sz. Falkner s
Dcfcript. of Patagon. p 130. d See NOTE LXXX11.

Chlrlcv. Hilt. N. Fr. iii. 332.

G 2 wards

wards refinement and luxury, for men in their
rudell fate were not acquainted with any method
of drefling their victuals, but by roasting them
on the fire; and among several tribes in Ame.
rica, this is the only species of cookery yet
known f. But the mailer-piece of art, among
the savages of America, is the construction of
their canoes. An Efkimaux, shut up in his
boat of whalebone, covered with the tkins of
feals, can brave that flormy ocean, on which
the barrenness of his country compels him to
depend for the chief part of his subsistences.
The people of Canada venture upon their riven
and lakes, in boats made of the bark of trees, and
so light that two men can carry them, wherevtr
lhallows or cataracts obstruct the navigation .
In these frail vefels they undertake and accom-
plifh long voyages'. The inhabitants of the
isles and of the southern continent form their
canoes by hollowing the trunk of a large tree,
with infinite labour, and though in appearance
they are extremely awkwar.: and unwieldy, they
paddle and steer them with such dexterity,
that Europeans, well acquainted with all the
improvements in the science of navigation, have
been allonifhed at the rapidity of their motion,
and the quickness of their evolutions. Their
piroguex, or war-boats, are so large as to carry
forty or fifty men; their canoes employed in
filhing and in short voyages are less capaciousk.
The form, as well as materials of all these va.
r;ous kinds of vessels, is well adapted to the

t Set NSoT LXXXIII. e Ellis, Voy. 133.
h See NOTr LXXXIV. i Lafitau, Mcaurs, &.
ii. 213. k Labat, Voyages, ii, 91, -ce. 131.

£ervici

service for which they are destined; and the
more minutely they are examined, the me-
chanifm of tleir ftructurc, as well as neatness
of their fabric, will appear the more surprising.

But, in every attempt towards industry among

the Americans, one flriking quality in their cha-
raAer is conspicuous. They apply to work with-
out ardour, carry it on with little acivity, and,
like children, are calily diverted from it. Even
in operations which seem the most interesting,
and where the most powerful motives urge them
to vigorous exertions, they labour with a languid
listlessness. Their work advances under their
hand with such slowness, that an eye-witness
compares it to the imperceptible progress of
vegetation i. They will spend so many years in
forming a canoe, that it often begins to rot with
age before they finish it. They will susser one
part of a roof to decay and perish, before they
complete the other '. The slightest manual
operation consumes an amazing length of time,
and what in poiiflcd nations would hardly be an
effort of induftrv, is among savages an arduous
undertaking. This slowness of the Americans
in executing works of every kind may be im-
puted to various causes. Among savages, who
do not depend for subsistence upon the efforts
of regular industry, time is of so little import-
ance, that they set no value upon it; and pro-
'ided they can finish a design, they never regard
how long they are employed about it. The
tools which they employ are so awkward and

Gumil'a, ii. 297.
m Boidc, Relda. dc Caraibes, p. 22.

c 3 defecvtive,

defetive, that every work in which they engage
must neceffanly be tedious. The hand of the
molt indultrious and skilful artist, were it fur.
nifhed with no better instrument than a stone
hatchet, a (hell, or the bone of some animal,
would find it difficult to perfe&t the molt simple
work. It is bv length of labour, that he must
endeavour to supply his defe&t of power. But
above all, the cold phlegmatic temper peculiar
to theAmericans renders their operations languid.
It is almost impossible to rouse them from that
h .)itual indolence in which they are funk; and,
unless when engaged in war or hunting, they
fcem incapable of exerting any vigorous effort.
T!:ci- ardour of application is not so great as to
cail forth that inventive spirit which suggests ex-
pedients for facilitating and abridging labour.
They will return to a task day after day, but all
their methods of executing it are tedious and
operose ". Even since the Europeans have
commui:Icatcd to them the knowledge of their
in!iruments, and taught them to imitate their
arts, the peculiar genius of the Americans is
conspicuous in every attempt they make. They
may be patient and assiduous in labour, they can
copy with a servile and minute accuracy, but
difover littic invention, and no talents for dif-
pa.ch. In spite of initruci;on and exm.rple, the
ip:ri: of the race predominates; their motion5
are naturally tardy, and it is in vain to iirze
t-Fr.m o quicken their pace. Among the Spai:i-
a-is in America, the work of an Indian is a
p.irac- by which they describe any thing, in the

" S No-T LXXXV.

execution

execution of which an immense time has been
employed, and much labour wafted °.

VII. No circumstance refpe&ing rude nations

has been the object of greater curiosity than
their religious tenets and rites; and none, per-
haps, has been so imperfectly understood, or
reprefcnted with so little fidelity. Priests and
mitionaries are the pcrfons who have had the
bcil opportunities of carrying on this inquiry,
among the most uncivilized of the American
tribes. Their minds, engrossed by the doEtrines
of their own religion, and habituated to its in-
ftitutions, are apt to discover something which
resembles those objects of their veneration, in
the opinions and rites of every people. What-
ever they contemplate, they view through one
medium, and draw and accommodate it to their
own system. They study to reconcile the infli-
tutions, which fall under their observation, to
their own creed, not to explain them according
to the rude notions of the people themselves.
They ascribe to them ideas which they are in-
capable of forming, and suppose them to be
acquain:ted with principles and sacs, which it is
impossible that they should know. Hence some
missionarics have Leen induced to believe, that
even anong the mc.[ barbarous nations in Ane-
rica, they had d;ico:ered traces, no less ditinct
than amazing, of their acquaintance with the
fublirre myileries and pecuLar institutions of
Chriftianitv. From their own interpretation of
certain e.preffions and ceremonics, they have
.ccluded that these people had some know-
ledge of the doctrine of the Trinity, of the in-

Vojiges de I'loa, i, 335. Le;tr. Edif, &c. 1 5. 348.

carnation

carnation of the Son of God, of his expiator)
sacrifice, of the virtue of the cross, and of th(
effic:.cy of the sacraments p. In such unintel
ligent and credulous guides, we can placi
little confidence.

But, even when we make our choice of con

ductors, with the greatest care, we must nol
follow them with implicit faith. An inquiry intc
the religious notions of rude nations is involvec
in peculiar intricacies, and we muit often pauft
in order to fcparate the facts which our informer
relate, from the reasonings with which they an
accompanied, or the theories which they builC
upon them. Several pious writers, more atten.
tive to the importance of the fubjeEt than tc
the condition of the people whose sentiments
they were endeavouring to discover, have be.
flowed much unprofitable labour in researches of
this nature %.

There are two fundamental doctrines, upon

which the whole fvitem of religion, as far a. it
can be discovered by the light of nature, is ela-
bliihed. The one rtfpcts the being of a God,
the other the immortality of the foul. To dif.
cover the ideas of the uncultivated nations under
our review with regard to those important
points, is not only an objec of curiosity, but
may afford instruction. To these two articles I
fhal confine my researches, leaving subordinate
opinions, and the detail of local superstitions, to
more minute inquirers. Whoever has had any
opportunity of examining into the religious

P Venegas, i. S9. 92. Torquenmada, ii. 445. Garcia,

Crigen. . H. Herrera, dec. 4. li1. ix. c. ;. dec. 5. lib. i,.
C. 7, ' See NoTr LXXXVI.

opinioni

opinions of persons in the inferior ranks of life,
even in the most enlightened and civilized na-
tions, will find that their fvitem of belief is de.
rived from inftruEtion, not difcovrred by inquiry.
That numerous part of the human species, whose
lot is labour, whose principal and almost sole
occupation is to secure fubfiftlece, views the
arrangement and operations of Nature with little
reflection, and has neither leisure nor capacity
for entering into that path of refined and in-
tricate speculation which conducts to the know-
ledge of the principles es natural religion. In
the early and most rude periods of savage life,
such disquisitions are altogether unknown.
When the intelletual powers are just beginning
to unfold, and their ilrit feeble exertions are
directed towards a few objesct of primary necef-
fitv and use; wlien the faculties of the mind
are so limited, as not to have formed abftra& or
general ideas; when language is so barren, as to
be destitute of names to dift;nguifh any thing
that is not perceived by forme of the senses; it
is prepoftcrous to e:,:pect that man should be ca-
pable of tracing with accuracy the relation be-
tween cause ar:d effedt; or to suppose that he
should rife from the contemplation of the one
to the knowledge of the other, and form just
conceptions of a Deity, as the Creator and Go,
'crnor of the universe. The idea of creation is
so familiar wherever the mind is enlarged by
science, and illuminated w ith revelation, that
we seldom reflect how profound and abitrufe this
idea is, or confider what progress man must have
made in observation and rcfearch, before he
could arrive at any knov.lcdge of this elementary

principle

principle in religion. Accordingly, fevera
tribes have been difzovercd in America, whicr
have no idea whatever of a Supreme Being, anm
no rites of religioui w.orship. Inattentive to tha
magniiicent fect3cle of beauty and order pre
sented to their viewi, unaccuitomed to refleEl
tither upon wha: they themfclves are, or tr
inquire w}uo is the author of their exiRence
men, in their savage Ilate, pass their days like
the animals round them, without knowledge ol
veneration of any fupcrior power. Some runde
tribes have not in their lanuage any name for
the Deity, nor have the molL accurate obferven
been able to discover any practice or institution
which seemed to imply that they recognised his
authoritn, or were solicitous to obtain his fa.
vourr. It is however only among men in the
moRs uncultivated state of nature, and wh ile
their intellectual faculties are so feeble and
limited as hardly to elevate them above the ir.
rational creation, that we discover this total in-
sensibility to the imprellions of any invisible
po ver.

But the human mind, formed for religion, soon

opens to the receptiuiu of ideas, which are def-
tined, w*hen corrcted and refined, to be the

Biet, i59. Lery ap. de Pry, iii. 221. Nieuhoff.

Church. Co'. ii. ei:.

3. :r. Edif. z. 177. Id. 12, 13.

Venega;, i. 8.. Lizino, Wil;ript. del Gran Chaco, 59.
Fernand. Mitfin. de Ca:qjit. 59. Gum:lla, ii. z56.
Rochefc.r, Hil. de. 4Brl'c¢, p. 46'. Margrave, Hill. in
ApFe-.J. ce Cn;lienfibus, z36. Uiloa N:ic. Americ. 335,
&c. Brrrcre z,, 219. Harcourt, Voy. to Guiana.
i'u-ch. Pi!gr. iv p. 1273. Accunt of Brasil, by a Portu-
gucle. Ibid p. z29. Jone's Journal, . 59. Sc¢ NoTS
LXXXV!.

great

great source of consolation amidst the calamities
of life. Among some of the American tribes,
itill in the infancy of improvement, we discern
apprchenfions of some invisible and powerful
beings. These apprehensions are originally in-
Liifinet and perplexed, and seem to be suggested
rather by the dread of impending evils, than to
flow frcm gratitude for bleiinigs rccived.
Whili Nature holds on her courfc with uniforrm
a!::d ui:dlftnrbed regularity, r.en enj-oy the be.
nlft u rcfulting from it, without inquiring con-
crrning its cause. But every deviation from this
rcgular course rouses and altonifhes them. \\hen
tliy bchtold e;tnts to which thty are not accuf.
tir.ced, they fearcl for the reasons of them with
eager curiotity. Their underilanding is unable
to penc-'at into tlkfe ; but ini.gination, a mnore
so -aard aid ardent faculty of tih mind, decides
v itiit tlkeitation. It ascribes the extraordinary
occun-enccs in nature to the influtnce of invisible
bing-, and fuppofts that tle thunder, the huiri-
cane, and tL. earthquake, are efieits of their
i.trpulitioni. Some such confured notion of
spiritual or invilible povwer, superintending over
t'ofe natu:-al calamites which frequently desolate
the earth, aid terrify its inhabitants, may be
traced among many rude nations s. But betides
thi-, tlhe dialters and dangers of savage life are
f, many, and men often tind themselves in situ-
a:uor: lu formidable, that tlhe mind, sensible of
it! own xveakncfs, has no resource but in the

, iiaiice and protection of wisdom and power

f ,criur to what is human. Dejected with ca-
. :.ities shliich oppress him, and exposed to

Si te Nor LXXXVIII.

dangers

dangers which he cannot repel, the savage no
longer relies upon himself; he feels his own
impotence, and fees no prospect of being extri.
cated, but by the interposition of some unfecn
arm. Hence, in all unenlightened nations,
the first rites or practices which bear any re-
semblance to acts of religion, have it for their
objec to avert evils which men susser or dread.
The Mlanils or O0kl, of the North Americans
were amulets or charms, which they imagined
to be of such virtue, as to preserve the persons
who reposed consid nce in them from every
difallroi:s event, or they were confidered as tute.
lary spir:t;, whose aid they might implore in
c.rcu.Titances of di refs t. The Cemir of the
illanders were reputed by them to be the au-
thors of every calamity that affiicts the human
race; they were reprefcnted under the moA
f:in'rtfil form;, and rJigious homage was paid
to tihem wth no other view than to appease
these furious dei:ies u. Even among those
trbes whose religious fvflem was more enlarged,
and who had formed some conception of bene-
volent beings, which dcl;,hted in conferring be-
nefits, as well as of mal!cious powers prone to
inflict evil ; ftuperflition f.il! appears as the off-
spring of fear, and all its efforts were employed
to avert calamities. They were persuaded that
their good deities, pr,ompted by the beneficer.ce
of their nature, would hes ow ever- blessing in
their power, without solicitation or acknow-
ledgment; and their only anxiety was to sooth

' Char.ev. N. Fr. ;;i. 34;. &c. Creuxii, Hifl. Cana4.

p Sg, &c. O()v-:o il., iii. c I.p. 1i. P.
Martjr, d'ia- p. io:, &c.

and

;,,d deprecate the wrath of the powers whom
thev regarded as the enemies of mankind x.

Such were the imperfec conceptions of the

greater part of the Americans with refped to the
ilte-pofitio;s us invisible agents, and such, al-
molt universally, was the mean and iliberal
object of their fupertlitions. Were wve to trace
back the ideas of other nations to that rude
itate in which history firpt presents them to our
-vicw, we should discover a furpriling resemblance
in their tenets and practices; and should be
con'inced, that, in similar circumitances, the
faculties of the human mind hold nearly the
fame codrfe in their progress, and anrive at
a!moft the fame conclusions. The impressions of
fear ar:- conspicuous in all the fyitems of super-
fil;n formed in this fituaticn. The moil ex-
>c:d notions of men rife no higher than to a
tprple.cd apprehension of certain beings, whose
power, though supernatural, is limited as well
as partial.

But, among other tribes, which have been

longer unitcd, or have made greater progress in
[irprovement, we difern fume feeble pointing
itowards more just and adequate conceptions of
Ith- power that presides in nature. They seem
to perceive that there must be some universal
Cauli to whom all things are indebted for their
b;rg. If we may judge by some of their ex-
prclions, they appear to acknowledge a divine
puworcr to be the maker of the world, and the
d:;pofer of all events. They denominate him the

' Ter:re, ii. 36;. Borde, p. 1.. State of Virginia, by

a N.i',e, book iii. p. 31, 33. Dumoa', i. 15-5. Bancrcft
:,' .1 ft. of Guiana; 3c9.

OL. i. H Great

Great Spirit . But these ideas are faint ar
confused, and when they attempt to explai
them, it is manifest, that among them the wor
spirit has a meaning very different from that i
which we employ it, and that they have n
conception of any deity but what is corporea
They believe their gods to be of the huma
form, though of a nature more excellent tha
man, and retail such wild incoherent fables cor
cerning their functions and operations, as ar
altogether u:!'iurthy of a place in hilton.
1Evn a:nong these tribes, there is no eflablilhbc
form of public worihip ; there are no tempi.
erected in honour of their deities; and no IT:
in;:ilrs peculiarly cunfecrated to their fcrvice
They have the knowlcdge, however, of ftver
fpcrltitious ceremonies and practices handc
d, wn to them by tradition, and to these th.
have recourse with a childish credulity, whc
routed by any emergence from their usual ii
lcnlibility, and excited to acknowledge t;
power, and to implore the protetion of si
perior beings r.

The tribe of the Natchcz and the people 0

Bogota had advanced beyond the other uncu
tivated nations of America in their ideas of r
ligion, as well as in their political institutions
and it is no less difficult to explain the cause 0
this diftintion than of that which we have a
ready confidered. The Sun was the chief o
ject of religious worllip among the Natche
In their temples, which were conftruEted wi

Chariev. N. Fr. iii. 343. Sagard, Voy. du Pays t

Hurons, zz6. r Chartle, N. Fr, iii. 345. Coldc
1. 7.

fol

[ome magnificence, and decorated with various
ornaments, according to their mode of archi-
tenure, they preserved a perpetual fire, as the
urcft emblem of their divinity. Ministers were
appointed to watch and feed this sacred flame.
The firit function of the great chief of the na-
tion, every morning, was an ac of obeisance to
the Sun; and fcftivals returned at stated seasons,
awhich were celebrated by the whole community
with folernn but unbloody ritesz. This is the
most refined species of superstition known in Ame-
rica, and, perhaps, one ofthe-moft natural as well
as most seducing. The Sun is the apparent source
of the joy, fertility, and life diffused through
nature; and while the human mind, in its early
eiTavs towards inquiry, contemplates and ad-
mires his universal and animating energy, its ad-
miration is apt to flop short at what is visible,
without reaching to the unseen cause ; and pays
that adoration to the most glorious and bene-
ficial work of God, which is due only to him who
formed it. As fire is the purest and molt active
cf the elements, and in some of its qualities and
efficts rcfembles the Sun, it was, not improperly,
chosen to be the emblem of his powerful opera.
tion. The ar.cient Persians, a people far fupe-
ir, in every refpet, to that rude tribe whose
rites I am describing, founded their religious
fvflem on similar principles, and established a
form of public worship, less gross and excep-
tiorable than that of any people destitute ot
guidance from revelation. This surprising co-
incidence in sentiment between two nations, in

Dun.,nr, i. i58, &c. Chdrlev. N. Fr. iii. 417, &c.
i4j. Lnntu, i. 167.

H 2 such

such different states of improvement, is one v
the many fngular and unaccountable circlr.
flances which occur in the Liflory of hunua
affairs.

Among the people of Bogota, the Sun 2z:

Moon were, likewvife, the chief objects of v,.
neraticn. Their fytiem of religion was r.:
regular and complete, though lcfs pure, tha
that of the Natchez. They had temples, altai,
priests, sacrifices, and that long train of cerc.
monies, which fuperpfition introduces whereat:
Ihe has fully efiablifhd her dominion over rte
minds of men. But the rites of their worfip
v.ere cruel and bloody. They offered lhumr.a
victims to their deities, and many of their prea.
tices nearly refemblkd the barbarous inflitutuicc
of the IMexicans, the genius of which we ia1
have an opportunity of confidering more atte,
lively in its proper place a.

With rtfpcc to the other great docrir.e ,:

religion, concerning the immortality of the foul,
the sentiments of the Americans were nmor:
united: tie human mind, even when least ir..
proved and invigorated by culture, shrinks frcr
the thoughts of annihilation, and looks furwa.
Lit;h hope and expe&ation to a fate of fu:ui:
cxittence. This sentiment, resulting from a c,
cret consciousness of its own dignity, from 2a
intin&tive longing after immortality, is univer!i,
and may be deemed natural. Upon this, ar:
founded the most exalted hopes of man in .i
highell itate of improvement; nor has Natu.:
wltiihcld from Liu this soothing consolation, i:

Pitdrahirt, Conq. del N. Reyno, p. 17. Heirei,
d:c. 6. lib. v. c. 6.

tli

the most early and rude period of his progress
We can trace this opinion from one extremity
of America to the other: in some regions more
faint and obscure, in others more perfetly de-
veloped, hut no where unknown. The most
uncivilized of its savage tribes do not apprehend
death as the extinction of being. All entertain
hopes of a future and more happy fate, where
thl- shall be for ever exempt from the calamities
which imbitter human life in its present con-
dition. This future state they conceive to be
3 delightful country, blessed with perpetual
fprin", 'hofc forests abound with game, whose
r;'.ers i:-.arm with fish, where famine is never
felt, and uninterrupted plenty shall be enjoyed
w:-ihout labour or toil. But as men, in forming
t!.ei- firt imperfea ideas concerning the invisible
Ev -d, suppose that there they flall continue to
fcl' t'.e fame desires, and to be engaged in the
fane occupations, as in the present world; they
naturally afcnrbe eminence and diftintion, in
that Rate, to the fame qualities and talents
which ate here the objec of their esteem. The
Americans, accordingly, allotted the highest
place, in their country of spirits, to the skilful
hunter, to the adventurous and successful war-
rior, and to such as had tortured the greatest
number of captives and devoured their flefhb.
Thcfe notions were so prevalent, that they gave
rife to an universal custom, which is, at once,
the strongest evidence that the Americans be-
lieve in a future Rate, and the best illustration of
what they expet there. As they imagine, that

Lry ap. de Bry, iii. 222. Charlev. N. Fr. iii 351.
&c. D hi Potherie, ii, 45, &c. iii. 5.

H 3 d;parted

departed spirits begin their career anew in t.
world whither they are gone, that their friend
may not enter upon it defenceless and unpr.
vided, they bury together with the bodies of the
dead their bow, their arrows, and other Ve'.
pons used in hunting or war; they deposit i;
their tombs the lkins or fluffs of which thy
make garments, Indian corn, manioc, venifoc,
domestic utensils, and whatever is reckoned
among ;he necessaries in their simple mode oi
life c. In some provinces, upon the decease of 2
cazique or chief, a certain number of his wivie
of his favourites, and of his slaves, were put to
death, and interred together with him, that he
might appear with the fame dignity in his future
flation, and be waited upon by the fame attend.
ants d. This persuasion is so deep rooted, that
many of the deceased person's retainers ofif
themfclves as voluntary victims, and court the
privilege 0f accompanying their departed malter,
as an high dilicirion. It has been found diffi-
cult, on forre occasions, to set bounds to this
enthusiasm of affectionate duty, and to reduce
the train of a favourite leader to such a number
as the tribe could afford to spare e.

Among the Americans, as well as other un.
civilized nations, many of the rites and obfenr,

c Chronkca de Cieca de Leon, c. 28. Sagard, 288.

Creux. Hifl. Canad. p. 91. Rochefort Hist. des Antille:,
568. Biet, 39r. Dc ia Potherie, ii. z4- iii. 8. Blanco,
Coavrf. de Piritu, p. 35. d Dumont, Louia'-,t,
L 20c, &c. Oviedo, lib. v. c. . Gomara, Hist. Ge.
c. 2. P. Mart. decad. 304. Charlev. N. Fr. iii. 421.
Herrera, d-c. . lib. iii. c. . P. Melchior Hernartez,
Memor. de Chiriqui. Coil. Orig. Papeis, i. Chron. c
Cieca de Lcon, c. 33. * See NOTr LXXXIX.

auca

acces which bear some resemblance to ats of
religion, have no connefion with devotion, but
procecd from a fond desire of prying into fu-
turity. The human mind is most apt to feel,
and to discover this vain curiosity, when its
own powers are most feeble and uninformed.
Ailonilhed with occurrences, of which it is
unable to comprehend the cause, it naturally
fancies that there is Something mysterious and
wonderful in their origin. Alarmed at events
of which it cannot difeern the issue or the con-
fcquences, it has recourse to other means of dcf-
covering them, than the exercise of its own fa-
gacity. Wherever fiperitlition is so established
as to form a regular system, this desire of pene-
trating into the secrets of futurity is connected
with it. Divination becomes a religious at.
Pries, as the ministers of Heaven, pretend to
deliver its oracles to men. They are the only
soothsayers, augurs, and magicians, who profess
the sacred and important art of disclosing what
is hid from other eyes.

But, among rude nations, who pay no venera-

tion to any superintending power, and who have
no ellablifhed rites or ministers of religion, their
curiosity to discover what is future and unknown
is cherished by a different principle, and derives
strength from another alliance. As the diseases
of men, in the savage state, are (as has been
already observed) like those of the animal cre-
ation, few but extremely violent, their impatience
under what they susser, and solicitude for the
recovery of health, soon inspired them with ex-
traord;nary reverence for such as pretended to
understand the nature of their maladies, and to

be

he possessed of knowledge sufficient to prefern
or deliver them from their sudden and fte+
effecs. These ignorant pretenders, however
were such utter strangers to the ftruture 1l
the human frame, as to be equally unacquainte
with the causes of its disorders, and the mannt
in which they will terminate. Superflition
mingled frequently with some portion of craft
supplied what they wanted in science. The
imputed the origin of diseases to fupernaturz
influence, and prescribcd or performed a vanitt
of rrvftcrous rites, which thee gave out to b
of such efficacy as to remove the most dangeror
and inveteiate maladies. The credulity and lov
of the marvellous, natural to uninformed mtn
favoured the deception, and prepared them t
be the dupes of those impoflors. Among savage!
their first phvficians are a kind of conjurers c
wiards, .'hj boast that they know what is pall
and can foretell what is to come. Incantations
forcer-, and rrummeries of diverse kinds, n.
left. trange than frivolous, are the means whicl
thev employ to expel the imaginary causes c
miali;nitv f; and relying upon the efficacy c
tlhef, thev predi& wi:th confidence what will b
the fate of their deluded patients. Thus, super
{tition, in its earliest form, flowed from th
solicitude of man to be delivered from prefen
distress. not from his dread of evils awaitinl
him in a future life, and was originally ingrafte
on medicine, not on religion. One of the firfl
and most intelligent historians of America, wa
struck with this alliance between the art of di

f P. Melch. Hcmiadez, Mcmorija de Chiriqui. C-!ic3
Orig. Pa.,. i.

vnat.:

iation and that of physic, among the people
f Hifpaniolag. But this mas not peculiar to
em. The Alexis, the Piayas, the Autmoins, or
liatever was the distinguishing name of their
vi:ers and charmers in other parts of America,
re all the physicians of their refpeEtive tribes,
the fame manner as the Buhitos of Hispaniola.
stheir function led them to apply to the hu-
n mind when enfeebled by sickness, and as
hey found it, in that season of dejection, prone
o be alarmed with imaginary fears, or amused
|ith vain hopes, they cafily induced it to rely
vith implicit confidence on the virtue of their
pells, and the certainty of their predictions h.

Whenever men acknowledge the reality of
supernatural power and discernment in one in-

i

face, they have a propensity to admit it in
o:hcrs. The Americans did not long suppose
thi efficacy of conjuration to be confined to one
f| {:.t. They had recourse to it in every situ-
a:ion of danger or distress. When the events of
I -z- were peculiarly difatirous, when they met
v. --h unforeseen disappointments in hunting,
|rzie iniundations or drought threatened their
crops with deitrution, they called upon their
cur9,urers to begin their incantations, in order to
diicover the causes of those calamities, or to
Lrctcll what would be their issue i. Their con.

Oviedo, lib. v. c. i. h Herrera, dec. i. lib, iii.

c. . Of'arne, Co:l, ii. 86o. Dumont, i. 169, &c.
C.-leYv. N. Fr. iii. 361. 364, &c. Lawson, N. Carol.
::-. R ais, Triumph. p. 17. Biet, 3S6. De la Po-

I.:- 3. ,

i &. 3' C':a:lev. N. Fr. iii. 3. Du-

mr;.u i. 17 . Fernaid. Rela;. de los Chicuit. p. 40.
LCano, 4, MBargrave, z79.

fidence

fidence in this delusive art gradually increased
and manifested itself in all the occurrences a
life. When involved in any difficulty, or abocl
to enter upon any tranfadion of moment, even
individual regularly consulted the forcerer, and
depended upon his inftru&ions to extricate him
from the former, as well as to diret his con.
dut in the latter. Even among the rudest tribe
in America, superstition appears in this form,
and divination is an art in high eftetm. Long
before man had acquired such knowledge of a
deity as inspires reverence, and leads to adoration,
we observe him stretching out a presumptuous
hand to draw aside that veil with which Provi-
dence kindly conceals its purposes from human
knowledge; and we find him labouring, with
fruitless anxiety, to penetrate into the mysteries
of the divine adminiltration. To discern, and
to worihip a superintending power, is an evidence
of the enlargement and maturity of the human
underfianding; a vain desire of prying into
futurity, is the error of its infancy, and a proof
of its weakness.

From this weakness proceeded likewise the

faith of the Americans in dreams, their obfen-a.
tion of omens, their attention to the chirping
of birds, and the cries of anima!s, all which they
suppose to be indications of future events,
and if any one of these prognostics is deemed
unfavourabie, they instantly abandon the pursuit
of those mcafures on which tic.- are molt eagerly
bent '.

/ Charley N. Fr. ii. 26i .

26. 5 Stalius, 2p. de Brs,

i 2i . Cr.Cexj. Hil. CAnad. 84. Tccho, Hill of Parag
thrch. Coli. v. 3,. De la Potherie, iii. 6.

lrT TT "TN .,

VIII. But if we would form a complete idea
of the uncultivated nations of America, we must
not pass unobserved some singular customs,
which, though universal and characeriftic, could
not be reduced, with propriety, to any of the
articles into which I have divided my inquiry
concerning their manners.

Among savages, in every part of the globe,

the love of dancing is a favourite passion. As,
during a great part of their time, they languish
in a Itate of inactivity and indolence, without
any occupation to rouse or interest them, they
delight inivcrfally in a pastime which calls forth
the active powers of their nature into exercise.
The Spaniards, when they first visited America,
swere altonifhed at the fondness of the natives for
dancing, and beheld with wonder a people, cold
and unanimated in most of their other pursuits,
kindle into life, and exert themselves with ar-
dour, as often as this favourite amusement re-
curred. Among them, indeed, dancing ought
not to be denominated an amusement. It is a
serious and important occupation, which min-
gles in every occurrence of public or private
life. If any intercourse be necessary between
two American tribes, the ambassadors of the one
approach in a solemn dance, and present the
calumet or emblem of peace; the sachems of
the other receive it with the fame ceremony !.
If war is denounced against an enemy, it is by a
dance, expressive of the resentment which they
feel, and of the vengeance which they meditate m,

De la Potherie Hit. ii. 17, &c. Charley, N. Fr.

i. 211. 297. La Hontan. i. 1oo. 137. Hennepin, Decou.
jt6, &c. m Charlav. N. Fr. iii. 298. Lfitau, i 513.

If

If the wrath of their gods is-to be appeased, o
their beneficence to be celebrated; if they re
joice at the birth of a child, or mourn the dead
of a friend n, they have dances appropriated ts
each of there situations, and suited to the dif
ferent fentirrents with which they are then ani
mated. If a person is indisposed, a dance i
preferibed as the most effetual means of reftoin'
him to health ; and if himself cannot endure th
fatigue of such an exercise, the physician o
conjurer performs it in his name, as if th
virtue of his activity could be transferred to hi
patient o.

All their dances are imitations of some ac

tion; and though the music by which they ar
regulated is extremely simple and tiresome to th
ear by its dull monotony, some of their dance
appear wonderfully expressive and animated
The war dance is, perhaps, the most flriking
it is the representation of a complete Americai
campaign. The departure of the warriors fron
their village, their march into the enemy's coun
try, the caution with which they encamp, th,
address with which they station some of tcri
party in ambush, the manner of surprising ti,
enemy, the noise and ferocity of the combat, th,
Icalping of those who are flan, the seizing o
prisoners, the triumphant return of the con
querors, and the torture of the victims, are fuc
ceffively exhibited. The performers enter wilt
such enthusiastic ardour into their several parts
their gestures, their countenance, their voice, ar
so wild and fu well adapted to their varioui

Jooute!, 343. Corrara, Hifl, Cen. c 196. °

Denó v
it. Nat. iSg. Brickell, 37. De la Potherie, ii. 6.

fituatiuns,

situations, that Europeans can hardly believe it
to be a mimic scene, or view it without emotions
of fear and horror P.

But however expressive some of the American

dances may be, there is one circumstance in them
remarkable, and conneced with the charater of
the race. The songs, the dances, the amuse-
ments of other nations, expressive of the senti-
ments which animate their hearts, are often
adapted to display or excite that sensibility which
mutually attaches the sexes. Among some peo-
ple, such is the ardour of this paflion, that love
is almost the sole objet of festivity and joy; and
as rude nations are strangers to delicacy, and
unaccustomed to disguise any emotion of their
minds, their dances are often extremely wanton
and indecent. Such is the Calenda, of which
the natives of Africa are so passionately fond q;
and such the feats of the dancing girls, which
the Asiatics contemplate with so much avidity
of desire. But, among the Americans, more
cold and indifferent to their females, from causes
which I have already explained, the passion of
love mingles but little with their festivals and
pastimes. Their songs and dances are mostly
fuleran and martial; they are conne&ed with
some of the serious and important affairs of
life r, and having no relation to love or gal-
lantry are seldom common to the two fcxes, but

P De la Potheric, ii. x16, Charlev. N. Fr. iii. z97.

Lafitau, i. 5z3. q Adanfon, Voyage to Senegal,
p. hi. z87. Labat, Voyages, iv. 463. Sloane, HifR. Nat.
of Jam. Introd. p. 48. Fermin. Dcfcript. de Surin. i. p 139.

' Defcrpt. of N. France, Olorme, Coll. ii, 883. Charlev.
N, Fr. iii 84..
'VOL. II. A executed

executed by men and women apart 5. If, on
some occasions, the women are permitted to join
in the festival, the character of the entertain.
ment is fill the fame, and no movement or
geture is expressive of attachment, or encourages
familiarity t.

An immoderate love of play, especially at

games of hazard, which seems to be natural to
all people unaccustomed to the occupations oi
regular indufiry, is likewise universal among the
Americans. The fame causes, which so often
prompt persons in civilized life, who are at thei;
cafe, to have recourse to this pastime, render it
the delight of the savage. The former are in.
dependent of labour, the latter do not feel the ne.
ceffity of it; and as both are unemployed, they
run with transport to whatever is interelting
enough to stir and to agitate their minds.
Hence the Americans, who at other times are
so indifferent, so phlegmatic, so silent, and ani-
mated with so few desires, as soon as they en.
gage in play become rapacious, impatient, noisy,
and almost frantic with eagerness. Their furs
their domestic utensils, their clothes, their arms,
are staked at the gaming-table, and when all ii
loft, high as their sense of independence is, in a
wild emotion of despair or of hope, they wi1l
often ri(k their personal liberty upon a single
cast u. Among fevcral tribes, such gaming par.

Wafer's Account of Ifhnrr., &c. l69, Lery ap. :

Bry, iii. 177. Loano, Hitl. de larag. i. 149. 1Hrren,
dec. z. iib. vii. c. 8. dec. 4. lib. x. c. 4. See No-r E XC.

t Barrerc, Fr. Equ n. p i.19. u Chariev. N. Fr

iii. z6x.. 1. 3 Lafia, il. 33s, &c. Riba, Triumi. i
Enri:kel, 53;.

t!(c

is frequently recur, and become their molt
cceptable entertainment at every great festival.

iSperfiton, which is apt to take hold of those

afions which are molt vigorous, frequently
ends its aid to confirm and strengthen this fa-
ourite inclination. Their conjurers are accuf.
tomed to prescribe a solemn match at play, as
one of the most efficaciou6 methods of appeasing
their gods, or of restoring the sick to health X.

From causes similar to those which render

them fond of play, the Americans are extremely
addicted to drunkenness. It seems to have been
one of the first exertions of human ingenuity to
discover some composition of an intoxicating qua-
lity; and there is hardly any nation so rude, or
so deflitute of invention, as not to have succeeded
in this fatal research. The most barbarous of
the American tribes have been so unfortunate
as to attain this art; and even those which are
lo deficient in knowledge, as to be unacquainted
with the method of giving an inebriating strength
te liquors by fermentation, can accomplish the
fame end by other means. The people of the
islands of North America, and of California,
used, for this purpose the smoke of tobacco,
drawn up with a certain instrument into the
noftnls, the fumes of which ascending to the
brain, they felt all the transports and frenzy of
intoxication Y. In almost every other part of
the New World, the natives possessed the art
of extracting an intoxicating liquor from maize
or the manioc root, the fame substances which

' Charlev. N. Fr. iii. z6z. Y Oviedo, Hist. ap.
Ramus. iii. 113. Venegas, i. 68, Naufrag. de Cabeca de
Vica, c. z6. See NOTr XCI.

X z they

they convert into bread. The operation b]
which they effec this, nearly resembles th
common one of brewing, but with this difference
that in place of yeft, they use a nauseous infufiol
of a certain quantity of maize or manioc chewe
by their women. The saliva excites a vigorou
fermentation, and in a few days the liquor hb
comes fit for drinking. It is not difagreeabl
to the tafe, and when swallowed in large quat
tities, is of an intoxicating quality Z. This isth
general beverage of the Americans, which the
diffin uifh by various names, and for which theb
feel such a violent and insatiable desire, as it i
not easy either to conceive or describe. Amonj
polilhed nations, where a fucceffiion of varioE
functions and amusements keeps the mind i
continual occupation, the desire for strong drin
is regulated, in a great measure, by the climate
and icreafes or diminishes according to the va
nations of its temperature. In warm region!
the delicate and sensible frame of the inhabitant
does not require the itimulation of fermentec
liquors. In colder countries, the confitution o
the natives, more robufl and more fluggifl
stands in need of generous liquors to quicke
and animate it. But among savages, the defir
of something that is of power to intoxicate, is u
every situation the fame. All the people of Amer
ca, if we except some small tribes near the Strait
of Magellan, whether natives of the torrid zore
or inhabitants of its more temperate regions, o
placed by a harder fate in the severe climate
towards its northern or southern extremity, a:
pear to be equally under the dominion of th.

z Stadius ap. de Brj, iii. Lery, ibid. 175.

appetit:

appetite a. Such a similarity of taste, among
people in such different situations, must be as-
cribed to the influence of some moral cause,
and cannot be confidered as the effect of any
physical or conffitutional want. While engaged
in war or in the chafe, the savage is often in the
most interefring situations, and all the powers of
his nature are roused to the most vigorous ex-
ertions. But those animating scenes are fuc-
ceeded by long intervals of repose, during which
the warrior meets with nothing that he deems
of fifficient dignity or importance to merit his
attention. He languishes and mopes in this sea-
son of indolence. The posture of his body is an
emblem of the state of his mind. In one cli-
mate, cowering over the fire in his cabin; in
another, stretched under the (hade of some tree,
he doses away his time in sleep, or in an un-
thinking joyless inafivity, not far removed from
it. As itrong liquors awake him from this
torpid state, give a brisker motion to his spirits,
and enliven him more thoroughly than either
dancing or gaming, his love of them is excessive.
A savage, when not engaged in aftion, is a pen.
five melancholy animal; but as soon as he taftes,
or has a profpe& of tafting, the intoxicating
draught, he becomes gay and frolicsome b
Whatever be the occasion or pretext on which
the Americans assemble, the meeting always ter-
minates in a debauch. Many of their festivals

'Gumilla, i. 257. Lozano, Defcrip. del Gran Chaco,
56. 103. Ribas, 8. Ulloa, i. 249. 337. Marchais,
v. 436. Fernandez, Mission. de los Chiquet. 35. Eartere,
p. z-3. Blanco Convert. de Piritu, 31. Melendez
Tcforez Yerdad, iii, 369.

$3 have

have no other object, and they welcome the
return of them with transports of joy. As they
are not accustomed to refrain any appetite, they
set no bounds to this. The riot often continues
without intermission several days; and whatever
may be the fatal effects of their excess, they
never cease from drinking as long as one drop
of liquor remains. The persons of greatest emi,
inence, the most distinguished warriors, and the
chiefs most renowned for their wisdom, have no
greater command of themselves than the rmot
obscure member of the community. Their
eagerness for present enjoyment renders them
blind to its fatal consequences; and those very
men, who, in other situations, seem to possess a
force of mind more than human, are in this in.
fiance inferior to children in foresight, as well a
consideration, and mere flares of brutal appe.
titec. When their passions, naturally firong,
are heightened and inflamed by drink, they are
guilty of the most enormous outrages, and the
festivity seldom concludes without deeds of vio.
lence or bloodshed d.

But, amidst this wild debauch, there is one

circumstance remarkable; the women, in moR
of the American tribes, are not permitted tc
partake of it e. Their province is to prepare the
liquor, to serve it about to the guests, and tc
take care of their husbands and friends, whet
their reason is overpowered. This exclusion o;
the women from an enjoyment so highly valuci
by savages, :ma be justly confidered as a marl
of their inferiority, and as an additional evidenc'

' Ribas, 9. U'lloa, i. 33, 4 Lettr. Edif. ii. 1-3
TcrSqcrcmaa, Mond. Ird, i, 335. Ses No7E XCII

1:

of that contempt with which they were treated
in the New World, The people of North
America, when first discovered, were not ac-
quainted with any intoxicating drink; but as
the Europeans early found it their interest to
supply them with spirituous liquors, drunkenness
soon became as universal among them as among
their countrymen to the south; and their wo-
men having acquired this new taste, indulge
it with as little decency and moderation as the
men .

It were endless to enumerate all the detached

customs which have excited the wonder of tra-
vellers in America ; but I cannot omit one seem-
ingly as singular as any that has been mention-
ed. When their parents and other relations
become old, or labour under any diitemper
which their slender knowledge of the healing
art cannot remove, the Americans cut short their
days with a violent hand, in order to be relieved
from the burden of supporting and tending
them. This practice prevailed among the ruder
tribes in every part of the continent, from Hud-
son's Bay to the river De la Plata; and how-
ever shocking it may be to those sentiments of
tenderness and attachment, which, in civilized
life, we are apt to confider as congenial with our
frame, the condition of man in the savage state
leads and reconciles him to it. The fame hard-
fbips and difficulty of procuring subsistence,
which deter savages, in some cafes, from rearing
their children, prompt them to destroy the aged
and infirm. The declining state of the one is
f Hu:rhinfon, Hii, of Malachuf. 469. Lafitau, ii. xz5.

|5s'ouwaj 146.

as

as helpless as the infancy of the other. The
former are no less unable than the latter to per.
form the functions that belong to a warrior or
hunter, or to endure those various distresses in
which savages are so often involved, by their own
want of foresight and industry. Their relations
feel this, and, incapable of attending to the
wants or weaknesses of others, their impatience
under an additional burden prompts them to ex.
tinguifh that life which they find it difficult to
fuflain. This is not regarded as a deed of cru-
elty, but as an ad of mercy. An American,
broken with years and infirmities, conscious
that he can no longer depend on the aid of those
around him, places himself contentedly in his
grave; and it is by the hands of his children or
nearest relations that the thong is pulled, or the
blow inflited, which releases him for ever from
the sorrows of life 9.

IX. After contemplating the rude American

tribes in such various lights, after taking a view
of their cuetoms and manners from so many dif.
ferert ftatiuns, nothing remains but to form a
general estimate of their characer, compared
with that of more polished nations. A human
being, as he comes originally from the hand of
Nature, is every where the fame. At his first
appearance in the state of infancy, whether it
be among the rudest savages, or in the mos
civilized nation, we can discern no quality
which marks any diftindtion or superiority. The
capacity of improvement seems to be the fame;
and the talents he may afterwards acquire, as

' CafTani, HiRor. dc N. Reyno de Gran. p, 300. Pif0o
. 6. LJ'is, VoI, 191, Gumili) i, 33t,

.well

xvdl as the virtues he may be rendered capable
of exercising, depend, in a great measure, upon
the itate of society in which he is placed. To
this itate his mind naturally accommodates itself,
and from it receives discipline and culture. In
proportion to the wants which it accustoms a
human being to feel, and the funtions in which
these engage him, his intellecEual powers are
called forth. According to the connecions
which it establishes between him and the reit of
his species, the affedions of his heart are exerted.
It is only by attending to this great principle?
that we can discover what is the characer of
man in every different period of his progress.

If we apply it to savage life, and measure the

attainments of the human mind in that state by
this standard, we shall find, according to an ob-
fcrvation which I have already made, that the
intellecual powers of man must be extremely
linited in their operations. They are confined
within the narrow sphere of what he deems ne-
ceffary for supplying his own wants. Whatever
has not some relation to these, neither attracts
hi; attention, nor is the obje& of his inquiries.
But, however narrow the bounds may be within
which the knowledge of a savage is circumscribed,
he pofcffrcs thoroughly that small portion which he
hia3 attained. It was not communicated to him
by formal initruc2ion; he does not attend to it as
a matter of mere fpeculatign and curiosity; it is
tl.c result of his own observation, the fruit of his
own experience, and accommodated to his condi-
jti;i ai,d exigencies. While employed in the active
occupations of war or of hunting, he often finds
I::;;.lf in difficult and perilpus situations, from

which

which the efforts of his own sagacity must ex.
tricate him. He is frequently engaged in mea.
fures, where every ftep depends upon his own
ability to decide, where he must rely solely upon
his own penetration to discern the dangers to
which he is exposed, and upon his own wisdom
in providing against them. In consequence of this,
he feels the knowledge which he possesses, and
the efforts which he makes, and either in deli.
beration or a&ion refs on himself alone.

As the talents of individuals are exercised

and improved by such exertions, much political
w-isdom is said to be displayed in conducting
the affairs of their small communities. The
council of old men in an American tribe, deli.
berating upon its interests, and determining with
refpet to peace or war, has been compared to
the senate in more polished republics. The
proceedings of the former, we are told, an
often no less formal and sagacious than those of
the latter. Great political wisdom is exhibited
in pondering the various measures proposed, and
in balancing their probable advantages, againt
the evils of which they may be productive
Much address and eloquence are employed bi
the leaders, who aspire at acquiring such confi
dence with their countrymen, as to have an as
cendant in those affembliesh. But, among fa
vage tribes, the field for displaying political tU
lents cannot be extensive. Where the idea o
private property is incomplete, and no crimina
jurisdiction is established, there is hardly an
function of internal government to exercifs
VWhere there is no commerce, and scarcely an

" Charln. N, Fr. iii. 269, &c.

inter

iatercourfe among separate tribes; where enmity
L implacable, and hotlilities are carried on almoll
without intermifion; there will be few points
of public concern to adjust with their neigh-
bours; and that department of their affairs
which may be denominated foreign, cannot be
so intricate as to require much refined policy in
condu&ing it. Where individuals are so thought-
ld'f and improvident as seldom to take effecual
precautions for felf-prefervation, it is vain to ex-
pcit that public measures and deliberations will
be regulated by the contemplation of remote
events. It is the genius of savages to a&t from
the impulse of present passion. They have
reithcr foresight nor temper to form complicated
arrangements with refpet to their future con-
duct. The consultations of the Americans, in-
d&cd, are so frequent, and their negotiations are
so manyi, and so long protraced, as to give
their proceedings an extraordinary aspect of
-uifdom. But this is not owing so much to the
depth of their schemes, as to the coldness and
phlrgm of their temper, which render them flow
:il determining k. If we except the celebrated
l-ague, that united the Five Nations in Canada
i:;:o a federal republic, which flall be confidered
lu its proper place, we can discern few such
races of political wisdom, among the rude Ame-
Ican tribes, as discover any great degree of fore-
iglit or extent of intellectual abilities. Even
mr.ong them, we shall find public measures more
:equently directed by the impetuous ferocity of
,cir youth, than regulated by the experience

w.I v ifdom of their old men.
* ';c /rz XCIJI. k Charkr, N, Fr. iii. z-r.

As

As the condition of man in the savage fiate ii

Unfavourable to the progress of the undertana.
ing, it has a tendency likewise, in some refpei,
to check the exercise of affetion, and to rende
the heart contraced. The strongest feeling i
the mind of a savage is a sense of his own inde
pendence. He has sacrificed so small a portio
of his natural liberty by becoming a memlb
of society, that he remains, in a great degre
the sole master of his own actions . He oft
takes his resolutions alone, without consulting
or feeling any connection with the persons arour-
him. In many of his operations, he fRands
much detached from the reft of his species, a
if he had formed no union with them. Confcio2
how little he depends upon other men, he is a?.
to view them with a careless indifference. Em
the force io his mind contributes to increase thi
unconcern, and as he looks not beyond himfe
in deliberating with refpet to the part whic
he fhonld at, his solicitude about the confc
quences of it seldom extends farther. He p,
sues his own career, and indulges his own fanc,
without inquiring or regarding whether w
he does be agreeable or offensive to others, wheth
'they may derive benefit or receive hurt from
Hence the ungovernable caprice of savages, th
impatience under any species of restraint, th'
inability to suppress or moderate any inclinati
the scorn or neglect with which they rece
advice, their high etfimation of themfelM
and their contempt of other men. Ame0
them, the pride of independence produces
most the fame effefts with interefltdnefs is

Fcrnandez, Mlffion. ce los Chiau't. 33.

2

more advanced state of society; it refers every
thing to a man himself, it leads him to be indif.
ferent about the manner in which his aftions may
affect other men, and renders the gratification
of his own withes the measure and end of
condut.

To the fame cause may be imputed the hard-

ness of heart, and insensibility, remarkable in all
savage nations. Their minds, roused only by
trong emotions, are little susceptible of gentle,
delicate, or tender affeEions m. Their union is
so incomplete, that each individual ads as if he
retained all his natural rights entire and undi-
minifhed. If a favour is conferred upon him, or
any beneficial service is performed on his ac-
count, he receives it with much fatisfa&ion, be-
cause it contributes to his enjoyment; but this
sentiment extends not beyond himself, it excites
no sense of obligation, he neither feels gratitude
nor thinks of making any return . Even among
pcrfons the most closely connected, the exchange
of those good offices which strengthen attach-
ment, mollify the heart, and sweeten the inter-
course of life, is not frequent. The high ideas
of independence among the Americans nourish a
fullen reserve, which keeps them at a distance
from each other. The nearest relations ate mu-
tually afraid to make any demand, or to solicit
any service 0, left it should be confidered by the
other as imposing a burden or laying a refiraiut
upon his will.

I have already remarked the influence of this
bard unfeeling temper upon domestic life, with

' Charlev. N. Fr. iii. 309. n Ovicd. Hilt. lib.
'i. c 2. See NoTE XCIV. o De la Pothcrie, iii. 28.
VOL. ii, refpcct

refpet to the connection between husband and
wife, as well as that between parents and children.
Its effeEts are no less conspicuous, in the per.
formance of those mutual offices of tenderneis
which the infirmities of our nature frequently
exat. Among some tribes, when any of thei
number are seized with any violent disease, they
are generally abandoned by all around then,
who, carlcefs of their recovery, fly in the ut.
most consternation from the supposed danger of
infection P. But even where they are not thus
deserted, the cold indifference with which they
are attended can afford them little confolatio.
No look of sympathy, no soothing expreflion,
no officious services, contribute to alleviate the
distress of the sufferers, or to make them forget
what they endure q. Their nearest relations will
often rcfufe to submit to the smallest inconveni
ency, or to part with the least trifle, however
much it may tend to their accommodation or
relief . So little is the breast of a savage fur.
ceptible of those sentiments which prompt men
to that feeling attention which mitigates the c2.
lamities of human life, that, in some provinces of
America, the Spaniards have found it necelary
to inforce the common duties of humanity by
positive laws, and to oblige husbands and wive
parents and children, under severe penalties, to
take care of each other during their sickness'.

P Lettre de P. Cataneo ap. Muratori Chriflian, i. 3c.

Tertre, ii. 41o. Lozano, loo. Henera, dec. 4- lib. vii.
. 5. dec. 5. lib. iv. c. 2. Faulkner's Defcript. d
Pdtagonia, 98. q Gurnilla, i. 329. Lozano, Ice

Garci;, Or;gen, &c. 90. Hcrrcra, dec. 4 lib. viii. c. 5
' Cogulludo, Hill. 'c Yucatbhn, p. 30o.

r:.-

The fame harshness of temper is fiill more con-
[fpicuous in their treatment of the animal crea-
tion. Prior to their intercourse with the people
of Europe, the North Americans had some tame
dogs, which accompanied them in their hunting
exeurions, and served them with all the ardour
and fidelity peculiar to the species. But, instead
of that fond attachment which the hunter natu-
rally feels towards those useful companions of
his toils, they requite their services with neglet,
seldom feed, and never caress them t. In other
provinces, the Americans have become acquainted
with the domestic animals of Europe, and avail
themselves of their service; but it is universally
observed that they always treat them harshly",
and never employ any method, either for break-

gor managing them, but force and cruelty.
In every part of the deportment of man in his
avage state, whether towards his equals of the

human species, or towards the animals below him,

we recognize the fame character, and trace the
operations of a mind intent on its own gratifica-
tions, and regulated by its own caprice, with
litle attention or sensibility to the sentiments and
feelings of the beings around him.

After explaining how unfavourable the savage
late is to the cultivation of the understanding,
and to the improvement of the heart, I should
not have thought it necessary to mention what
mnay be deemed its lesser defects, if the character
of nations, as well as of individuals, were not
often more ditincaly marked by circumifances
apparently trivial than by those of greater mo-

t Charlev. N. Fr. iii. 119. 337.
Ulloa, Notic. American. 312.

K 2 ment.

ment. A savage, frequently placed in fituatiol
of danger and dilrrefs, depending on himdf
alone, and wrapt up in his own thoughts ard
schemes, is a serious melancholy animal. Hi
attention to others is smalL The range of hi
own ideas is narrow. Hence that taciturnitY
which is so disgusting to men accufomed to th
open intercourse of social conversation, Whe
they are not engaged in action, the Americaa
often fit whole days in one posture, witho
opening their lipsx. When they go forth
war, or to the chafe, they usually march in a
line at some diflance from one another, and wit.
out exchanging a word. The fame profouid
silence is observed when they row together in i
canoe J. It is only when they are animated by
intoxicating liquors, or roused by the jollity d
the festival and dance, that they become gay ard
converfible.

To the fame causes may be imputed the refind

cunning with which they form and execute
their schemes. Men, who are not habituated to
a liberal communication of their own fentimenti
and wishes, are apt to be so diftrutful, as to
place little confidence in others, and to have re.
course to an insidious craft in accomplishing th&
own purposes. In civilized life, those perfonh
who, by their situation, have but a few objeai
of pursuit on which their minds incessantly dwell,
are most remarkable for low artifice in carryrn
on their little projets. Among savages, whoi
views are equally confined, and their attentio0
no lcfi persevering, those circumstances must opt
rate 1till more powerfully, and gradually a.

5 Voyage de Bougacr, jo. Y Charley. iii. 34r

cuflt0

custom them to a difingenuou3 subtlety in all their
tranfa&ions. The force of this is increased by
habits which they acquire in carrying on the
two most interesting operations wherein they
are engaged. With them war is a system of
craft, in which they trust for success to ftra-
tagem more than to open force, and have their
invention continually on the stretch to circum-
:vent and surprise their enemies. As hunters,
it is their constant obje& to ensnare, in order
that they may destroy. Accordingly, art and
cunning have been universally observed as dif-
tinguifhing charaEeriftics of all savages. The
people of the rude tribes of America are re-
[markable for their artifice and duplicity. Im-
ienetrablv secret in forming their measures,
they pursue them with a patient undeviating
attention, and there is no refinement of diffi-
mrulation which they cannot employ, in order
|to insure success. The natives of Peru were

gaged above thirty years, in concerting the
lan of that infurretion which took place under
the vice-royalty of the marquis de Villa.Garcia;
and though it was communicated to a great
ur mber of persons in all different ranks, no
indication of it ever transpired during that long
period; no man betrayed his trust, or by an
nguarded look, or rash word, gave rife to any
pufpicion of what was intendedz. The diffi-
mulation and craft of individuals is no less re-

arkable than that of nations. When set upon
deceiving, they wrap themselves up so arti-
cially, that it is impossible to penetrate into
their intentions, or to detect their defignsa.

z Voyage de U lloa,ii. 30o.
Ga umiila, i. 16z. Charley. iii. Ic9.

K 3 But

But if there be defe&s or vices peculiar to

the savage state, there are likewise virtues which
it inspires, and good qualities, to the exercif
of which it is friendly. The bonds of society
fit so loose upon the members of the more rude
American tribes, that they hardly feel any re.
ftraint. Hence the spirit of independence, which
is the pride of a savage, and which he con.
fiders as the unalienable prerogative of marn
Incapable of control, and disdaining to acknow.
ledge any superior, his mind, though limited
in its powers, and erring in many of its pur.
suits, acquires such elevation by the conscious.
ness of its own freedom, that he acs on fonm
occasions with astonishing force, and perfever.
ance, and dignity.

As independence nourishes this high fpiri

among savages, the perpetual wars in which
they are engaged call it forth into action. Such
long intervals of tranquillity as are frequent ia
polished societies are unknown in the savage fate.
Their enmities, as I have observed, are impl.
cable and immortal The valour of the young
men is never allowed to rust in inaction. Thf
hatchet is always in their hand, either for at.
tack or defence. Even in their hunting excur
sions, they nuft be on their guard againit fur
prise from the hostile tribes, by which they an
surrounded. Accustomed to continual alarms,
they grow familiar with danger; courage be.
comes an habitual virtue, resulting natura!l
from their situation, and strengthened by con
Rant exertions. The mode of displaying for
titude may not be the fame in small and rude corn
munitics, as in more powerful amd civilize'

Pat¢!

fates. Their system of war, and standard of
valour, may be formed upon different principles,
but in no situation does the human mind rife
more superior to the sense of danger, or the
dread of death, than in its most simple and un.
cultivated state.

Another virtue remarkable among savages,
is attachment to the community of which they
are members. From the nature of their poli.
tical union, one might expect this tie to be ex-
trenmely feeble. But there are circumstances
which render the influence, even of their loose
mode of association, very powerful. The Ame-
rican tribes are frnall; combined against their
neighbours, in prosecution of ancient enmities,
cr in avenging recent injuries, their interests and
operations are neither numerous nor complex.
These are objects which the uncultivated under.
standing of a savage can comprehend. His heart
is capable of forming connecions, which are so
little diffused. He assents with warmth to pub.
lic measures, dictated by passions similar to those
which diret his own conduft. Hence the ar-
dour with which individuals undertake the molt
perilous service, when the community deems it
ieceffary. Hence their fierce and deep-rooted
antipathy to the public enemies. Hence their
zeal for the honour of their tribe, and that love
of their country, which prompts them to brave
danger that it may triumph, and to endure the
most exquisite torments, without a groan, that
it may not be disgraced.

Thus, in everv situation where a human being
can be placed, even the most unfavourable, there
are virtues which peculiarly belong to it; there

are

are affe&ons which it calls forth; there is a
species of happiness which it yields. Nature,
with most beneficent intention, conciliates and
forms the mind to its condition; the ideas and
wiihcs of man extend not beyond that state of
society to which he is habituated. What it
presents as objecEs of contemplation or enjoy.
ment fills and satisfies his mind, and he can
hardly conceive any other mode of life to be
pleasant, or even tolerable. The Tartar, accuf.
tomed to roam over extensive plains, and to sub.
fit on the product of his herds, imprecates
upon his enemy, as the greatest of all curses,
that he may be condemned to rcfide in one place,
and to be nourished with the top of a wee?,
The rude Americans, fond of their own pursuits,
and satisfied with their own lot, are equally un.
able to comprehend the intention or utility of
the various accommodations which, in more
polished society, are deemed essential to the corn
fort of life. Far from complaining of their own
situation, or viewing that of men in a more im
proved state with admiration or envy, they re
gard themselves as the standard of excellence
as beings the best entitled, as well as the molt
perfectly qualified, to enjoy real happiness. Un.
accustomed to any restraint upon their will oi
their acions, they behold with amazement the
inequality of rank and the subordination which
take place in ciilized life, and confider the vo-
luntary submission of one man to another as a
renunciation, no less base than unaccountable, oi
the first diftintion of humanity. Void of fore
fight, as well as free from care themselves, and
delighted with that state of indolent security

th.r

thev wonder at the anxious precautions, -the un-

eaing indufiry, and complicated arrangements

of Europeans, in guarding against distant evils,
or providing for future wants; and they often
exclaim againit their preposterous folly, in thus
irultiplying the troubles, and increaiing the la.
bour of life b. This preference of their own
rranners is conspicuous on every occasion. Even
the names, by which the various nations wish
to be distinguished, are assumed from this idea
of their own pre-eminence. The appellation
which the Iroquois give to themselves is, the
chief of men. Caraibe, the original name of the
fierce inhabitants of the Windward Islands, fig,
nifies the warlike people d. The Cherokees, fronm
an idea of their own superiority, call the Euro.
peans Nothings, or the accursed race, and assume
to themselves the name of the beloved peoplee
The fame principle regulated the notions of the
other Americans concerning the Europeans;
for although, at firif, they were filled with aftoi
r.ihment at their arts, and with dread of their
power, they soon came to abate their estimation
of men, whole maxims of life were so different
from their own. Hence they called them
the froth of the sea, men without father or
mother. They supposcd, that either they
had no country of their own, and therefore
invaded that which belonged to others f; or
that, being deftitnte of the necessaries of life a;

b Charlev. N. Fr. i'i- 3c8. Lahontan, ii. 97.

Colden, i. 3. 4 Rcchefort, Hist. des Antilles, 455.
' Adair, Hist of Amer. InAi-ns, p. 2.
Benzon. Hit. Novi Orbis, lib. iii. c. 2i.

hom¢ie

home, they were obliged to roam over the ocean,
in order to rob such as were more amply proe
vided.

Men, thus satisfied with their condition, are

far from any inclination to relinquish their own
habits, or to adopt those of civilized life. The
transition is too violent to be suddenly made.
Even where endeavours have been used to wean
a savage from his own customs, and to render
the accommodations of polished society familiar
to him; even where he has been allowed to talb
of those pleasures, and has been honoured with
those diftinsions, which are the chief objets
of our desire, he droops and languishes under the
restraint of laws and forms, he seizes the first
opportunity of breaking loose from them, and
returns with transport to the forest or the wild,
where he can enjoy a careless and uncontrolled
freedom r.

Thus I have finished a laborious delineation

of the character and manners of the uncivilized
tribes scattered over the vafi continent of Ame.
rica. In this, I aspire not at rivalling the great
maflers who have painted and adorned savage
life, either in boldness of design, or in the glow
and beauty of their colouring. I am satisfied
with the more humble merit of having persisted
with patient indufiry, 'in viewing my subjet in
many various lights, and collecting from the molt
accurate observers such detached, and often mi-
nute features, as might enable me to exhibit a
portrait that resembles the original

_ Charie. N. Fr. iii. 31z.

Before

Before I close this part of my work, one ob-

servation more is necessary, in order to justify
the conclusions which I have formed, or to pre-
vent the mistakes into which such as examine
them may fall. In contemplating the inhabitants
of a country so widely extended as America, great
attention should be paid to the diversity of cli-
mates under which they are placed, The influence
of this I have pointed out with refpea to several
important particulars, which have been the object
of research; but even where it has not been
mentioned, it ought not to be overlooked. The
provinces of America are of such different tem-
perament, that this alone is sufficient to confti-
tute a distinction between their inhabitants. In
every part of the earth where man exists, the
power of climate operates, with decisive influ-
ence, upon his condition and characer. In those
countries which approach near to the extremes
of heat or cold, this influence is so conspicuous
a; to friike every eye. Whether we confider
man merely as an animal, or as being endowed
with rational powers which fit him for acivity
and speculation, we shall find that he has uni-
formly attained the greatest perfeEion of which
his nature is capable, in the temperate regions of
the globe. There his constitution is most vigorous,
his organs most acute, and his form most beauti-
ful. There, too, he possesses a superior extent
tf capacity, greater fertility of imagination,
iorc enterprising courage, and a sensibility of
Lcart which gives birth to desires, not only ar-

Irnt, but persevering. In this favourite situation
: has displayed the utmost efforts of his genius,

in

in literature, in policy, in commerce, in war,
and in all the arts which improve or embelliUh
life .

This powerful operation of climate is fek

mofl sensibly by rude nations, and produce
greater effects than in societies more improved.
The talents of civilized men are continually ex.
erted in rendering their own condition more
comfortable; and by their ingenuity and
inventions, they can, in a great measure, supply
the defects, and guard against the incon-
veniences of any climate. But the improvident
savage i. affected by every circumstance peculiar
to his situation. He takes no precaution either
to mitigate or to improve it. Like a plant
or an animal, he is formed by the climate
tnder which he is placed, ani feels the fill
force of its influence.

In surveying the rude nations of America,

this natural dihtiri&non between the inhabitant
of the temperate and torrid zones is very re.
markable. They may, accordingly, be divided
into two great classes. The one comprehends all
the North Americans, frm the river St. Lau.
rence to the Gulf of Mexico, together with th:
people of Chili, and a few small tribes towards
the extremity of the fiuthern continent. To
the other belong all the inhabitants of the islands
and those fettled in the various provinces wi.ich
extend from the isthmus of Darien almost to the
southern confines of Brasil, along the east fid'
of the Andes. In the former, which coinpre.

h Dr. Ferguson's Effy on the Hil. of Civil Sc-:cn,
Pl. 1ii, C ,he

heat

,ends all the regions of the temperate zone that
.i America are inhabited, the human species ap-
:ars manifestly to be more perfec. The natives

more robust, more ative, more intelligent,

Ad more courageous. They possess, in the
roft eminent degree, that force of mind and
ove of independence which I have pointed out
the chief virtues of man in his savage slate.
lThev have defended their liberty with perfever-

:g fortitude against the Europeans, who sub-
ocd the other rude nations of America with
e greatest ease. The natives of the temperate
ec are the only people in the New World who
e indebted for their freedom to their own
alour. The North Americans, though long
:^compassed by three formidable European
owers, still retain part of their original posses-
jns, and continue to exist as independent na-
:r.s. The people of Chili, though early in-

ed, still maintain a gallant contest with the

paniards, and have set bounds to their en-
;.oachments; whereas, in the warmer regions,
r.en are more feeble in their frame, less vigorous

the efforts of their mind, of a gentle but
ialardly spirit, more enslaved by pleasure, and
gr.ore funk in indolence. Accordingly, it is in
i}.c torrid zone that the Europeans have most
comnpletely eltablifhed their dominion over Ame-

ca ; the most fertile and desirable provinces in
are fubje&ed to their yoke; and if several

rbes there till enjoy independence, it is either
tcaufe they have never been attacked by an
-.-ny already ftiataed with conquest, and pof-
| .Icd of larger territories than he was able to
:cupy, or because they have been savcd from

lii. ii, L opprcfflon

oppression by their remote and inaccessible fit;
ation.

Conspicuous as this diftin&ion may appear bl

tween the inhabitants of those different regioni
it is not, however, universaL Moral and politic
causes, as I have formerly observed, affeet t
disposition and characer of individuals as wa
as nations, fill more powerfully than the infl
ence of climate. There are, accordingly, foni
tribes, in various parts of the torrid zone, po
sessed of courage, high spirit, and the lovec
independence, in a degree hardly inferior to tL
natives of more temperate climates. We are to
little acquainted with the history of those peopL
to be able to trace the several circumftancesa
their progress and condition, to which they a
indebted for this remarkable pre-eminence. Th
fad, nevertheless, is certain. As early as th
first voyage of Columbus, he received inform
tion that several of the islands were inhabited b
the Caribbeu, a fierce race of men, nowifc r:
fembling their feeble and timid neighbours. I
his second expedition to the New World, b
found this information to be just, and was himft
a witness of their intrepid valouri. The fai
charater they have maintained invariably in 2
subsequent contests with the people of Europe'
and, even in our own times, we have seen the
make a gallant stand in defence of the last ten
tory which the rapacity of their invaders h,
left in their possession 1. Some nations in Brai
were no less eminent for vigour of mind, za

' Life of Columbus, c. 47, 48. See NOTE XCV.
k Rochefort, Hist. des Andlls, 531.
See- NOTz XCVI.

brC

# BOOK V.

bravery in war m. The people of the isthmus of
Darien boldly met the Spaniards in the field, and
frequently repelled those formidable invaders".
Other instances might be produced. It is not
attending to any single cause or principle, how
powerful and extensive soever its influence may
appear, that we can explain the a&ions, or ac-
count for the chara&er of men. Even the law
of climate, more universal, perhaps, in its opera-
tion than any that assets the human species, can-
not be applied, in judging of their condu&c
without many exceptions.

BOOK V.
i'58.] VWHEN Grijalva returned to Cuba, he

found the armament destined to at-

tempt the conquest of that rich country which
he had discovered, almost complete. Not only
ambition, but avarice, had urged Velasquez to
hatien his preparations; and having such a pro-
fpe& of gratifying both, he had advanced con-
Fderable fums out of his private fortune towards
defraying the expence of the expedition. At
lhe fame time, he exerted his influence as gover.
For, in engaging the most distinguished persons
In the colony to undertake the service a. At a
me when the spirit of the Spanish nation was

Lcry ap. de Bry, iii. 207, &c.
Herrera, dec. i. lib. x. c. 15, &c.; dec. z. passim.
' See NOTE XCVII.

L 2 adven.

adventurous to excess, a number of soldien
eager to embark in any daring enterprise, foce
appeared. But it was not so easy to find a pe
son qualified to take the command in an expe
dition of so much importance; and the charaat
of Velasquez, who had the right of nomination
greatly increased the difficulty of the choice
Though of most aspiring ambition, and not diti
tute of talents for government, he poffeffe
neither such courage, nor such vigour and ace
Lity of mind, as to undertake in person the coe
dudt of the armament which he was preparing
In this embarraling situation, he formedt
chimerical scheme, not only of atchieving gra
e'xploits by a deputy, but of securing to himfd
the glory of conquests which were to be made sr
another. In the execution of this plan, he fond3
aimcd at reconciling contradicions. He was folil
ous to choose a commander of intrepid resolution
and of superior abilities, because he knew thd
to be requifrte in order to ensure success; bi
at the fame time, from the jealousy naturalt
little minds, he wished this person to be of
spirit so tame and obsequious, as to be entire
dependent on his will. But when he came t
apply those ideas in forming an opinion concen
ing the several officers who occurred to h
thoughts as worthy of being entrusted with tt
command, he soon perceived that it was in
possible to find such incompatible qualities unitt
in one characer. Such as were distinguished fl
courage and talents were too high-fpirited;
be pdffie inP.ruments in his hand. Those ,v
appeared more gentle and tractable, were deftitc
cf capacity, and unequal to the charge. Tt

augment

augmented his perplexity and his fears. He
deliberated long, and with much solicitude, and
was still wavering in his choice, when Amador
de Lares, the royal treasurer in Cuba, and An-
dres Duero, his own secretary, the two persons
in whom he chiefly confided, were encouraged
by this irresolution to propose a new candidate,
and they supported their recommendation with
such assiduity and address, that, no less fatally
for Velasquez than happily for their country, it
proved successful b.

The man whom they pointed out to him was
Fernando Cortes. He was born at Medellin, a
friall town in Estremadura, in the year one
thousand four hundred and eighty-five, and de-
fccnded from a family of noble blood, but of very
moderate fortune. Being originally destined by
his parents to the study of law, as the most
Rklly method of bettering his condition, he was
font early to the university of Salamanca, where
he imbibed some tinlure of learning. But he
was soon disgusted with an academic life, which
did not suit his ardent and restless genius, and
retired to Medellin, where he gave himself up
entirely to adive sports and martial exercises.
At this period of life, he was so impetuous, so
overbearing, and so dissipated, that his father
' as glad to comply with his inclination, and fend
him abroad as an adventurer in arms. There
were in that age two conspicuous theatres, on
which such of the Spanish youth as courted
military glory might display their valour; one
in Italy, under the command of the Great Cap-

b B. Diaz. c. 19. Gomara, Cron. C. 7. Herrera,

:: l.
2. lib , i iA I .

1,3 tain,

tain; the other in the New World. Corte
preferred the former, but was prevented by in.
disposition from embarking with a reinforcement
of troops sent to Naples. Upon this difap.
pointment he turned his views towards America,
whither he was allured by the profpe&t of the
.advantages which he might derive from the pa.
tronage of Ovando C, the governor of Hifpa.
niola, who was his kinsman. When he landed
at St Domingo in one thousand five hundred
and f(,ur, his reception was such as equalled hi3
moit sanguine hopes, and he was employed by
the governor in several honourable and lucrative
stations. These however did not fatisfv hi.
ambition; and in the year one thousand five
hundred and eleven, he obtained permission to
accompany Diego Velasquez in hi. expedition to
Cuba. In this service he diitinguifhed himfcit
so much, that, notwithifanding ofme violer.t
conteils with Velasquez, occasioned by trivial
events, unworthy of remembrance, he was at
length taken into favour, and received an ample
conctffion of lands and of Indians, the recompence
ufuallv beflowed upon adventurers in the New
World d

Though Cortes had not hitherto a&ed in high

command, he had difplaved such qualities in fe-
veral fccnes of difficulty and danger, as iailed
universal expectation, and turned the eyes of his
countrymen towards him, as one capable of per.
forming great things. The turbulence of youth,
as soon as he found objects and occupations
suited to the ardour of his mind, gradually sub-
ided, and fettled into a habit of regular inde.
c Se' NOTE XCVIII. d Gomaa, Cron. c. 1, 2, 3.

fatigabk

fatigable ativity. The impetuosity of his tem-
per, when he came to a& with his equals,
insensibly abated, by being kept under restraint,
and mellowed into a cordial soldierly frankness.
These qualities were accompanied with calm
prudence in concerting his schemes, with per-
ievering vigour in executing them, and with
what is peculiar to superior genius, the art of
gaining the confidence and governing the minds
of men. To all which were added the inferior
acccmplifhments that strike the vulgar, and
command their respect ; a graceful person, a
winning asped, extraordinary address in martial
exercises, and a confitution of fueh vigour as to
be capable of enduring any fatigue.

As soon as Cortes was mentioned to Velasquez

c: hais two confidents, he flattered himself that
he had at length found what he had hitherto
fought in vain, a man with talents for command,
but not an objec for jealousy. Neither the
rank nor the fortune of Cortes, as he imagined,
wvere such that he could aspire at independence.
He had reason to believe that by his own readi-
ness to bury ancient animofities in oblivion, as
well as his liberality in conferring several recent
favours, he had already gained the good-will of
Cortes, and hoped, by this new and unexpected
mark of confidence, that he might attach him
for ever to his interest.

Cortes, receiving his commifion [O&. 23]
with the warmnet exprefiions of refpeft and
gratitude to the governor, immediately ere&ted
i:is ltandard before his own house, appeared in a
military dress, and assumed all the ensigns of his
egw dignity. -His utmost influence and ativity

were

were exerted in persuading many of his friends
to engage in the service, and in urging forward
the preparations for the voyage. All his own
funds, together with what money he could raise
by mortgaging his lands and Indians, were ex.
pended in purchasing military flores and pro.
visions, or in supplying the wants of such of hii
officers as were unable to equip themselves in z
manner suited to their rank e. Inoffensive, and
even laudable as this conduct was, his disappoint.
ed competitors were malicious enough to give it
a turn to his disadvantage. They represented
him as aiming already, with little disguise, at
eflabliling an independent authority over hii
troops, and endeavouring to secure their refpec
or love byhis ostentatious and interested liberality.
They reminded Velasquez of his former difif.
sions with the man in whom he now reposed so
much confidence, and foretold that Cortes would
be more apt to avail himself of the power, which
the governor was inconsiderately putting in his
hands, to avenge past injuries, than to requite
recent obligations. These insinuations made fuc'
impression upon the suspicious mind of Vdal
qucz, that Cortes soon observed fonte fymptor.3
of a growing alienation and distrust in his be.
haviour, and was advised by Lares and Duerc,
to halten his departure, before these should be.
come so confirmed, as to break out with open
violence. Fully fcnlible of this danger, he urged
forward his preparations with such rapidity,
that he set fail from St. Jago de Cuba on the
eighteenth of November, Velasquez accompany.
ing him to the shore, and taking leave of li.

See NOTZ XCIX.

v\i:i

w:th an appearance of perfect friendihip and
confidence, though he had secretly given it in
charge to some of Cortes's officers, to keep a
watchful eye upon every part of their command-
er's conduct f.

Cortes proceeded to Trinidad, a small fettle-

ment on the fame fide of the island, where he
was jined by several adventurers, and received a
supply of provisions and military flores, of
H-hich his flock was still very incomplete. He
bad hardly left St. Jago, when the jealousy
which had been working in the breast of Velaf-
quez, grew so violent, that it was impossible to
suppress it. The armament was no longer under
his own eye and direction; and he felt, that as
his power over it ceased, that of Cortes would
become more absolute. Imagination now aggra-
vated every circumtance which had formerly
excited suspicion: the rivals of Cortes induftri.
oufy threw in refiecions which increased his
fears; and with no less art than malice they
called fuperftiio to their aid, employing the
predictions of an astrologer in order to complete
tie alarm. All these, by their united operation,
produced the desired effeft. Velasquez repented
bitterly of his own imprudence, in having com.
mitted a trust of so much importance to a per-
foi whose fidelity appeared so doubtful, and
hallily dispatched inltrucions to Trinidad, em-
powering Verdugo, the chief magiitrate there,
to deprive Cortes of his commiflion. But Cortes
had already made such progress in gaining the
e;tcem and confidence of his troops, that, find-
ing officers as well as soldiers equally zealous to

f Comara, Cron. c. 7* B.-Diaz. c.ao.

support

support his authority, he soothed or intimidated
Verdugo, and was permitted to depart fron
Trinidad without moleffation.

From Trinidad Cortes failed for the Havana

in order to raise more soldiers, and to complete
the victualling of his fleet. There several perfow
of diftin&ion entered into the service, and en.
gaged to supply what provisions were till want.
ing ; but as it was necessary to allow them some
time for performing what they had promised
Velasquez, sensible that he ought no longer tc
rely on a man of whom he had so openly dif.
covered his diftruit, availed himself of the inter.
val, which this unavoidable delay afforded, in
order to make one attempt more to wrest the
command out of the hands of Cortes. He
loudly complained of Verdngo's condu&, accuf.
ing him either of childish facility, or of manifest
treachery, in suffering Cortes to escape from
Trinidad. Anxious to guard against a second
disappointment, he sent a person of confidence
to the Havana, with peremptory injunctions to
Pedro Barba, his lieutenant-governor in that
colony, initantly to arrest Cortes, to fend him
prisoner to St. Jago under a itrong guard, and
to countermand the failing of the armament
until he should receive farther orders. He wrote
likewise to the principal officers, requiring them
to assist Barba in executing what he had given
him in charge. But before the arrival of hi
meflenger, a Franciscan friar of St. Jago had
secretly conveyed an account of this interesting
tranfa&ion to Bartholomew de Olmedo, a
monk of the fame order, who acted as chaplain
to the expedition.

Cortes,

Cortes, forewarned of the danger, had time

to take precautions for his own safety. His first
ftep was to find some pretext for removing from
the Havana Diego de Ordaz, an officer of
reat merit, but in whom, on account of his
known attachment to Velasquez, he could not
confide in this trying and delicate jun&ture. He
gave him the command of a vessel, defined to
take on board some provisions in a small harbour
beyond Cape Antonio, and thus made sure of
his absence, without seeming to fufpe& his fide-
lity. When he was gone, Cortes no longer
concealed the intentions of Velasquez from his
troops; and as officers and soldiers were equally
impatient to set out on an expedition, in pre-
paring for which most of them had expended
all their fortunes, they expressed their aftoni(h-
ment and indignation at that illiberal jealousy to
which the governor was about to sacrifice, not
only the honour of their general, but all their
sanguine hopes of glory and wealth. With one
voice they intreated that he would not abandon
the important station to which he had such a
good title. They conjured him not to deprive
them of a leader whom they followed with such
well-founded confidence, and offered to Ihed the
last drop of their blood in maintaining his au-
thority. Cortes was easily induced to comply
with what he himself so ardently desired. He
swore that he would never desert soldiers who
had given him such a signal proof of their at-
tachment, and promised instantly to conduc them
to that rich country, which had been so long
the obje& of their thoughts and wishes. This
declaration was received with transports of mili-

tary

tary applause, accompanied with threats and
imprecations a ainft all who should presume to
call in queition the jurifdi&ion of their general,
or to obitruct the execution of his designs.

Every thing was now ready for their departs

ure; but though this expedition was fitted out
by the united effort of the Spani(h power in
Cuba; though every settlement had contributed
its quota of men and provisions; though the
governor had laid out considerable fums, and
each adventurer had exhaufled his flock, or
stained his credit, the poverty of the prepara.
tions was such as must astonish the present age,
and bore, indeed, no resemblance to an armamert
destined for the conquest of a great empire. Tht
fleet confiffed of eleven vessels; the largest of a
hundred tons, which was dignified by the narr
bs Admiral; three of seventy or eighty ton,
and the reft frr.all open barks. On board cf
these were fix hundred and seventeen men ; c
which five hundred and eight belonged to th:
land service, and a hundred and nine were sea.
men or artificers. The soldiers were divided
into eleven companies, according to the number
of the ships ; to each of which Cortes appointed
a captain, and committed to him the comma.d
of the vessel while at fta, and of the men w\!:
on Ihorc g. As the tife of fire-arms among the
nations of Europe was hitherto confined to a
few battalions of regularly disciplined infantry,
only thirteen soldiers were armed with munf:ctc,
thirty-two were cross-bow men, and th:
reif had swords and spears. Instead cf thS
ufial dcfrnfi.e armour, which must have bee

* tSis N I cu
C:.

icuiiibcrf.jri

cu nberfome in a hot climate, the soldiers wore
iackets quilted with cotton, which experience
had taught the Spaniards to be a sufficient pro-
tection against the weapons of the Americans.
The) had only sixteen horses, ten small field-
pieces, and four falconets h.

With this slender and ill-provided train did

Cortes set fail [Feb. 10, 1519], to make war
upon a monarch whose dominions were more ex-
tensive than all the kingdoms subjet to the

'Sanilh crown. As religious enthusiasm always

mingled with the spirit of adventure in the New
World, and, by a combination still more trange,
united with avarice, in prompting the Spaniards
to all their enterprises, a large cross was dif-
played in their standards, with this inscription,
Let us follow the croft, for under thirign we Jball
igngtr.

So powerfully were Cortes and his followers

animated with both these passions, that no leds
eager to plunder the opulent country whither
they were bound, than zealous to propagate the
Chritiian faith among its inhabitants, they set
ojt, not with the solicitude natural to men going
upon dangerous services, but with that confidence
which arises from security of success, and cer-
tainty of the divine protection.

As Cortes had determined to touch at every

place which Grijalva had visited, he steered di-
recly towards the island of Cozumel: there he
had the good fortune to redeem Jerome de Agui.

.r, a Spaniard, who had been eight years a.pri-
'.jncr among the Indians. This man was per-
fc:tly acquainted with a dialec of their language>

h B. Diaz. c. I9,

** .jt. 11. M under.l

understood through a large extent of country,
and possessing besides a considerable share of pru.
dence and sagacity, proved extremely useful as
an interpreter. From Coznmel, Cortes pro-
ceeded to the river of Tabasco [March 4J, ii
hopes of a reception as friendly as Grijalva had
met with there, and of finding gold in the farce
abundance; but the disposition of the nativt,
from some unknown cause, was totally chalngd.
After repeated endeavours to conciliate their
good-will, he was constrained to have recourfi
to violence. Though the forces of the entelry
were numerous, and advanced with extraordinary
courage, they were routed, with great slaughter,
in several successive actions. The loss wh;ich
they sustained, and flill more the aftoniflment
and terror excited by the destructive effectz o
the fire-arms, and the dreadful appearance ci
the horfcs, humbled their fierce spirits, a:.
induced them to sue for peace. They acknow-
ledged the king of Catile as their fovereigc:,
and granted Cortes a supply of provisions, wit!
a present of cotton garments, some gold, ai.J
twenty female slaves i.

Cortes continued his course to the westward,

keeping as near the shore as possible, in order to
obfcrve the country; but could discover no pro.
per place for landing, until he arrived at St. Juan
de Ulua k. As he entered this harbour [April 2]
a large canoe, full of people, among whom were
two who seemed to be persons of difin&tion,
approached his ship with ligns of peace and

A See NOTE CI. k B. Diaz. c.31--6. Cc.

manr, Cr-. c. 1--z3. Hrrera, dec z. lib. iv. c. J1,
&c.

an it

amity. They came on board without fear or
dillrul, and addressed him in a most refpe&ful
manner, but in a language altogether unknown
to Aguilar. Cortes was in the utmot perplexity
a:d distress, at an event of which he instantly
foresaw all the consequences, and already felt
the hesitation and uncertainty with which he
hfould carry on the great schemes which he
r.nditated, if, in his tranfa&ions with the na-
tivcs, he mult depend entirely upon such an
imperfect, ambiguous, and conjectural mode of
communication, as the use of signs. But he did
not remain long in his embarrafling situation: a
fortunate accident extricated him, when his own
sagacity could have contributed little towards
his relief. One of the female slaves, whom he
had received from the cazique of Tabasco, hap.
pened to be present at the firlt interview between
Curtes and his new guests. She perceived his
ditrefs, as well as the confusion of Aguilar; and
as she perfecfly understood the Mexican languages
ihe explained what they had said in the Yucatan
tongue, with which Auguilar was acquainted.
Tiis woman, known afterwards by the name of
Donna Marina, and who makes a conspicuous
figure in the hiltory of the New World, where
great revolutions were brought about by small
caufcs and inconsiderable instruments, was born
i: one of the provinces of the Mexican empire:
Having been fold as a slave in the early part of
icr life, after a variety of adventurers Ihe fell
i:.:u the hands of the Tabafcans, and had relided
,.;g enough among them to acquire their lan-:
?.agc, without loling the use of her own.

M 2 Though.

Though it was both tedious and troublcfome t
converse by the intervention of two different in
terpreters, Cortes was so highly pleased witi
hae~ discovered this method of carrying o0
some intercourse with the people of a countn
into which he was determined to penetrate
that in the transports of his joy he confiderel
it as a visible interposition of Providence in hii
favour1.

He now learned, that the two persons whoa

he had received on board of his ship were deputin
from Teutile and Pilpatoe, two officers entrusted
with the government of that province, by a great
monarch, whom they called Montezuma; and
that they were sent to inquire what his intentions
were in visiting their coast, and to offer him what
aflifiance he might need, in order to continue
his vovage. Cortes, struck with the appear.
ance of those people, as well as the tenorof
the message, assured them, in refpeftful terrms,
that he approached their country with mofi
friendly sentiments, and came to propose matten
of great importance to the welfare of their prince
and his kingdom, which he would unfold more
fully, in person, to the governor and the general,
Next morning, without waiting for any answer,
he landed his troops, his horses, and artillery;
and having chosen proper ground, began to eret
huts for his men, and to fortify his camp. The
natives, instead of opposing the entrance of thole
fetal guests into their ccuntrv, affiited them in
ll their operations, with an alacrity of ishith
they had ere long good reason to repent.

B. Disz. c. 37, 32, 39. Comara, Cron. c. 25, 16.
Bferrci, dac. 2. lib. v. c. 4-

NC.V.

Next day Teutile and Pilpatoe entered the
Spanish camp with a numerous retinue, and
Cortes confidering them as the ministers of a great
monarch, entitled to a degree of attention very
different from that which the Spaniards were
accustomed to pay to the petty caziques, with
whom they had intercourse in the isles, received
them with much formal ceremony. He informed
them, that he came as ambassador from Don
Carlos of Austria, king of Castile, the greatest
monarch of the East, and was intrusted with
propoitions of such moment that he could im-
part them to none but the emperor Montezuma
himself, and therefore required them to condu&
him, without loss of time, into the presence of
their master. The Mexican officers could not
conceal their uneasiness at a request which they
knew would be disagreeable, and which they
foresaw might prove extremely embarrassing to
their sovereign, whose mind had been filled
with many disquieting apprehensions, ever since
the former appearance of the Spaniards on his
:oasts. But before they attempted to dissuade
Cortcs from infilting on this demand, they en-
deavoured to conciliate his good-will, by in-
treating him to accept of certain presents,
which, as humble slaves of Montezuma, they
laid at his feet. They were introduced with
great parade, and confiited of fine cotton cloth,
of plumes of various colours, and of ornaments
of gold and silver, to a considerable value; the
workmanship of which appeared to be as curious
as the materials were rich. The display of these
produced an effect very different from what the
Mexicans intended. Instead of satisfying, it

M1 3 incrcaied

increased the avidity of the Spaniards, and ren.
dered them so eager and impatient to become
mailers of a country which abounded with such
precious productions, that Cortes could hardir
iften with patience to the arguments which
Pilpatoe and Teutile employed to dissuade him
from viiting the capital, and in a haughty de.
termined tone he insisted on his demand, of being
admitted to a personal audience of their sovereign.
During this interview, some painters, in the
train of the Mexican chiefs, had been diligently
employed in delineating, upon white cotton
cloths, figures of the Ihips, the horses, the
artillery, the soldiers, and whatever else attracted
their eves, as singular. WVhen Cortes observed
this, and was informed that these pictures were
to be sent to Montezuma, in order to convey to
him a more lively idea of the strange and won.
derful objects now presented to their view, than
any words could communicate, he resolved to
render the representation still more animated
and interesting, by exhibiting such a fpecAde
as might give both them and their monarch an
awful imprefiion of the extraordinary prowefj
of his followers, and the irresistible force of their
arms. The trumpets, by his order, founded an
alarm; the troops, in amoment, formed in order
of battle, the infantry performed such martial
exercises as were best suited to display the
effect of their different weapons; the horse, in
various evolutions, gave a specimen of their
agility and strength : the artillery, pointed to-
wards the thick woods which surrounded the
camp, were fired, and made dreadful havoc
among the trees. The Mexicans looked on vwith

lL;:

that silent amazement which is natural when the
mind is firuck with objects, which are both awful
a-d above its comprehension. But, at the ex-
plosion of the cannon, many of them fled, some
fll to the ground, and all were so much con-
founded at the light of men whose power so
nearly resembled that of the gods, that Cortes
found it difficult to compose and re-assure them.
'Ihe painters had now many new objects on
which to exercise their art, and they put their
fancy on the stretch in order to invent figures
and fvmbols to represent the'extraordinary things
which they had seen.

Messengers were immediately dispatched to

Montezuma with those pi&ures, -and a full ac-
count of every thing that had passed since the
arrival of the Spaniards, and by them Cortes
fcnt a present of some European curiosities to
Montezuma, which, though of no great value, he
believed would be acceptable on account of their
noveltv. The Mexican monarchs, in order to
obtain early information of every occurrence in
all the corners of their extensive empire, had in-
troduced a refinement in police, unknown, at
that time in Europe. They had couriers posted
at proper frations along the principal roads;
and as these were trained to agility by a regular
education, and relieved one another at moderate
difances, they conveyed intelligence with fur-
pr'fing rapidity. Though the capital in which
Montezuma resided was above a hundred and
eighty miles from St. Juan de Ulua, Cortes's
presents were carried thither, and an answer to
his demands was received in few days. The
fi..e officers who had hitherto treated with the

Spaniards,

Spaniards, were employed to dliver this answer;
but as they knew how repugnant the determin.
tion of their malter was to all the schemes and
wiihes of the Spanifl commander, they would
not venture to make it known until they had
previously endeavoured to sooth and mollify him,
For this purpose, they renewed their negotiation,
by introducing a train of a hundred Indians,
loaded with presents sent to him by Montezuma
The magnificence of these was such as became a
great monarch, and far exceeded any idea which
the Spaniards had hitherto formed of his
wealth. They were placed on mats spread on
the ground, in such order, as shewed them to
the greatell advantage. Cortes and his officen
view-cd, v ith admiration, the various manufac.
tures of the country, cotton fluffs so fine, and of
fuih delicate texture, as to resemble silk; pic.
tures of animals, trees, and other natural objects,
formed with feathers of different colours, disposed
and mingled with such Ikill and elegance, as to
ri.al the works of the pencil in truth and beauty
of imitation. But what chiefly attracted their
eyes, were two large plates of a circular form,
one of maflive gold representing the fun, the
other of silver, an emblem of the moon m. These
were accompanied with bracelets, collars, rings,
and other trinkets of gold; and that nothing
might be wanting which could give the Spaniards
a complete idea of what the country afforded,
with tome boxes filled with pearls, precious
stones, and grains of gold unwrought, as they
had been found in the mines or rivers. Cortes
receivcd all these with an appearance of profound

m Se NOTE CII.

veneratioi

veneration for the monarch by whom they were
bcftowed. But when the Mexicans, presuming
upon this, informed him, that their master,
though he desired him to accept of what he
had sent as a token of regard for that monarch
whom Cortes represented, would not give his
consent that foreign troops should approach
nearer to his capital, or even allow them to
continue longer in his dominions, the Spanish
general declared, in a manner more resolute and
peremptory than formerly, that he must insist
c. his first demand, as he could not, without
cilhonour, return to his own country, until he
was admitted into the presence of the prince
whom he was appointed to visit in the name of
his fovercign. The Mexicans, afionifhed at
feeing any man dare to oppose that will, which
they were accustomed to confider as supreme and
rrefiftible, yet afraid of precipitating their

country into an open rupture with such for-

rmidable enemies, prevailed with Cortes to pro-
.ife, that he would not move from his present
anmp, until the return of a mcflenger, whom
hey sent to Montezuma for farther inftruc.
Lions n.

The firmness with which Cortes adhered to
:is original proposal, Ihould naturally have
rought the negotiation between him and Mon.
ezuma to a speedy issue, as it seemed to leave
.he Mexican monarch no choice, but either to
:cci-e him with confidence as a friend, or to
:?pose him openly as an enemy. The latter was
ihsat might have been expected from a haughty

B. Diaz. c. 39. Gomara, Cron c. 27. Herrera,

pr. l;b. v. c. 5,i6. prince

prince in possession of extensive power. Th
Mexican empire, at this period, was at a pitch d
grandeur to which no fuciety ever attained in f0
short a period. Though it had subsisted, accord.
ing to their own traditions, only a hundred ard
thirty years, its dominion extended from tht
North to the South Sea, over territories itretc..
ing, with some small interruption, above five
hundred leagues from east to weft, and mor:
than two hundred from north to south, con.
prehending provinces not inferior in fertility,
population, and opulence, to any in the torr.d
zone. The people were warlike and enterpriing;
the authority of the monarch unbounded, azd
his revenues considerable. If, with the forct!
which might have been fuddcnly assembled i'
such an empire, Montezuma had fallen upon tht
Spaniards while encamped on a barren unhealthy
coast, unsupported by any ally, without a place
of retreat, and deffitute of provisions, it seems to
be impoflible, even with all the advantages c
their lupeiior discipline and arms, that they couli
have flood the shock, and they must either hav:
perihed in such an unequal contet, or ha-i
abandoned the enterprise.

As the power of Montezuma enabled him t,

tak. this spirited part, his own dispositions wev
such as formed naturally to prompt him to i=
Of all the princes who had swayed the Mexica:
sceptre, he was the most haughty, the me.
violent, and the most impatient of contro.
His fubjedts looked up to him with awe, and h5
cnmin-s with terror. The former he govcrne
with une arrmpled rigour, but they were i.
Freffed w'ith luch an opinion iof hi capacity,

cc-

urrmanded their respect ; and, by manyvicorics

,er the latter, he had spread far the dread of
i arms, and had added several considerable pro-
;iccs to his dominions. But though his talents
-:ht be suited to the tranfadions of a state so
-:perfcctly polished as the Mexican empire, and
ufficient to conduct them while in their accuf-
..med course, they were altogether inadequate
,a conjuncture so extraordinary, and did not
-jaiifv him either to judge with the difcerrnment,
I to aC with the decision, requisite in such
:. .:g emergence.
Frnm the moment that the Spaniards appeared
:- hi; coait, he discovered symptoms of timidity
'.d cmrbanr'ament. Intfead of taking such re-

:!ns as the consciousness of his own power,
: the memory of his former exploits, might

.. in.spired, he deliberated with an anxiety and
L:iitatiou which did not escape the notice of

L. nmeaiclt courticls. The perplexity and dif-

i.mpofure of Montezuma's mind upon this
a.caioun, as well as the general dismay of his
.bjccts, were not owing wholly to the impref-
.,:: whiich the Spaniards had made by the novelty
L: their appearance and the terror of their arms.
I:, origin may be traced up to a more remote
[. re. There was an opinion, if we may b!e-
.-c the earlicft and molt authentic Spanish
.:torians, almoit universal among the Ameri-
i '., that some dreadful calamity was impending
.er their heads, from a race of formidable in-
idcr-. wlio should come from regions towards
.: riling fun, to overrun and desolate their
,.ntry. Whether this disquieting apprehenfioa
wrd from the memory of some natural ca-

lamity

lamity which had afBiced that part of t[
globe, and impressed the minds of the inhabk.
ants with superstitious fears and forebodings, ci
whether it was an imagination accidentally fug.
gested by the astonishment which the firit si
of a new race of men occasioned, it is impo0flti
to determine. But as the Mexicans were mon
prone to superstition than any people in the Ne,
World, the' were more deeply affected by tk
appearance of the Spaniards, whom their ern
dulitv instantly represented as the instrumtn
destined to bring about this fatal revoluti.
which they dreaded. Under those circumitance,
it ceases to be incredible that a handful of ad;r,
turers should alarm the monarch of a great er
pire, and all his subjects °.

Notwithflanding the influence of this i.

preflion, when the messenger arrived from tl
Spanish camp with an account that the lea'.
of the strangers, adhering to his original demari
refused to obey the order enjoining him to leai
the country, Montezuma assumed some degra
ofrefolution, and, in a transport of rage natur
to a fierce prince unaccustomed to meet iij
any opposition to his will, he threatened to i
critice those presumptuous men to his gud
But his doubts and fears quickly returned, a
instead of issuing orders to carry his threats at
execution, he again called his ministers to conl
and offer their advice. Feeble and tempnria.
mnafures will always be the result when mt
afftmble to deliberate in a situation where th

o Cortes, Re atione Seconda, au. Ramus. iii. 234, :

Htrc:ra, drc. 2. lib. iii. c. I. fib. v. c. II. lib. v.i. L
Gj=j-a, Cron. c. 65. 9z. 144.

2 C-

u-.'; to ac. The Mexican counsellors took
ricctual measure for expelling such trouble-

[oe intruders, and were satisfied with issuing

r more poiitive injuncion, requiring them to
|e2,e the country; but this they preposterously
ccompanied with a present of such value, as
provcd freih inducement to remain there.
I leanshile, the Spaniards were not without
oLitude or a variety of sentiments, in delbe-
rSing concerning their own future conduet.

o.sl what they had already seen, many of
:.cm formed such extravagant ideas concerning
LeC opulence of the country, that despising dan.
er or hardihips, when they had in view trea-
fre; which appeared to be inexhaustible, they
=erc tager to attempt the conquest. Others,
tr.lating the power of the Mexican empire by
ws -ea'th, and enumerating the various proots
i.ich had occurred of its being under a well-
g-ulated administration, contended, that it would
I an act of the wildest frenzy to attack such a
:eC with a small body of men, in want of pro-
·:n%, unconnected with any ally, and already
leeblcd by the difeafcs peculiar to the climate,

ad the loss offeveral of their number P. Cortes
ecretly applauded the advocates for bold mea-
:re-, and cherifled their romantic hopes, as such
de-s corresponded with his own, and favoured
.,c execution of the schemes which he had
rncd. From the time that the suspicions of
ciafquez broke out with open violence in the
:trnpts to deprive him of the command, Cor.
t law t;he necessity of dissolving a connection
J:ch would obltruct and embarrass all his

r B Diaz. c. 4c.
tL. 11. N operations,

operations, and watched for a proper opport
nity of coming to a final rupture with hi.
Having this in view, he had laboured by eve,
art to secure the esteem and affe&ion of l
soldiers. With his abilities for command, itwa
cafv to gain their efeem; and his followers we
quickly satisfied that they might rely, with pe.
feet confidence, on the conduct and courage c
their leader. Nor was it more difficult to :.
quire their affection. Among adventure.
neari.- of the fame rank, and serving at the:
own expence, the dignity of command did nw
elevate a general above mingling with those wv
acitcd under hIm. Cortes availed himself of ti
freedom of intercourse, to insinuate himself ";
their favour, and by his affable manners, by we.3
timed acts of liberality to some, by infpiring2d
with vast hopes, and by allowing them to iran
privately with the narives q, he attached t:i
greater part of his soldiers so firmly to hirr.fc:,
that they aimoll forgot that the armament hs
been fitted out by the authority, and at thee.
pence, of another.

During those intrigues, Teutile arrived swi;

the present from Montezuma, and, togther w-.
it, delivered the ultimate order of that mona:.c
to depart in!tantly out of his dominions; 2
when Cortes, instead of complying, renewed hi
requet of an audience, the Mexican turned frm
him abruptly, and quitted the camp with looksri
gestures which strongly expressed his furprifezs
resentment. Next morning, none of the na
tives, who uscd to frequent the camp in gr3
numbers, in order to barter with the foldc.

£ Sc .S'CTE CIIL

ad to bring in provisions, appeared. All friendly
worrefpondence seemed now to be at an end, and
t was expecEed every moment that hostilities
Pould commence. This, though an event that
might have been foreseen, occasioned a sudden
confteration among the Spaniards, which em.
boldened the adherents of Velasquez not only
to murmur and cabal against their general, but
to appoint one of their number to remonitrate
openly against his imprudence in attempting the
conquest of a mighty empire with such inade-
quate force, and to urge the necessity of return.
jig to Cuba, in order to refit the fleet and aug-
Pnent the army. Diego de Ordaz, one of his
principal officers,whom the malecontents charged
with this commission, delivered it with a soldierly
freedom and bluntness, assuring Cortes that he
spoke the sentiments of the whole army. He
l:/ened to this remonstrance without any ap-
pearance of emotion, and as he well knew the
irmper and wishes of his soldiers, and foresaw
owv they would receive a proposition fatal at
once to all the splendid hopes and schemes
which they had been forming with such com-
lacency, he carried his dissimulation so far as

)

ficm to relinquish his own measures in com-
Iliance with the request of Ordaz, and issued
rders that the army should be in readiness next
lay to reimbark for Cuba. As soon as this was
known, the disappointed adventurers exclaimed
End threatened; the emissaries of Cortes, ming.
lng with them, inflamed their rage; the ferment
ibcame general; the whole camp was almost in
?cn mutiny ; all demanding with eagerness to fee
t.cir commander. Cortes was not flow in ap-

hi 2 pearing;

pearin,; when, with one voice, officers a
soldiers expressed their aftonithment and ind.
nation at the orders which they had receirv
It was unworthy, they cried, of the Caftila
courage, to be daunted at the sirs afpe& ,
danger, and infamous to fly before any enea
appeared. For their parts, they were dete.
mined not to relinquish an enterprise, that h
hitherto been successful, and which tended j
visibly to spread the knowledge of true religi
and to advance the glory and interest of th
country. Happy under his command, th
would follow him with alacrity through even
danger, in quest of those settlements and trm
fures which he had so long held out to thi
view; but if he chore rather to return to Cub,
and tamely give up all his hopes of diftinai
and opulence to an envious rival, they won
instantly choose another general to condri
them in that path of glory, which he had
spirit to enter.

Cortes, delighted with their ardour, took

offence at the boldncfs with w-hich it was utte
ed. The fentimrents were what he himfelfh!
inspired, and the warmth of expression fatisfi
him that his followers had imbibed them th,
roughly. He affected however, to be furp'ifd
at what he heard, declaring that his ordern
prepare for embarking were issued from a p-
suasion that this was agreeable to his troopi;
that, from deference to what he had been i^
formed was their inclination, he had facrfc
hi, own prirate opinion, which was firmly be2
on eflabli'hing immediatelv a fettlemrnt on t,
fez-coa:-, ar.n thtn on endearouring to pener.::

i ,,

into the interior part of the country; that now
he was convinced of his error; and as he per-
ceived that they were animated with the gene-
rous spirit which breathed in every true Spaniard,
he would resume, with fresh ardour, his original
plan of operation, and doubted not to conduct
them, in the career of victory, to such inde-
pendent fortunes as their valour merited. Upon
this declaration, shouts of applause testified the
excess of their joy. The measure seemed to be
taken with unanimous content; such as secretly
condemned it being obliged to join in the accla-
mations, partly to conceal their disaffection from
their general, and partly to avoid the imputa-
tion or cowardice from their fellow-fold iers r

Without allowing his men time to cool or to
reflec, Cortes set about carrying his design into
execution. In order to give a beginning to a
colony, he assembled the principal pelfons in his
army, and by their suffrage eleced a council
and magistrates in whom the government was to
be vested. As men naturally transplant the in,
ftitutions and forms of the mother-country into
their new settlements, this was framed upon the
model of a Spanish corporation. The magistrates
were diftinguilhed by the fame names and en-
signs of office, and were to exercise a similar
jirifdition. All the persons chosen were most
fitruly devoted to Cortes, and the instrument of
their election was framed in the king's name,
without any mention of their dependence on
Velasquez. The two principles of avarice and
enthuiiain, which prompted the Spaniards to all
their e::tcrprifcs in the New World, seem to
' . D;az. c, 0o, r1, 4z. Herrera, dec, z. .ib. v. c. 6, 7.

N 3 have

have concurred in suggesting the name which
Cortes beltowed on his infant settlement. lt
called it, 7he rich town of the true Croft s.

The first meeting of the new council w-

distinguished by a tranfaaion of great moment
As soon as it afftenbled, Cortes applied for leav
to enter; and approaching with many marksof
profound refpeEt, which added dignity to thk
tribunal, aud set an example of reverence fcr
its authority, he began a long harangue, is
which, with much art, and in terms extremne
flattering to persons just entering upon their nea
fun&tion, he observed, that as the supreme ju.
rifdiction over the colony which they had planted
was now veited in this court, he confidered them
as clothed with tie authority, and reprefentinz
the person of their fo7ereign ; that accordingir
he would communicate to them what he deemci
essential to the public safety, with the fame du
tiful fidelity as if he were addressing his rori
master; that the fcurity of a colony fettled in
great empire, whose foyereign had already dii.
covered his hostile int entions, depended upon arm,
and the efficacy of these upon the fubordinatio.
and discipline preserved among the troops;
that his right to command was derived from
commission granted by the governor of Cuba;
and as that had been long since revoked
the lawfulness of his jurifdiAion might well bp
questioned; that he might be thought to ad
upon a defective, or even a dubious title; ncr
could they trust an army which might difpu::
the powers of its general, at a jupnture when
ought implicitly to obey his orders; that,

Vilia rica de la vera Cruz.

moved by these considerations, he now resigned
all his authority to them, that they, having both
right to choose, and power to confer full ju-
riidiction, might appoint one, in the king's
name, to command the army in its future opera-
tions; and as for his own part, such was his zeal
for the service in which they were engaged, that
he would most cheerfully take up a pike with the
fan-.e hand that laid down the general's trun-
cheon, and convince his fellow-foldiers, that
though accustomed to command, he had not
forgotten how to obey. Having finished his dif-
conre, he laid the commission from Velasquez
upon the table, and after kissing his truncheon,
delivered it to the chief magiltrate, and with-
drew.

The deliberations of the council were not

long, as Cortes had concerted this important
mealure with his confidents, and had prepared
the other members with great address, for the
part which he wished them to take. His refig-
nation was accepted; and as the uninterrupted
tenor of their prosperity under his conduc
afforded the most satisfying evidence of his
ahbiities for command, the-, by their unanimous
furirage, elected him chief justice of the colony,
and captain-general of its arrmy, and appointed
his commission to be made out in the king's
name, with moit ample powers, which were to
continue in force until the royal plcafure should
be farther known. That this deed might not
be deemed the machination of a junto, the
council called together the troops and acquainted
t::nm with what had been resolved. The fol-
Lcrn, w -th eager aplauf, ratified the choice

v.which

which the council had made; the air resounded
with the name of Cortes, and all vowed to hed
their blood in support of his authority.

Cortes having now brought his intrigues to

the desired issue, and (haken off his mortifying
dependence on the governor of Cuba, accepted
of the commission which vested in him supreme
jurifdition, civil as well as military, over the
colony, with many professions of respect to the
council, and gratitude to the army. Together
with his new command, he assumed greater dig.
nity, and began to exercise more extenlive powers
Formerly he had felt himself to be only the de-
puty of a subject; now he acted as the repre.
fentative of his sovereign. The adherents of
V',lafquez, fully aware of what would be the
effect of this change in the situation of Cortes,
could no longer continue silent and passive spec.
tators of his a&tions. They exclaimed openly
again f the proceedings of the council as ilk.
gal, and against those of the army as mutinous
Cortes, instantly perceiving the necessity of
giving a timely check to such seditious difeourfe
by some vigorous measure, arrelted Ordaz, Es-
cudero, and Velasquez de Leon, the ringleaders
of this faction, and sent them prisoners aboard
the fleet, loaded with chains. Their depend.
ents, ailonifhed and overawed, remained quiet;
and Cortes, more desirous to reclaim than to
punish his prisoners, who were officers of great
merit, courted their friend(hip with such afl-.
duity and address, that the reconciliation vwa
perfectly cordial; and, on the moit trying occ2-
l ons, neither their connecion with the governor
of Cuba, nor the memory of the indignity wid

whici

which they had been treated, tempted them to
swerve from an inviolable attachment to his in-
terest r. In this, as well as his other negotia-
tions at this critical conjuncrure, which decided
with refpe& to his future fame and fortune,
Cortes owed much of his success to the Mexican
gold, which he distributed with a liberal hand
both among his friends and his opponents ".

Cortcs, having thus rendered the union be-
tween himself and his army indissoluble, by en-
gaging it to join him in disclaiming any depend-
e:ce on the governor of Cuba, and in repeated
acis of disobedience to his authority, thought he
r-i-ht now venture to quit the camp in which
he had hitherto remained, and advance into the
country. To this he was encouraged by an
erent no less fortunate than seasonable. Some
Indians having approached his camp in a myfte-
rious manner, were introduced into his presence.
He found that they were sent with a proffer of
friendship from the cazique of Zempoalla, a con-
liderable town at no great distance; and from
their answers to a variety of questions which he
put to them, according to his usual practice in
every interview with the people of the country,
lie gathered, that their maitcr, though subject
to the Mexican empire, was impatient of the
yoke, and filled with such dread and hatred of
Montezuma, that nothing could be more ac-
ccptable to him than any profpe& of deliver-
ance from the oppression under which he groan-
ed. On hearing this, a ray of light and hope
broke in upon the mind of Cortes. He saw

' B. Diaz. c.42, 43. Gomara, Cron. c. 3o, 31. Her-
r:), dtc. 2. sib. v, c. 7. i B. Diaz. c. 4;.

that

that the great empire which he intended to at.
tack was neither perfetly united, nor its fore.
reign univerfilly beloved. He concluded, that
the causes of difaffction could not be confined
to one province, but that in other corners there
must be malecontents, so weary of fubje&ion,
or so desirous of change, as to be ready to follow
the standard of any protector. Full of thofk
ideas, on which he began to form a scheme,
that time, and more perfec information co-
cerning the state of the country, enabled him
to mature, he gave a most gracious reception to
the Zempoallans, and promised soon to visit their
cazique n.

In order to perform this promise, it was not

necessary to vary the route which he had alread7
fixed for his march. Some officers, whom ht
had employed to survey the coast, having dif.
covered a village named Quiabiflan, about forty
miles to the northward, which, both on ac-
count of the fertility of the foil, and commo-
dioufnefs of the harbour, seemed to be a more
proper flation for a settlement than that where
he was encamped, Cortes determined to remove
thither. Zempoalla lay in his way, where the
cazique received him in the manner which he
had reason to expect; with gifts and careffe
like a man solicitous to gain his good-will; with
rcfpct approaching almost to adoration, like one
who looked up to him as a deliverer. From him
he learned many particulars with refpeft to the
character of Montezuma, and the circumstances
which rendered his dominion odious. He wa
a tyrant, as the cazique told him swith tear.,

B. DIaz. c. . Gomara, Cron. c. 18.

haughty,

haughty, cruel, and suspicious; who treated his
own subje&s with arrogance, ruined the con-
uered provinces by excessive exa&tions, and
often tore their sons and daughters from them
by violence ; the former to be offered as victims
to his gods; the latter to be reserved as con-
cubines for himself or favourites. Cortes, in
reply to him, artfully infinnated, that one great
object of the Spaniards in visiting a country so
remote from their own, was to redress griev-
ances, and to relieve the oppressed; and having
encouraged him to hope for this interposition in
due time, he continued his march to Quiabiflan.

The spot which his officers had recommended
as a proper situation, appeared to him to be so
well chosen, that he immediately marked our
ground for a town. The houses to be erected
Ncre only huts ; but these were to be surrounded
with fortifications, of sufficient strength to resist
the aflaults of an Indian army. As the finishing
of thrfe fortifications was essential to the exist-
ence of a colony, and of no less importance in
prosecuting the designs which the leader and his
sollowvers meditated, both in order to secure a
place of retreat, and to preserve their commu-
nication with the lea, every man in the army,
officers as well as soldiers, put his hand to the
work, Cortes himself setting them an example
of activity and perseverance in labour. The
I:.dians of Zempoalla and Quiabiflan lent their
a.'; and this petty station, the parent of so
n.any mighty settlements, was soon in a state of
fdJcnce Z.

B. Diaz. c. 45, 46. 48. Gomara, Cron. c. 32, 3X.
P;. H.rsr.,r dec, z. Iib. v. c , 9y.

Whi'hle

While engaged in this necessary work, Cor.

tes had fevcral interviews with the caziques of
Zempoalla and Qtiabiflan; and availing hirumt
of their wonder and aftonilhmcnt at the new
objecs which they daily beheld, he gradually in.
spircd them with such an high opinion of the
Spaniards, as beings of a superior order, and
irreliltible in arms, that, relying on their pro.
tection, they ventured to insult the Mi4exica
power, at the very name of which they wert
accuilomed to tremble. Some of Montezuma'i
officers having appeared to levy the usual trn.
Lute, and to demand a certain number of hu.
man victims, as an expiation for their guilt i:
preiuming to hold intcrcourfe with those ltran.
gcrj whom the emperor had commanded to leave
his dominions, iitead of obeying the older, the
caziques made them prisoners, treated them
with great indignity, and, as their superstition
was no leIs barbarous than that of the Mexicans,
they prepared to sacrifice them to their go&
From this lait danger they were delivered by
the interposition of Cortes, who manifested the
utmolt horror at the mention of such a d,.d.
The two caziques having now been pulhed to an
act of such open rebellion, as left them no hope od
faicty but in attaching thcmfelves inviolabiy u
the Spaniards, they soon completed their union
with them, by formally acakowledging their,
selves to be vassals of the fame monarch. ThLe
example was followed by the Totunaquc, a
fierce people who inhabited the mountainous
part of the country. They willingly fubjec:cd
thc;:;vc;s to tLh crown of Castile anid offTerc

to

Daccompany Cortes, with all their forces, in
is march towards Mexico Y.
Cortes had now been above three months in
;crv Spain; and though this period had not
en diifinguifhed by martial exploits, every
:oment had been employed in operations,
rhch, though less splendid, were more im-
,,rant- By his address in conduCting his in-
igues with his own army, as well as his saga-
:'y in carrying on his negotiations with the
?!.ives, he had already laid the foundations of
.. future success. But whatever confidence he
'..ih place in the plan which he had formed,
: could not but percei--e, that as his title to
,rn.mand was derived from a doubtful autho-
-:v, he held it by a precarious tenure. The
:,'.ries which Velasquez had received, were
'"ch as would naturally prompt him to apply for
·:dress to their common sovereign ; and fucll a
.presentation, he foresaw, might be given of
.i, condut, that he had reason to apprehend,
cot only that he might be degraded from his
p-reent rank, but fubjeeed to punishment. Be-
1-rc he began his march, it was neceflary to
tike the most effe&ual precautions againit this
i..pending danger. WVith this view he per-
·.aded the magiitrates of the colony at Vera
Cruz to address a letter to the king, the chief
c'jec of which was to justify their own conduc
L. ctablifhing a colony independent on the jurif-
diction of Velasquez. In order to accomplish
t.i:s, they endeavoured to detrac from his me-
r., in fitting out the two former armaments

I . Diz. c. 47. Comrara, Cron. 35, ;6. Herrera,

'
- 2 l.b v. c 9. 9, 1 -, 1.

r.L I:.. o under

under Cordova and Grijalva, affirming that thi
had been equipped by the adventurers who e.
gaged in the expeditions, and not by the gove.
nor. They contended that the sole object d
Velasquez was to trade or barter with the m.
tives, not to attempt the conquest of Ne,
Spain, or to fettle a colony there. They ,.
ferted that Cortes and the officers who serrd
under him had defrayed the greater part of th
expence in fitting out the armament. On th
account, they humbly requested their foverep
to ratify what they had done in his name, az:
to confirm Cortes in the supreme command ih
his royal commission. That Charles might .
induced to grant more readily what they d.
manded, they give him a pompous defcriptii
of the country which they had difcovcred; d
it; riches, the number of its inhabitants, thi:
civilization and arts; they relate the prog:r
which they had already made in annexing fore
parts of the country situated on the fea-coaf ti
the crown of Castile ; and mention the fcheiar
which they had formed, as well as the hopa
which they entertained, of reducing the whole u
fubje&ion '. Cortes himself wrote in a fimi-

firain;

7 In this letter it is aflerted, that though a confidtri:

number of Spaniards have been wounded in their vari,
encounters with the people of Tabasco, not one of them oa,
and all had recovered in a very fiort time. This fem'r.
confirm what I observe in p. 15I, concerning the imreia.
tion of the offensive weapons used by the Americars is
tbhi lIetr, the human sacrifices offered by the Mex:c-rs3
their deitise are dfecribed r.inutely, and with great hn.r.
tome oi the Spaniards, it is (aid, had been eye-witneaT i
thoe barbarous rites. To the letter is fubjoine a caatr

r.ain; and as he knew that the Spanish court,
acuftomed to the exaggerated representations
,f every new country by its discoverers, would
give little credit to their splendid accounts of
.'w Spain, if these were not accompanied with
Lch a specimen of what it contained, as would
tcite an high idea of its opulence, he solicited
h;s soldiers to relinquish what they might claim
2s their part of the treasures which had hitherto
b.en colleded, in order that the whole might be
!sint to the king. Such was the ascendant which
ite had acquired over their minds, and such their
r:n romantic expeEations of future wealth,
t:at an army of indigent and rapacious adven-
itrers was capable of this generous effort, and
offered to their fovcreign the richest present that
lad hitherto been transmitted from the New
WI'orldz. Portocarrero and Montejo, the chief
iragiirates of the colony, were appointed to
carry this present to Castile, with exprcfs or,
drn not to touch at Cuba in their passage thi,
ther a.

While a vessel was preparing for their de,
irtnre, an unexpeced event occasioned a gene.
r-l alarm. Some soldiers and sailors, secretly
a:ached to Velasquez, or intimidated at the
rofnc&t of the dangers unavoidable in attempt.
i,, to penetrate into the heart of a great empire
i.;:h such unequal force, formed the design of

a- c-fcription of the presents sent to the emperor. That
}.liIed by Gomara, Cron. c. 29, seems to have been copied
f:mn it. Pet. Martyr describes many of the articles in his
l:t;fe De infulis nuper inventis, p. 354, &c.

b t NEOTE CIV.
' B. Diz. c. 54. Gomara, Cron. c. 40.

0 2 rfizin

seizing one of the brigantines, and making the i
cfcape to Cuba, in order to give the govern
such intelligence as might enable him to inte.
cept the ship which was to carry the treafcu
and dispatches to Spain. This confpirc,
though formed by persons of low rank. wm
conducted with profound secrecy; but at tL.
moment when every thing was ready for exec.
tion, they were betrayed by one of their afG
ciates.

Though the good fortune of Cortes interpofd

¶o seasonably on this occasion, the detection c
this conspiracy filled his mind with most L'
quieting apprehensions, and prompted himr
execute a fchene which he had long revol1.
He perceived that the spirit of difaffecion 1
lurked among his troops; that, though hither.
checked br the uniform success of his fche,.en
or fupprefled by the hand of authority, vano
events might occur which would encouraF
and call it forth. He observed, that many of hi
men, weary of the fatigue of service, longed
revisit their settlements in Cuba; and that ups:
any appearance of extraordinary danger, or a:.
reverse of fortune, it would be impofible *
restrain them from returning thither. He w
sensible that his forces, already too feeble, co,.'
bear no diminution, and that a very small defec
tion of his followers would oblige him to ab-
don the enterprifc. After ruminating often, 2-
with much solicitude, upon those particulars,
saw no hope of success, but in cutting of i
pofTibilitv of retreat, and in reducing his men:
the necelfity of adopting the fame refolu:.:
with which he himself was animated, either:

CUri--

conquer or to perish. With this view, he deter-
mined to destroy his fleet; but as he durst not
venture to execute such a bold resolution by his
single authority, he laboured to bring his fol-
diers to adopt his ideas with refpec to the pro-
priety of this measure. His address in accom-
plilhing this was not inferior to the arduous occa-
sion in which it was employed. He persuaded
forne, that the ships had suffered so much by
ha'.ing been long at sea, as to be altogether
unfit for service; to others he pointed out what
a seasonable reinforcement of strength they would
derive from the junction of an hundred men,
now unprofitably employed as sailors; and to
al!, he represented the necessity of fixing their
eve; and wifnes upon what was before them,
without allowing the idea of a retreat once to
enter their thoughts. With universal consent
thl ships were drawn ashore, and after stripping
thnm of their fails, rigging, iron works, and
whatever else might be of us , they were broke
in pieces. Thus, from an effort of magnani-
mitv, to which there is nothing parallel in his-
tory, five hundred men voluntarily consented to
be shut up in a hotiile country, filled with
powerful and unknown nations; and having
precluded every means of escape, left themselves
without any resource but their own valour and
perseverance b.

Nothing now retarded Cortes; the alacrity

of his troops and the disposition of his allies were
equally favourable. All the advantages, how-
ever, derived from the latter, though procured

R Pat. di Cortes. Ramu. iii. 225. B. Diaz. c. 57, 58.
i;;;i;a, a;c. 2. lib. v. c. 4-.

o 3 by

by much assiduity and address, were well nig,
lotu in a rmoment, by an indifcrcet sally of rtiL
jijus zeal, which, on manyoccafions, precipitatcd
Cortes into actions inconfifient with the pr.
tience that diftinguithes his charaSter. Thouzh
hitherto he had neither time nor opportunity to
expain to the natives the errors of their owt
fuperitition, or to inftrut them in the principlei
of the Christian faith, he commanded his soldien
to overturn the altars and to defIroy the idols in
the chief temple of Zempoalla, and in thet
place to erect a crucifix and an image of t},e
Virgin Marv. The people beheld this wlit
aftoniit-ment and horror; the priests exc itc
them to arms ; but such was the authority .,.
Cortes, and so great the ascendant whici ttr
Spaniards had acquired, that the commotion sa!
appeased without bloodfhtcd, and concord Fpr.
fectly re-established C.

Cortes began his march from Zempoalla en

the sixteenth of Augufi, with five hundred
men, fifteen horse, and fix field-pieces. The
reft of his troops, confilfing chiefly of such ai
from age or infirmity were less fit for acts:t
fervicc he left ar a garrison in Villa Rica, under
the command of Efcalante, an officer of merit,
and wanrrl attached to his interest. The
cazique of Zempoalla supplied him with pro.

siJion., and vith twou hundred of those Indians,

called T7omrn.:;, wnhofe office, in a country
where tame arnimals were unknown, sas to
carry burdens, and to perform all servile labour.
They were a great relief to the Spanish soldiers,
vho hitherto had been obliged, not only :u
c B. D;ja. c. 4i1, . Hcrrcra, dec. z. Ub, v. c. 3 4-

carry

carry their own baggage, but to drag along
the artillery by main force. He offered likewise
a coiii'dcrable body of his troops, but Cortes
was satisfied with four hundred; taking care,
iho;cser, to choose persons of such note as
might prove hostages for the fidelity of their
mar;cr. Nothing memorable happened in his
progrcfs, until he arrived on the confines of
Tlafcala. The inhabitants of that province, a
wvarlike people, were implacable enemies of the
Mexicans, and had been united in an ancient
';jiance with the caziques of Zempoalla. Though
ic civilized than the fibjects of Montezuma,
tU.ey were advanced in improvement far beyond
.e rude nations of America, whose manners we
lavre described. They had made considerable
pr,,rcfs in agriculture; they dwelt in large
tJswis; they were not strangers to fume species
*tf commerce; and in the imperfect accounts of
:inir irititutions and laws, transmitted to us by
.-c earl)' Spanish writers, we discern traces
i;,,ui of distributive juflice and of criminal jurif-
I':.ioii, in their interior police. But till, as the
,:-grcc of their civilization was incomplete, and
a, they depended for subsistence not on agricul-
:!:c alone, but trusted for it, in a great measure,
J hunting, they retained many of the qualities
i.atural to men in this state. Like them, theywere
nrce and revengeful; like them, too, they were
:.igl-fpirited and independent. In consequence of
t.,1 former, they were involved in perpetual hof-
'.;.-, and had but a slender and occasional in-
'.t;-ourfc with neighbouring ftatts. The latter

pired them with such detestation of servitude,
:: tllhey nt only refused to Roop to a foreign

yoke,

yoke, and maintained an obstinate and fuccefsfsi
contest in defence of their liberty against th
superior power of the Mexican empire, bat
they guarded with equal solicitude against domed.
tic tyranny; and disdaining to acknowledge atr
master, they lived under the mild and limited ju!ri.
di&tion of a council elected by their several trib!.

Cortes, though he had received i:lforrnati. :

concerning the martial character of this peopi',
flattered hiimfelf that his profcffions of deliverir.
the oppressed from the tyranny of Montezura.
their inveterate enmity to the Mexicans, and t};
example of their ancient allies the Zempoalla..,
might induce the Tlafcalans to grant him
friendly reception. In order to dispose them :.
this, four Zempoallans of great eminence wet:
sent arr.baffadors, to requelt, in his name, as:
in that of their cazique, that they would perr..
the Spaniards to pass through the territorie-s
the republic in their way to Mexico. But it
:tead of the favoura:.le answer which was n.
pecaed, theTlafcalans fcized the ambassadors, arc.
wi:hout any regard to their public characr.
made preparations for facriticing them to tth
gods. At the fame time, they assemblcd ther
roops, in order to oppose those unknown r.-
vaderz, if they fmhou!d attempt to make thc
Fafage good by force of arms. Various mouir,
concurred in precip'tating the Tlafcalans ir.'
this refclution. A fierce people, shut up witt.
its own narrow precipicts, and little accuftorre.
to ar.v intercourie with foreigners, is apt to cce:-
fider cet:y f.rarger as an enemy, and is easily n-
cited to arms. They concluded from Cort:'
proposal of i;iit'rg Mlontezuina in his cap?-£

[nat, rotwithftanding all his professions, he
courted the friendship of a monarch whom they
both hated and feared. The imprudent zeal of
Cortes in violating the temples in Zempoalla,
sied the Tlafcalans with horror; and as they
wver no less attached to their superstition than
thc other nations of New Spain, they were
impatient to avenge their injured gods, and to
acquire the merit of offering up to them, as vic-
tims, those impious men who had dared to profane
their altars; they contemned the small number of
the Spaniards, as they had not yet measured
their own strength with that of these new
enemies, and had no idea of the superiority
w.ich they derived from their arms and dif-
cJlinle.

Cortes, after waiting some days, in vain,

for the return of his ambassadors, advanced
rAug. 30] into the Tlafcalan territories. As the
reiolutions of people who delight in war are ex-
ecuted with no less promptitude than they are
formed, he found troops in the field ready to
oppose him. They attacked him with great
intrepidity, and, in the first encounter, wounded
iforr. of the Spaniards, and killed two horses; a
lss, in their situation, of great moment, because
it was irreparable. From this specimen of their
courage, Cortes saw the necessity of proceed.
ing with caution. His army marched in close
oruer; he chose the stations, where he halted,
u'i:h attention, and fortified every camp with
extraordinary care. During fourteen days he
isas exposed to almost uninterrupted aiTaults, the
'I alcalans advancing with numerous armies,
2ad rcne;ing the attack in various forms, with

a de-

a degree of valour and perseverance to which
the Spaniards had seen nothing parallel in the
New World. The Spanish hiltorians describe
those successive battles with great pomp, and
enter into a minute detail of particulari,
mingling many exaggerated and incredible cr.
cumftancesd, with such as arc real and marvl.
lous. But no power of words can render tke
recital of a combat interesting, where there is
no equality of danger; and when the narrative
closes with an account of thousands slain on the
one fide, while not a single person falls on the
other, the moit laboured descriptions of the pre.
vious disposition of the troops, or of the various
viciflitudes in the engagement, command no at.
tcntion.

There are some circumstances, however, in

this war, which are memorable, and merit no-
tice, as they throw light upon the charaecr
both of the people of New Spain, and of their
conquerors. Though the Tlafcalans brought
into the field such numerous armies as appear
sufficient to have overwhelmed the Spaniard;,
they were never able to make any impreflion
upon their small battallion. Singular as this
may seem, it is not inexplicable. The Tlafcaians,
though addidted to war, were, like all unpo.
lifhed nations, Strangers to military order ard
discipline, and loft in a great measure the ad-
vantage which they might have derived from
their numbers, ai.d the impetuosity of their at-
tack, by their conflant solicitude to carry of
the dead and wounded. This point of honour,
founded on a sentiment of tenderneif natural tu

4 Sec NOTz CV.

th-

the human mind, and strengthened by anxiety
to preserve the bodies of their countrymen from
being devoured by their enemies, was universal
among the people of New Spain. Attention to
this pious office occupied them even during
the heat of combate, broke their union, and
diminished the force of the impression which they
mirht have made by a joint effort.

Not only was their superiority in number of

little avail, but the imperfecion of their military
weapons rendered their valour in a great measure
i:,offenive. After three battles, and many fkir-
rni.es and assaults, not one Spaniard was killed in
the ftild. Arrows and spears, headed witl flint
or the bones of filhes, stakes hardened in the fire,
and wooden swords, though deftrudive weapons
among naked Indians, were easily turned aside by
the Spanish bucklers, and could hardly penetrate
tn-e e;aupiles, or quilted jackets, which the fol-
cd!rr wore. The Tlafcalans advanced boldly to
the charge, and often fought hand to hand.
Many of the Spaniards were wounded, though
all slightly, which cannot be imputed toany want
of courage or strength in their enemies, but to
the defect of the arms with which they assailed
them.

Notwithstanding the fury with which the
Tlafcalans attacked the Spaniards, they seem
to have conducted their hostilities with some
degree of barbarous generosity. They gave the
Spaniards warning of their hostile intentions,
a-d as they knew that their invaders wanted
provilions, and imagined, perhaps, like the other
.A:::;ri:;.,, that they had left their own country

' B. Dinz. c. 6;.

because

becatife it did not afford them subsistence, they
sent to their camp a large supply of poultry and
maize, desiring them to eat plentifully, becaume
they scorned to attack an enemy enfeebled by
hunger, and it would be an affront to their goc
to offer them famimhed viEtims, as well as dif.
agreeable to themfclves to feed on such emaciated
prey f.

When they were taught by the first ea.

counter with their new enemies, that it was not
eafv to execute his threat; when they perceived,
in the fubfequcnt engagements, that notwvit.
standing all the efforts of their own valour, oi
which they had a very high opinion, not'one
of the Spaniards was slain or taken, they began
to conceive them to be a superior order of bt.
ings, against whom human power could not avail,
In this extremity, they had recourse to tlhtir
priefis, requirirg thern to reveal the mylteriou
causes of such extraordinary events, and to U.
dare what new means they should employ i
order to repulse thofc formidable invaders. Tbt
prietts, after many sacrifices and incantation;,
delivered this response. That these ftraingc-
wvere the offspring of the fun, procreated by I:i
a.nimating enerrg in the regions of the cait
that, by day, while chtrilhed with the influ:.,;
of his parental beams, they were invincibl
but by night, when his re-viing heat was wvi:
drawn, their vigour declined and faded like thi
herbs in the field, and they dwindled down inu
mortal men g. Theories less plausible hat
gained credit with more enlightened natia.:

f Herrera, dec. z. lib. vL c. 6. CGvnar, Cron, G. 4-.
RB. Diaz, c. 66.

and have influenced their-conduc.. In' confe-
quince of this, the Tlafcalans, with the implicit
conidrence of men who fanzy themselves to be
under the guidance of Heaven, acted in con-
tradiction to one of their most eltablifhed maxims
i; war, and ventured to attack the enemy, with
a tlrong body, in the night-time, inhopes of
delt oviing them when enfeebled and surprised.
Bjt CorteC had greater vigilance and difeern-
,ent than to be deceived by the rude stratagems
of an Indian army. The centinels at his out-
puol, observing some extraordinary movement
armong the Tlafcalans, gave the alarm. In a
monmcut the troops were under arms, and sally-
ing out, disperscd the party with great laughter,
\i;!iout allowing it to approach the camp. The
Tlafcalans, convinced, by fad experience, that
their pritls had deluded them, and satisfied that
t!hey attempted in vain, either to deceive or to
vanquish their enemies, their fierceness abated,
and they began to incline ferioufy to peace.

They were at a loss, however, in what man-
ner to address the itrangers, what idea to form
,f Itlir characer, and whether to confider them
a- beings of a gentle or of a malevolent nature.
There were circumstances in their conduct which
farned to favour each opinion. On the one
hand, as the Spaniards conllantly dismissed the
prisoners whom they took, not only without
i;jjry, but often with presents of European
toji, and renewed their offers of peace after
tcr). victory ; this lenity amazed people, who,
a iordill; to the exterminating fyltem of war
KiPwn in America, were accuitomed to sacrifice
r.d devour without mercy all the captives taken
voL. i. P in

in battle, and disposed them to entertain favour.
able sentiments of the humanity of their nDt
enemies. But, on the other hand, as Cortti
had seized fifty of their countrymen who brought
provisions to his camp, and, supposing them to
be spies, had cut off their hands h; this hloodT
spectacle, added to the terror occasioned by tri
fire-arms and horses, filled them with dreadful
imprefflons of the ferocity of their invaders.,
This uncertai-ty was apparent in the mode of
addressing the Spaniards. " If," said they,
" you are divinities of a cruel and savage nature,
we present to you five flares, that you may drink
their blood, and eat their flelh. If you are mil
deities, accept an offering of incense and varic.
gated plumes. If you are men, here is meat,
and bread and fruit to nourish youk." The
peace, which both parties now desired with eq-,l
ardour, was soon concluded. The Tlafcaila
yielded themselves as vassals to the crown oi
Caflile, and engaged to alfift Cortes in all his
future operations. He took the republic
under his protecion, and promised to defend
their persons and possessions from injury or
violence.

This treaty was concluded at a feafona;!e

juncture for the Spaniards. The fatigue of for.
,ice among a small body of men, surrounded by
such a multitude of enemies, was incredib!e.
Half the army was on duty every night, and
'ecn they whose turn it was to reft, slept alwayi
upon their arms, that they might be ready to

" Cortes, Relat. Ramus. iil. zzg. C. Gomara, Crm

C. 4R. ' Se NOTL CVI. t B. Diaz. c.-.
Cuorra, Cron. c. 47. Hcrica, dec. a, lib. i. c. 7.

1 11C1~~~

rn to their posts on a moment's warning. Many
of them were wounded, a good number, and
among these Cortcs himself, laboured under the
dilfempers prevalent in hot climates, and several
bad died since they set out from Vera Cruz.
Notwvithftanding the supplies which they received
from the Tlafcalans, they were often in want of
provisions, and so destitute of the necessaries most
requisite in dangerous service, that they had no
salve to dress their wounds, but what was com-
posed with the fat of the Indians whom they had
slain . Worn out with such intolerable toil and
hardhips, many of the soldiers began to mur-
mur, and, when they refleted on the multitude
and boldness of their enemies, more were ready
to despair. It required the utmost exertion of -
Cortes's authority and address to check this spirit
of despondency in its progress, and to re-animate
his followers with their wonted sense of their own
superiority over the enemies with whom they had
to contend m. The submission of the Tlafcalans,
and their own triumphant entry into the capital
city, where they were received with the reve-
rence paid to beings of a superior order, banish-
cd, at once, from the minds of the Spaniards, all
memory of past sufferings, dispelled every an-
xious thought with refpef to their future ope-
rdtions, and fully satisfied them that there was
rot now any power in America able to withstand
their arms ".

Cortes remained twenty days in Tlafcala, in
order to allow his troops a short interval of re;

B. Diaz. c. 6z. 65. Cortes, Relat. Ramuil
z:i. B. Diaz. c. 69. Gomara, Cron. c. 51.
Cortc!, Rclat. namuf..iii. o. B. Diaz. c, 71.

Pa pose

pose after such hard service. During that tin,
he was employed in tranfaations and inquiries o
great mrir.ent with respect to his future fchenme
In his daily conferences with the Tlafcaia
chiefs, he received information concerning even
particular relative to the state of the Mexica
empire, or to the qualities of its sovereign,
which could be of use in regulating his condut,
whether he should be obliged to a& as a friend
or as an enemy. As he found that the antipati
of his new allies to the Mcxican nation was Do
lcfs implacable than had been represented, and
perceived what benefit he might derive from tbk
aid of such powerful confederates, he employed
all his powers of insinuation in order to gai
their confidence. Nor was any extraordinary
exertion of thcfe necessary. The Tlafcalan~,
with the levity of mind natural to unpolifed
men, were, of their own accord, disposed to
run from the extreme of hatred to thatof fond.
ness. Every thing in the appearance and con.
duc; of their guerls, was to them matter of
,wondcr °. They gazed with admiration at
whatever the Spaniards did, and fancying them
to be of heavenly origin, were eager not cay7
to comply with their.demands, but to anticipate
their wiihes. They offered, accordingly, to ac-
company Cortes in his march to Mexico, with
all the forces of the republic, under the com-
mar.d of their mcft experienced captains.

But, after bettowing so much pains on ce-

Pcnting this union, all the beneficial fruits of it
wvere on the point of being loll, by a new l: .-
ion of that intemperate religious ztal :.;_

e S NOTE CV1I.

whicbh

which Cortes was animated, no less than the:
other adventurers of the age. They all con-
fidered themselves as instruments employed by
Heaven to propagate the Christian faith, and
the less they were qualified, either by their
knowledge or morals, for such a function, they
were more eager to discharge it. The profound
veneration of the Tlafcalans for the Spaniards,
having encouraged Cortes to explain to some of
their chiefs the dotrines of the Christian reli-
gion, 'and to insist that they ihould abandon
their own superstitions, and embrace the faith
of their new friends, they, according to an
idea universal among barbarous nations, readily
acknowledged the truth and excellence of what
he taught; but contended, that the Teules of
Tlafcala were divinities no less than the God in
whom the Spaniards believed; and as that Being
was entitled to the homage of Europeans, so
they were bound to revere the fame powers
which their ancestors had worlhipped. Cortes
continued, nevertheless, to urge his demand in a
tone of authority, mingling threats with his
arguments, until the Tlafcalans could bear it
no longer, and conjured him never to mention
this again, left the gods flould avenge on their
heads the guilt of having listened to such a pro-
position. Cortes, astonished and enraged at
their obstinacy, prepared to execute by force,
what he could not accomplish by persuasion,
and was going to overturn their altars, and cait
down their idols with the fame violent hand as
a: Zempoalla, if father Bartholomew de Olmedo,
haplain to the expedition, had not checked his
i;:,.lidcrate impetuosity. He represented the

p3. imprudence

imprudence of such an attempt in a large ty
newly reconciled, and filled with people no-l
superstitious than warlike; he declared .that
the proceeding at Zempoalla had always ap.
peared to him precipitate and unjust; that ma
ligion was not to be propagated by the fwordci
infidels to be converted by violence; that othe
weapons were to be employed in this minifry
patient inftrudion must enlighten the unden
standing, and pious example captivate the hert,
before men could be induced to abandon error,
and embrace the truth P. Amidfl fcenet,
i here a narrow-minded bigotry appears in func
cltfe union with oppression and cruelty, feni.
ments so liberal and humane sooth the mind
with unexpeted pleasure; and at a.time when
the rights of conscience were little understood i
the Christian world, and the idea of toleration
unknown, onp is aftonilhed to find a Spanifl
monk of the sixteenth century among the fir
advocates againtt persecution, and in behalf of
religious liberty. The remonstrances of an eccle.
fiaftic, no Ic£s refpcctable for wildom than vir-
tue, had their proper weight with Cortes. He
kft the Tlafcalans in the undifiurbed exercise of
their own rites, requiring only that they should
desist from their horrid pradice of offering hn.
man victims in sacrifice.

Cortes, as soon as his troops were fit for ser.

yicc, resolvcd to continue his march towards
Mexico, notwitliflanding the earnett dirfuaa.vs
of the Tlafcalanc, who represented his defiruction
a. unavoidable, if he put himself in the power :
a princc so fatlilcfs and cruel as Mouiltezuna.

! B. Diaz. c. 7 p. 54. c, Sj p. 6I.

2 :;

4 -l-s~ j~ITE!D~s~tT . bPa
- a~RPl~aEn'~hEr~

As he was accompanied by fix thousand Tlafcat
lans, he had now the command of forces whichl
resembled a regular army. They dire&ed their
course towards Cholula [OA. 13]; Monte-
zurna, who had at length consented to admit the
Spaniards into his presence, having informed
Curtes, that he had given orders for his friendly
recieption there. Cholula was a considerable
;wn, and, though only five leagues distant from
l'iT'cala, was formerly an independent state, but
Lad been lately fubje&ed to the Mexican em-
piiC. This was confidered by all the people of
Near Spain as a holy place, the fanEuary and
chif feat of their gods, to which pilgrims re-
;.:ted from every province, and a greater num-
b'r oi human vitims were offered in its principal
t.-plz than even in that of Mexico q. Monte-
znina seems to have invited the Spaniards thither,
either from some superstitious hope that the
gods would not susser this sacred mansion to be
dz:iled, without pouring down their wrath upon
those impious strangers, who ventured to insult
ithir power in the place of its peculiar refit
dince ; or. from a belief that he himself might
there attempt to cut them off with more certain
success, under the immediate protection of his
divinities.

Cortes had been warned by the Tlafcalans,

before he set out on his march, to keep a watch-
f1l eve over the Cholulans. He himself, though
received into the town with much seeming re-
fpcct and cordiality, observed several circum-

s Torquemada, Monar. Ind. i. zSi, zgz. ii. 291. Go-
mua, Cron. c. 61. 'Herrera, dec. z. lib. vii. c. z.

flances

itances in their conduct which excited fufpicioo.
Two of the Tlafcalans, who were encamped at
some distance from the town, as the Cholulant
refused to admit their ancient enemies within
its precincs, having found means to enter ia
disguise, acquainted Cortes, that they obfcrved
the women and children of the principal citizens
retiring in great hurry every night; and that
fix children had been sacrificed in the chief
temple, a rite which indicated the execution of
rome warlike enterprise to be approaching.
At the fame time, Marina the interpreter re.
ceived information from an Indian woman of
ditinciion, whose confidence she had gained, that
the deftruaion of her friends was concerted;
that a body of Mexican troops lay concealed
near the town; that some of the streets were
barricaded, and in others, pits or deep trenches
were dug, and slightly covered over, as traps
into which the horses might fall; that stones
or miflive weapons were collected on the tops
of the temples, with which to overwhelm
the infantry; that the fatal hour was now at
band, and their ruin unavoidable. Cortes,
alarmed at this concurring evidence, secretly
arrested three of the chief priests, and extorted
from them a confefion, that confirmed the in-
telligence which he had received. As not a
moment was to be loll, he inilantly resolved to
prevent his enemies, and to inflict on them such
dreadful vengeance as might strike Montezuma
and his subjects with terror. For this purpose,
the Spaniard; and Zempoallans were drawn up
in a large court, vwhh Lad been allotted for

their

their quarters, near the centre of the town,
;:ic lafcalans had orders to advance; the ma-
giitrates and several of the chief citizens were
tent for, under various pretexts, and seized.
On a signal given, the troops rushed out, and
fill upon the multitude, destitute of leaders,
and so much astonished, that the weapons drop.
ping from their hands, they stood motionless,
and incapable of defence. While the Spaniards
pressed them in front, the Tlafcalans attacked
them in the rear. The itreets were filled with
bloodlhed and death. The temples, which
afforded a retreat to the-priefts and some of the
leading men, were set on fire, and they perished
in the flames. This scene of horror continued
two days; during which, the wretched in-
habitants suffered all that the deftrutive rage of
the Spaniards, or the implacable revenge of their
Indian allies, could inflict. At length the car-
nage ceased, after the slaughter of lix thousand
Cholulans, without the loss of a single Spaniard.
Cortes then released the magistrates, and re-
proaching them bitterly for their intended
treachery, declared, that as justice swas now
appeased, he forgave the offence, but required
tnem to recal the citizens who had fled, and re-
tita.,lilh order in the town. Such was the ascend-
ar.t which the Spaniards had acquired over this
fupc-rl!itious race of men, and so deeply were
they impressed with an opinion of their superior
discernment, as well as power, that, in obedience
ti this command, the city was in a few days
iL.d again with people, who, amidit the ruins
of t1,ir sacred buildings, yielded rcfpectful
fti;cc tu men, whose hands were itained

witsi

with the blood of their relations and fellow.
citizens r.

From Cholula, Cortes advanced dire&lyto.

wards Mexico [Oc. 29], which was onty
twenty leagues diflant. In every place through
which he passed, he was received as a pernon
pofieffed of fuffiient power to deliver the em.
pire from the oppression under which it groaned;
and the caziques or governors communicated to
him all the grievances which they felt under the
tyrannical government of Montezuma, with that
unreserved confidence which men naturally repose
in superior beings. When Cortes first observed
the feeds of discontent in the remote provinces
of the empire, hope dawned upon his mind;
but when he now discovered such symptoms oi
alienation from their monarch near the feat of
government, he concluded that the vital parts of
the conflitution were affected, and conceivedthe
molt sanguine expectations of overturning a
slate, whose natural strength was thus divided
and impaired. While those reflections encouraged
the general to persist in his arduous undertaking,
the soldiers were no less animated by obfervationi
more obvious to their capacity. In descending
from the mountains of Chalco, across which the
road lay, the vast plain of Mexico opened gra.
dually to their view. When they first beheld
this profped, one of the most striking and
beautiful on the face of the earth; when they
observed fertile and cultivated fields, stretching
farther than the eye could reach; when they

r Cortes, Relat. Ranuf. iii. zlr. B. Diaz. c. 83.

GCrra, Cron. c. 64. Herrera, Je. z. lib. vii. c. i,
Sc Noiz 2 CVIi.

so,

saw a lake resembling the sea in extent, encom.
passed with large towns, and discovered the ca.
pital city rising upon an island in the middle,
adorned with its temples and turrets; the scene
so far exceeded their imagination, that some be-
lieved the fanciful descriptions of romance were
realized, and that its enchanted palaces and
gilded domes were presented to their fight;
others could hardly persuade themselves that this
wonderful fpetacle was any thing more than a
dream '. As they advanced, their doubts were
removed, but their amazementincreafed. They
were now fully satisfied that the country was
rich beyond any conception which they had
formed of it, and flattered themselves that at
length they should obtain an ample recompence
for all their services and sufferings.

Hitherto they had met with no enemy to op.

pose their progress, though several eircumftances
occurred which led them to fufpe& that some
design was formed to surprise and cut them off.
Many messengers arrived successively from Mon-
tezuma, permitting them one day to advance,
requiring them on the next to retire, as his
hopes or fears alternately prevailed; and so
wonderful was this infatuation, which seems to
be unaccountable on any supposition but that of
a superstitious dread of the Spaniards, as beings
of a superior nature, that Cortes was almost at
the gates of the capital, before the monarch had
determined whether to receive him as a friend, or
to oppose him as an enemy. But as no sign of
open hoftflity appeared, the Spaniards, without
regarding the fluctuations of Montezuma's fen-

See Nori CIX.

timentg,

timents, continued their march along the cafe.
way which led tX Mexico through the-lke Ovkh
great circunfpectiin and the firidef difcipine,
though without seeming to fufpeet the prince
whom they were about to visit.

When they drew near the city, about a thou.

sand persons, who appeared to be of diftintion,
came forth to meet them, adorned with plumes,
and clad in mantles of fine cotton. Each of
these, in his order, passed by Cortes, and saluted
him according to the mode deemed most refpea.
ful and submissive in their country. They an.
nounced the approach of Montezuma himsef,
and soon after his harbingers came in fight.
There appeared first two hundred persons in an
uniform dress, with large. plumes of feathers,
alike in fashion, marching two and two, in deep
silence, bare-footed, with their eyes fixed on the
ground. These were followed by a company of
Sigher rank, in their mot (howy apparel, in the
jnidf of whom was Montezuma, in a chair or
litter richly ornamented with gold, and feathers
ps various colours. Four of his principal fa
vourites carried him on their Ihoulders, other
supported a canopy of curious workmaanhip ova
his head. Before him marched three officer
with' rods of gold in their hands, which the/
lifted up on high at certain intervals, and at
that signal all the people bowed their head
and hid their faces, as unworthy to look- on k
great a monarch. When he drew near, Corte
dismounted, advancing towards him with officiou
hafe, and in a refpecful potture. At the fans
time Montezuma alighted from his chair, and
leaning on the arms of two of his near re

latiot.:

-·~ ~ ~ ~ ~~~-

ONTE ti 'SsljsL/nlm)ehl'n~ilt C

.X
KB A

l5ions, approached with a flow and stately pace,
his attendants covering the street with cotton
cdIths, that he might not touch the ground.
Cortes accosted him with profound reverence,
fter.the European fashion. He returned the
azlutation, according to the mode of his coun-
trv, by touching the earth with his hand, and
ihen kissing it. · This ceremony, the cuflomary
cpr:tffion of veneration from inferiors towards
tbicf who were above them in rank, appeared
such amazing condescension in a proud monarch,
wnho scarcely deigned to confider the reft of man-
kind 7a of the fame species with himself, that all
his fubjedts firmly believed those pcrfons, before
whom he humbled himself in this manner, to
be something more than human. Accordingly,
as they marched through the crowd, the Spa-
niards frequently, and with much fatisfa&ion,
heard themselves denominated Teales,or divinities.
Nothing material passed in this first interview.
Montezuma conducted Cortes to the quarters
which he had prepared for his reception, and
mrrnediately took leave of him, with a polite.
nes not unworthy of a court more refined.
" You are now," fays he, " with your bro.
thers in vour own house; refresh yourselves after
your fatigue, and be happy until I return t'
The place allotted to the Spaniards for their
lodging was a house built by the father of
bontezuma. It was surrounded by a stone-
tall, with towers at proper distances, which
bed for defence as well as for ornament, and

Co-ea, Relct. Ramus. ii z32---35. B. Diaz. c. 83

-Ei. Comara, Cron. c. 64, 65. H.rrera, dec. z. lib. vii.
voL. I, q its

its apartments and courts were so large, as to
accommodate both the Spaniards and their I.
dian allies. The firt care of Cortes was totake
precautions for his security, by planting the
artillery so as to command the different avenua
which led to it, by appointing a large division of
his troops to be always on guard, and by post.
ing centinels at proper stations with injunions
to observe the fame vigilant discipline as if they
were within fight of an enemy's camp.

In the evening, Montezuma returned to v'i

his guests with the fame pomp as in their fir
interview, and brought presents of such value,
not only to Cortes and to his officers, but erea
to the private men, as proved the liberality of
the monarch to be suitable to the opulenceof
his kingdom. A long conference ensued, in
which Cortes learned what was the opinion of
Montezuma with respect to the Spaniards. It
was an established tradition, he told him, among
the Mexicans, that their ancestors came originally
from a remote region, and conquered the pro.
vinces now subjeA to his dominion; that after
they were fettled there, the great captain who
conduEted this colony returned to his own
country, promiiing, that at some future period
his descendants should visit them, assume thb
government, and reform their constitution and

vws; that, from what he had heard and seen oi

Cortes and his followers, he was convinced tha
they were the very persons whose appearance the
Mexican traditions and prophecies taught then
to cxpcci; that accordingly he had receiv:
them, not as strangers, but as relations of th[
fame blood and parentage, and defined that thil

mi$~

might confider themselves as masters in his do.
minions, for both himself and his fubjeAs fiould
be ready to comply with their will, and even
to prevent their wishes. Cortes made a reply
in his usual style with refpea to the dignity and
power of his sovereign, and his intention id
fnding him into that country; artfully endea-
vouring so to frame his discourse, that it might
coincide as much as possible with the idea which
blontezuma had formed concerning the origin
of the Spaniards. Next morning, Cortes and
some of his principal attendants were admitted
to a public audience of the emperor. The three
fibfequent days were employed in viewing the
city; the appearance of which, so far superior
in the order of its buildings and the number of
its inhabitants to any place the Spaniards had
beheld in America, and yet so little resembling
the ftruture of an European city, filled them
with surprise and admiration.

Mexico, or Tenuchtitlan, as it was anciently
called by the natives, is situated in a large plain,
environed by mountains of such height, that,
though within the torrid zone, the temperature
of its climate is mild and healthful. All the
moisture which descends from the high grounds
B colleced in several lakes, the two largest of
which, of about ninety miles in circuit, com-
municate with each other. The waters of the one
arefrefh,thofc of the other brackish. Onthebanks
of the latter, and on some small ilands adjoining
to them, the capital of Montezuma's empire
was built. The access to the city was by arti-
ficial causeways or streets formed of stones and
earth, about thirty feet in breadth. As the

Qo z waters

waters of the lake during the rainy season ovr
flowed the flat country, these canfewvays were o
considerable length. That of Tacuba, on the
weft, extended a mile and a half; that of Tepe.
aca ', on the north-west, three miles; that f
Cuoyacan, towards the south, fix miles. Ondt
east there was no causeway, and the city could bk
approached only by canoes 1. In each of thde
causeways were openings at proper interval
through which the waters fiowed, and ove
these beams of timber were laid, which beiag
covered with earth, the causeway or fireet ha
every-where an uniform appearance As tht
approaches to the city were singular, its con.
firu&ion was remarkable. Not only the templa
of their gods, but the houses belonging to tht
monarch, and to persons of diitinEtion, were oi
such dimensions, that, in comparison with aa
other buildings which had been hitherto disco.
vered in America, they might be termed magnifi
cent. The habitations of the common peopl:
were mean, referbling the huts of other Indias
But they were all placed in a regular manner,
on the banks of the canals which pascd through
the city, in some of its difirics, or on the fide
of the fireets which interfccted it in other quar.
ters. In several places were large openings o

' I am ina'b:ed to M. Clarigero fru corretina an erlon

imp:tance in may de.ription of Meaico. From theeca
wh-re Tez-nco was fitua:ed, tbere was no causeway, al
have obferted, and yet by some inatten!ion on my p-st, c
on thor f trs prinner, in all oi Lh rformner e4iuons oEr a
tei cute=wa)s a i Lsid to .eud to .eceuco. M.. Cla'/ig'
inc.l-r-.necn ofi ric lergth of rhece caUfesa)s difiers fbib
what from cnat which I have a .r:td from F. Tornm
Clavig. ii. p. ,. " F. Ttrribio MS.

squarci

sqares, one of which, allotted for the great
rmarket, is said to have been so spacious, that
forty or fifty thousand persons carried on trafi
there. In this city, the pride of the New
World, and the noblest monument of the industry
and art of man, while unacquainted with the use
of iron, and destitute of aid from any domestic
animal, the Spaniards, who are most moderate
in their computations, reckon that there were at
leai sixty thousand inhabitants x.

But how much soever the novelty of those
objeas might amuse or astonish the Spaniards,
they felt the utmost solicitude with refpet to
their own situation. From a concurrence of
ircumItanccs, no less unexpeced than favour.
able to their progress, they had been allowed
to penetrate into the heart of a powerful king,
dom, and were now lodged in its capital, with,
out having once met with open opposition from
its monarch. The Tlafcalans, however, had
earnestly dissuaded them from placing such con-
fdence in Montezuma, as to enter a city of
fnch a peculiar situation as Mexico, where that
prince would have them at mercy, shut up as
it were in a snare, from which it was impossible
to escape. They asured him that the Mexi-
can priests had, in the name of the gods, coun-
elled their sovereign to admit the Spaniards into
the capital, that he might cut them off there at
one blow with perfect security . They now
perceived, too plainly, that the apprehensions

Cortes, Relat. Ram. iii. 39. D. Relat della gran

Cit; de Mexico, par un Gentelhuom3 del Cortfe. Ram.
ilid 304. E. Herrera, dec. a. lib. vii .
c. 1, &c.

B E. Diaz. S.5, 86.

Q-3 of

of their allies were not defittute of foundatio;
that, by breaking the bridges placed. at certain
intervals on the causeways, or by (}eftroyaig
part of the caaueways themselves, their reftear
would be rendered impraficable, and they must
remain cooped up in the centre of a hoftRe cityr
surrounded by multitudes flfficient to overnvhel
them, and without a piffibiity of receiving aid
from their allies Montezuma had, indeed,
received them with diftinguifed iefpea. But
ought they to reckon upon this as real, orto
confider it as feigned ? E.en if it were sincere,
could they promite on its continuance ? Their
safety depended upon the will of a monarch in
whose attachment they had no reason to cQn-
fide; and an order flowing from his caprice, or
a word uttered by him in passion, might decide
irrevocably concerning their fate '.

These reflections, so obvious as to occur to

the reanet foldir, did not escape the vigilant
fagacitv of their general. Before he set out
from Cholula, Cortes had received advice fron
Villa Rica a, that ()ualpopoca, one of Ihe feri.
can generals on the frontiers, having assemblcd
an army in order to attack tome of the people
whom the Spaniards had encouraged to throw
fs the Mexican yoke, Efcalante had marched
out with part of the garrison to support hi,
allies; that an engagement had ensued, in
which, though the Spaniar4s were vicorious,
Efcalante, with seven of his men, had been
mortally wounded, his horse killed, and on:
Spaniard had been surrounded by the enemy,

z B. Daz. c. 94.
Co::s, Rclat. Ram. iii. z35. C.

and taken alive ;: that the head of'this: unfor.
tnnate captive, after being carried,, in: i tiumph
to different cities; in order to .convince -.the
people that their. invaders were lot. iminmrtal
had been sent to Mexico b. 'Cotes, though
alarmed with this intelligence, as an 'indication
of.Montezunma -'hoftile'intentions,; had centinued
his march. But as foon-as he entered Mexico;
be became fenfirbl, that, from an. exce-ss of. eoni
fidence in the superior valour anddiffcipline ofhiq
troops, as well as from the disadvantage of havinr
nothing to guide him. in an unknown country,
but the defective intelligence which 'he had re-
ceived from people with whom his mode:of.
communication 'was wery imperfe&the had pufhedL
fornard into a fittation, where it was difficult
to continue, and from which it was danger6us
to retire. Diftngre, and perhaps ruin, was the
certain consequence of 'attempting the latter.
The success of his enterprise depended upon sup-
porting the high opinion which the people of
New Spain had formed with refpe& to the ir-
resistible power of his arms. Upon the first
fmptom of timidity on his part, their venera-
tion would cease, and Monteznma, whom fear
alone reft-raied at prefert, w;ould let loose upon
him the whole force of his empire. At the fame:
irne, he knew thai the countenance of his own
'.vcreign was to be obtained only by a series of
id.ories, and that nothing but the merit of
t.traordinary success could screen his conduct:
from the censure of irregularity. From all these
.nfijerations, it was neceffarv to maintain his
iation, and to extricate hiifelf out of the diffi.

B. Diaz. c. i3, ,. I-Irrrera, dec. z. lib. vlii. c. r.

cultics

eulties in which one bold ftep had involved him,
by venturing upon another fill bolder. The
fitnation was trying, but his mind was equal to
it; and after revolving the matter with deep at.
tention, he fixed upon a plan no less extraordi.
nary than daring. He determined to seize Mon.
tezuma in his palace, and to carry him as a pri.
soner to the Spanish quarters. From the lu.
perftitious veneration of the Mexicans for the
person of their monarch, as well as their im.
plicit submission to his will, he hoped, by having
Montezuma in his power, to acquire the supreme
dire&ion of their affairs; or, at least, with such
a sacred pledge in his hands, he made no
doubt of being secure from any effort of their
violence.

This he immediately propafed to his officer.

The timid fiartled at a measure so audacious,
and raised objections. The more intelligent and
resolute, conscious that it was the only resource
in which there appeared any profpeE of safety,
warmly approved of it, and brought over their
companions so cordially to the fame opinion,
that it was agreed instantly to make the attempt.
At his usual hour of viliting Montezuma, Cortes
went to the palace, accompanied by Alvarado,
Sandoval, Lugo, Velasquez de Leon, and
Davila, five of his principal officers, and as
many trusty soldiers. Thirty chosen men fol.
lowed, not in regular order, but sauntering at
some ditance, as if they had no obje& but cu.
riofity; small parties were posted at proper
intervals, in all the streets leading from the
Spanish quarters to the court; and the re.
mainder of his troops, with the Tlafcalan allis,

wen

-ere under arms, ready to sally out on the sirs0
alarm. Cortes and his attendants were admitted'
without suspicion; the Mexicans retiring, as
ufial, out of refpe&. He addreflied the moJ
narch in a tone very different from that which he
had employed in former -conferences, reproach-
ing him bitterly- as the author of the violent as-
fault made upon the Spaniards by one of his
officers, and demanded public reparation for the
loss which they had fuflained by the death of
some of their companions, as well as for the in-
fult offered to the great prince whose servants
they were. Mointezuma, confounded at this
unexpe&ed accusation, and changing colour,
either from ccnfcioufnefs of guilt, or fron feeling
the indignity with which he was treated, ati
ferted. his own innocence with great earnefnefs,
and, as a proof of it, gave orders inltarnly to
bring Qualpopoca and his accomplices prisoners
to Mbexlco. Cortes replied, with seeming com-
plaifance, that a declaration so refpetable left
BO doubt remaining in his own mind, but that
something more vas requisite to satisfy his fol-
lowers, who would never be convinced that
Montezuma did not harbour hostile intentions
againil them, unlcfs, as an evidence of his con-
fidence and attachment, he removed from his
own. palace, and took up his residence in the
Spanifl quarters, where he should be served and
honoured as became a great monarch. The first
mention of so ltrange a proposal bereaved
Montezuma of speech, and alhnmf of motion.
At length, indignation gave him utterance, and
he haughtily answered, " That :parsons of his
a t -wetre not accuilomed voluntarily to give up

them-

themselves as prisoners; and were he mean
enough to do so, his subje&s would not permit
such an affront to be offered to their sovereign"
Cortes, unwilling to employ force, endeavoured
alternately to sooth and to intimidate him. The
altercation became warm ; and having continued
above three hours, Velasquez de Leon, an
impetuous and gallant young man, exclaimed
with impatience, 4' Why waste more time in
vain ? Let us either seize him instantly, or flab
him to the heart." The threatening voice and
fierce gestures with whichthefe words were uttered,
truck Montezuma. The Spaniards, he wa
sensible, had now proceeded so far, as left him
no hope that they would recede. His own dan.
ger was imminent, the necessity unavoidabk.
He saw both, and abandoning himself to his
fate, complied with their requef.

His officers were called. He communicated

to them his resolution. Though astonished and
afflied, they presumed not to question the will
of their mafier, but carried him in silent pomp,
all bathed in tears, to the Spanilh quarter.
When it was known that the strangers were
conveying away the emperor, the people broke
out into the wildest transports of grief and rage,
threatening the Spaniards with immediate de.
ftrudion, as the punishment jufly due to then
impious audacity. But as soon as Montezumn
appeared with a teeming gaiety of countenance,
and waved his hand, the tumult was hulhtd,
and upon his declaring it to be of his own choice
that he went to reside for some time among his
lew friends, the multitude, taught to revere

peai

everv intimation of their fovtreign's pleasure,
quietly dispersed'.

Thus was a powerful prince seized by a few
firangers in the midst of his capital, at noonday,
and carried off as a prisoner without opposition
or bloodshed. History contains nothing parallel
to this event, either with refpet to the temerity
of the attempt, or the success of the execution;
and were not all the circumstances of this ex-
traordinary tranfaEtion authenticated by the most
unquestionable evidence, they would appear fd
wild and extravagant, as to go far beyond the
bounds of that probability which must be pre-
ferred even in fictitious narrations.

Montezuma was received in the Spanish quar-
ters with all the ceremonious refpe& which
Cortes had promised. He was attended by his
own domestics, and served with his usual state,
His principal officers had free access to him,
and he carried on every funtion of governmentr
as if he had been at perse& liberty. The
Spaniards, however, watched him with the
fc-upulous vigilance which was natural in guard-
ing such an Important prized, endeavounng at
the fame time to sooth and reconcile him to his
situation, by every external demonstration of
rezard and attachment. But from captive princes
the hour of humiliation and suffering is never
far distant. Q!alpopoca, his son, and five of
the principal officers who served under him,
were brought prisoners to the captital [Dec. 4],
in consequence of the orders which Montezuma

c B. Diaz. c. 95. Gomara, Cron. c. 83. Corres, Relat.
PRai. iii. p. 235, z36. Hcrrcra, dcc. z. lib. vii. . c. 3.

' CC Nó c£ CX.

had

had iffqed. The emperor gave them up to
Cortes, that he might inquire into the nature
of'their crime, and deterrine their punishment
They were formally tried by a Spanish court.
martial; and though they had acted no other
part than what became loyal fubjeds and brav
men, in obeying the orders of their lawful so.
vereign, and in cppofing the invaders of thei
country, they were condemned to be burnt alive
-The execution of such atrocious deeds is
seldom long suspended. The unhappy victim
were instantly led forth. The pile on which
they were laid was composed of the weapern
collectd( in the royal magazine for the public
defence. An innumerable multitude ofMexican
beheld, in silent altonifhment, the double infit
offered to the rrajefty of their empire, an officer
of diltinction committed to the flames by the
authority of ftrangets, for having done what he
owed in duty to his natural sovereign; and the
arms provided by the foreight of their ancefnn
for avenging public wrongs, consumed before
their eyes.

But these were not the most (hocking in.

dignities which the Mexicans had to bear. The
Spaniards, convinced that QualDopoca woul
not have ventured to attack Efcalante without
orders from his ,iafter, were not satisfied with
infli&ing vengeance on the inftrumrnt emplored
in committing that crime, while the author o
it escaped with impunity. Just before Qualpo
poca was led out to susser, Cortes entered th!
apartment of Montezuma, followed by forme o
his officers, and a soldier carrying a pair of set
ters; and approachiln the monarch with a fir

cou.:L

otntenance, told him, that as the persons who
were now to undergo the punishment which they
erinted, had charged him as the cause of-the
outrage committed, it was necessary that he
likewise should make atonement for that guilt
then turning away abruptly, without waiting
for a reply, commanded the soldier to clap the
ftters on his legs. The orders were iiftantly
executed. The disconsolate monarch, trained
up with an idea that his person was sacred and
insolable, ard confidering this profanation of it
as the prelude of immediate death, broke out
into loud lamentations and complaints. His at-
kndants, speechless with horror, fell at his feet,
bathing them with their tears; and bearing up
the fetters in their hands, endeavoured with of-
scious tenderness to lighten their pressure. Nor
did their grief and despondency abate, until
Cortes returned from the execution, and with
a cheerful countenance ordered the fetters to
be taken off. As Montezuma's spirits had funk
with unmanly dejection, they now rose into in-
decent joy ; and with an unbecoming tranfitioni
he passed at once from the anguish of despair to
transports of gratitude and expressions of fondness
towards his deliverer.

In those tranfations, as represented by the
Spanilh historians, we search in vain for the
qualitics which distinguish other parts of Cortes's
conduEt. To usurp a jurifdi&ion which could
not belong to a stranger, who assumed no higher
charater than that of an ambassador from a
foreign prince, and, under colour of it, to inflit
a capital punishment on men whose condua en-
t:!cd them to esteem, appears an ad of bar-

OL... . baro.u

barous cruelty. To put the monarch of a gr
kingdom in irons, and, after such ignominiya
treatment, suddenly to release him, seems to be i
display of power no less inconsiderate than rc-
ton. According to the common relation, :
account can be given either of the one aaion o
the other, but that Cortes, intoxicated wid
success, and presuming on the ascendant whid
he had acquired over the minds of the Mexican;
thought nothing too bold for him to undertakt
or too dangerous to execute. But, in one vit
there proceedings, however repugnant to juffi
and humanity, may have flowed from that arts
policy which regulated every part of Cortes'
behaviour towards the Mexicans. They ha
conceived the Spaniards to be an order of being
superior to men, It was of the utmost conic
quence to cherish this illusion, and to keep a
the veneration which it inspired. Cortes wile
that shedding the blood of a Spaniard should b
deemed the mos heinous of all crimes; and nc
thing appeared better calculated to establish th
opinion, than to condemn the sirs Mexicat
who had ventured to commit it to a cru
death, and to oblige their monarch himfr
to submit to a mortifying indignity, as an a
piation for being accessary to a deed so atrc
cious '.

1520.] The rigour with which Cortt

puniihed the unhappy persons who firit pn
fumed to lay violent hands upon his follower
seems accordingly to have made all the ic
pression that he desired. The spirit of Montr
zuma was not only overawed, but fubduar

See NOTE CXI.

Da'J

During fix months that Cortes remained ini
lMexico, the monarch continued in the Spanish
quarters, with an appearance of as entire fatisfac-
tion and tranquillity, as if he had resided there,
sot from conifraint, but through choice. His
linifters and officers attended him as usual. He
took cognizance of all affairs; every order was
ifued in his name. The external afpeft of go-
wrnment appearing the fame, and all its ancient
forms being scrupulously observed, the people
were so little sensible of any change, that they
obeved the mandates of their monarch with the
fame submissive reverence as ever. Such was the
dread which both Montezuma and his fubjeAs
lad of the Spaniards, or such the veneration in
which they held them, that no attempt was made
to deliver their sovereign from confinement; and
though Cortes, relying on this ascendant which
he had acquired over their minds, permitted
him not only to visit his temples, but to make
hunting excursions beyond the lake, a guard of
a few Spaniards carried with it such a terror as
to intimidate the multitude, and secure the
captive monarch f.

Thus, by the fortunate temerity of Cortes in
seizing Montezuma, the Spaniards at once fe-
cured to themselves more extensive authority in
i the Mexican empire than it was poflible to have
i cquired in a long course of time by open force;
land they exercised more absolute sway in the
namre of another than they could have done in
their own. The arts of polished nations, in
fubjeaing such as are less improved, have been
nearly the fame in every period. The system
' Concs, Relt. p. 236. E. B.Diaz. . 97, 98, 99.

R 2 Q

of forecuing a foreign usurpation, under tla
sanction of authority derived from the naturn
rulers of a country, the device of erplovii
the magistrates and forms already eftablilitd z
iftrurnents to introduce a new dominion, u
which we are apt to boas as sublime refinemnit
in policy peculiar to the present age, wtr,
inventions of a more early period, and had be
tried with ficcefs in the Weft, long bcior
the) were pradifed iu the East.

Cortes availed himself to the utmost of th

power which he poiteffed by being able to ac
in the name of Mvntez-uma. He sent fore
Spaniards, whom he judged belt qualified iv
such commuiffionE, into different parts of th
empire, accompanied by persons of diltinbion
whom Montezuma appointed to attend the:
both as guides and protectors. They viiitc
ioft of the proyinces, viewed their foil and pn
ducAions, surveyed with particular care the di
tri&s which yiclAed gold or silver, pitched up

-eeral places as proper stations for future cok

aies, and endeavoured to prepare the minds (
the people for fubmittilg to the Spaniih yok,
While they were thus employed, -Cartes,
the name and by the authority of Montezumn
degraded some of the principal officer; in th
empire, whose abilities or indcpc-ndent spirit c
cited his jealufy, and fubhiituted'in their pla
pcrfons lei capablek more obfcquious.

One thing fill was wauling to comiplte k

fecuity. Fte wishcd to have luch commandt
the lake as might insure a retreat, if, either fro:
levity or difguit, the Mexicans should take zr
agaiLfl him, and break down the -bridgeis

2."

causeways. This, too, his own address, and the
facility of Montezuma, enabled him to accomrn
plilh. Having frequently entertained his prisoner
with pompous accounts of the European marine
and art of navigation, he awakened his curiosity
to fee those moving palaces which made their
way through the water without oars. Under
pretext of gratifying this desire, Cortes per-
fuaded Montezuma to appoint some of his sub-
jets to fetch part of the naval stores which the
Spaniards had deposited at Vera Cruz to Mex-
ico, and to employ others in cutting down and
preparing timber. With their affifance, the
Spanish carpenters soon completed two brigan-
tines, which afforded a frivolous amusement to
the monarch, and were confidered by Cortes as
a certain resource, if he should be obliged to
retire.

Encouraged by so many inflances of the mo-

narch's tame submission to his will, Cortes ven-
tured to put it to a proof still more trying. He
urged Montezuma to acknowledge himself a
vassal of the king of Castile, to hold his crown of
him as superior, and to subject his dominions to
the payment of an anuual tribute. With this
requisition, the last and most humbling that can
be made to one possessed of sovereign authority,
Montezuma was so obsequious as to comply.
He called together the chief men of his empire,
and in a solemn harangue, reminding them of the
traditions and prophecies which led them to ex.
pet the arrival of a people sprung from the
fame stock with themselves, in order to take
poflfefion of the supreme power, he declared
his belief that the Spaniards were this promised

g 3 race i

race; that therefore he recognized the rigjt of
their monarch to govern the Mexican erpire,
that he would lay his crown at his feet, and
obey him as a fiibutary. When uttering thei
words, Montezuma discovered how deeply he
waa asseted in making such a sacrifice. Tean
and groans frequently interrupted: his difeo'ur
Overawed and broken as his spirit was, it i;l
retained such a sense of dignity, as tq feel ti:a
pang which pierces the heart of princes wirca
eonltrained to reign independent power. T.e
sirs mention of such a refonltion ilruck the a.-
f£ntbly dumb w;ith aftonifhrnent. TLia was tv;
lowed by a fulten murmur of fornow, mingMcd
with indignation, which indicated some vi;en.
eruption of rage to be near at .hand. Tii
Cortes foresaw, and seasonably interpored r:
prevent it, by declaring that his master had no
intention to deprive Montezuma of the rov-l
dignity, or to make any innovation upon te
conftLution and aw.3 of the Mexican empire,
This assurance, added to their dread of the
Spanish power, and to the authority of their
monarch's example, extorted a reluctant confest
from the affcmblys. The at of submission and
homage was executed with all the formalitiu
which the Spaniards were pleased to prefcribc'.

Montezuma, at the desire of Cortes, accom-

panied this profefion of fealty and homage with
a magnificent present to his new sovereign ; and,
after his example, his fubjets brought in very
liberal contributions. The Spaniards now cuil

< See NOTE- CXII. h Cortes, Relat. z 3. D,

B. D.caz. c. C0. Goma-a, Cron. c. 9.- Heriera, dc.'-
ib. . x. c. 4

lc;,-l

tdcd all tle treaiure. which had. been eitherg;v
,intarily beldowed :upot them at different: ti'mr
,, Montezuma, or had..b.een extorted from hi~
.copie under various: pretexts; and .having
:.rtd the gold and Cfiveri the value.of thee,¥
.ithout including jiwetl an.d ornaments of va-
-ua3 kinds, which were 'preserved on account
Ji their curious workmanffip, amounted to fix
vindred tloufand pefqs. The soldiers were im-
atiei,t to have it divided, and Cortes complied
': their delire. A fifth of the whole was firi;
ict apart as the tax due to the king. Another
aith' was allotted to Cortes, as commander in
:hirf. The fums advanced by Velasquez, by
ulrtes, and by some of the officers, -tpwards
drfraying the expeuce of fitting out the arma-
ment, were tlhen dedu&ed. The remainder
was divided among the army, including the
earrifon of Vera Cruz, in. proportion to their
ifitCrent ranks. After so many defalcations,
the fharc of a private man did not exceed a
hundred pesos. This fum fell so far. below
their sanguine erspectations, that some- soldiers
rcictcd it with feorn, and others murmured so
iudl;, at this cruel disappointment of their hopes,
that it required all the address of Cortes, and no
irmall exertion of his liberality, to appease them.
The complaints of the army were not altogether
dc:iitutc of foundation. As the crown had
contributed nothing towards the equipment or
fucccfs of the armament, it was not without
rergrt that the soldiers beheld it sweep away
so great a proportion of the treasure purchased
by their bloud and toil. Whaj fell to the share

of

of the general appeared, according to the idea
of wealth in the sixteenth century, an enormots
fum. Some of Cortes's favourites had fecrh
appropriated to their own use several ornament
of gold, which neither paid the royal fifth, nor
were brought into account as part of the con.
mon stock. It was, however, so manifefly the
interest of Cortes at this period to make a
large remittance to the king, that it is highl
probable those concealments were not of grce
consequence.

The total fum amafled by the Spaniards bean

no proportion to the ideas which might bt
formed, either by refle&ing on the description
given by historians of the ancient fplendourci
Mexico, or by confidering the produ&tions d
its mines in modern times. But, among the
ancient Mexicans, gold and silver were not the
standards by which the worth of other comm.
dities was estimated; and destitute of the artifici
value derived from this circumfiance, were n
farther in request than as they furnished materai
for ornaments and trinkets. These were eitha
consecrated to the gods in their temples, 0
were worn as marks of diftin&don by thd
princes and some of their most eminent chief,
As the consumption of the precious metals wa
inconsiderable, the demand for them was no,
such as to put either the ingenuity or industry oi
the Mexicaps on the stretch, in order to augment
their store. They were altogether unacquainted
with the art of working the rich mines with whic
their country abounded. What gold they hb
was gathered in the beds of rivers, native, ad

ripene

-,,pned into a pure metallic Itatei. The utmost
eojri of their labour in search of it was to wash
t: earth carried down by torrents from the,
zoultains, and to pick out the grains of gold,
,iuich fublided; and even this simple operation,
.acording to the report of the persons whom
Cirtis appointed to survey the provinces.where
ticre was a profpec of finding mines, they per.
formed very unfkilfully k. From all those causes,
the whole mass of gold in poffeffipn of the
Mexicans was not great. As iilver is rarely
iound pure, and the Mexican art was too rude
to conducA the process for refining it in a proper
manner, the quantity of this metal was till lefi
coniderable 1. Thus, though the Spaniards ha4
exerted all the power wbic.h they possessed iu,
Mexico, and often with indecent rapacity, in
order to gratify their predominant paflion, and
though Montezuma had fondly exhausted hiq
treasures, in hopes of satiating their thirlf for

jilJ, the produc of both, which probably in-
cluded a great part of the bullion in the empire,
did not rife in value above what has been men-
t med m.

But however pliant Moutezuma might be in

other matters, with respect to one point he waa
idiexible. Though Cortes often urged him,
with the importunate zcal of a miflionary, tQo
renounce his falfc gods, and to embrace the
Chrlitian faith, he always rejected the proposition
w'ih horror. Superfition, among the Mexicans,
w-as formed into such a regular and complete

i Cortes, Relat. p. 236. F. B. Diaz. c. o12, 103, Go-
Ca:, Cron. c. 90 k B. Diaz. c. 103.
' Herrera, dec. 2. lib. it. c. 4
- jee .Nui, CXJlL

system,

system, that its institutions naturally took fad
hold of the mind; and while the rude tribes
other parts of America were easily induced to
relinquish a few notions and rites, so loose and
arbitrary as hardly to merit the name of a pubic
religion, the Mexicans adhered tenaciously to
their mode of worhhip, which, however bar.
barous, was accompanied with such order and
solemnity as to render it an object of the highest
veneration. Coltes, finding all his attempt;
ipeffecual to shake the constancy of Monti
zuma, was so much enraged at his obflinacr,
that in a transport of zeal he led out his soldien
to throw down the idols in the great temple by
force. But the priests taking arms in defence
of their altars, and the people crowding with
great ardour to support them, Cortes's prudence
overruled his zeal, and induced him to defli
from his rash attempt, after dislodging the idols
from one of the shrines, and placing in their
itead an image of the Virgin Mary ".

From that moment the Mexicans, who had

permitted the imprisonment of their sovereign,
and suffered the examtions of strangers without a
struggle, began to meditate how they might ex.
pel or destroy the Spaniards, and thought them.
selves called upon to avenge their insulted
deities. The priests and leading men held fre.
quent consultations with Montezuma for this
purpose. But as it might prove fatal to the
captive monarch to attempt either the one or
the other by violence, he was willing to try
more gentle means. Having called Cortce into
his presence, he observed, that now, as all the
purposes of his embassy were fully accomplhed,

B Se NOTE CXIV.

th

the gods had declared their will, and the people
fgnified their desire that he and his followers
fould instantly depart out of the empire. With
this he required them to comply, or unavoidable
deftrucion would fall suddenly on their heads.
The tenor of this unexpected requisition, as well
2s the determined tone in which it was uttered,
kit Cortes no room to doubt that it was the re.,
fit of some deep scheme concerted between
Mlontezuma and his subje&s. He quickly per-
ceired that he might derive more advantage
from a teeming compliance with the monarch's
inclination, than from an ill-timed attempt to
change or to oppose it; and replied, with
great composure, that he had already begun to
prepare for returning to his own country; but
as he had destroyed the vessels in which he ar-
rived, some time was requisite for building
other (hips. This appeared reasonable. A
number of Mexicans were sent to Vera Cruz to
cut down timber, and some Spanish carpenters
were appointed to superintend the work. Cortes
fattered himself, that during this interval he
might either find means to avert the threatened
darger, or receive such reinforcements as would
enable him to despise it.

Almost nine months were elapsed since Porto-
carrero and Montejo had failed with his dif-
patches to Spain; and he daily expe&ed their
return with a confirmation of his authority
from the king. Without this, his condition
was insecure and precarious, and after all the
great things which he had done, it might be his
coorn to bear the name and susser the punifth-
tcnt of a traitor. Rapid and extensive as his

progress

progress had been, he could not hope to co.
plete the redudtion of a great empire with so
fnall a body of men, which by this time disease
es various kinds conftderab1y thinned; nor could
he apply for recruits to the Spanish fettlementi
in the islands until he received the royal appr.
bation'of his proceedings.

While he remained in this cruel situation,

anxious about what was pals, uncertain with
refpeE to the future, and, by the late declaratio
of Montezuma, oppresscd with a new additi:
of cares, a Mexican courier arrived with an ac
count of krme ships having appeared on th;
coaf. Cortes, wnnh fond credulity, imagnin;
that his meffengets were retarned from Spain
and that the completion of all his wishes an
hopes was at hand, imparted the glad tidings ti
his companions, who received them with trani
ports of mutual gratulation. Their joy wa
not of long continuance. A courier from Sa:
doval, whom Cortes had appointed to fuccee,
Efcalante in command at Vera Cruz, brough
certain information that the armament wa
fitted out by Velasquez, governor of Cuba
and instead of bringing the aid which they ex
peEtcd, threater. d them with immediate d&
ftrntion.

The motives which prompted Velasquez t

this violent measure arc obvious. From th
circumilances of Cortes's departure, it was in
possible not to fufpe&t his intention of throwisn
off all dependence upon him. His neglectia
to transmit any account of-his operations t
Cuba, strengthened this suspicion, which in
at last confirmed beyond doubt, by the indifcr<

t ..

*,on of the officers whom Cortes sent to Spain.
Thcv, from some motive which is not clearly
:plained by the contemporary historians,
:*uched at the island of Cuba, contrary to the
pereptory orders of their general°. By this
means Velasquez not only leanled that Cortes
a:d his followers, after formally renouncing all
connection with him, had established an inde-
ptndent colony in New Spain, and were solicit-
Irg the king to confirm their proceedings by
2, authority; but he obtained particular in-
rirmation concerning the opulence of the
country, the valuable presents which Cortes
had received, and the inviting profpeEs of fuc-
ccfs that opened to his view. Every passion
,hich can agitate an ambitious mind; shame, at
Laving been so grossly overreached; indignation,
at being betrayed by the man wshom he had fe-
itcted as the objec of his favour and confidence
grief, for having wafted his fortune to aggrandize
an enemy; and despair of recovering so fair an
opportunity of establishing his fame and extend-
ing his power, now raged in the bosom of
Vdlafquez. All these, with united force, excited
'im to make an extraordinary effort in order to
!,c avenged on the author of his wrongs, and to
.rcii from him his usurped authority and con-
,c'lelts. Nor did he want the appearance of a
good title to justify such an attempt. The agent
whom he sent to Spain with an account of
Grijalva's voyage, had met with a most favour-
iblt reception; and from the specimens which
h.e produced, such high expectations were

: B. Diaz. c. 54, 55. Herrcra, dc. z, lib. v. c. 14
Co.nara Cron. c. 96,
voL. II. S formed

formed concerning the opulence of New Spain,
that Velasquez was authorised to prosecute Iti
discovery of the country, and appointed go\n.
nor of it during life, with more extensive puoe
and privilegcs than had been granted to aL
adventurer from the time of Columbusq. Elaht
by this distinguishing mark of favour, and w'.
ranted to confider Cortes not only as intruding
upon his jurisdiction, but as disobedient to te-
roval mandate, he determined to vindicate h:;
owsn rights and the honour of his sovereign L?
force of armsr. His ardour in carrying on h:i
preparations, was such as might have been c.
peaed from the violence of the passions wi:h
which he was animated; and in a short time a:
armament war completed, confilting of eightce;
fLips, which had on board fourscore horferr.r!
eight hundred foot folditrs, of which eigh:.
were musketeers, and an hundred and twcr::
cross-bow men, together witl a train of twsclr
pieces of cannon. As Velasquez's experience cl
the fatal coifequence of committing to anotlhe
what he ought to have executed himself, had
not rendered him more enterprising, he vcl:W
the command of this formidable body, whii.,
in the infancy of the Spanish power in America,
merits the appellation of an army, in Pampl.,
de Narvaez, with inftru&ions to fcize Curr:n
and his principal officers, to fend them prisoner;
to him, and then to complete the discovery and
conqueit of the country in his name.

After a prosperous voyage, Narvaez lander
hia men without opposition near St. Juan de

c Herrcr, dec. 2. lib. iii, c. II.
S NOTZ CXV.

U r! .,

llla [April]. Three soldiers, whomCortes had
feat to search for mines in that diftric, immedi-
ately joined him. By this accident, he not only
received information concerning the progress and
iltuation of Cortes, but as these soldiers had
made some progress in the knowledge of the
Mexican language, he acquired interpreters, by
whole means he was enabled to hold some inter-
course with the people of the country. But,
according to the low cunning of deserters, they
franed their intelligence with more attention to
-hat they thought would be agreeable, than to
-hat they knew to be true; and represented
the situation of Cortes to be so desperate, and
the difaffetion of his followers to be so ge-
neral, as increased the natural confidence and
prefuimption of Narvaez. His first operation,
howeier, might have taught him not to rely on
their partial accounts. Having sent to fum-
mon the governor of Vera Cruz to surrender,
Guevara, a priest whom he employed in that
frnvice, made the requisition with such insolence,
that Sandoval, an officer of high spirit, and
zealously attached to Cortes, inctead of
cumplying with his demands, seized him and
his attendants, and feat them in chains to
Mexico.

Cortes received them not like enemies, but as
friends, and condemning the severity of San-
doval, set them immediately at liberty. By this
well-timed clemency, seconded by caresses and
presents, he gained their confidence, and drew
from them such particulars concerning the force
and intentions of Narvaez, as gave him a view
,f the impending danger in its full extent. Hie

s 2 had

had not to contend now with half-naked Il.
dians, no match for him in war, and still iru,r
inferior in the arts of policy, but to take tli
field agairft an army in courage and mart:
difc;pline equal to his own, in number far fIx.
rior, a&cing under the fancaion of royal authorni,
and commanded by an officer of known brautr.
He was informed that Narvaez, more folicite,
to gratify the resentment of Velasquez, tiL-.
attentive to the honour or interell of his countr.,
had begun his intercourse with the natives, Ij
representing him and his followers as fugiii',
and outlaws, guilty of rebellion against tl:t.:
own sovereign, and of injustice in invadinrg tl}
Mexican empire; and had declared that I:!
chief object in visiting the country v.as :
punish the Spaniards who had committed tht.,
crirrt, and to rescue the Mexicans from o0k
preffon. He soon peiceived that the fame un.
favourable reprrfentations of his charater ani
actions had been conveyed to Montezuma, and
that Narvaez had found means to aifwic hii:,
that as the conduct of those who kept him uder
restraint was highly displeasing to the ki:ng L,
mailer, he had it in charge not only to rtfcur
an injured monarch from confinement, but to
reinflate him in the possession of hi, ancient
power and independence. Animated with th:,
profpe& of being set free from fubjctiion to
ftrngers, the Mexicans in several provinces.begai
openly to revolt from Cortes, and to regard
Narraez as a deliverer no less able than willing
to save them. Montezuma himself kept up a
secret intercourse with the new commander, and
fien.ed to court him as a person fuperiur i;

po .' .

,nwer and dignity to those Spaniards whom he
:A! hitherto revered as the first of men s.
Such were the various afpets of danger and
dCfficultv which presented thernfelves to the view
c Cortes. No situation can be conceived more
* ng to the capacity and firmness of a general,
( rwhere the choice of the plan which ought
:-i be adopted was more difficult. If he should
, ait the approach of Narvaez in Mexico, de-
"-ru-ion seemed to be unavoidable; for while
e Spaniards pressed him from without, the in-
iabitants, whose turbuleit spirit he could hardly
--airainwith all his authority and attention, would
:2c;rlv lay hold on such a favourable opportu-
:'v of avenging all their wrongs. If he ihould
;az.don the capital, set the captive monarch at
:crty, and march out to meet the enemy, he
-aft at once forego the fruits of all his toils and
:tonrits, and relinquish advantages which could
rnt he recovered without extraordinary efforts,
;id infinite danger. If, inltead of employing
,r-ce, he hould have recourse to conciliating
-easures, and attempt an accommodation with
;arvaez; the natural haugiitinefs of that offi-
e-, augmented by consciousness of his present
;!;eriority, sorbad him to cherish any sanguine
! 'P of success. After revolving every scheme
;.ih deep attention, Cortes fixed upon that
nicdi in execution was most hazardous, but,
i: cccfsfrl, would prove moit beneficial to
'Ti:.lf and to his country ; and with the de-
:iva intrepidity suited to desperate situations,
."ermined to make one bold effort for victorv
.-.edr e:cry disadvantage, rather than sacrifice

SeC NOTE CXVI.

s 3 his

his own conqueits and the Spanih intcrtit i;
Mexico.

But though he foresaw that the contest mrn:

be terminated finally by arms, it would ha:
been not only indecent but criminal, to h;
marched against his countrymnen, without a.
tempting to adjust matters by an amicable -
gociation. In this service he employed Olmn,
llis chaplain, to whose character the furc;-
was well suited, and who possessed, befiUL.
such prudence and address as qualified him :,
carry on the secret intrigues in which Cor.
placed his chief confidence. Narvaez rejccrc.
with scorn, evenr fchcme of accommodation t.L:
Olmedo proposed, and was with difficulty r-.
traincd from laying violent hands on him a;:
lis attendants. He met, however, with a rr,
favourable reception among the followers
Narvaez, to many of whom he delicered letttr
either from Cortes or his officers, their ancir:.
friends and companions. Cortes artfully ac
companicd these with presents of rings, chai;
of gold, and other trinkets of value, which i;
spircd thofc needy adventurers with high idn
of the wealth that he had acquired, and swit
envy of their good fortune who were engaged i:
his service. Some, from hopes of becoming fharet
in those rich spoils, declared for an immediat;
accommodation with Cortes. Others, froE
public spirit, laboured to prevent a civil W2:
which, whatever party ihould prevail, mL.
shake, and perhaps subvert the Spanish powce
in a country where it was so imperftc.a
cftablifhed. Narvaez disregarded both, and by
a public proclamation denounccd Cortes and h:'

adhsrc:.

adherents rebels and enemies to their country.
Corte3, it is probable, was not much surprised
a; the untra&able arrogance of Narvaez; and,
ater having given such a proof of his own
pacfic disposition as might justify his recourse
z, other means, he determined to advance to-
iardi an enemy whom he had laboured in vain
t· appease.

lie left a hundred and fifty men in the ca-

pital [May], under the command of Pedro de
Al'arado, an officer of distinguished courage,
f.r whom the Mexicans had conceived a fingu-
lar degree of refpec. To the custody of this
,cendcr garrison he committed a great city, with
all the wealth he had amassed, and, what was
A:il of greater importance, the person of the
:.;,priioned monarch. His utmost art was em-
;,,o-yed in concealing from Montezuma the
rTal cause of his march. He laboured to per-
f'jade him, that the firangers who had lately
arrived were his friends and fellow-fubjecs;
and that, after a (hort interview with them,
;ey would depart together, and return to their
oun country. The captive prince, unable to
comprehend the designs of the Spaniards, or to
reconcile what he now heard with the declara-
tions of Narvaez, and afraid to discover any
symptom of suspicion or distrust of Cortes, pro-
mifed to remain quietly in the Spanish quarters,
and to cultivate the fame friendship with Alva-
rado which he had uniformly maintained with
him. Cortes, with seeming confidence in this
promise, but relying principally upon the in-
jinCtions which he had given Alvarado to guard

his

his prisoner with the most scrupulous vigilance
se-t out from Mexico.

His strength, even after it was reinforced bh

the juncion of Sandoval and the garrison of
Vera Cruz, did not exceed two hundred and
fifty men. As he hoped for succesS chiefly from
the rapidity of his motions, his troops were net
incumbered either v.:th baggage or artiller.
But as he dreaded extremely the impreffio
which the enemy might make with their cavalry,
he had provided against this danger with the
foresight and sagacity which distinguish a great
commander. Having observed that the Indians
in the province of Chinantla used spears of ex-
traordinary length and force, he armed h:s
soldiers with thcfe, and accustomed them to that
deep and compact arrangement which the use of
this formidable weapon, the belt perhaps that ever
was invented for defence, enabled them to assume.

W.ith this small but firm battalion, Cortes

advanced towards Zempoalla, of which Narvaez
had taken poffeflion. During his march, lie
made repeated attempts towards some accommo-
dation with his opponent. But Narvaez re-
quiring that Cortes and his followers should in-
ftantly recognize his title to be governor of
New Spain, in virtue of the powers which he
derived from Velasquez; and Cortes refusing to
submit to any authority which was not founded
on a commiflion from the emperor himself, under
whose immediate protedion he and his adherents
had placed their infant colony ; all these attempts
proved fnritlefs. The intercourse, however,
which this occasioned hetween the two parties,
proved of no small dd:'antage to Cortes, as it

afforded

Lorrded him an opportunity of gaining some of

.nrvaez's officers by liberal presents, of soften-
., others by a semblance of moderation, and of
iL.zling all by the appearance of wealth among
'i: troops, moit of his soldiers having converted
:ncir share of the Mexican gold into chains,
?:actltts, and other ornaments, which they dif-
*',cd with military ostentation. Narvaez and
i.tle junto of his creatures excepted, all the
:\leaned towards an accommodation with

":c:r countrymen. This discovery of their in-
claction irritated his violent temper almost to
r:.lnLi. In a transport of rage, he set a price
>ijn the head of Cortes, and of his principal
i.;.:cc ; and having learned that he was now

- vaced within a league of Zempoalla with
f., rnall body of men, he confidered this as an

;:.jlt vhich merited immediate chastisement, and
,arched out with all his troops to offer him
a'-tic.

But Cortes was a leader of greater abilities

Z:, experience than, on equal ground, to fight

ci c.ny so farfuperior in number, and so much
-:ter appointed. Having taken his station on
:oppuiite bank of the river de Canoas, where
:.knew that he could not be attacked, he be-
:id the approach of the enemy without con.
crn, and disregarded this vain bravade. It
a: then the beginning of the wet season t, and
..c rain had poured down, during a great part
': the day, with the violence peculiar to the
t.rid zone. The followers of Narvaez, unac-
caiftomcd to the hardships of military service,
.urn.ured so much at being thus fruitlessly ex-
posed, that, from their unfoldier-like impatience,
' Hack!uyt, vcl. iii. 467. De Laet, Defcr. Ind. Occid. zzi.

as well as his own contempt of his adverfan,
their general permitted them to retire to Zeo.
poalla The very circumflance which induced
them to quit the field, encouraged Cortes t,
form a scheme, by which he hoped at once to
terminate the war. He observed, that his hard,
veterans, though flanding under the torrent;,
which continued to fall, without a single tent r
any (helter whatsoever to cover them, were fs
far from repining at hardships which were be.
come familiar to them, that they were fill frea
and alert far service. He foresaw that the enemr
would naturally give themselves up to repodA
after their fatigue, and that, judging of the
conduct of others by their own effeminacy, they
would deem themselves perfetly secure at a fra.
son so uhfit for action. He resolved, therefore,
to fall upon them in the dead of night, whe,
the surprise and terror of this unexpe&ed
attack might more than compensate the i-.
feriority of his numbers. His soldiers, fenfibl
that no resource remained but in some defperat'
effort of courage, approved of the measure
with such warmth, that Cortes, in a mi'tan-
oration which he addressed to them before
they began their march, was more folicitnus to
temper than to inflame their ardour. He d:-
vided them into three parties. At the head oi
the first he placed Sandoval; entrusting this
gallant officer with the most dangerous and irm
portant service, that of seizing the enemy's at.
tillery, which was planted before the pnrinpal
tower of the temple, where Narvaez had fixe.
his head-quarters. Chriltoval de Olid cor.
mandcd the fecund, with orders to affailt the

towra,

tower, and lay hold on the general. Cortes
himself conduced the third and smallest division,
which was to ac as a body of reserve, and to sup-
prt the other two as there should be occasion.
Having passed the river de Canoas, which was
r.:uh swelled with the rains, not without diffi-
..t!, the water reaching almoit to their chins,
:hey advanced in profound silence, without beat
,f drum, or found of any warlike instrument;
tacil man armed with his sword, his dagger, and
!,i Chinantlan spear. Narvaez, remits in pro-
?r-tion to his security, had posted only two
,ntilels to watch the motions of an enemy
;hhum he had fuclh good cause to dread. One
o; thcfe was fci/ed by the advanced guard of
CJrtc,'% troops, the other made his escape, and
.j rrUing to tu e toin ith all the precipitation

s. fear and zeal, gave such timely notice of the
:.cmy's approach, that there was full leisure to
!.'a prepared for their reception. But, through
;.: arrogance and infatuation of Narvaez, this
I;onrtant interval was loll. He imputed this
larm to the cowardice of the centinel, and
treattd with derision the idea of being attacked

r furces so unequal to his own. The shouts of

tC )c,'s soldiers, rushing on to the aftault, con-
i:occd him at last, that the danger which he
dcfpiftd was real. The rapidity with which
they advanced was fich, that only one cannon
cvuld be fired, hefotre Sandoval's party closed
with the enemy, drove them from their guns,
and began to force their way up the steps of
:ic tower. Narvaez, no less brave in action
th!aa pretimptuous in conduct, armed himself
i, haste, and by his voice and example animated
h:' men to the cumbat. Olid advanced to sus-

tain

tain his companions; and Cortes himself, rs:.
ing to the front, conduted and added new r.
gour to the attack. The compat order :;
which this small body pressed on, and the in.
penetrable front which they presented with ti,:
long spears, bore down all opposition before:.
They had now reached the gate, and were ftr7.
gling to burit it open, when a soldier having '
fire to the reeds with which the tower ;:i
covered, compelled Narvaez to rally out. I;
the first encounter he was wounded in the e,:
with a spear, and falling to the ground, .:
dragged down the steps, and in a moment c;:
in fetters. The cry of vicory resounded arro:.
the troops of Cortes. Those who had faz!i:
out with their leader now maintained the cr,-
flict feeblv, and began 'to surrender. Arrc:
the remainder of his soldiers, stationed in tv.
smaller towers of the temple, terror and cons:
sion prevailed. The darkness was so great, thL:
they could not distinguish between their fcr.rd
and foes. Their own artillery was pointed agair.
them. Wherever they turned their eyes, the(
beheld lights gleaming through the obtcuritvy
night, which, though proceeding only fro;::
variety of shining infects, that abound in r.o,
and sultry climates, their affrighted imaginatiL'.
represented as numerous bands of mulketc.
advancing with kindled matches to the attach
After a short resistance, the soldiers compellc
their officers to capitulate, and before morni:i
all laid down their arms, and submitted quie':;
to their conquerors.

This complete vi&ory proved more acceptat'

as it was gained almost without bloodshed, c:.'.
two soldiers being killed on the fide of Cor:;

2;

and two officers, with fifteen private men, of
the adveife faftion. Cortes treated the van-
quifhed not like enemies, but as countrymen and
friends, and offered either to fend them direcfly to
Cuba, or to take them into his service, as part-
ners in his fortune, on equal terms with his own
foldicrs. This latter proposition, seconded by
a seasonable distribution of some presents from
Ccrtes, and liberal promises of more, opened pro-
fpe&s so agreeable to the romantic expetations
which had invited them to engage in this service,
that all, a few partizans of Narvaez excepted,
cl-,fcd with it, and vied with each other in pro-
fiflons of fidelity and attachment to a general
whose recent success had given them such a
striking proof of his abilities for command.
Thu.,, by a series of events no less fortunate than
uncommon, Cortes not only escaped from per-
dition which seemed inevitable, but, when he had
leait reason to expef it,was placed at the head of a
thousand Spaniards, ready to follow wherever he
should lead them. Whoever reflecs upon the
facility with which this viEory was obtained, or
confiders with what sudden and unanimous
transition the followers of Narvaez ranged them-
fcdves under the standard of his rival, will be
apt to ascribe both events as much to the in-
tringus as to the arms of Cortes, and cannot
but fufpeEt that the ruin of Narvaez was oc-
cafioncd, no less by the treachery of his own
fullwetrs, than by the valour of his enemy u.

But, in one point, the prudent conduct and
good fortune of Cortes were equally conspicuous.

° Cortes, Relat. 24z. D. B. Diaz. c. xo-1rz5. Her-
c:a, dtc. 2. lib. ix. c. iS, &c. Gomara, Cron, c. 97, &c.
VOL. 11. T If,

If, by the rapidity of his operations after he
began his march, he had not brought matters to
such a speedy issue, even this decisive vicory
would have come too late to have saved hi!
companions whom he left in Mexico. A sea
days after the discomfiture of Narvaez, a courie
arrived with an account that the Mexicans hac
taken arms, and having seized and deftroyre
the two brigantines, which Cortes had built i!
order to secure the command of the lake, an(
attacked the Spaniards in their quarters, ha,
killed several of them, and wounded more, ha(
reduced to ashes their magazine of provisions
and carried on hostilities with such fury, tha
though Alvarado and his men defended themfeliv
with undaunted resolution, they mult either b
fuon cut off by famine, or fink under the mu;
titudc of their enemies. This revolt was excito
by motives which rendered it Htill more alarminr
On the departure of Cortes for Zempoalla, th
Mexicans flattered themselves, that the log
expectcd opportunity of reltoring thcir fovereigl
to liberty, and of vindicating their country fror
the odious dominion of Itrangers, was at lceigt
arrived ; that while the forces of tlhir opprclour
were divided, and the arms of one party turile
againll the other, they might triumph wit!
greater facility over both. Consultations wer
held, and fchemcs formed with this intentior
The Spaniards in Mexico, conscious of thci
own feebleness, fufpeted and dreaded thol
machinations. Alvarado, though a gallant officer
possessed neither that extent of capacity, nor dig
nity of manners, by which Cortes had acquirr
such an ascendant over the minds of the Mxt

calii

cans, as never allowed them to form ajuft eflimate
of his weakness or of their own itrcngth. Al-
varado knew no mode of supporting his authority
but force. Inflead of employing address to
disconccrt the plans or to sooth the spirits of
the Mexicans, he waited the return of one of
their solemn festivals, when the principal persons
in the empire were dancing, according to custom,
in the court of the great temple; he seized all
the avenues which led to it, and, allured partly
by the rich ornaments which the) wore in honour
of their gods, and partly by the facility of cutting
on at once the authors of that conspiracy which
he dreaded, he fell upon them, unarmed and
unfufpicious of any danger, and massacred a
grrat number, none escaping but such as made
tlc;r way over the battlements of the temple.
An action so cruel and treacherous filled not
only the city, but the whole empire, with indig-
nation and rage. All called aloud for vengeance;
and regardlets of the safety of their monarch,
irhofe life was at the mercy of the Spaniards, or
of titir own danger in assaulting an enemy who
bad been so long the object of their terror, they
committed all those acts of violence of which
(ortcs received an account.

To him the danger appeared so imminent, as

to admit rnither of deliberation nor delay. ie
fIt out inftanity with all his forces, and returned
from Zempoalla with no lcfs rapidity than he
lad advanced thither. At Tlafcala he was
joined by two thousand chosen warriors. On
entering the Mexican territories he found that
difafftcion to the Spaniards was not confined to
the capital. The principal inhabitants had de-

T 2 ferted

ferted the towns through which he passed; no
person of note appearing to meet him with the
usual refpeaQ; no provision was made for the
subsistence of his troops; and though he waM
permitted to advance without opposition, the
solitude and silence which reigned in every
place, and the horror with which the peop]e
avoided all intercourse with him, discovered a
deep-rooted antipathy, that excited the most ju:g
alarm. But, implacable as the enmity of the
Mexicans was, they were so unacquainted with
the science of war, fhat they knew not how to
take the proper measures, either for their oG-
safety or the deftrution of the Spaniards. 'n
instructed by their former error in admitting;
formidable enemy into their capital, infttad o
breaking down the causeways and bridges, b,
which they might have inclosed Alvarado an(
his party, and have effectually ftopt the caree
of Cortes, they again suffered him to march int'
the city [June 24] without molestation, and t
take quiet poffeflion of his ancient Itation.

The transports of joy with which Alvaradi

and his soldiers received their companions canno
be expressed. Both parties were so' mu!'
elated, the one with their seasonable deliverance
and the other with the great exploits which the
had atchieved, that this intoxication of fucce!
seems to have reached Cortes himself; and b
behaved on this occasion neither with his ufuz
sagacity nor attention. He not only neglicta
to visit Montezuma, but imbittered the insult b
cxpreffions full of contempt for that unfortuna;
prince and his people. The forces of which h
had now the command, appeared to him so irre

fi1tibl

ftible, that he might assume an higher tone,
and lay aside the mask of moderation under
which he had hitherto concealed his designs.
Some Mexicans, who understood the Spanish
language, heard the contemptuous words which
Cortes uttered, and reporting them to their
countrymen, kindled their rage anew. They
were now convinced that the intentions of the
general -ere equally bloody with those of Al-
varado, and that his original purpose in visiting
their country, had not been, as he pretended,
to court the alliance of their sovereign, but to
attempt the conquest of his dominions. They
resumcd their arms with the additional fury
which this discover' inspired, attacked a con-
iderable body of Spaniards twho were marching
tow-rds the great square in which the public
market was held, and compelled them to retire
with forne loss. Emboldened by this success,
and delighted to find that their oppressors were
not in\incible, they advanced next day with ex-
traordinary martial pomp to assault the Spaniards
in their quarters. Their number was formidable,
and their undaunted courage still more so.
Though the artillery pointed againit their nu-
merous battalions, crowded together in narrow
fireets, fwvept off multitudes at every discharge;
though every blow of the Spanish weapons fell
with mortal effeft upon their naked bodies, the
impetuofitv of the assault did not abate. Fresh
men rushed forward to occupy the places of the
flin, and meeting with the fame fate, were
succeeded by others no less intrepid and eager

rr vengeance. The utmost effort of Cortes's
abilitin' and experience, fecond:d by the difci-

T 3 plincd

plined valour of his troops, were hardly fuffieiem
to defend the fortifications that surrounded the
pofl where the Spaniards were stationed, into
which the enemy were more than once on the
point of forcing their way.

Cortes beheld, with wonder, the implacable

ferocity of a people who seemed at first to sub-
mit tamely to the yoke, and had continued so
long pafflve under it. The soldiers of Narvaez,
who fondly imagined that they followed Conel
to share in the spoils of a conquered empire, were
aftonilhed to find that they were involved in a
dangerous war, w-ih an enemy whose vigour
was flill unbroken, and loudly execrated their
own weakness, in giving such easy credit to
the delusive promises of their new leader'.
But surprise and complaints were of no a:a;L
Some immediate and extraordinary effort rw
requisite to extricate themselves out of their pre-
sent situation. As soon as the approach of
evening induced the Mexicans to retire, in comr
pliance with their national cultom of ceasing
from hostilities with the setting fun, Cort-;
began to prepare for a sally, next day, with fucn
a considerable force, as might either drive the
enemy out of the city, or compel them to lifca
to terms of accommodation.

He conducted, in person, the troops destined

for this important service. Every invention
known in the European art of war, as well as
every precaution, suggesttd by hlii lorlg acquain-
ance with the Indian mode of lightinng, wecre
employed to ensure success. But he found a2
enemy prepared and determined to oppofc hb.m.

c B. Diaz. c I:6.

The force of the Mexicans was greatly aug-
mented by fresh troops, which poured in con-
tinually from the country, and their animosity
was in no degree abated. They were led by
their nobles, inflamed by the exhortations of
their priests, and fought in defence of their
temples and families, under the eye of their gods,
and in presence of their wives and children.
Notwithstanding their numbers, and enthusiastic
contempt of danger and death, wherever the
Spaniards could close with them, the fupe-
riority of their discipline and arms obliged the
Mexicans to give way. But in narrow streets,
and where many of the bridges of communication
were broken down, the Spaniards could feldoni
come to a fair rencounter with the enemy, and
as they advanced, were exposed to /howers of
arrows and stones from the tops of houses. After
a day of incessant exertion, though vast numbers
of the Mexicans fell, and part of the city was
burrn, the Spaniards, weary with the slaughter,
and harassed by multitudes which fucceflively
relieved each other, were obliged at length to
retire, with the mortification of having accom-
plifned nothing so decisive as to compensate
the unusual calamity of having twelve soldiers
killed, and above sixty wounded. -Another
sally, i::adc: with greater force, was not more
tffetual, and in it the general himself was
wounded in the hand.

Cortes now perceived, too late, the fatal
error into which he had been betrayed by his
own contempt of the Mexicans, and was satisfied
that he could neither maintain his present station
i:!:z czrntre of an hoitile city, nor retire from

it

it without the most imminent danger. One re.
source still remained, to try what effe& the in-
terpofition of Montezuma might have to soothe
or overawe his fubjecs. When the Mexicans
approached next morning to renew the assault,
that unfortunate prince, at the mercy of the
Spaniards, and reduced to the fad neceffityof
becoming the intirument of his own disgrace,
and of the slave;- of his people Y, advanced to
the battlements in his royal robe%, and with all
the pomp in which he used to appear on folernn
occasions. At fight ,f their sovereign, whom
they had long been acctionmed to honour, and
almoit revere as a god, the weapons dropt from
th-ir har.d, c-.ery tongue was silent, all bowed
their head,, and many protlrated themselves rn
the grruind. Montezuma addreifed them with
everr argumernt that could mitigate their rage,
or persuade them to ceaic from hollilities. '\hcn
he ended his difcourf, a fullen murmur of dif-
approhat:ion run through the rank;; to this
fuccccd-d reproaches and threat ; and the fury
of the mu:titude riling in a moment above every
rcfraint of decency or refpc, ftlig,,hts of arrows
and volleys of idones poured in so violently upon
the ramparts, that before the Spanish soldier;,
appointed to cover Montezt;mn with their buck-
lers, had time to lift them in his defence, two
arrows wounded the unhappy monarch, and the
blow of a ltone on his temple flruck him to the
ground. On secing him fall, thr Mexicans were
so much aflornnilcd, thrat, ;v'til ;i tranltinn nit
uncomrrmon in popula: tumult,, they passed in a
rmoment from one extreme t, the other, rernor,;'

I See NOTZ CX'Ji.

fucceee i

7~ q~~pe
A~~~~~~_-;;

I - ·. ·
a' -~~~~~·`

ucceeded to insult, and they fled with horror,
is if the vengeance of Heaven were pursuing the
rime which they had committed. The Spa,
liards, without moleftationjpcarried Montezuma
to his apartments, and Cortes hastened thither
n console him under his misfortune. But the
inhappy monarch now perceived how low he
-as funk, and the haughty spirit which seemed
.o have been so long extint, returning, he scorned.
o survive this last humiliation, and to protraa an
gnorr.inious life, not only as the prisoner and
tool of his enemies, but as. the object of con-
tempt or detestation among his subje&s. In a
transport of rage he tore the bandages from
his wounds, and refused, with such obstinacy,
to take any nourishment, that he soon ended
his wretched days, rejecting with disdain all
the felicitations of the Spaniards to embrace
the Christian faith.

Upon the death of Montezuma, Cortes'having

loft all hope of bringing the Mexicans to ari
accommodation, saw no profpec of safety but
in attempting a retreat, and began to prepare for
it. But a sudden motion of the Mexicans en-
gaged him in new conflióts. They took posses-
sion of a high tower in the great temple which
overlooked the 8panifhn quarters, and placing
there a garrison of their principal warriors, not
a Spaniard could flir without being exposed to
their miflile weapons. From this post it was
neceflary to dislodge them at. any rik ; and Juan
de Efcobar, with a numerous detachment of
chosen soldiers, was ordered to make the attack.
But Efcobar, though a gallant officer, and at the
Bead of troops accustomtd to conquer, and who

now

now_ fought under the eyes of their countrymen

.as thrice repulsed. Cortes, sensible that rn

only the reputation, but the safety of his arm
depended on the success of this aftault, ordera
a buckler to be tied to his arm, as he could na
manage it with his wounded hand, and rufihe
with his drawn sword into the thickest of tn
combatants. Encouraged by the presence o
their general, the Spaniards returned to t;
charge with such vigour, that they graduai]
forced their way up the steps, and drove tie
Mexicans to the platform at the top of thi
tower. There a dreadful carnage began, whe
two young Mexicans of high rank, obfemir.;
Cortes as he animated his soldiers by his vo.,;
and example, rcfolvcd to sacrifice their own li.r
in order to cut offthe author of all the calamir
tics which desolated their country. They ap
proached him in a supplicant posture, as if the
had intended to lay down their arms, and feiz.
ing him in a moment, hurried him towards the
battlements, over which they threw themfclya
headlong, in hopes of dragging him along tc
be dashed in pieces by the fame fall. But
Cortes, by his strength and agility, broke
loose from their grasp, and the gallant youths
perishcd in this generous though unsuccessful
attempt to save their country Y. As soon as the

· M. Clavigero has censured me with asperity for relahti

this gallant a&ion of the two Mericans, and for fuppofin
that there were batlements round the temple of Mexico. I
»eiatd the attempt to defiroy Cortes on the authority of He.
ec z. lib. x c. 9. and of Torquemnaa, lib. iv. c. 69.
J followed them likewise in supposing the uppertrnft plr-
form of the temple to be encompafed by a battienelo t
ral.

Spaniarts

Spaniards became masters of the tower, they set
fre to it, and, without farther molestation, con-
tinued the preparations for their retreat.

This became the more necessary, as the Mexi.
cans were so much astonished at the last effort of
t.e Spanish valour, that they began to change
tneir whole fyitem of hostility, and, instead of
iceffant attacks, endeavoured, by barricading
he streets, and breaking down the causeways,
to cut off the communication of the Spaniards
with the continent, and thus to starve an enemy
rhom they could not subdue. The first point
to be determined by Cortes and his followers,
w-as, whether they ihould march out openly in
the face of day, when they could discern every
danger, and fee how to regulate their own mo-
ticns, as well as how to refill the assaults of the
uerny; or, whether they should endeavour to
rtire fecrttly in the night ? The latter was pre-
ikrred, partly from hopes that their national fu-
prftlition would restrain the Mexicans from ven-
turing to attack them in the night, and partly
ftom their own fond belief in the predictions of
private soldier, who having acquired universal
credit.by a smattering of learning, and his pre-
tcnfions to astrology, boldly assured his country-
men of success, if they made their retreat in this
manner. They began to move, towards mid-
. ght, in three divisions. Sandoval led the van;
Pcdro Alvarado, and Velasquez de Leon, had
the conduc of the rear; and Cortes commanded
;a the centre, where he placed the prisoners,
2aiong whom were a son and two daughters of
Montczuma, together with several Mexicans of
Cinction, the artillery, the baggage, and a

portable

portable bridge of timber, intended to be laid
over the breaches in the causeway. They marchtd
in profound silence along the causeway which lti
to Tacuba, because it was shorter than any or
the reft, and lying most remote from the road
towards Tlafcala and the sea-coast, had been 1id
more entire by the Mexicans. They reached
the first breach in it without molestation, hoping
that their retreat was undiscovered.

But the Mexicans, unperceived, had not only

watched all their motions with attention, ba.
had made proper dispositions for a moit for,m-
dable attack. While the Spaniards were inttnt
upon placing their bridge in the breach, and oc.
cupied in conducting their horses and artilier
along it, thev were suddenly alarmed with tbt
tremendous found of warlike inltruments, and a
general shout from an innumerable multitude of
enemies; the lake was covered with canore;
flights of arrows and showers of stones poured
in upon, them from every quarter; the Mei.
cans ruffing forward to the charge with fearldi
impetuolity, as if they hoped in that moment to
be avenged for all their wrongs. Unfortunatdt
the wooden bridge, by the weight of the artillery,
was wedged so fast into the Htones and mud, th.t
it was impofiible to remove it. Dismayed a;
this accident, the Spaniards advanced with pre-
cipitation towards the second breach. The Mexi-
cans hemmed them in on every fide, and though
they defended themselves with their usual cou-
rage, yet crouded together as they were on a
narrow causeway, their discipline and militanr
skill were of little avail, nor did the obscurity of
the night permit them to derive great advantage

s,-.

borm their fire-arms,or the superiority of their other
-eapons. All Mexico was now in arms, and so
eaer were the people on the destruction of their
,.prelfors, that they who were not near enough
:o annoy them in person, impatient of the delay,
:.-rscd forward with such ardour, as drove on
:iir countrymen in the front with irresistible
-:.lence. Fresh warriors instantly filled the place
i such as fell. The Spaniards, weary with
-i-ghter, and unable to fultain the weight of
:,c torrent that poured in upon them, began

c. ive wav. In a moment the confulion was
liverial; horse and foot, officers and soldiers,
-:eds and enemies, were mingled together:
2.zd while all fought, and many fell, they could
ikrdiv distinguish from what hand the blow
came.

Cortes, with about a hundred foot soldiers
-nd a few horse, forced his way over the two
:ceaining breaches in the causeway, the bodies
.:'the dead fcrving to fill up the charms, and
:ached the main land. Having formed them as
:oon as they arrived, he returned with such as
-rae vet capable of fervicc, to assist his friends
- their retreat, and to encourage them, by his
rdr'ence and example, to perfcvere in the efforts
r-quilte to effec it. He met with part of his
;'diers, wsho had broke through the enemy, but
:.und many more overwhelmed by the multitude
o their aggressors, or perishing in the lake;
a2d h ard the piteous lamentations of others,
whom the Mexicans, having taken alive, were
ctrrying off in triumph to be sacrificed to the
gAd of war. Before day, all who had escaped
'-c:nled at 'Tacuba. But when the morning
YCL. 11. U dawdled,

dawned, and discovered to the view of Cone
his shattered battalion, reduced to less than hali
its number, the survivors deje&ed, and moRftf
them covered with wounds, the thoughts i
what they had suffered, and the remembranm
of so many faithful friends and gallant followm
who had fallen in that night of sorrow z, picrco
his foul with such anguish, that while he wa
forming their ranks, and issuing some neceff-
orders, his soldiers observed the tears trickliri
from his eyes, and remarked, with much sati
faction, that, llile attentive to the duties of i
general, he was not insensible to the feelings o:
a man.

In this fatal retreat many officers ofdiftinc&ir

perinhed a, and among there Velasquez de Leor,
who having forsaken the party of his kinfain,
the governor of Cuba, to follow the fortune ofh
companions, was, on that account, as welli
for his superior merit, respected by them as tk.
second pcrfon in the army. All the artillry,
ammunition, and baggage, were loft ; the greate
part of the horses, and above two thoufa!
Tlafcalans, were killed, and only a very fmin
portion of the treasure which they had amafic'
was saved. This, which had been always th.:
chief objed, proved a great cause of their ca
lamity ; for many of the soldiers having so ovr.
loaded themselves with bars of gold as renderT
them unfit for acion, and retarded their fligi!,
fell ignominiously the vi&ims of their own '-
considerate avarice. Amidit so many difaicr.,
it was some consolation to find that Agu-'

N Axe T rif is the name by which it is fiil diflictl.z5
in New Spain. ' Sec NOTE CXVIII.

=\-

and Marina, whose funtion as interpreters
wa of such essential importance, had made
their escape b.

The first care of Cortes was to find some
felrer for his wearied troops; for as the Mexi-
tans infested them on every fide, and the people
of Tacuba began to take arms, he could not
continue in his present station. He directed his
narch towards the rising ground, and having
irtunately discovered a temple situated on an
eminence, took possession of it. There he found
r.ot only the shelter for which he wished, but,
wrhat was no less wanted, some provisions to
rcfrelh his men; and though the enemy did not
i:;tcrmit their attacks throughout the day, they
wcre with less difficulty prevented from making
any impression. During this time Cortes was
engaged in deep consultation with his officers,
concerning the route which they ought to take
in their retreat. They were now on the weft
fide of the lake. Tlafcala, the only place
where they could hope for a friendly reception,
ly about fixty-four miles to the east of Mexi-
co '; so that they were obliged to go round the'
;.orth end of the lake before they could fall
:.to the road which led thither. A Tlafcalan
soldier undertook to be their guide, and con-
ductd them through a country, in some places
rarfhv, in others mountainous, in all ill-culti-
rated and thinly peopled. They marched for
fix days with little respite, and under continual
alarms, numerous bodies of the Mexicans hover-

Corie', Relat. p. 248. P. Diaz. c. izg. Gomara,
C. c. Icg. 1Hcirera, dec. 2. lib. x. c. aI, Iz.

Villa Seanor Teatro Americanos, lib, ii. c. ix.

u z ing

ing around them, sometimes harassing them at
dittance with their miflile weapons, and foi.
times attacking them c!ofely in front, in rear, :
flank, with great boldness, as they now knr.
that they were not invincible. Nor were ,t
fatigue and danger of those incessant confli&ts :
woorn evils to which they were exposed. As'L
barren countrythrough which they passcd afford.
hardly any proviiions, they were reduced toft.r
on berries, roots, and the flalks of green maiz;
and at the very time that famine was depreffin
their spirits and wafting their strength, th:
iituation required the most vigorous and unre.
mitting exertions of courage and actir:v.
Amidit those complicated distresses, one c:.
cumftance supported and animated the Spaniar.c
Their commander filtaincd this fad reverie w
fortune with unfnakeni magnanimity. His prt
fence of mind never forsook him; his fagacr
foresaw every event, and his vigilance providd'
for it. He was foremost in ever,' danger, a.-
endured every hardship with cheerfulness. T%'
difficulties with which he was surrounded feemd
to call forth new talents; and his soldi..,
though despairing themselves, continued to folici
him with encreafing confidence in his abilities.

On the sixth day they arrived near to Otumbs,

not far from the road between Mexico and Tiz.
cala. Early next morning they began to a-
vance towards it, flying parties of the enemy :r
hanging on their rear; and, amidst the ini:a
with which they accompanied their hoftlihiti
Marina remarked that they often exclaimed w-::
exultation, Go on, robbers; go to the .;
where you shall quickly meet the vengeance ci-

to your crimes." The meaning of this threat
the Spaniards did not comprehend, until they
reached the summit of an eminence before them.
There a spacious valley opened to their view,
covered with a vast army, extending as far as
the eve could reach. The Mexicans, while with
one body of their troops they harassed the Spa-
rnards in their retreat, had assembled their
principal force on the other fide of the lake;
and marching along the road which led directly
to Tlafcala, posted it in the plain of Otumba,
through which they knew Cortes must pass.
At the fight of this incredible multitude, which
they could firvey at once from the rifng ground,
the Spaniards were astonished, and even the
boldeit began to despair. But Cortes, without
2lowing leiftre for their fears to acquire strength
by reflection, after x arning them briefly that no
alternative now remained but to conquer or to
die, led them instantly to the charge. The
Mlexicans waited their approach with unufilal
fortitude. Such, however, was the superiority
of the Spanish discipline and arms, that the
impression of this small body was irresistible;
ard whllchever way its force was directed, it
-pnetrated and dispersed the moit numerous
battalions. But while these gave way in one
quarter, new combatants advanced from another,
a-d the Spaniards, though successful in every
i:tack, were ready to fink under those repeated
efforts, without feeing any end of their toil, or
rany hope of vicory. At that time Cortes ob-
irn-ed the great standard of the empire, which
as carried before the Mexican general, ad-
sicinlg; and fortunately recollecting to have

v 3 heard,

heard, that on the fate of it depended the eTer
of every battle, he assembled a few of his brawi
.officers, v.'lofe horses were ftiil capable of fenict,
and placing himself at their head, pushed so:.
ward towards the fIandard with an impetuofi7
which bore down every thing before it. .
chosen body of nobles, who guarded the ftand2r.
made some rcfitiance, but were soon broker
Cortes, with a ilroke of his lance, wounded :i
lexican general, and threw him to the grcu.,r.
One of the Spanifil officers alighting, put a
end to his life, and laid hold of the impeid
standard. The moment that their leader ft!,
and the standard, towards which all directd
their eyes, disappeared, an universal panic ftruct
the Mexicans, and, as if the bond which hi
them together had been diflolved, every crin
was lowered, each soldier threw away his v.-.r
pons, and all fled with precipitation to t.-
mountains. The Spaniards, unable to p;.ir
them far, returned to collect the spoils ot t?;
field, which were so valuable, as to be f,r-
compensation for the wealth which they had '.
in Mexico; for in the enemy's army were rr,
of their principal warriors, dressed out in :h-
richest ornaments, as if they lhad been r.archi:.
to assured victory. Next day [Julv. 'S,
their great joy, they entered the Tlafciaz
territores d.

But, amidst their fatifaction in ha;ing C:

beyond the precincs of an hoftilc counry. t :
could not look fon.-ard without solicitud-. .
they were l:ili urncertain what reception '.:

C Coa:-s, R-l.. .. 9. 9. B. Diz. c. i2S. G-rx-

Crrn. c. I. Hr:.
H-r:r . zi . . , c. 12 I -

r'-y''

right meet with from allies, to whom they
returned in a condition very different from that
ii which they had lately set out from their
dcmilions. Happily for them, the enmity of
the Tlafcalans to the Mexican name was so in-
,etrate, their desire to avenge the death of their
c(ur,tr;:nen so vehement, and the ascendant
iv ilc Cortes had acquired over the chiefs of the
rcAnublB so complete, that, far from entertaining
a hi'.!i'r t of taking any advantage of the distressed
:.ua2:io,i in which they beheld the Spaniards,
:c:- received them with a tenderness and
c,, aity- which quickly dissipated all their

>Jlc interval of tranquillity and indulgence

was ::u.V abfohltely necessary; not only that the
5amiiards might give attention to the cure of
their wounds, which had been too long negle&ed,
hiut in order to recruit their firength, exhausted
i. iuch a long succession of fatigue and hard-
s!;is. During this, Cortes learned that he and
i companions were not the only Spaniards who
i.dc felt the effects of the Mexican enmity. A
c,aidcrahle detachment, which was marching
f-rm Zempoalla towards the capital, had been
ct off by the people of Tepeaca. A smaller
p.rv, returning from Tlafcala to Vera Cruz,
v '.h tlic share of the Mexican gold allotted to
t,,: garrison, had been surprised and destroyed
i-the mointains. At a juncture when the life
f c;erv Spaniard was of importance, such loftes
*'ere deuetllv felt. The schemes which Cortes
Wa;t minditating rendered them peculiarly afflidtive
-, him. While his enemies, and even many of
*:'.; followera Lcoiilidered the difalteri which had

befallen

befallen him as fatal to the progress of his arrn,
and imagined that nothing now remained bK-
speedily to abandon a country which he lhad::,
vaded with unequal force, his mind, as emir,:
for perseverance as for enterprise, was still b.
on accomplishing his original purpose, of sic
jecing the Mexican empire to the croRn ,
Castile. Severe and unexpected as the cl,-r.
wa. which he had received, it did not apr-:
to him a fufficicnt rcafon for relilrquifhing ::
conquells which he had already made, or aga:
resuming his operations with better hopes of fc..
ccfs. The colony at Vera Cruz was not o::;
safe, but had remaited unmolet.ed. The pte'.
of Zcrmpoalla and the adjacent diftrcis had d::
covered no fvmptoms of defeinon. The 'ai.
calans continued faithful to their alliance. 0,
their martial spirit, easily rouzed to arms, arn
inflamed with implacable hatred of the MIexicar,;,
Cortes dcpended for powerful aid. He had
still the command of a body of Spaniards, equal
in number to that with which he had opened ii,
way- into the centre of tile empire, a:d had takei
poffeflion of tile capital ; so that with the ber.rc1
of greater experience, as well as more pcrftc:
knowledge of the country, he did not dtcpairof
quickly recovering all that he had been dcpnri't
of by untoward events.

Full of this idea, he courted the Tlafcalan

chiefs with such attention, and diitributed amoig
them so libcrally the rich spoils of Otumba, tli:
he was secure of obtaining whlna:ver he fhoiL.
require of the republic. He drew a small fupi'r
of ammunition, arid two or three field-piert
from his itores at Vcra Cruz. He difpatchc,

at.

an officer of confidence with four ships of Nar-
racz'i fleet to Hispaniola and Jamaica, to engage
a..e:iturers, and to purchase horses, gunpowder,
od other military stores. As he knew that it
-wud he vain to attempt the reduction of Mex-
in-, unless he could secure the command of the
lak;, he gave orders to prepare, in the mountains
: Tiafcala, materials for building twelve brigan-
tinc, so as they might be carried thither in
p::cts ready to be put together, and launched
whern he Itood in need of their service e

But while, with provident attention, he was
tiking those necessary steps towards the execu-
: ;n of his measures, an obstacle arose in a
c .tcr where it was least expected, but most
'.rr.idable. The spirit of discontent and mutiny
r-,ke out in his own army. Many of Narvaez's
io r'ers were planters rather than soldiers, and
.2ad accompanied him to New Spain with fan-
line hopes of obtaining settlements, but with
little inclination to engage in the hardships and
dangers of war. As the fame motives had in-
duced them to enter into their new engagements
Xr:h Cortes, they no sooner became acquainted
with the nature of the service, than they bitterly
r:pented of their choice. Such of them as had
thi good fortune to survive the perilous adven-
tures in which their own imprudence had in-
volved them, happy in having made their escape,
trembled at the thoughts of being exposed a
ifcond time to similar calamities. As soon as
they discovered the intention of Cortes, they
began secretly to murmur and cabal, and waxing

Cortes Relat. p. 253, E. Comara Cron, c. 17.

gradually

gradually more audacious, they, in a body, ,,o
sered a remonfirance to their general against.1
imprudence of attacking a powerful empire wt"
his shattered forces, and formally required Lia
to lead them back directly to Cuba. Thoie,
Corte;, long practiscd in the arts of comrar,a,
employed arguments, intreaties, and prefer;.,
to convince or to soothe them; though lib i;:
soldiers, animated with the spirit of their leadc,
warmly fcconded his endeavours; he found the:,
scars too violent and deep-rooted to be removti
and the utmost he could effet was to preta
with them to defer their departure for some tirrc,
on a promise that he would, at a more propc
junature, difmifsfuch as should desire it.

That the malcontents might have no leifur

to brood over the causes of their disaffection, Lt
resolved initantly to call forth his troops into
action. He proposed to chastise the people of
Tepeaca for the outrage which they had com-
mnited, and as the detachment which they had
cut off happened to be composed moftlv of sod.
diers who had served under Nprvacz, their coir.
panions, from the desire of vengeance, cngager
the more willingly in this war. He took th.
command in person [August], accompanied by
a numerous body of Tlafcalans, and in the fpacc
of a few weeks, after various encounters, wri:
great slaughter of the Tepeacans, reduced that
province to fubjcdion. During several montir,
while he waited for the supplies of men and ar.-
munition which lie expected, and was carrninc
on his preparations for constructing the briga-L
tines, he kept his troops conltantly employed
Tarious expeditions againlt the adjacent pv

V !il, ..I

vinces, all of which were conduted with an
uaiform tenor of success. By these, his men
became again accustomed to vicory, and resumed
their wonted sense of superiority ; the Mexicau
power was weakened; the Tlafcalan warriors
acquired the habit of acting in conjunction with
the Spaniards; and the chiefs of the republic
delighted to fee their country enriched with the
fpois of all the people around them, and afto-
tilhed every day with fresh discoveries of the
irrefittible prowess of their allies, they declined
ro effort requisite to support them.

All those preparatory arrangements, however,
though the molt prudent and efficacious which
the Situation of Cortes allowed him to make,
would have been of little avail, without a rein-
farcement of Spanish soldiers. Of this he was
so deeply sensible, that it was the chief objea of
his thoughts and wishes; and yet his only pro-
fpct of obtaining it from the return of the of-
scer whom he had sent to the isles to solicit aid,
was both dillant and uncertain. But what neither
his own sagacity nor power could have procured,
he owed to a series of fortunate and unforeseen inci-
dents. The governorofCuba, towhom the success
r.s Narvaez appeared an event of infallible cer-
:inty, having sent two small (hips after him with
aew inilructions, and a supply of men and military
i'.,res, the officer whom Cortes had appointed to
c'mnmand on the coast, artfully decoyed thenm
into the harbour of Vera Cruz, seized the
(cfftls, and easily persuaded the soldiers to follow
;:it itandard of a more able leader than him whom
t:;Iy were deitined to join f. Soon after, three

D A. Diaz. c, 231.

flip:

ships of more considerable force came into tht
harbour separately. These belonged to an ar.
nament fitted out by Francisco de Galvr,
governor of Jamaica, who, being poffefTed with
the rage of discovery and conquest which ani.
mated every Spaniard fettled in America, had
long aimed at intruding into some diifri& o.
New Spain, and dividing with Cortes the glorr
and gain of annexing that empire to the cronsa
of Castile. They unadvisedly made their at.
tempt on the northern provinces, where tit
country was poor, and the people fierce and war.
like; and, after a cruel succession of disaster,
famine compelled them to venture into YVcn
Cruz, and cast themselves upon the mercy oi
their countrymen [Oct. z8]. Their fidelity wu
not proof against the splendid hopes and prc.
mises which had seduced other adventurers, ard,
as if the spirit of revolt had been contagious in
New Spain, they likewifc abandoned the mailtr
whom they were bound to serve, and inlilkd
under Cortes g. Nor was it America alone that
furnihbed such unexpected aid. A ship arrivtd
from Spain, freighted by fonme private merchanu
with military stores, in hopes of a profitabl
market in a country, the fame of whose opulece
begun to spread over Europe. Cortes eagerlt
purchased a cargo wh'ch to him was invaluable,
and the crew, following the general exampie,
joined him at Tlafcala h.

From those various quarters, the army of Cor.

tes was augmented with an hundred and eighty
men, and twenty horses, a reinforcement too is-
considerable to produce any consequence which
r Corts Relat. z53, F. B. Diaz c. 133. " Ibid. c. ;:'-

·ó'. ~

would entitle it to have been mentioned in the
LiIlory of other parts of the globe. But in that
Cf America, where great revolutions were
brought about by causes which seemed to bear
ro proportion to their effecs, such small events
rife into importance, because they were sufficient
to decide with refpet to the fate of kingdoms.

',Jr is it the least remarkable instance of the
1g:"ilar felicity conspicuous in many passages of
Cotes's itory, that the two persons chiefly in-
arumental in furnishing him with those season-
able supplies, should be an avowed enemy who
a:ned at his deftruftion, and an envious rival
iho wished to supplant him.

The first effet of the jun&ion with his new
fllowers was to enable him to dismiss such of
Nar;aez's soldiers as remained with rcluctance

' :is service. After their departure, he fill
ruftered five hundred and fifty infantry, of
r;hich fourscore were armed with muskets or
Cross-bows, forty horsemen, and a train of nine
field pieces . At the head of these, accompanied
by ten thousand Tlafcalans and other friendly
Indians, Cortes began his march towards
Mexico, on the twenty-eighth of December,
fix months after his disastrous retreat from that
city .

Nor did he advance to attack an enemy un-
prepared to receive him. Upon the death of
Miontezuma, the Mexican chiefs, in whom the
right of electing the emperor was veiled, had in-
·antly raised his brother Quetlavaca to the
throne. His avowed and inveterate enmity to

i Cortes, Relat. z5, E.

Re!t, 356

, A. B. Diaz, c, 137,
otL. 1i, x the

the Spaniards would have been fuffcient to ga2i
their suffrages, although he had been less di,
tinguiiftd for courage and capacity. He [h,
an immediate opportunity of shewing that th
was worthy of their choice, by conducing, ii
person, those fierce attacks which compelled the
Spaniards to abandon his capital; and as s0oo
as their retreat afforded him any respite fron
action, he took mcafures for preventing their
return to Mexico, with prudence equal to tht
spirit which he had displayed in driving thc,
out of it. As from the vicinity of Tlafcala, Le
could not be unacquainted with the motions a:.d
intention, of Cortc-, lie obfcrved the fiorm that
was gathering, and began early to provide agairn
it. He repaired what the Spaniards had ruintd
in the city, and strengthened it with such new
fortifications as the skill of his fubjeCAs wa
capable of erecting. Betide filling his maga.
zines with the usual weapons of war, he ga.;
diretions to make long spears headed with the
swords and daggers taken from the Spaniard;,
in order to annoy the cavalry. He summonrd
the people in every province of the empire .;
take arms against their oppressors, and as an er..
couragement to exert themselves with vigour, he
promiftd them exemption from all the ta:.u
which his predecessors had impsed'. But wL:
he laboured with the geatefl earneftners was, !o
deprive the Spaniards of the advantages whLc!i
they derived from the friendship of the Thaca-
lans, by endeavouring to persuade that people to
renounce a!! connection with men, who were r.o
only avowed enemies of the gods whom thry

C or.us, Rclat. p. z53, E. 254, A. B. Diaz. c. i,-.

worzhi:J-i

Foiipped, but who would not fail to fubjeft
uern at last to the fame yoke, which they were
;oi inconsiderately lending their aid to impose
aon others. These representations, no less
;-sing than well founded, were urged so forcibly
;' his ambassadors, that it required all the ad-
.-ds of Cortes to prevent their making a dan-
rerous impression m.
But while Quetlavaca was arranging his plan
'cdefence, with a degree of forelight uncom-
ron in an American, his days were cut short by
the small-pox. This distemper, which raged at
.hat time in New Spain with fatal malignity,
was unknown in that quarter of the globe, until
was introduced by the Europeans, and may be
reckoned among the greatest calamities brought
upon them by their invaders. In his stead the
lMexicans raised to the throne Guatimozin, ne-
phew and fon-in-law of Montezuma, a young
ran of such high reputation for abilities and
ralour, that in this dangerous crisis, his country-
men, with one voice, called him to the supreme
command b.

j15Z.] As soon as Cortes entered the ene-

my's territories, he discovered various prepara-
tions to obflru& his progress. But his troops
'rced their way with little difficulty, and took
poffcffion of Tezeuco, the second city of the
empire, situated on the banks of the lake about
twenty miles from Mexico o. Here he deter-
rined to establish his head-quarters, as the mofl
?roper station for launching his brigantines, as

B. Diaz. c. Iz9. Herrera, dec. z. lib. x. c. 14- 19.
B. Diaz. c-. 30.
Yiiia Senor Theatro Amrricano, L 156.

x 2 well

well as for making his approaches to the capiti
In order to render his residence there more fecue,
he deposed the cazique or chief, who was at toh
head of that community, under pretext of fomn
defe& in his title, and substituted in his place
person whom a faction of the nobles pointed cc:
as the right heir of that dignity. Attached to
him by this benefit, the new cazique and hii
adherents served the Spaniards with invioLi:-
fidelity P.

As the preparations for confiruaing the br.

gantines advanced slowly under the urllifsl
hands of soldiers and Indians, whom Cortes wa
obliged to employ in assisting three or four car-
penters who happened fortunately to be in thi
service, and as he had not yet received the reinr
forcement which he expected from Hifpanioz,
he was not in a condition to turn his arms direcly
against the capital To have attacked, at thi
period, a city so populous, so well prepared for
defence,and in afituation of such peculiar firength,
must have exposed his troops to inevitable de.
ftruetion. Three months elapsed before the
materials for the brigantines were finished, ard
before he heard any thing with respect to t.e
success of the officer whom he had sent to Hii-
paniola. This, however, was not a season of ir..
action to Cortes. He attacked fucccffively fevlr
of the towns situated around the lake; and
though all the Mexican power was exertd to
obftnict his operations, he either compelled them
to fubnit to the Spanish crown, or reduced
them to ruins. The inhabitants of other towr.i

P Cortev, Re:at. 256, &c. B. Daz. c. 137. Gorri,
Cron. c. il. . HCrtia, dec. 3. c. 1.

FS.

Lc endeavoured to conciliate by more gentle
reans, and though he could not hold any inter-
ourrfe with them but by the intervention of
:erpreters, yet under all the disadvantage of
that tedious and imperfe& mode of communi-
cation, he had acquired such thorough know-
\dA.e of the state of the country, as well as of
:tldifpofitions of the people, that he conducAed
.i; negotiations and intrigues with astonishing

KScterity and success. Most of the cities ad-

-acent to Mexico were originally the capitals of
-all independent states; and some of them
av;ing been but lately annexed to the Mexican
:rpire, still retained the remembrance of their
i;cient liberty, and bore with impatience the
'porous yoke of their new maiters. Cortes
aving early observed symptoms of their difaf,
:Etion, availed himself of this knowledge to
ain their confidence and friendship. By offer-
I:, with confidence, to deliver them from the
:iious dominion of the Mexicans, and by liberal
:omifes of more indulgent treatment, if they
,ould unite with him against their oppressors,

prevailed on the people of several considerable
!i frits, not only to acknowledge the king of

Castile as their sovereign, but to supply the
Spanish camp with provisions, and to strengthen
:i, army with auxiliary troops. Guatimozin,
ni the first appearance of defection among his

i'-;cts, exerted himself with vigour to prevent

- to punish their revolt; but in spite of his
fort-, the spirit continued to spread. The
?ian'iards gradually acquired new allies, and
'::i deep concern he beheld Cortes arming
:-I:,. hii empire those very hands which ought

x 3 to

to have been acive in its defence; and ready t,
advance against the capital at the head of a nu.
merous body of his own fubjets q.

While, by those various methods, Cortes ma

gradually circumscribing the Mexican power i
such a manner that his profpeft of overturnslg
it seemed neither to be uncertain nor remkt:,
all his schemes were well nigh defeated, by
conspiracy no less unexpeced than dangerous
The soldiers of Narvaez had never united pt.
fecly with the original companions of Cone,
nor did they enter into his measures with thi
fame cordial zeal Upon every occasion th:;
required any extraordinary effort of courage c.
of patience, their spirits were apt to fink; ad
now, on a near view of what they had to en
counter, in attempting to reduce a city so inac.
ceffible as Mexico, and defended by a numeroui
army, the resolution even of those among then
who had adhered to Cortes when he was deserted
by their associates, began to fail. Their ftan
led them to presumptuous and unfoldier-like
discussions concerning the propriety of their
general's measures, and the improbability of the:r
success. From these they proceeded to censure
and inve&ives, and at las began to deliberate
how they might provide for their own fafcty,
of which they deemed their commander to b:
totally negligent. Antonio Villefagna, a priv:e
soldier, but bold, intriguing, and strongly a:
tached to Velasquez, artfully fomented tLh
growing spirit of difaffetion. His quarters be.

q Cortes, Relat. 256-2Co. B. Diaz. c. 17--l:.

Gomara, Cron c. xzz, 113. Herrera, dec. 3. lis ,
C. I, 2.

W-ls

cane the rendezvous of the malcontents, where,
fter many consultations, they could difeover no
rcthod of checking Cortes in his career, but by
aiafTinating him and his most considerable offi-
cers, and conferring the command upon some
person who would relinquish his wild plans, and
adopt meafirres more consistent with the general
security. Despair inspired them with courage.
The hour for perpetrating the crime, the per-
fjns whom they destined as victims, the officers
to succeed them in command, were all named;
and the conspirators signed an association, by
.hich they bound themselves with molt solemn
oaths to mutual fidelity. But on the evening
Ckore the appointed day, one of Cortes's ancient
:-llowers, who had been seduced into the con-
.piracv, touched with compunEtion at the immi-
rent danger of a man whom he had long been
accustomed to revere, or itruck with horror at
tii own treachery, went privately to his general,
a.-d revealed to him all that he knew. Cortes,
though deeply alarmed, discerned at once what
rjndu't was proper in a situation so critical.
He repaired instantly to Villefagna's quarters,
accompanied by some of his most trusty officers.
The astonishment and confusion of the man at
th:' unexpected visit anticipated the confession.
cf his guilt. Cortes, while his attendants seized
the traitor, snatched from his bosom a paper con-
taining the association, signed by the confpira-
;,n. Impatient to know how far the defection
extended, he retired to read it, and found there
r.lmes which filled him with surprise and sorrow.
E:t, aware how dangerous a ftrit scrutiny
right prove at such a juncure, he confined his

judicial

judicial inquiries to Villefagna alone. As th
proofs of his guilt were manifest, he was con.
demned after a short trial, and next morning h,
was seen hanging before the door of th
house in which he had lodged. Cortes called
his troops together, and having explained
to them the atrocious purpose of the confpira.
tors, as well as the justice of the punilhment
inflicted on Villefagna, he added, with an an.
pearance of satisfaction, that he was entirehl
ignorant with refpet to all the circumstance
of this dark transaction, as the traitor, when
arrefled, had suddenly torn and swallowed a
paper which probably contained an account of
it, and under the severest tortures possessed such
constancy as to conceal the names of his ac-
complices. This artful declaration restored
tranquillity to many a breast that was throbbing,
while he spoke, with consciousness of guilt and
dread of detetion; and by this prudent modera-
tion, Cortes had the advantage of having dii-
covered, and of being able to observe such of
his followers as were difaffeted; while they,
flattering themselves that their past crime was
unknown, endeavoured to avert any suspicion
of it, by redoubling their acivity and zeal in
his service r.

Cortes did not allow them leisure to ruminate

on what had happened; and as the most effectual
means of preventing the return of a mutinous
spirit, he determined to call forth his troops im.
nlediately to action. Fortunately, a proper
occasion for thi; occurred without his seeming

' Cortes, Reat. zS3, C. D. Diaz. , 146. HCrnl,
dec. 3. lib. i. c. I.

to

t court it. He received intelligence that the
,:ierials for building the brigantines were at
Lith completely finished, and waited only for
2 ,odv of Spaniards to condu&c them to Te-
I7ce.j The command of this convoy, consist-
inz of two hundred foot soldiers, fifteen horse-
sin, and two field.pieces, he gave to Sandoval,

b,, by the vigilance, activity, and courage,

r,,ich he manifetled on every occasion, was
rowing daily in his confidence, and in the efti-
,ation of his fellow-foldiers. The service was
o less singular than important; the beams,
:ie planks, the masts, the cordage, the fails, the
ion-work, and all the infinite variety of articles
rcruhite for the conftruAion of thirteen brigan-
nres, were to be carried sixty miles over land,
Ltrough a mountainous country, by people who
were unacquainted with the ministry of domestic
aimals, or the aid of machines to facilitate any
work of labour. The Tlafcalans furnished eight
thouland Tamener, an inferior order of men
dftined for servile tasks, to carry the materials
or. their shoulders, and appointed fifteen thou-
dnd warriors to accompany and defend them.
Sandoval made the disposition for their progress
*With great propriety, placing the Tamenes in the
crntre, one body of warriors in the front, an-
rother in the rear, with considerable parties to
'rcTr the flanks. To each of these he joined
iome Spaniards, not only to assist them in danger,
but to accustom them to regularity and fubor-
'rnation. A body so numerous, and so much
e cumbered, advanced leisurely, but in excellent

:.-; and in some places, where it was confined
;I :': w\oods or mountains, the line of march

extended

extended above fix miles. Parties of Mexica
frequently appeared hovering around them e0
the high grounds; but perceiving no profpet of
fucccfs in attacking an enemy continually on Li
guard, and prepared to receive them, they) i
not venture to molest him; and Sandoval ha
the glory of conduiding safely to Tezeuco, a
convoy on which all the future operations of lii
countrymen depended '.

This was followed by another event of no

less moment. Four ihips arrived at Vera Cruz
from Hispaniola, with two hundred soldier,
eighty horses, two battering cannon, and a con.
fiderable supply of ammunition and arms t. Ele.
vated with obfcrving that all his preparatory
schemes, either for recruiting his own army, or
impairing the force of the enemy, had now pro.
duced their full effec, Cortes, impatient to be.
gin the siege in form, hastened the launching of
the brigantines. To facilitate this, he had em-
ployed a vafl number of Indians for two monthk
in deepening the small rivulet which runs by
Tezeuco into the lake, and in forming it into a
canal near two miles in length ; and though
the Mexicans, aware of his intentions, as well
as of the danger which threatened them, en-
deavoured frequently to interrupt the labourers,
or to burn the brigantines, the work was at Ilat
completed ., On the twenty-eighth of April,
all the Spanish troops, together with the auxiliary
Indians, were drawn up on the banks of the
canal; and with extraordinary military pop,

' ConeC, Rebt. 260, C. E. B. Diaz. c. 140.
C Corte, Rclat. z59, F. 262, D. Gomara, Cron. c. 1;,-
a See NoTz CXIX. x B. Diaz. c. 14c.

... 1Iid-

de&red more solemn by the celebration of the
r.o sacred rites of religion, the brigantines were
:-:chcd. As they fell down the canal in order,
ither Olmedo blessed them, and gave each its
:re. Every eye followed them with wonder
ad hope, until they entered the lake, when
t.c; hoited their fails, and bore away before
:, Wind. A general shout of joy was raised;
*admiring that bold inventive genius, which,

means so extraordinary that their success
ioA exceeded belief, had acquired the com-
r.a:d of a fleet, without the aid of which Mexico
id have continued to set the Spaniih power

aid arms at defiance r.
Cortes determined to attack the city from
:'-te different quarters; from Tepeaca on the
;.rt fide of the lake, from Tacuba on the well,
ar. from Cuyocan towards the south. Those
:.w;.s were situated on the principal causeways
?.ich led to the capital, and intended for their
&:;nce. He appointed Sandoval to command
i: the finr, Pedro de Alvarado in the second,
i:d Chriftoval de Olid in the third; allotting
:' each a numerous body of Indian auxiliaries,
t.rether with an equal division of Spaniards,

b;J, b) the junction of the troops from His-

^iiiola, amounted now to eighty-fix horsemen,
2:d eight hundred and eighteen foot soldiers;.
ci whom one hundred and eighteen were armed.
iah mulkets or cross-bows. The train of ar-
G:-7y consisted of three battering cannon, and
£-acen fitld-pieces 7. He reserved for himself,
u the fation of greatest importance and danger,.

' Cotr;, Relat. 266, C. Herrera, dec. 3. lib. i.
i Gomara, Cron. c, 119. 5 Cortes, Relat. z66, C,

the

the conduct of the brigantines, each armed d
one of his small cannon, and manned with twenTr.
five Spaniards.

As Alvarado and Olid proceeded towards t&

posts afligned them [May lo], they broke donr
the aqueducs which the ingenuity of the Ma.
cans had erected for conveying water into tt
capital, and by the distress to which this rednce.
the inhabitants, gave a beginning to the ca.
mities which they were destined to fuiie.
Alvarado and Olid found the towns of w,':;
they were ordered to take pofffeion deserted !
their inhabitants, who had fled for safety to t3
capital, where Guatimozm had collected tl
chief force of his empire, as there alone -:
could hope to make a fuccefsfnl itand agzi,:
the formidable enemies who were approaching::
assault him.

The first effort of the Mexicans was to ce.

stroy the fleet of brigantines, the fatal effcts cr
whose operations they foresaw and dreadoe
Though the brigantines, after all the labour a."
merit of Cortes in forming them, were of i-.
considerable bulk, rudely conftruted, and a:,
ned chiefly with landmen, hardly poffreed c-
skill enough to conduct them, they must hat
been objects of terror to a people unacquainttd
with any navigation but that of their lake, a:
possessed of no vessel larger than a canoe. N-.
ceffity, however, urged Guatimozin to hazard :i
attack; and hoping to supply by numbers wL:
he wanted in force, he assembled such a rnult-
tude of canoes as covered the face of the li,-

* Cortes, Relat, 267, B. B. Diaz. c. x5o. HeTS ,
dec. 3. lib. i., c. 13.

3 J ~~~~~~~~T^r

Thev rowed on boldly to the charge, while the
brigantines, retarded by a dead calm, could
Icarcely advance to meet them. But as the
enemy drew near, a breeze suddenly sprung up;
i a moment the fails were spread, the brigan-
tines, with the utmost ease, broke through their
feeble opponents, overset many canoes, and diffi-
pated the whole armament with such slaughter,
a convinced the Mexicans, that the progress
of the Europeans in knowledge and arcs ren-
dered their superiority greater on this new ele-
ment, than they had hitherto found it by land b.

From that time Cortes remained malter of
the lake, and the brigantines not only preserved
a communication between the Spaniards in their
different stations, though at considerable distance
from each other, but were employed to cover the
causeways on each fide, and keep off the ca-
noes, when they attempted to annoy the troops
as they advanced towards the city. Cortes
formed the brigantines in three divisions, ap-
[ pointing one to cover each of the stations from
which an attack was to be carried on against
the city, with orders to second the operations
of the officer who commanded there. Fromr
ail the three Rtations he pushed on the attack
agpinft the city with equal vigour; but in a
manner so very different from the conduct of
sieges in regular war, that he himself seems
afraid it would appear no less improper than
firgular, to persons unacquainted with his situ-
2tion c. Each morning his troops assaulted the

Cortes, Relat. 267, C. B. Diaz. c. 150. Gomara,
C.:... c. 131. Herrera, dec. 3. lib. i. c. 17.

Cortes, Relat. 70, F.
YOL. ii. Y barricades

barricades which the enemy had ereced on tie
caufcways, forced their way over the trenchl
which they had dug, and through the cana
where the bridges were broken down, and es
deavoured to [penetrate into the heart of th
city, in hopes of obtaining some decisive ad.
vantage, which might force the enemy to fur.
render, and terminate the war at once; be
when the obstinate valour of the Mexican
rendered the efforts of the day ineffectual, th
Spaniards retired in the evening to their fojrmc
quarters. Thus their toil and danger were, i'
some measure, continually renewed; the Meni
cans repairing in the night what the Spanizar
had destroyed through the day, and rccoverian
the posts from which they had driven then
But necessity prescribed this flow and unto
ward mode of operation. The number of hi
troops was so small, that Cortes durl not, wi'd
a handful of men, attempt to make a lodginmt
in a city where he might be surrounded and an
noyed by such a multitude of enemies. Th
remembrance of what he had already suffered bj
the ill-judged confidence with which he ha
ventured into such a dangerous situation, ia
still frtfh in his mind. The Spaniards, tx
baufled with fatigue, were unable to guard thb
various posts which they daily gained; aa
though their camp was filled with India
auxiliaries, they durfli not devolve this chargy
upon them, because they were so little accuf
tomed to discipline, that no confidence coui
be placed in their vigilance. Besides this, Cor
tes was extremely solicitous to preserve the ci;:
as much as possible from being destroyed, bc,:

beca-l

bscaufe he destined it to be the capital of his
conquests, and wished that it might remain as
a monument of his glory. From all these con-
«rations, he adhered obstinately, for a month
2aser the siege was opened, to the system which
be had adopted. The Mexicans, in their own
dience, displayed valour which was hardly in-
linior to that with which the Spaniards attacked
tuem. On land, on water, by night and by day,
cne furious conflict succeeded to another. Se-
seral Spaniards were killed, more wounded, and
il were ready to fink under the toils of umnter.
,itting service, which were rendered more
:tolrable by the injuries of the season, the
:dodical rains being now set in with their
.al vi.,lence d.
A'tonifhed and disconcerted with the length
_. d;i iculties of the siege, Cortes determined
r.ake one great effort to get possession of the

e:, ItfJor he relinquished the plan which he
WA hitherto followed, and had recourse to any
rier mode of attack. With this view, he sent
iitrudcions to Alvarado and Sandoval to advance
with their divisions to a general assault, and took
·e command in person [July 3] of that posted on
:aecaufeway of Cuyocan. Animated by his pre-
iace, and the expectation of some decisive
Fecnt, the Spaniards pushed forward with irre-
i,:'ble impetuosity. They broke through one
barricade after another, forced their way over
the ditches and canals, and having entered the
chy, gained ground incessantly, in spite of the
s;ltitude and ferocity of their opponents.
Corte, though delighted with the rapidity of

d B. Diaz. c.-iS.

Y2 hi2

his progress, did not forget that he might ftig
find it necessary to retreat; and in order to
secure it, appointed Julien de Alderete, acp.
tain of chief note in the troops which he h-s
received from Hispaniola, to fill up the canal
and gaps in the causeway as the main body ad.
vanced That officer, deeming it inglorious t
be thus employed, while his companions were i:
the heat of action and the career of victory, IK.
gleaed the important charge committed to him
and hurried on, inconsiderately, to mingle wia
the combatants. The Mexicans, whose militar
attention and skill were daily improving, r.
sooner observed this, than they carried an ac
count of it to their monarch.

Guatimozin iniftantly discerned the confe

quence of the error which the Spaniards h-
committed, and, with admirable presence e
mind, prepared to take advantage of it. H
commanded the troops posted in the front ti
flacken their efforts, in order to allure tb
Spaniards to push forward, while he difpatchn
a large body of chosen warriors through differem
efreets, some by land, and others by wate
towards the great breach in the causeway, whid
had been left open. On a signal which he gve
the priests in the principal temple struck td
great drum consecrated to the god of war. N.
'ooner did the Mexicans hear its doleful foleim
found, calculated to inspire them with contemn
of death and enthusiastic ardour, than they ruCr
upon the enemy with frantic rage. The Sp
niards, unable to resist men urged on no less t
religious fury than hope of success, began :I
retirc, at first leisurely, and with a good cou::"

nanc;

Bgnce; but as the enemy pressed on, and their
own impatience to escape increased, the terror
indconfufion became so general, that when they
rrived at the gap in the causeway, Spaniards
and Tlafcalans, horsemen and infantry, plunged
in promiscuously, while the Mexicans rushed
npon them fiercely from every fide, their light
canoes carrying them through shoals which the
brigantines could not approach. In vain did
Cortes attempt to flop and rally his flying
troops; fear rendered them regardless of his
rctreaties or commands. Finding all his endea-
rours to renew the combat fruitless, his next
are was to save some of those who had thrown
ihcrfclves into the water; but while thus em-
ployed, with more attention to their situation
than to his own, fix Mexican captains suddenly
l d ihold of him, and were hurrying him off in
triumph; and though two of his officers rescued
him at the expencc of their own lives, he re-
ceived fcvcral dangerous wounds before he could
Ir-ak loose. Above sixty Spaniards perished in
tie rout; and what rendered the disaster more
aii;ring, forty of these fell alive into the hands
of an enemy never known to shew mercy to a
captive C.

The approach of night, though it delivered
the dejectcd Spaniards from the attacks of the
eacrny, ushered in, what was hardly less griev-
ous, the noise of their barbarous triumph, and of
t.t horrid fcltival with which they celebrated
thLir victory. Every quarter of the city was
Lurninated; the great temple shone with such

Carte-, Relat. 0. 273. B. Diaz. c. 1i , Gomara,
C:c,.. c. i3. Herrcra, dec. 3. lib. i. c. 0o.

Y 3 peculiar

peculiar splendour, that the Spainiards csv!
plainly fee the people in motion, and the prier
busy in hastening the preparations for the dera
of the prisoners. Through the gloom, ther
fancied that they discerned their companions b5
the whiteness of their skins, as they were ftri'
naked and compelled to dance before the imr
of the god to whom they were to be offerei.
They heard the (hrieks of those who were facri.
siced, and thought that they could diltintii
each unhappy vitim, by the well-known foani
of his voice. Imagination added to what tbrr
really saw or heard, and augmented its horror.
The most unfeeling melted into tears of co,.
passion, and the stoutest heart trembled at the
dreadful fpedacle which they beheld f.

Cortes, who, besides all that he felt in co-

mon with his soldiers, was opprefTed with the
additional load of anxious reflections natural t
a general on such an unexpeced calamity, co=!d
not, like them, relieve his mind by giving v-:
to its anguilh. He was obliged to affumc 1
air of tranquillity, in order to revive the fpiri:
and hopes of his followers. The juncure, in-
deed, required an extraordinarv exer-ion of
fortitude. The Mexicans, elated with thei
victory, sallied out next morning to attack him
in his quarters. But they did not rely on tht
efforts of their own arms alone. They sent the
heads of the Spaniards whom they had sacrifice,
to the leading men in the adjacent provinces, z.d
assured them that the god of war, appeared b,
the blood of their invaders, which had hen
shed so plentifully on his altars, had deciare

fSee NOT CXX.

v".L

with an audible voice, that in eight days time
those hated enemies should be finally destroyed,
and peace and prosperity re-established in the
emnpire.

A prediction uttered with such confidence,
cd in terms so void of ambiguity, gained uni-
rerfal credit among a people prone to superstition.
The zeal of the provinces, which had already
declared against the Spaniards, augmented; and
fceral which had hitherto remained ina&cive,
took arms, with enthusiastic ardour, to execute
the decree of the gods. The Indian auxiliaries
who had joined Cortes, accustomed to venerate
the fame deities with the Mexicans, and to re-
ceive the responses of their priests with the fame
implicit faith, abandoned the Spaniards as a
race of men devoted to certain deferuEtion.
Even the fidelity of the Tlafcalans was shaken,
and the Spanish troops were left almost alone
in their stations. Cortes, finding that he at-
tempted in vain to dispel the superstitious fears
cf his confederates by argument, took advan-
tage, from the imprudence of those who had
franed the prophecy, in fixing its accomplishs
.crpt so near at hand, to give a striking de-
ronnftration of its falsity. He suspended all
. litary operations during the period marked
cut by the oracle. Under cover of the brigan-
t:ne,, which kept the enemy at a distance, his
troops lay in safety, and the fatal term expired
u. itl.out any disaster g.

Many of his allies, ashamed of their own

credlli:v, returned to their station. Other tribes,
,oging that the gods who had now deceived the

S B. Diaz. c, 153. Gomaia, Cron. c. 138.

Mexicans,

Mexicans, had decreed finally to withdraw their
protecion from them, joined his standard; and
fich was the levity of a simple people, moved by
every flight imprefiion, that in a (hort tirne after
such a general defection of his confederate,
Cortes Law himself, if we may believe his own
account, at the head of a hundred and fifty
thouiand Indians. Even with such a numerom
army, he found it necessary to adopt a new and
more wary fyflem of operation. Instead of re.
newing his attempts to become mailer of the
city at once, by such bold but dangerous efforts
of valour as he had already tried, he made his
advances gradually, and with every pofiible pre.
caution againit exposing his men to any calamity
fimiar to that which they still bewailed. As t!h
Spaniards puihed forward, the Indians regularly
repaired the causeways behind them. As food
as they got possession of any part of the town,
the houses were insfantly levelled with the
ground. Day by day, the Mexicans, forced tc
retire as their enemies gained ground, were
hemmed in within more narrow limits. Guati.
mozin, though unable to flop the career of the
enemy, continued to defend his capital with ob>
Rinate resolution, and disputed every inch 01
ground. The Spaniards not only varied thei
mode of attack, but, by orders of Cortes chanrcc
the weapons with which thry fought. Thq
were again armed with the long Chinantlar
fptars, which they had employed with sucd
fucccfs againfl Narvaez ; and, by the firm ana.
in which this enabled them to range themfelver
they repelled, with little danger, the loose affaui:
of the Mexicans; incredible numbers of thc-

fM]

F!n in the conflicts which they renewed every
br . While war wafted without, famine be-
rei to consume them within the city. The
Fanilh brigantines, having the entire command
es the lake, rendered it almost impossible to
convey to the besieged any supply of provisions
T water. The immense number of his Indian
avxiaries enabled Cortes to shut up the avenues
j the city by land. The stores which Guati.
r=zin had laid up were exhausted, by the mul-
t:tudes which had crowded into the capital, to
defend their sovereign and the temples of their
gds. Not only the people, but persons of the
highest rank, felt the utmost distresses of famine.
What they suffered, brought on infetious and
rortal diitempers, the last calamity that visits
bt:Aeged cities, and which filled up the measure
es their woes i.

BLt, under the pressure of so many and such
tarious evils, the spirit of Guatimozin remained
'-n and unfubdued. He rejeEted, with scorn,
eern overture of peace from Cortes; and dif-
dirining the idea of submitting to the oppressors
of his country, determined not to survive its
rin. The Spaniards continued their progress.
At length all the three divisions penetrated into
the greatfquare in the centre of the city, and made
a secure lodgment there [July 27 ]. Three-fourths
of the city were now reduced, and laid in ruins.
The remaining quarter was so closely pressed,
that it could not long withstand assailants, who
attacked it from their new station with superior

h Cores, Rlat. p. 275, C. 276, F. B. Diaz. c. j53.

Cortes, Relat. z76, E. z77, F. B. Diaz. j55. Go-
M.a, Clo>. c. 141.

advantage,

advantage, and more assured expectation of fr.
cess. The Mexican nobles, solicitous to far
the life of a monarch whom they revered, pre
vailed on Guatimozin to retire from a pace
where refillnce was now vain, that he might
rouse the more distant provinces of the empireto
arms, and maintain there a more fuccefsfal
struggle with the public enemy. In order to
facilitate the execution of this measure, theT
endeavoured to amuse Cortes with overtures o
fubmiflion, that, while his attention was employed
in adjusting the articles of pacification, Guati.
mozin might escape unperceived. But the
made this attempt upon a leader of greatr
lagacity and discernment than to be deceived by
their arts. Cortes suspecting their intention,
and aware of what moment it was to defeat ii,
appointed Sandoval, the officer on whose vigilance
he could mot perfecly rely, to take the con:.
mnand of the brigantines, with ftric injuncuoni
to watch every motion of the enemy. San.
doval, attentive to the charge, observing sone
large canoes crowded with people rowing acrofi
the lake with extraordinary rapidity, initantly
gave the signal to chace. Garcia Holguin, who
commanded the fwifteft-failing brigantine, soon
overtook them, and was preparing to fire oa
the foremost canoe, which feerned to carry forr
person whom all the reft followed and obeyed
At once the rowers dropt their oars, and all on
board, throwing down their arms, conjured him
with cries and tears to forbear, as the emperor
was there. Holguin eagerly seized his prize,
and Guatimozin, with a dignified compofcre,
gave hinfelf up into his hands, requesting orIn

that

that no insult might be offered to the empress or
his children. When conduted to Cortes, he
appeared neither with the fullen fierceness of a
barbarian, nor with the dejection ofa supplicant.
u I have done," said he, addressing himself to
the Spanish general, " what became a ir.o-
rirch. I have defended my people to the last ex-
tremity. Nothing now remains but to die.
Take this dagger," laying his hand on one
vhich Cortes wore, " plant it in my breast,
and put an end to a life which can no longer
be of use k."

As soon as the fate of their sovereign was
known, the resistance of the Mexicans ceased;
a:d Cortes took possession of that small part of
the capital [AuguR 13] which yet remained
undeftroyed. Thus terminated the siege of
Mcx;co, the most memorable event in the con-
quest of America. It continued feventy-five
lyas, hardly one of which passed without some
ntraordinary effort of one party in the attack,
or of the other in the defence of a city, on the
bc: of which both knew that the fortune of the
ripire depended. As the struggle here was
more obstinate, it was likewise more equal, than
any between the inhabitants of the Old and
New Worlds. The great abilities of GuaLi-
r.ozin, the number of his troops, the peculiar
fi:ation of his capital, so far counterbalanced
the superiority of the Spaniards in arms and
ifcpline, that they. mutt have relinquished the
,terprife, if they had trusted for success to
themselves alone. But Mexico was overturned

Cortes, Rela. 279. B. Diaz. c. 156. Comara, Cron.
c zi. Hc-crra, Oac. 3. lib. ii. c. 7.

by

by the jealousy of neighbours who dreaded it
power, and by the revolt of fubjefts imtpatie
to (hake off its yoke. By their effe&ual i
Cortes was enabled to accomplish what, witho"
such support, he would hardly have ventured t
attempt. How much soever this account of i
reduction of Mexico may detra&, on the o
hand, from the marvellous relations of fora
Spanish writers, by ascribing that to simple nA
obvious causes which they attribute to the ro
mantic valour of their countrymen, it adds, cr
the other, to the merit and abilities of Corne,
who, under every disadvantage, acquired Ifi
an ascendant over unknown nations, as to rc.
der them instruments towards carrying hi
schemes into execution .

The exultation of the Spaniards, on accos

plifhing this arduous enterprise, was at firtt ex
ceffive. But this was quicldy damped by ti
cruel difappi;ntment of those sanguine hope
which had animated them amidst io many har
(hips and dangers. Inilead of the inexhauuit;
wealth which they expectid from becorrin1
masters of Montezuma's trealures, and the orn
ments of so many temples, their rapacioufca
could collea only an inconsiderable booty amidi
ruins and desolation m. Guatimozin, anare oc
his impending fate, had ordered what remanie
of the riches amafled by his anceltors to h
tbrown into the lake. The Indian auxfliarie
while the Spaniards were engaged in confi

See NOTE CXXI.

7 The g§id and llver, according to Corter, ar~:r.

only to izo,occ pesos, Relat. g28, A. a fum much icri.
to that which the Spaniards had formerly dividc in ,'Mc.

ft.".

J:. the enemy, had carried off the moil valu-
ie;: part of the spoil. The fim to be divided
2-ong the conquerors was so small, that many
,: them disdained to accept of the pittance
.rJh fell to their share, and all murmured and
c'laimed; some, against Cortes and his confi-
cc: , whom they fufpe&ed of having secretly
.lprupriated to their own use a large portion of
;: riches which should have been brought into
:. common itock; others, against Guatimozin,
si.om they accused of obstinacy, in refusing to
c:.ovcr the place where he had hidden his
::a'iure.

Arguments, intreaties, and promises, were
-plouved in order to soothe them, but with so
Lr:,c effect, that Cortes, from solicitude to
ceck this growing spirit of discontent, gave
2v. to a deed which itains the glory of all his
F;a: actions. Without regarding the former
rcgaity of Guatimozin, or feeling any reverence
Lr those virtues which he had displayed, he
Lbjected the unhappy monarch, together with
L chief favourite, to torture, in order to force
iom them a discovery of the royal treasures,
Xii.ich it was supposed they had concealed.
Guatimozin bore whatever the refined cruelty of
Lib tormentors could inflict, with the invincible
rontitude of an American warrior. His fellow-
i.rcrcr, overcome by the violence of the an-
g:ih, turned a dejeted eye towards his master,
.nich seemed to implore his permitfion to re-
Sca all that he knew. But the high-fpirited
pnce, darting on him a look of authority
.agled with scorn, checked his weakness by
::rg, " Am I now reposing on a bed of
C'L. I., Z. flowers ''

flowers ? Overawed by the reproach, theft.
vourite persevered in his dutiful silence, and t.
pired. Cortes, ashamed of a scene so horri,
rescued the royal victim from the hands of '
torturers, and prolonged a life reserved for rn
indignities and sufferings m.

The fate of the capital, as both parties b

foreseen, decided that of the empire. The po
vinces Submitted one after another to the co.
querors. Small detachments of Spaniards m2r.
ing through them without interruption, pr,.
trated in different quarters to the great Southe:
Ocean, which, according to the ideas of Ca
lumbus, they imagined would open a fhor a
well as easy passage to the East Indies, and! .
cure to the crown of Castile all the envied weoL
of those fertile regions ; and the active r-
of Cortes began already to form schemes so: -:.
tempting this important discovery °.

He did not know, that during the progre

of his vicorious arms in Mexico, the tn
scheme, of which he began to form some ida
had been undertaken and accomplished. A
this is one of the most splendid events in tk
history of the Spanish discoveries, and has be:
productive of effects peculiarly interesting t
those extensive provinces which Cortes had no0
fubjecied to the crown of Castile, the accoe
of its rife and progress merits a particul
detail.

Ferdinand 'Magalhaens, or Magellan, a Pce
tuguefe gentleman of honourable birth, harbi

B. Diaz. c. 157. Gomara, Cron. c. 146. Ho1~
dec. 3. lib. ii. c 8. Torquem. Mon. Ind. i. 574.

Cortn, Relaxt. o, D, &c. B. Diaz. c. 157.
* Hcrtra, de. 3. lib. ii. c. 17. Gomara Croo. c. L

isT

jsred several years in the East Indies, with dif-
tliled valour, under the famous Albu.
aerque, demanded the recompence which he
tought due to his services, with the boldness
,tural to a high.fpirited soldier. But as his
itferal would not grant his suit, and he
jcpcted greater justice from his sovereign,
whom he knew to be a good judge and a
gecerous rewarder of merit, he quitted India
air.ptly, and returned to Lisbon. In order
: induce Emanuel to liften more favour-
;alv to his claim, he not only stated his pail ser-
r.cc, but offered to add to them by conducting
Lb countrymen to the Molucca or Spice islands,
cv holding a westerly course; which he con-
tnded would be both shorter and less hazardous
tln that which the Portuguese now followed by
,; Cape of Good Hope, through the immense
:e!::. of the Eastern Ocean. This was the
c:gir.al and favourite project of Columbus, and
Blgcilan founded his hopes of success on the
:icra of that great navigator, confirmed by many
Iftcrvations, the result of his own naval expe-
ncnce, as well as that of his countrymen in their
i-crcourfe with the East. But though the
',rtugutfe monarchs had the merit of having
int awakened and encouraged the spirit of di-f
cuerv in that age, it was their deiliny, in the
c,.urse of a few years, to rejet two grand
i-.er.es for this purpose, the execution of which
*'sid have been attended with a great accession
c: glory to themselves, and of power to their
kirgSdom. In consequence of fume ill-founded
prjdice against Magellan, or of fume dark in,

Z 2 trigu

trigue which contemporary hitlorians have act
explained, Emanuel would neither bestow tht
recompence which he claimed, nor approve o
the scheme which he proposed; and difmriffdi
him with a disdainful coldness intolerable to a
man conscious of what he deserved, and animated
with the sanguine hopes of success peculiar t
those who are capable of forming or of conduc.
ing new and great undertakings. In a tranfpoa
of resentment [1517], Magellan formally re.
nounced his allegiance to an ungrateful mater,
and fled to the court of Castile, where he es.
pe&ed that his talents would be more juflv ds.
timated. He endeavoured to recommend hm.
self by offering to execute, under the patronage
of Spain, that scheme, which he had laid befor
the court of Portugal, the accomplishment oi
which, he knew, would wound the monarch
against whom he was exasperated in the mr.o
tender part. In order to establish the juftnef oi
his theory, he produced the fame argumera
which he had employed at Lisbon; acknowledg.
ing, at the fame time, that the undertaking Vai
both arduous and expensive, as it could not tx
attempted but with a squadron of confiderabk
force, and vi&ualled for at least two year.
Fortunately, he applied to a minister who wa
not apt to be deterred, either by the boldness ci
a design, or the expence of carrying it into e.
ecution. Cardinal Ximenes, who at that tirK
direted the affairs of Spain, discerning at once
what an increase of wealth and glory wo':
accrue to his country by the success of bl2rg
lan's proposal, listened to it with a moit l-
,ourablc car, Cliarlcs V. on his arrival i: .

Sp^j

Spanish dominions, entered into the measure with
DO less ardour, and orders were issued for equip-
ping a proper squadron at the public charge, of
which the command was given to Magellan,
Shor the king honoured with the habit of St.
Jago and the title of Captain-General P.

On the tenth of August one thousand five hun-
dred and nineteen, Magellan failed from Seville
with five Ihips, which, according to the ideas of
the age, were deemed to be of considerable force,
though the burden of the largest did not exceed
oie hundred and twenty tons. The crews of
the whole amounted to two hundred and thirty-
jour men, among whom were some of the most
f;ilful pilots in Spain, and several Portuguese
ailors, in whose experience, as more extensive,
Mfagellan placed still greater confidence. After
touching at the Canaries, he stood direcly south
towards the equinocial line along the coast of
America, but was so long retarded by tedious-
calms, and spent so much time in searching every
bav and inlet for that communication with the
Southern Ocean which he wished to discover,
that he did not reach the river De la Plata till
the twelfth of January [1520]. That spacious
opening through which its vast body of water
pours into the Atlantic allured him to enter;
hut after failing up it for some days, he con-
cluded, from the shallowness of the stream and
the freshness of the water, that the wifhed-for
strait was not situated there, and continued his
course towards the south. On the thirty-firtl of

P Herrcra, dec, 2. lib. ii. c 19. lib. iv. c. 9. Gomara,
Hii. c. 9 . Dalrymple's ColleC of Voyages to the South
PIric Ocean, vol. i. p. I, &c.

. 3 March

March he arrived in the port of St. Julian, about
fortv-eight degrees south of the line, where he
refoi-ed to winter. In this uncomfortable tation
he loft one of his squadron, and the Spaniards
suffered so much from the excessive rigour of the
climate, that the crews of three of his ships,
headed by their officers, rose in open mutinv,
and insisted on relinquishing the visionary projed
of a desperate adventurer, and returning direlct
to Spain. This dangerous infurretion Magellan
suppressed by an effort of courage no less prompt
than intrepid, and inflicted exemplary punifhmnrt
on the ringleaders. With the remainder of his
follovwers, overawed but not reconciled to his
scheme, he continued his voyage towards the
south, and at length difcoverecl, near the fiftv.
third deiree of latitude, the mouth of a rmait,
into which he entered, notvwithftanding the
murmurs and remonstrances of the people under
his command. After failing twenty days in that
winding dangerous channel, to which he gave
his own name, and where one of his ships de.
ferted him, the great Southern Ocean opened to
his view, and with tears of joy he returned thanks
to Heaven for having thus far crowned his en-
deavours with success q.

But he was till at a greater distance than he

imagined from the object of his wishes. He
failed during three months and twenty days in an
uniform direction towards the north.west, with-
out discovering land. In this voyage, the longel
that had ever been made in the unbounded ocean,

s Hrrera, dec. 2. lib. iv. c. o1. lib. ix. c. 10, &c.

Gomara, Hist. . 92. Pisafeta Viaggio ap. RamuL ii.
p. 352, &c.

k suffered incredible diflrefs. His flock of pro,
lions was almost exhausted, the water became
:trlid, the men were reduced to the shortest al.
brance with which it was possible to sustain life,
,;d the feurvy, the molt dreadful of all the ma-
h;es with which sea-faring people are affli&ed,
bean to spread among the crew. One eircum,
:ance alone afforded them some consolation;
:ry enjoyed an uninterrupted course of fair
seather, with such favourable winds, that
Magellan bestowed on that ocean the name of
Pucif) which it fill retains. When reduced to
; cil extremity that they must have funk under
::eir sufferings, they fell in with a cluster of
frall but fertile islands [March 6], which as-
i,.:ed them refreshments in such abundance, that
:trlr health was soon re-established. From these
i;:, which he called De lo; Ladrones, he pro-
c:tded on his voyage, and soon made a more
unportant discovery of the islands now known by
u!e name of the Philippine. In one of these he
p: into an unfortunate quarrel with the natives,
*ho attacked him with a numerous body of
loops well armed; and while he fought at the
Lead of his men with his usual valour, he fell
]April 26] by the hands of those barbarians,
together with several of his principal officers.

The expedition was prosecuted under other
commanders. After visiting many of the smaller
iL fScattered in the eastern part of the Indian
cwean, they touched at the great island of
Bjrrieo [Nov. 8], and at length landed in
T.dore, one of the Moluccas, to the aftonilhment
c. the Portuguese, who could not comprehend
Lw the Spaniards, by holding a weserly course,

had

had arrived at that sequestered feat of their moni
valuable commerce, which they themnfelves had
discovered by failing in an opposite dire&tion
There, and in the adjacent isles, the Spaniards
found a people acquainted with the benefits cf
extensive trade, and willing to open an inte.
course with a new nation. They took in a cargo
of the precious spices, which are the diftinguiibd
production of those islands; and with that, u
well as with specimens of the rich commoditit
yielded by the other countries which they had
visited, the 'iory, which, of the two fhipi
that remained of the squadron, was most fit for a
long voyage, set fail for Europe [Jan. 1522,
under the command of Juan Sebaftion del Cano.
He followed the course of the Portuguese, bh
the Cape of Good Hope, and, after many di:
afters and sufferings, he arrived at St. Lucar cn
the fcventh of September one thousand five trn.
dred and twenty-two, having failed round the
globe in the space of three years and twcnty-eight
days'.

Though an untimely fate deprived Magellan

of the fatisfation of accomplishing this great
undertaking, his contemporaries, just to his
memory and talents, ascribed to him not or.i,
the honour of having formed the plan, but oi
having surmounted almost evern obitacle to t}:
completion of it; and in the prcfent age I:i
name is still ranked among the higheit in %;s
roll of eminert and fucccfsful navigators. T'P
naval glory of Spa;n now eclipsed that of evc-
other nation; a.:d by a fin;-',:ar fc;icitvy he !?'

r H rrera, dec. 3. lib. i. c. 3. 9. lib. iv. c. i. Co. z,
Cron. c. 3, &c. Pigaifcta ap. Ramaf. ii. r. 36", &c.

,L.

he merit, in the course of a few years, of dif,
:rering a new continent almost as large as that
,art of the earth which was formerly known, and
;iafcertaining by experience the form and extent
;f the whole terraqueous globe.
The Spaniards were not satisfied with the
rIory of having first encompassed the earth;
Icv expected to derive great commercial ad-
:antages from this new and boldest effort of their
aritime skill. The men of fcieilce among them
:ontended, that the spice islands, and several of
he richest countries in the East, were so situated
as to belong of right to the crown of Castile, in
:onfequence of the partition made by Alex-
nder VI. The merchants, without attending
:o this discussion, engaged eagerly in that lucra-
:I;e and alluring commerce, which was now
)?ened to them. The Portuguese, alarmed at
he intrusion of such formidable rivals, remony
irated and negociated in Europe, while in Asia
Ihey obftruted the trade of the Spaniards by
Force of arms. Charles V. not sufficiently in-
tructed with refpedt to the importance of this
raluable branch of commerce, or diftrafted by
:he multiplicity of his schemes and operations,
aid not afford his fubjeas proper protection.
At last, the low Riate of his finances, exhausted
by the efforts of his arms in every part of
Europe, together with the dread of adding a
newv war with Portugal to those in which he was
already engaged, induced him to make over his
claim of the Moluccas to the Portuguese for
three hundred and fifty thousand ducats. He
rct-rved, however, to the crown of Castile the
rghilt of reviving its pretentions on repayment

of

of that fum; but other objeEts engrossed his a.
tention and that of his successors; and Spain
was finally excluded from a branch of commerc
in which it was engaging with sanguine expec&.
tions of profit'.

Though the trade with the Moluccas wu-

relinquished, the voyage of Magellan was fil.
lowed by commercial ieffeas of great moment to
Spain. Philip II. in the year one thoufend
five hundred and fixty-four, reduced those islands
which he discovered in the Eastern Ocean to
fubjeaion, and established settlements there; be.
tween which and the kingdom of New Spain,
a regular intercourse, the nature of which fall
be explained in its proper place, is flill carried
on. I return now to the transactions in New
Spain.

At the time that Cortes was acquiring such

extensive territories for his native country, and
preparing the way for future conqucfts, it was
his singular fate not only to be destitute of any
commifion or authority from the sovereign whom
he was ferring with such successful zeal, but to
be regarded as an undutiful and seditious fubjta.
By the influence of Fonseca, bishop of Bu'gos,
his conduct in aflurrming the government of New
Spain was declared to be an irregular usurpation,
in contempt of the royal authority; and Chrilo-
val de Tapia received a comnrifilon, impowering
him to fuperfedc Cortes, to seize his person, to
confiscate his effcts, to make a ltrict scrutiny
into his proceedings, and to tranfrit the result
of all the enquiries carried on in New Spain to

* Herera, dec. 3. lib. vi. c 5, &c. dec. a lib. r.
co 7, &c.

t},,

the council of the Indies, of which the bishop of
Burgos was president. A few weeks afeer the
reducion of Mexico, Tapia landed at Vera Cruz
with the royal mandate to flrip its conqueror of
his power, and to treat him as a criminal. But
Fonseca had chosen a very improper instrument
to wreak his vengeance on Cortes. Tapia had
odther the reputation nor the talents that suited
the high command to which he was appointed.
Cortes, while he publicly expressed the most
tfpeEtful veneration for the emperor's autho-
-tv, secretly took measures to defeat the effec
:f his commission; and having involved Tapia
ujd his followers in a multiplicity of negotiations
md conferences, in which he sometimes had re-
:ourfe to threats, but more frequently employed
bribes and promises, he at length prevailed on
sht weak man to abandon a province which he
&as unworthy of governing '.
But notwithstanding the fortunate dexterity
-Ith which he had eluded this danger, Cortes
rva so sensible of the precarious tenure by which
,e held his power, that he dispatched deputies to
;pain [May 15], with a pompous account of
he success of his arms, with farther specimens
)f the productions of the country, and with rich
srcfents to the emperor, as the earnest of future
:ontributions from his new conquest; request
::g, in recompence for all his services, the ap-
probation of his proceedings, and that he might
De entrusted with the government of those do-
minions, which his condut, and the valour of
is followers, had added to the crown of Caf-

tHerrera, dec. 3 lib. iii. c. t6. der. iv. c. L Cortes,
R'lt. 281, E. B. Diaz. c. 158.

tile,

tilt. The junnure in which his deputies reachec
the court was favourable. The internal comnm
tions in Spain, which had disquieted the begin
niug of Charles's reign, were juit appeased.
The ministers had leisure to turn their attentio
towards foreign affairs. The account of Conrt
victories filled his countrymen with admiraticn
The extent and value of his conquests becar.i
the objed of vast and interesting hopes. What
ever stain he might have contracted, by the ii
regularity of the steps which he took in orde
to attain power, was so fully effaced by th
splendour and merit of the great actions whic!
this had enabled him to perform, that evtr
heart revolted at the thought of infliiing an
censure on a man, whose services entitled him t,
the highest marks of difrinEtion. The publi
voice declared warmly in favour of his prcter
lions, and Cllarles arriving in Spain about thi
time, adopted the sentiments of his fubjtac
with a youthful ardour. Notwithstanding th
claims of Velasquez, and the partial reprefenta
tions of the bishop of Burgos, the emperor ap
pointed Cortes captain-general and governor o
New Spain, judging that no person was so ca
pable of maintaining the royal authority, or o
etablifhing good order both among his Spanrli
and Indian subjects, as the victorious leadc
whom the former had long been accuftomn.c
to obey, and the latter had been taught to sea
and to respect x.

Even before his jurifdifion received this lega

sanction, Cortes ventured to exercise all tb

° His. of Charis V. vol. ii. b. iii.
I Hl:cr2a, oec. 3. ib. iv. c. 3. Gomara, Cron. c. liE
z6;. B. L. JD7. 6 ibC.

pOsi ¢ ;i

powers of a governor, and by various arrange-
rents, endeavoured to render his conquest a
ecure and beneficial acquisition to his country.
He determined to establish the feat of govern-
ment in its ancient station, and to raise Mexico
aain from its ruins; and having conceived high
uas concerning the future grandeur of the state
of which he was laying the foundation, he began
to rebuild its capital on a plan which hath
gprdually formed the most magnificent city in
the New World. At the fame time, he em-
plrcd skilful persons to search for mines in dif-
ferent parts of the country, and opened some
which were found to be richer than any which
t:e Spaniards had hitherto discovered in Ame-
.'a. He detached his principal officers into the
renote provinces, and encouraged them to fettle
there, not only by bestowing upon them large
tnafts of land, but by granting them the fame
orminion over the Indians, and the fame right
to their service, which the Spaniards had as-
s!ned in the islands.

It was not, however, without difficulty that
the Mexican empire could be entirely reduced
Lcto the form of a Spanilh colony. Enraged
ad rendered desperate by oppression, the natives
often forgot the superiority of their enemies, and
ran to arms in defence of their liberties. In
7ery conteit, however, the European valour and
ifcipline prevailed But fatally for the honour
of their country, the Spaniards sullied the
gly redounding from these repeated vi&ories
yb their mode of treating the vanquished people.
After taking Guatimozin, and becoming maafers
oi his capital, they supposed that the king of
VOL, 11. A A CaRtile

Caitle entered on poiffliion of all the righ tji
the captive monarch, and affected to confls:
every cffort of the Mexicans to assert their o0.
independence, as the rebellion of vassals agami
their sovereign, or the mutiny of slaves agairi
their master. Under the sanction of thofc £.
founded maxims, they violated every right t:
should be hdd sacred bctv'-een hostile natioa;
After each infurretion, they reduced the con.
mon people in the provinces which they fL
dued, to the fr.oit hutriiiating of all conditio:.
that of per focal f.rvitude. Their chiefs, sup
posed to be rr.ore crimnial, were punished w;:
greater e-vrit -, and put to death in the mo:
ignorr.niou.; or the moll excruciating mode, :ta
the insolence or the cruelty of their conquersr
could desice. In almost every district of tii
Mcxican errpirt, the progress of the Spani:
arms is marked with blood, and with deeds ft
atrocious, as disgrace the enterprising valoui
that conducted them to success. In the counto
of Panuco, fixtv caziqies or leaders, and fouJ
hundred nobles, were burnt at one time. No:
was this shocking barbarity perpetrated in zr:
sudden sally of rage, or by a commander of is.
ferior note. It was the act of Sandoval, a:
officer whose name is entitled to the second rar,.
in the annals of New' Spain, and executed aftc:
a solemn consultation witl Cortes ; and to cor-
plere the horror of the scene, the children 2z,
relations of the wretched victims were assemblcd,
and compelled to be fpetators of their dying
agonies i. it seems hardly poflible to exceed :i
horror this dreadful example of severity; but i

r Cores, Relat. 291, C. Gomara, Cron. c. 15;.

ls't

,25 followed by alother, which affected the
Mkxicans still more sensibly, as it gave them a
,ofl feeling proof of their own degradation,
sd of the small regard which their haughty
raiters retained for the ancient dignity and
'lindour of their state. On a flight suspicion,
:r.firmed by very imperfect evidence, that
Guatimozin had formed a fchcme to shake off
:he yoke, and to excite his former fubjecs to
:ke arms, Cortes, without the formality of a

1-al, ordered the unhappy monarch, together

rith the caziques of Tezeuco and Tacuba, the
wo persons of greatdct eminence in the empire,
1o be hanged ; and the Mexicans, with attonifh-
rent and horror, beheld this disgraceful punish-
.ent inflited upon persons, to whom they were
-acuftomed to look up with reverence, hardly
i:.feior to that which they paid to the gods
ihemfelves z. The example of Cortes and his
principal officers encouraged and jultitied persons
,f ;ubordinate rank to venture upon committing
7-atur exceiTes. Nuno de Guzman, in par-
Lc:lar, ftalned an iiliflt:rioti name by deeds of
*c.',lar enormity and rigour, in various expe-
rion u which he conducted d.

One circumitancc, however, saved the Mexi-
cr.s from farther consumption, perhaps from one
as com.plcte as that which had depopulated the
::a :s. The firit conquerors did not attempt
s fiearch for the precious metals in the bowels
c. the earth. They were neither lufficiently
w:a-lthv to carry on the expensive works which
i-: -cqu;fite for opening those deep recesses

'Gomra, Cron. c.. 17. B. Daz c. .77. Herrera,
::.. jib. viii. c. 9. See NOTE CXXII.

Herrera, dec. 4 & 5, paffiii.

A A 2 where

where nature has concealed the veins of gik
and fdver, not sufficiently skilful to perform th;
ingenious operations by which those predoi
metals are separated from their refpe&ive orn
They were satisfied with the more fimplenet
thod, pra&ised by the Indians, of waflhing ti
earth carried down rivers and torrents from tr
mountains, and collecting the grains of nathi
metal deposited there. The rich mines of Nn
Spain, which have poured forth their treafurt
with such profusion on every quarter of thi
globe, were not discovered for several years afte
the conquest b. By that time [1552, &c.],
more orderly government and police were intro
duced into the colony; experience, derived frog
former errors, had suggested many useful am
humane regulations for the protection and pre
servation of the Indians; and though it thn
became neccfary to increase the number of thou
employed in the mines, and they were engagde
in a species of labour more pernicious to thl
human conifitution, they suffered less hardihi
or diminution than from the ill-judged, but ku
extensive, fcbemes of the first conquerors.

While it was the lot of the Indians to susser,

their new matters seem not to have derived any
considerable wealth from their ill-conduAed re.
searches. According to the usual fate of fini
settlers in new colonies, it was their lot to en.
counter danger, and to flruggle with diffcultis;
the fruits of their vitories and toils were referred
for times of tranquillity, and reaped by fucceffon
of greater industry, but of inferior merit. The
early hisforians of America abound with account

b Hcrrera, de. 8. lib . c. zc.,

C,

of the sufferings and of the poverty of its con-
cuerors c. In New Spain, their condition was
rndered more grievous by a peculiar arrange-

ment. When Charles V. advanced Cortes to
t1: government of that country, he at the fame
time appointed certain commiflioners to receive

ad adminiftcr the royal revenue there, with

pdependent jurifdic'ion d. These men, chosen

-om inferior stations in various departments of
:)lic btfinefs at Madrid, were so much elevated
-ith their promotion, that they thought they
Iere called to act a part of the first confcquence.
PRit hbing accnftomed to the minute formalities

;i office, and having contracted the narrow ideas
,ited to the sphere in which they had hitherto
o'.'cd, they were aftonilhed, on arriving in
!Icxico [15243, at the high authority which

..rte- exercised, and could not conceive that

',e mode of admini!tration, in a country recently:
'ndued and fettled, mult be different from
r.hat took place in one where tranquillity and
;vular government had been long established.
in their letters, they represented Cortes as an

hmbitiokls tyrant, who having usurped a jurif-

i>lion superior to law, aspired at independence,
:-Ad by his exorbitant wealth, and exteniive
silence, might accomplish those disloyal
cme; which he apparently meditated . These
,,linuations made such deep impression upon
he Spaniih ministers, most of whom had been
ourmed to business under the jealous and rigid
iminiftration of Ferdinand, that, unmindful of
i1l Cortes's palt services, and regardless of what
Cortes, Relat. 283, F. B. Diaz. c. 209. d Herrera,

*:. 3.
I, iv. c. 3. Ibd. lib. v. c. 14.

A A 3 he

Jhe was then suffering in condusting that extra
ordinary expedition, in which he advanced frro
the lake of Mexico to the western extremitis of
Honduras f, they inrfafed the fame fufpicioel
into the mind of- their masser, and prevailed on
him to order a folern inquest to be made into
his condnA r[ 253], with powers to the lice.
date Ponce de Leon, entrufled with that com.
mission, to seize his person, if he should find that
expedient, and fend him prisoner to Spain g.

The sudden death of Ponce de Leon, a fen

days after his arrival in New Spain, prevented
the execution of this commission. But as the
object of his appointment was known, the mind
of Cortes was deeply wounded with this unex-
pe&ed return for services which far exceeded
whatever any fubje& of Spain had rendered to
hi; sovereign. He endeavoured, however, to
maintain his station, and to recover the confidence
of the court. But every person in office, who
had arrived from Spain since the conquest, wasa
spy upon his conduc, and with malicious inge-
nuity gave an unfavourable representation of all
his aftions. The apprehensions of Charle
and his miniiers increased. A new commiflion
of enquiry was iffned Frr28], with more Cx-
tensive powers, and various precautions were
taken in order to prevent or to punibh him,
if he should be so presumptuous as to attempt
what was inconliftent with the fidelity of a sub.
ject h. Cortes beheld the approaching crisis of

f See NOTE CXXIII. z Herrera, dec. 1. lib. v;i

c. 14, 15. ' IbMd. c. 15. dec. 4. lib. ii. c. :.
::i. ;c. 9 i , D

. Diaz. c. c7. 9g6. Gomara, CrMa.
c. iC6.

L.

bis fortune with all the violent emotions natural
to a haughty mind, conscious of high desert,
and receiving unworthy treatment. But though
ome of his desperate followers urged him to
afert his own rights against his ungrateful
country, and with a bold hand to seize that
power which the courtiers meanly accused him
of coveting i, he retained such felf-command,
or was aeuated with such sentiments of loyalty,
as to reje&t their dangerous counsels, and to
choose the only course in which he could secure
his own dignity, without departing from his
duty. He resolved not to expose hinfelf to the
isgominy of a trial, in that country which had
Len the scene of his triumphs; but without
waiting for the arrival of his judges, to repair
ircctly to Castile, and commit himself and
h:i cause to the juflice and generosity of his
iovereign k.

Cortes appeared in his native country with the
splendour that suited the conqueror of a mighty
kingdom. He brought with him a great part
of his wealth, many jewels and ornaments of
great value, several curious produaions of the
country 1, and was attended by some Mexicans
of the sirs lrank, as well as by the most con-
filerable of his own officers. His arrival in
Spin removed at once every suspicion and fear
that had been entertained with xefpea to his
intentions. The emperor, having now nothing
to apprehend from the designs of Cortes, received
him like a person whom consciousness of his
own innocence had brought into the presence of

B. Diaz. c. 194- k Hcrrcra, dec, 3. lib, iv. c. S.
'Sc NOTE CXXIV.

bis'

hi3 maler, and who was entitled, by the eminenc
of his services, to the highest marks of diftin&iir
and refpe.t. The order of St. Jago, the tiJi
of Marquis del Valle de Guaxaca, the grants
an ample terrtory in New Spain, were fucceffivt'v
bestowed upon him; and as his manners wer
correte and elegant, although he had passed the
greater part of his life among rough adventurte,
the emperor admitted him to the fame famil:-
intcrcourfe with himself, that was enjoyed by
noblemen of the firfl rank =.

But, amidit those external proofs of regard,

symptoms of remaining diliruft appeared.
Though Cortes earnestly solicited to be rein.
flated in the government of New Spain, Charlc;,
too sagacious to commit filch an important
charge to a man whom le had once fifpected,
peremptorily refused to invest him again with
powers which he might find it impoflible to
control. Cortes, though dignified with new
titles, returned to Mexico with diminished au.
thority. The military department, with powers
to attempt new discoveries, was left in his
hands; but the supreme direcion of civil affainr
was placed in a board, called The Audience of
New Spain. At a subsequent period, when,
upon the increase of the colony, the exertion of
authority more united and extensive became ne-
ceffary, Antonio de Mendoza, a nobleman of
high rank, was sent thither as Viceroy, to take
the government into his hands.

This division of power in New Spain, proved,
as was unavoidable, the source of perpetual dii.

» HcTrr l, dec. 3. I'b. iv. c. I. lib. i., c. 4. B. Di.
c. 196. Goe. Cton. c. iSz.

fation, which embittered the life of Cortes,
,ad thwarted all his schemes. As he had now
no opportunity to display his active talents but
in attempting new discoveries, he formed various
schemes for that purpose, all of which bear im-
rffions of a genius that delighted in what was
bold and splendid. He early entertained an
idea, that, either by steering through the gulf
of Florida along the east coast of North Ame-
rica, some itrait would be found that communi-
cnted with the western ocean; or that, by exa-
mining the isthmus of Darien, some passage
would be discovered between the North and
South Seas n. But having been disappointed in
ai expectations with refpead to both, he now
confined his views to such voyages of discovery
cs he could make from the ports of New Spain
in the South Sea. There he fitted out fuccef-
ii.cly ftveral small squadrons, which either pe-
rbhed in the attempt, or returned without
making any discovery of moment. Cortes,
wrary of entrusting the conduc of his operations
zo others, took the command of a new arma-

nit in person [1536], and, after enduring

incredible bardfhips, and encountering dangers
of every species, he discovered the large penin-
fula of California, and surveyed the greater part
of the gulf which separates it from New Spain.
The discovery of a country of such extent would
hre reflected credit on a common adventurer;
but it could add little new honour to the name
tfCortes, and was far from satisfying the fan.
gume expecsations which he had formed°.

Cortes, Relat. Ram. iii. 294, B. 0 Herrera, dec. .

: \.i c. 9, io. dec. 8. lib vi. c. 14. Venegas, Hifl.
;t:(i;:rn. i. 125. Lorcnzana, Hit. p. 322, &c.

Disgusted

Disgusted with ill success, to which he had r.,
been accustomed, and weary of contesting x&,-
adversaries to whom he confidered it as a d'.
grace to be opposcd, he once more fought f.r
redress in his native country [1540].

But his reception there was very different from

that which gratitude, and even decency, ouut
to have secured for him. The merit of hisar.
cient exploits was already, in a great measure,
forgotten, or eclipsed by the fame of recent and
more valuable conquests in another quarter us
America. No service of moment was now ex.
pceted from a man of declining years, and who
began to be unfortunate. The emperor behaved
to him with cold civility; his ministers treated
him, sometimes with neglet, sometimes with
insolence. His grievances received no redress;
his claims were urged without effet ; and after
several years spent in fruitless application to
ministers and judges, an occupation the mot'
irksome and mortifying to a man of high fpiri:,
who had moved in a sphere where he was more
accustomed to command than to solicit, Core;
ended his days on the second of December one
thousand five hundred and forty-feven, in the
fixty-fecond vearof his age. His fate was the sarre
with that of all the persons who diftinguiff!cd
themfclvcs in the difcoverv or conquest of the New
World. Envicd by his contemporaries, and 3:i
requited by the court which he served, he hiz
been admired and celebrated by succeeding azc-.
Which has formed the most jult eftimatt of(:i
character, an impartial consideration of his actios
;.iult dtcerrminc.

# BOOK VI.

BOOK VI.
5.] FROM the time that Nugnez de Balboa

discovered the great Southern Ocean,

:` received the tirnl obscure hints concerning
G: opulent countries with which it might open a
c;mmunication, the wiihes and schemes of every
.:;erprifing person in the colonies of Darien and
P.zr.;a were turned towards the wealth of those
;-;.nown regions. In an age when the spirit
c: adventure was so ardent and vigorous, that
i-e fortunes were wafted, and the molt alarm-
.2 dangers braved, in pursuit of discoveries
.rrely possible, the faintelt ray of hope was
:..'.ved with an cager expectation, and the
Lintelt information was sufficient to infpihe
:;,! perfect confidence, as conducted men to the
.,;t arduous undertakings a.
Accordingly, several armaments were fitted
i; ;i order to explore and take polfeflion of the
cr.tries to the east of Panama, but under the
t;Cuct of leaders whose talents and resources
A"re unequal to the attempt b. As the excur-

nss of thufe adventurers did not extend beyond
:.: limits of the province to which the Spa-
:irds have given the name of rierra Firme, a
rountainous region covered with woods, thinly
-labited, and extremely unhealthy, they re-
:rncd with dismal accounts concerning the dif-
-iTes to which they had been exposed, and the
apromifing afpe& of the places which they
' vilited. Damped by these tidings, the rage

Se NuOTE CXXV. b Calanchh, Coronica, p. oo0.

for

for discovery in that diretion abated; and .
became the general opinion, that Balboa had
founded visionary hopes, on the tale of ,
ignorant Indian, ill underiwood, or calculated ti
deceive.

1524.] But there were three persons feted

in Panama on whom the circumstances which
deterred others made so little impreflion, that
at the very moment when all confidered BA-.
boa's expectations of discovering a rich countrr,
by steering towards the east, as chimericl,
they resolved to attempt the execution of hi;
scheme. The names of those extraordinary mn
were Francisco Pizarro, Diego de Almagro, and
Hernando Luque. Pizarro was the natural son
of a gentleman of an honourable family by a vry
low woman, and, according to the cruel fte
which often attends the offspring of unlawfsl
love, had been so totally negleced in his youth
by the author of his birth, that he seems to hav
destined him never to rife beyond the conditioa
of his mother. In consequence of this unge
nerous idea, he set him, when bordering on man-
hood, to keep hogs. But the aspiring mind ol
young Pizarro disdaining that ignoble occupa.
tion, he abruptly abandoned his charge, en.
lifted as a soldier, and, after serving some yea
m Italy, embarked for America, which, by
opening such a boundless range to a&ive ta
lents, allured every adventurercr whose fortuu
was not equal to his ambitious thought.
There Pizarro early distinguished himself. With
a temper of mind no less daring than the conffi-
tution of his body was robust, he was fore
mot in every danger, patient under the gresr'

C:'.

d hardships, and unfubdued by any fatigue.
Though so illiterate that he could not even ready
he was soon confidered as a man formed to con-
and. Every operation committed to his con-
dun proved successful, as, by a happy but rare
conjunfi'on, he united perseverance with ardour,
ed was as cautious in executing, as he was bold
a forming his plans. By engaging early in
aive life, without any resource but his own ta-
knts and industry, and by depending on himself
alone in his struggles to emerge from obscurity,
he acquired such a thorough knowledge of affairs,
and of men, that he was fitted to assume a fu-
prior part in conducting the former, and in
goerning the latter c.

Almagro had as little to boast of his descent
Pizarro. The one was a bastard, the other
a foundling. Bred, like his companion, in the
camp, he yielded not to him in any of the fol-
&rly qualities of intrepid valour, indefatigable
a&i;ity, or insurmountable constancy in enduring
the hard/hips inseparable from military service
h the New World. But in Almagro these vir-
tets were accompanied with the openness, gene-
rtfitv, and candour, natural to men whose pro-
effion is arms; in Pizarro, they were united
with the address, the craft, and the dissimulation
f a politician, with the art of concealing his
mrn purposes, and with sagacity to penetrate

no those of other men.
Hcrnando de Luque was an ecclesiastic, who
t-d both as priest and schoolmaster at Panama,
ad, by means which the cotemporary writers

' Hrrcra, dec. 1 & 2, palTim. dec. 4. lib.vi. c. 1i7.
(x-.l:j, Hi:L c. 144. Zratc, Jib, iv. c. V..
TOL. J,. :3 B have

have not dcfcribed, had amasscd riches tht
inspired him with thoughts of rising to greatc
eminence.

Such were the men destined to overturn oan

of the most extensive empires on the face of th
earth. Their confederacy for this purpose wa
authorised by Pedrarias, the governor of Panama.
Each engaged to employ his whole fortune in
the adventure. Pizarro, the least wealthy i
the three, as he could not throw so large a fu
as his associates into the common stock, engaged
to take the department of greaterL fatigue and
danger, and to command in person the armamren
which was to go first upon discovery. Almagro
offered to coinduct the supplies of provisions and
reinforcements of troops, of which Pizarro might
.Rand in need. Luque was to remain at Pananm
to negotiate with the governor, and fuperintenr
whatever was carrying on fur the general intere
.As the spirit of enthusiasm uniformly accor
panied that of advcnture in the New World.
and by that strange union both acquired a;
increase of force, this confederacy, formed bj
ambition and avarice, was confirmed by ti,
molf solemn act of irligion. Luque celebrate
mass, divided a consecrated host into three, asn
refenring one part to himself, gave the othe
two to his afrociates, of which they partook
and thus, in the name of the Prince of Peac
ratified a contra&t of which plunder and bli
shed were the objects '.

The attempt was begun with a force rr.r

fulted to the humble condition of the three a:..
ciates, than to the grcatnefs of the entcrp::

' Hcrrera, dec. 3, lib. vi. . 13. Zarat, lib. i.
.

p: .

-I~~~~e
*¾*ai w!~~~~i;t~e ~J;i·~

which they were engaged. Pizarro set fail from
Panama with a single vessel [Nov. I4], of fnall
burden, and a hundred and twelve men. But
in that age, so little were the Spaniards acquaint-
d with the peculiarities of climate in America,
:'at the time which Pizarro chose for his de-
T-:tre was the most improper in the whole
;r; the periodical winds, which were then set
i-, beilg direfly adverse to the course which

r'!h' rt:ofcd to steer e. After beating about for
i-:mitv da-s, with much danger and incessant
f::'yie, Pizarro's progress towards the south-
<.. was not greater than what a fiilful navigator'
,wI now make in as many hours. [1525.] He
:tuched at several places on the coast of Tierra
Fnre, but found every where the fame unin-
':ing country which former adventurers had
'-fibed ; the low grounds converted into:
:'drps by an overflowing of rivers ; the higher,

-ered wEith impervious woods; few inhabitants,
*i tinfc fierce and hostile. Famine, fatigue,
":-: r.t rencounters with the natives, and above
::, the dilRempers of a moist, sultry climate,

Tbired in wafting his slender band of follow-
. The undaunted resolution of their leader
- ::u-ed, however, for some time, to sustain
"-, spirits, although no sign had yet ap.
-ed of discovering those golden regions to
.:
' he had promised to conduf them. At
.th he was obliged to abandon that inhof-
'-ibl) coast, and retire to Chuchama, opposite
' ;e pearl islands, where he hoped to re-
: a supply of provisions and troops from

' Hercraa dec. 4.

.ib. ic. . Xe, P.
.179.

{ B Z But

ButAlmagro having failed from that port wvit

seventy men, flood direcly towards that part
of the continent where he hoped to meet with hai
associate. Not finding him there, he landed L'
soldiers, who, in searching for their companion.,
underwent the fame distresses, and were expolnd
to the fame dangers, which had driven the=
out of the country. Repulsed at length by mhe
Indians in a sharp conflit, in which their leader
loft one of his eyes by the wound of an arrow,
they likewise were compelled to reimbark
Chance led them to the place of Pizarro's retrea,
where they found some consolation in recounting
to each other their adventures, and comparing
their ufferings. As Almagro had advanced a
far as the river St. Juan [June 24], in the pro.
vince of Popayan, where both the country anr
inhabitants appeared with a more promising
aspea, that dawn of better fortune was fuffcied:
to determine such sanguine projectors not to
abandon their scheme, notwithstanding all tha;
they had suffered in prosecuting it .

1526.] Almagro repaired to Panama, in

hopes of recruiting their shattered troop;.
But what he and Pizarro had suffered, gave hi;
countrymen such an unfavourable idea of the
service, that it was with difficulty he could le'
fourscore men g. Feeble as this reinforccmcr:
was, Almagro took the command of it, anr
having joined Pizarro, they did not hesitate aboe:
reumrning their operations. After a long ferie
of disasters and disappointments, not inferior'
those which they had already experienced, par

f Herrera,dec. 3 lib. viii. c. 1 , Iz. See NOT E CXXVI
Zaracc, iib. i c. I.

C

of the armament reached the Bay of St. Mat-
thew, on the coast of Quito, and landing at
Tacamez, to the south of the river of Emeraulds,
thne beheld a country more champaign and ser-
tile than any they had yet discovered in the
Southern Ocean, the natives clad in garments of
woollcn or cotton fluff, and adorned with several
trinklets of gold and silver.

But, notwithstanding those favourable appear.
ance , r.agnified beyond the truth, both by the
vanity of the persons who brought the report
f-om Tacamez, and by the fond imagination of
:hrce who listened to them, Pizarro and Almagro
durst not venture to invade a country so popu-
lous with a handful of men enfeebled by fatigue
a-d diseases. They retired to the small island
of Gallo, where Pizarro remained with part of
:he troops, and his associate returned to Panama,
in hopes of bringing such a reinforcement as
right enable them to take possession of the opu-
lent territories, whose existence seemed to be no
longer doubtful h

But fume of the adventurers, less entcrprifing,

or lets hardy than their leaders, having secretly
conveyed lamentable accounts of their sufferings
a2d lo'Tes to their friends at Panama, Almagro
r.et ;ith an unfavourable reception from Pedro
ce los Rio' , who had: succeedcd Pedrarias in the
government of that settlement. After weighing
!.e matter with that cold ceconomical prudence
which anpears the first of all virtues to persons
Vohro lim.ied faculties are incapable of conceiving
cr executing great designs, he concluded an ex-
p-d:ti:la, attended witli such certain waite of

1 Xerez, 131. Heerra, dec 3. lib, vii, c. 13.

B L 3 men,

men, to be so detrimental to an infant and feeble
colony, that he not only prohibited the railing
of new levies, but dispatched a vessel to bring
home Pizarro and his companions from the
ifiand of Gallo. Almagro and Luque, though
deeply affeced with those measures, which they
could not prevent, and durst not oppose, found
rr.eansof communicating theirfentiments privately
to Pizarro, and exhorted him not to relinquish
an enterprise that was the foundation of all their
hopes, and the only means of re-establishing
their reputation and fortune, which were both
on the decline. Pizarro's mind, bent with in.
flexible obstinacy on all its purposes, needed no
incentive to perfii in the scheme. He peremp-
torily refused to obey the governor of Panama's
orders, and employed all his addref, and elo-
quence in persuading his men not to abandon him.
But the incredible calamities to which they had
been exposed were shill so recent in their memo-
ries, and the thoughts of revisiting their famiie*
and friends after a long absence, rushed with
such joy into their minds, that when Pizarro
drew a line upon the sand with his sword, per-
mitting such as wished to return home to pals
over it, only thirteen of all the daring veterans
in his service had resolution to remain with their
commander i.

This small, but determined band, whose names

the Spanish historians record with deserved praile,
as the persons to whose persevering fortitude
their country is indebted for the most valuable
of all its American pofffions, fixed their rcn-

J Hrrera, dec. 3. lib. x. c. z, 3. Zarate, lib, . c.'.
Xccz, iSi, Gomnur, Hi. . c. o.

di".;.

&dnce in the island of Gorgona. This, as it
was farther removed from the coast than Gallo,.
and uninhabited, they confidered as a more secure
retreat, where, unmolested, they might wait for
supplies from Panama, which they trusted that
the ac&ivity of their associates would be able to
procure. Almagro and Luque were not inat-
tentive or cold solicitors, and their incessant im-
portunity was seconded by the general voice of
:he colony, which exclaimed loudly against the
infamy of exposing brave men, engaged in the
public service, and chargeable with no error
Lut what flowed from an excess of zeal and
c'urage, to perish like the molf odious criminals

a dcfcrt island. Overcome by those entreaties

and expoftulatious, the governor at last consented
:o fend a small vessel to their relief. But that
he might not seem to encourage Pizarro to any
new enterprise, he would not permit one land-
man to embark on board of it.

By. this time, Pizarro and his companions had
rr.ained five months in an island, infamous for
;hc most unhealthy climate in that region of
Americak. During all this period, their eyes
were turned towards Panama, in hopes of succour
from their countrymcn; but worn out at length
';ih fruitless expeEtations,and dispirited with sus-
f.ring hardfnips of which they saw no end, they,
in drcpair, came to a resolution of committing
:hEmfelves to the ocean on a float, rather thaa
continue in that detestable abode. But, on the
arrival of the vtffel from Panama, they were
trnfported with such joy, that all their sufferings

k See NTEr CXXVIL

were

were forgotten. Their hopes revived, and, with
a rapid transition, not unnatural among men
accuttomed by their mode of life to sudden viciffi.
tudes of fortune, high confidence succeeding to
extreme dejection, Pizarro easily induced not
only his own followers, but the crew of the
vessel from Panama, to resume his former scheme
with fresh ardour. Instead of returning to Pa-
nama, they Itood towards the fouth-eaft,and more
fortunate in this than in any of their past efforts,
they, on the twentieth day after their departure
from Gorgona, discovered the coast of Peru.
After touching at several villages near the shore,
which they found to be no wife inviting, they
landed at Tumbez, a place of fume note, about
three degrees south of tihe lne, distinguished for
its itately temple, and a palace of the Incar or
sovereigns of the country '. There the Spa.
niards featted their eyes with the firIl view of the
opulence and civilization of the Peruvian em-
pire. They beheld a country fully peopled,
znd cultivated with an appearance of re-
gular induftrv; the natives decently clothed,
and possessed of ingenuity so far surpassing the
other inhabitants of the New World, as to have
the use of tame domestic animals. But wha.
chiefly attracted their notice, was such a fhowv f
gold and silver, not only in the ornaments of
their persons and temples, but in several veiTeis
and utensils for common use, formed of thole
precious metals, as left no room to doubt tha:
they abounded with profusion in the countrn.
Pizarro and his companions seemed now to have
attained to the completion of their molt fangui:.:

t Calancha, p. IC3.

hOpo3,

hopes, and fancied that all their wishes and
dreams of rich domains, and inexhaustible trea,
fures, would soon be realized.

But with the fltnder force then under hi
command, Pizarro could only view the rich
country of which he hoped hereafter to obtain
possession. He ranged, however, for some time
along the coast, maintaining every where a
peaceable intercourse with the natives, no less
anonifhed at their new visitants, than the Spa-
niards were with the uniform appearance of
opulence and cultivation which they beheld,
[1527.] Having explored the country as far as
was requisite to ascertain the importance of the
discovery, Pizarro procured from the inhabitants
rome of their Llamas or tame cattle, to which
the Spaniards gave the name of sheep, some vessels
of gold and silver, as well as some specimens of
their other works of ingenuity, and two young
.en, whom he proposed to inftrunt in the Cat
tilian language, that they might serve as in-
terpreters in the expedition which he meditated.
With there he arrived at Panama, towards the
dose of the third year from the time of his de-
parture thence m. No adventurer of the age
;";trcd hardships or encountered dangers which
equal tlhoe to which he was cxpofed during this
lon- pcriod. The patience with which he en-
dured the one, and the foititude with which
!e surmounted the other, exceed whatever is
recorded in the history of the New World,
there so many romantic displays of those virtues
occur.

n Herrera, dec. 3. lib. %. c. 3-6. dec. 4, lib. ii.
c. -, X. Vega, z. lib. i. c. 10-14. Zarate, lib. i. c. z.
Ktto, Hist. Novi Orbis, lib.iii. C. 1.

1528,3

1528.] Neither the splendid relation that

Pizarro gave of the incredible opulence of the
country which he had discovered, nor his bitter
complaints on account of that unseasonable recal
of his forces, which had put it out of his power
to attempt making any settlement there, could
move the governor of Panama to swerv'e from his
former plan of condut. He ttill contended, that
the colony was not in a condition to invade such
a mighty empire, and refused to authorise an
expedition which he foresaw would be so allurinr
that it might ruin the province in which he pre.
fided, by an effort beyond its strength. His
coldness, however, did not in any degree abate
the ardour of the three associates; but they
perceived that they could not carry their
scheme into execution without the countenance
of superior authority, and must solicit their fo;.e-
reign to grant that permifiion which they could
not extort from his delegate. With this view,
after adjusting among themselves that Pizarro
Ihould claim the station of governor, Almagro
that of lieutenant-governor, and Luque the
dignity of bishop in the country which theypur.
posed to conquer, they sent Pizarro as their
agent to Spain, though their fortunes were nov
so much exhausted by the repeated efforts which
they had made, that they found some difficu!:y
in borrowing the small fum rcquifite towards
equipping him for the voyage".

Pizarro loft no time in repairing to court, and

new as the scene might be to him, he appeared
before the emperor with the unembarrafled dig-
nity of a man conscious of what his ferviccs

- Hcjrcra, dc. 4. lib. iii. c. . Vega, a2. lib i. c. 14

merite i

merited; and he conducted his negotiations with
an inilnuating dexterity of address, which could
not have been expe&ed either from his education
or former habits of life. His feeling description
of his own sufferings, and his pompous account
of the country which he had discovered, con-
firmed by the specimens of its productions which
he exhibited, made such an impression both on
Charles and his ministers, that they not only
approved of the intended expedition, but seemed
to be interested in the success of its leader.
Prefurning on those dispositions in his favour,
Pizarro paid little attention to the interest of his
afiociates. As the pretensions of Luque did not
interfere with his own, he obtained for him the
ecclefiallical dignity to which he aspired. For
Almagro, he claimed only the command of the
fortrcfs which should be erected at Tumbez.
To himself he secured whatever his boundlcfs
a-.bition could desire. He was appointed
[July 26] governor, captain-general, and adelan-
tairo of all the country which he had discovered,
aid t',pcl to conquer, with supreme authority,
c il a, well as military; and with full right to all
tU, privileges and emoluments ufrally granted to
a'i. ilturer, in the New World. His jurifdicion
..a, -clared to extend two hundred leagues
aL,:,g the coalt to the foutll of the river St. Jago;
;' be inidiendent of the governor of Panama;
a.. i h ;ad power to nominate all the officers
v:i'u were to serve under him. In return for
:..fe clmceffions, which coil the court of Spain
;. :ing, as the enjoyment of them depended
L,., tie success of Pizarro's own efforts, he en-
,d:d jto raifc two hundred and fifty men, and

to

to provide the ships, arms, and warlike fores
requisite towards fnibje&ing, to the crown of
Castile, the country of which the government
was allotted him.

1529.] Inconsiderable as the body of men w-a

which Pizarro had undertaken to raise, his funds
and credit were so low that he could hardly
complete half the number; and after obtaining
his patents from the crown, he was obliged to
feal privately out of the port of Seville, in order
to elude the scrutiny of the officers who had it
in charge to examine, whether he had fulfilled
the fiipulations in his contrasct. Before his depar-
ture, however, he received some supply of money
from Cortes, who having returned to Spain about
this time, was willing to contribute his aid to.
ward; enabling an ancient companion, with whose
talents and courage he was well acquainted, to
begin a career of glory similar to that which he
himself had finished P.

He landed at Nombre de Dios, and marched

across the isthmus to Panama, accompanied by
his three brothers, Ferdinand, Juan, and Gon-
zalo, of whom the firIt was born in lawful wed.
lock, the two latter, like himself, were of lle.
gitimate birth, and by Francisco de Alcantara,
his mother's brother. They were all in the
prime of life, and of such abilities and courage,
as fitted them to take a distinguished part in his
subsequent transactions.

I530.] On his arrival at Panama, Pizarro

found Almagro so much exasperated at the
manner in which he had conduced his nego
tiation, that he not only refused to ait ar.

o Hcrrera, dec. 4. lib. vii. c. 9. v Ibid. c. o0.

hlger in concert with a man, by whose perfidy
he had been excluded from the power and ho.
tours to which he had a just claim, but laboured
to form a new association, in order to thwart or
to rival his former confederate in his difeoveries.
Pizarro, however, had more wisdom and addrefb
;:an to susser a rupture so fatal to all his
schemes, to become in-eparable. By offering
voluntarily to relinquish the office of adelantado,
.d promising to concur in soliciting that title,
r.:h an independent government, for Almagro,
!; gradually mitigated the rage of an open-
tearted soldier, which had been violent, but
rs not implacable. Luque, highly satisfied
rrh having been successful in all his own pre-
:r-.Gons, cordially seconded Pizarro's endeavours.
A reconciliation was effe&ed; and the confe-

eracv renewed on its original terms, that the
-.erprife should be carried on at the common
=nence of the associates, and the profits accru-
-5 from it should be equally divided among
ern 9.
Even after their re-union, and the utmost es-
'crts of their interest, three small' veftls, with
hundred and eighty soldiers, thirty-fx of whom
rre horsemen, composed the armament which
her were able to fit out. But the astonishing
ngrefs of the Spaniards in America had inspired
Iem with such ideas of their own superiority,
.t' Pizarro did not hesitate to fail with this
:ntemptible force to invade a great empire.
[Ij31, February.] Almagro was left at Pana-
:a, as formerly, to follow him with what rein-

Henera, dec 4. lib. vii. c. 9. Zarate, lib. i. c. 3.

ICLI . cicfo.

c, 4r
C L. t. c c forcement

forcement of men he should be able to muat.
As the season for embarking was properly chose-.,
and the vourfc of navigation between P.
nama and Peru was now better known, Pizar,
compieted the voyage in thirteen days; thoug?.,
by the force of the winds and currents, he v2a
carried above a hundred leagues to the north c;
Tumbez, the place of his destination, and obligtd
to land his troops in the bay of St. Matthv..

'rithout losing a moment, he began to ad.va::

towards the south, taking care, however, :.
to depart far from the fea-fnore, both that ':
might easily ccftc a juntion with the fuppl.i
which he expected from Panama, and fecur
retreat in cafe of any difalter, by keeping as ne.:
as polfible to his Ihips. But as the counts.:
fevcral parts on the coast of Peru is barren, :.
healthful, and thinly peopled; as the Spaniar:
had to pass all the rivers near their mou;:.,
where the body of water is greatest; and as tL:
imprudence of Pizarro, in attacking the nat;;:i
when he should have studied to gain their co-,.
fidcncc, had forced them to abandon their hal:
ations; famine, fatigue, and diseases of varl'o
kinds, brought upon him and his followers ca:
miitis hardly inferior to those which they Ea'
endured in their former expedition. What tIh
now experienced correspondcd so ill with ti.:
alluring description of the country given bs
'Pizarro, that many began to reproach him, a d
every soldier mult have become cold to t:
service, if even in this unfertile region of Pcr-
they had not met with some appearances i:
wealth and cultivation which seemed to ju'1
the report of their leader. At length t'

reaci:

reached the province of Coaque [April 14];
2d, having furpi'fed the principal settlement of
he natives, they seizcd their vessels and orna-
rents of gold and silver, to the amount of
thirty thousand pesos, with other booty of
such vale, as dispelled all their doubts, and
irpired the most desponding with sanguine
hopes r.

Pizarro himself was so much delighted with
this rich spoil, which he confidered as the first-
hjits of a land abounding with treasure, that
he instantly dispatched one of his {hips to Pa-
Eama with a large remittance to Almagro; and
arother to Nicaragua with a considerable fum
to several persons of influence in that province,
i hopes of alluring adventurers, by this early
,dfplav of the wealth which he had acquired.
lMeanvhile, he continued his march along the
coafR, and disdaining to employ any means of
:rdcing the natives but force, he attacked them
with such violence in their scattered habitations,
L: compelled them either to retire into the interior
tcutrv, or to submit to his yoke. This fud-
.n appearance of invaders, whose aspet and
sr.ners were so strange, and whose power
iemed to be so irresistible, made the fame
-ladful impression as in other parts of Ame.
.a. Pizan-o hardly met with refiitance until

att;ackd the island of Puna in the bay of

(;avqiuil. As that was better peopled than
'-' country through which he had passed, and
; inhabitants fiercer and lcfs civilized than
,t o,f thti. continent, they defended themselves
':h fih!i obfiinate valour, that Pizarro spent
Hrrcri, dec. 4. lib. vii. c. 9. lib. ii. c. I. Xerez, 18z.

cc fix

fix months in reducing them to fubjetion.
From Puna he proceeded to Tumbez, what
the diltempers which raged among his men con.
pelled him to remain for three months s.

While he was thus employed, he began to

reap advantage from his attention, to spread
the fame of his firit success at Coaque. Two
different detachments arrived from Nicara-ua
[I5323, which, though neither exceeded thirn
men, he confidered as a reinforcement of great
consequence to his feeble band, especially as the
one was under the command of Sebastian Ben-a.
cazar, and the other of Hernando Soto, officer.
not inferior in merit and reputation to any
who had served in America. From Tumbez he
proceeded to the river Piura [May I6], ar.d
in an advantageous fIation near the mouth of
it, he eflablifhed the first Spanish colony in
Peru; to which he gave the name of St. Michael

As Pizarro continued to advance towards the

center of the Peruvian empire, he gradually re.
ceived more full information concerning its es.
tent and policy, as well as the situation of iu
affairs at that juncture. Without some know.
ledge of these, he could not have conducted his
operations with propriety; and without a fuitabie
attention to them, it is impossible to account
for the progress which the Spaniards had already
made, or to unfold the causes of their fubke.
quent success.

At the time when the Spaniards invaded
Peru, the dominions of its sovereigns extended

P. Sancho as. Ramus. iii. p. 371, F. Here1'

dec. 4. lib. vii. c. i. lib. ix. c. 1, Za.aLe, liD. ii. c. ,;
Xcrcz, p. 13z, &c.

nlength, from north to south, above fifteen
.l'dred miles along the Pacific Ocean. Its
!-¢adth, from east to weft, was much less con-
:ferable; being uniformly bounded by the vast
rdge of the Andes, stretching from its one ex-
-er.ity to the other. Peru, like the reft of the
.\er World, wvas originally possessed by small
-dependent tribes, differing from each other
:n manners, and in their formsr of rude policy.
A h'I, however, were so little civilized, that, if
ti:e traditions concerning their mode of life,
;reservcd among their descendants, deserve cre-
d:., ther must be classed among the most unim-
-.ved fa-.ages of America. Strangers to every
:'<cies of cultivation or regular industry, with.
out an'. fixed residence, and unacquainted with
i:noe sentiments and obligations which form the
f.h- bonds of social union, they are said to have
rhamed about naked in the forests, with wllich
the country was then covered, more like wild
b.r.ls than like men. After they had ftniggled

f..- je:'eral ages with the hardships and calamities
'l.ch are inevitable in such a state, and when
rJ circumstance seemed to indicate the approach
of any uncommon effort towards improvement,
we are told that there appeared on the banks of
i!e lake Titiaca, a man and woman of majestic
f(jrm, and clothed in decent garments. They
declared themselves to be children of the Sun,
sent by their beneficent parent, who beheld with
pitv the nmiferies of the human race, to instruCt
c.d to reclaim them. At their perfuation,
enforced bv reverence for the divinity in whose
rame theyv were supposed to speak, several of
' c dispersed savages united togther, and rcceiv-

c c 3 ing

ing their commands as heavenly injunctions, so!.
lowed them to Cuzco, where they fettled, acr
began to lay the foundations of a city.

Manco Capac and Mama Ocollo, for such were

the names of those extraordinary personages,
having thus collected some wandering tribe;,
formed that social union, which, by multiplying
the desires, and uniting the efforts of the hurr;n
species, excites industry, and leads to improve,
ment. Manco Capac instructed the men i:
agriculture, and other useful aits. bMrr.a
Ocollo taught the women to spin and to wea;c.
By the labour of the one sex, subsistence be.
came less precarious; by that of the other, liti
was rendered more comfortable. After fecu:.
ing the objecs of first necessity in an infant ftatc,
by providing food, raiment, and habitations, for
the rude people of whom he took charge, Manco
Capac turned his attention towards introducing
such laws and policy as might perpetuate the;r
happiness. By his institutions, which shall be
more particularly explained hereafter, the vanroui
relations in private life were eftablJihed, and the
duties resulting from them plefcribed with fuci
propriety, as gradually formed a barbarous people
to decency of manners. In public admiriilra
tion, the functions of persons in authority wer;
so precisely defined, and the subordination oA
those under their jurifdicion maintained wi;i
such a Ready hand, that the society in which hi
presided, soon assumed the afpe& of a regual
and well-governed ltate.

Thus, according to the Indian tradition, wa

founded the empire of the Incas or Lords oi
Peru. At first its extent was fmialL The tr.

2 ri:;Z-

ritory of Manco Capac did not reach above
eight leagues from Cuzco. But within its
narrow precincs he exercised absolute and un-
controlled authority. His successors, as their
dominions extended, arrogated a firmlar jurif-
dicion over the new fubjeds which they ac-
quired; the despotism of Asia was not more
complete. The Incas were not only obeyed
as monarchs, but revered as divinities. Their
blood was held to be sacred, and, by prohibiting
intermarriages with the people, was never con-
taminated by mixing with that of any other race.
The family, thus separated from the reft of the
nation, was distinguished by peculiarities in dress
and ornaments, which it was unlawful for others
to afrume. The monarch himself appeared with
ensigns of royalty reserved for him alone; and
receiked from his fubjecs marks of obsequious
homage and refpea, which approached almoif
to adoration.

But, among the Peruvians, this unbounded
power of their monarchs seems to have been
uniformly accompanied with attention to the
gjd of their fubjccs. It was not the rage
of conquest, if we may believe the accounts of
t:I;,r countrymen, that prompted the Incas to
crtcnd their dominions, but the desire of diffusing
t.te hleffiugs of civilization, and the knowledge
of the arts which they possessed, among the bar-
Larous people whom they reduced. During a
f'ccetlfon of twelve monarchs, it is said that
not one deviated from this beneficent cha.
racter '

Cieca de Leon, Chron. c. 44. HCTrera, dec. 3. lib. x.
' 4. cc. 5. lib. iii. c. 17.

When

When the Spaniards first visited the coast of

Peru, in the year one thousand five hundred and
twenty-fix, Huana Capac, the twelfth monarch
from the founder of the state, was feated o0
the throne. He is represented as a prince dif.
tinguilhed net only for the pacific virtues pe-
culiar to the race, but eminent for hi3 martial
talents. By his victorious arms the kingdom ,,f
Quito was subjected, a conquclt of such extent
an importance as almost doubled the power -f
the Peruvian empire. He was fond of refidin.
in the capital of that valuable province which
he had added to his dominions ; and, notvit.l-
standing the ancient and fundamental lav.- of the
monarchy against polluting the royal blood tv
any foreign alliance, he married the daughter of
the vanquished monarch of Quito. She brre
him a son named Atahualpa, whom, on hi: dcea:
at Quito, which seems to have happcncd abc.:
the year one thousand fivre hundred and twen:v-
nine, he appointed his successor in that kingdorr,
leaving the rft of his dominions to Huzecar,
his eldest son, by a mother of the royal race.
Greatly as the Peruvians revered the mc!lornv of
a monarch who had icigned with greater repu-
tation and splendour than any of his predeccc-
fors, the destination of Huana Capac concerning
the fuccefilon, appeared so repugnant to a maxim
coeval with the empire, and founded on autho-
rity deemed sacred, that it was no fooncr known
at Cuzco than it excited general difg:ift. Er-
couraged by those fcntimer;ts of hi fu;bjce'
Huafcar required his brother to renounce the
government of Quito, and to acknowledge hirn
as his lawful superior. But it had been the int

ca-:

care of Atahualpa to gain a large body of
troops which had accompanied his father to
Quito. These were the flower of the Peruvian
Warriors, to whole valour Huana Capac had been
indebted for all his victories. Relying on their
support, Atahualpa firfl eluded his brother's
demand, and then marched against him in hostile
array.

Thus the ambition of two young men, the
title of the one founded on ancient usage, and
that of the other asserted by the veteran troops,
Livolved Peru in civil war, a calamity to which,
under a fucceflion of virtuous princes, it had
hitherto been a stranger. In such a contest the,
iaue was obvious. The force of arms triumphed
over the authority of laws. Atahualpa remained
victorious, and made a cruel use of his victory.
Conscious of the defe& in his own title to the
crown, he attempted to exterminate the royal
race, by putting to death all the children of the
Sun descended from Manco Capac, whom he
could seize either by force or Itratagem. From
2 political motive, the life of his unfortunate
rinal Huafcar, who had been taken prisoner in
abattle which decided the fate of the empire,
was prolonged for some time, that, by issuing
orders in his name, the usurper might more easily
ellablifh his'own authority U.

When Pizarro landed in the bay of St. Mat-
'thew, this civil war raged between the two
brothers in its greatest fury. Had he made any
hostile attempt in his former visit to Peru in the
year one thousand five hundred and twenty-

; Za-t, lib. i. c. z5. Vega, I. lib. ix. c. rz and
:I-4o. Hcrrera, dec. 5 lib. i. c. z. lib. iii. c. 7.

seven,

seven, he muff then have encountered the force
of a powerful slate, united under a monarcr.
possessed of capacity as well as courage, asd
unembarraffed with any care that could divert
him from opposing his progress. But at this
time, the two competitors, though they received
early accounts of the arrival and violent pro.
ceedings of the Spaniards, were so intent upon
the operations of a war, which they deemed
more intcrefling, that they paid no attention to
the motions of an enemy, too inconsiderable in
number to excite any great alarm, and to whom,
it would be easy, as they imagined, to give a
check when more at leisure.

By this fortunate coincidence of events,

whereof Pizarro could have no foresight, and
of which, from his defective mode of intercourse
with the people of the country, he remained long
ignorant, he was permitted to carry on his ope-
rations unmolefled, and advanced to the centre
of a great empire before one effort of its power
was exerted to stop his career. During their
progress, the Spaniards lad acquired fomen imper-
set knowledge of this ftnrggle between the two
contending factions. The first complete infor-
mation with respect to it, they received from
messengers whom Huafcar sent to Pizarro, in or-
der to foiicit his aid against Atahualpa, whom
he represented as a rebel and an ufillper". Pi-
yarro perceived at once the importance of thi;
intelligence, and foresaw so clearly all the advar.-
tages which might be derived from this divided
state of the kingdom, which he had invaded,
that, without waiting for the reinforcemert'

Zarat, lb. i. c. 3.

Vwhi't.

which he expected from Panama, he determined
to push forward, while intestine discord put it out
of the power of the Peruvians to attack him
with their whole force, and while, by taking part,
as circumstances should incline him, with one of
the competitors, he might be enabled with greater
ease to crush both. Enterprising as the Spaniards
(c that age were in all their operations against
Americans, and diftinguilhed as Pizarro was
:rong his countrymen for daring courage, we
can hardly suppose, that after having proceeded
hitherto slowly, and with much caution, he
would have changed at once his system of ope-
ration, and have ventured upon a measure so
hazardous, without some new motive or profpet
tojulify it.

As le was obliged to divide his troops, in

order to leave a garrison in St. Michael, sufficient
to defend a station of equal importance as a place
of retreat in cafe of any disaster, and as a port
for receiving any supplies which flould come
from Panama, lie began his march with a very
ficndcr and ill-accoutred train of followers. They
con;iited of fixty-two horsemen y, and a hundred
and rvto foot-f(ldiers, of whom twenty were
armed with crof--bows, and three with muflets.
He directed his course towards Caxamalca, a
in,all town at the distance of twelve days march
frum St. Michael, where Atahualpa was en-
camped with a considerable body of troops.
Before he had proceeded far, an officer dispatched
by the Inca met him with a valuable present
from that prince, accompanied with a proffer of

X See NOTE CXXVIII.

hLis

his alliance, and assurances of a friendly reception
at Caxamalca. Pizarro, according to the ufu-l
artifice of his countrymen in America, pretended
to come as the ambassador of a very powerful
monarch, and declared that he was now advancing
with an intention to offer Atahualpa his aid
against those enemies who disputed his title to
the throne r.

As the obje& of the Spaniards in entering

their country was atogether incomprehensible to
the Peruvians, they had formed various conjec-
tuTes concerning it, without being able to decide
whether they should confider their new guests as
beings of a superior nature, who had visited them
from some beneficent motive, or as formidable
avengers of their crimes, and enemies to their
repose and liberty. The continual profeflions of
the Spaniards, that they came to enlighten them
with the knowledge of truth, and lead them ia
the way of happincfs, favoured the former opi.
nion; the outrages which'they committed, their
rapaciotfnefs and cruelty, were awful confirma-
tions of the latter. While in this state of uncer-
tainty, Pizarro's declaration of his pacific inten.
tions so far removed all the Inca's fears, that he
determined to give him a friendly reception. In
consequence of this resolution, the Spaniards were
allowed to march in tranquillity across the sandy
defcrt between St. Michael and Motupe, where
the most feeble effort of an enemy, added to the
unavoidable distresses which they suffered in pas-
ing through that comfortless region, muit have
proved fatal to themz. From Montupe they

J HerreTa, der 5. lib. i, c 3. Xceez, p. I89.
; et No-rT CXXIX.

advancej

advanced towards the mountains which encom-
passed the low country of Peru, and passed
througlh a defile so narrow and inaccessible, that
a few men might have defended it against a
numerous army. But here likewise, from the
fame inconsiderate credulity of the Inca, the
Spaniards met with no opposition, and took quiet
poIffefion. of a fort erected for the security of
that important itation. As they now approached
sear to Caxamalca, Atahualpa renewed his pro-
ffiions of friendship ; and as an evidence of their
incerity, sent them presents of greater value than
the former.

On entering Caxamalca, Pizarro took pof-
'fiion of a large court, on one fide of which was
- house which the Spanish historians call a palace
:he Inca, and on the other a temple of the
:un, the whole surrounded with a itrong ram-
;,r: or wall of earth. When he had poited his
:rJops in this advantageous station, he dispatched
' s brother Ferdinand and Hernando Soto to
:he camp of Atahualpa, which was about a
Bigue distant from the town. He inftruEted

:i.em to confinn the declaration which he had

:3.m.erly made of his pacific disposition, and to

ielire an interview with the Inca, that he might
Explain more fully the intention of the Spaniards
. visiting his country. They were treated with

:i the refpcaful hospitality usual among the

Prruvians in the reception of their most cordial
!ier,ds, and Atahualpa promised to visit the
Spani!h commander next day in his quarters.
The d':cent deportment of the Peruvian monarch,

::e or.ler of his court, and the reverence with
a:;ch lin subjects approached his pcrfon nnd

a .L. . UD ,':. r cd

obeyed his commands, afionifllcd thlfc Spania!dh,
who had never met in America ith any thitsg
more dignified thau the petty cazique of a bar.
baroua tribe. But their c)ts were still meor
powerfully attracted by the vail profusion ui
wealth which they obfcrved in the Inca's camp.
The rich ornaments worn by him and his at.
tendants, the veflels of gold and l;iver in which
tile repall offered to thtm was served up, tLe
multitude of utensils of every kind formtd f0
those prccions metals, opened profpe&ts far ex-
creding any idea of opulence that a European ui
the fixtcenth centurv could form.

On thcir return to Caxamalca, while thr;:

minds iwerc yet warm with admiration and delirt
of the v.caltli wv.ich they had beheld, they gaa
such a dcfcription of it to their countrymen, as
coiifi:n td Pizarro in a resolution \ hich lie had
lready) taken. From hi. own observation of
A:ner:ican manctrs duriig his long fcrvice ia
the New World, as well as from the advantag. j
whichl Curtcs had derived from fcizing Monte-
zurma, le knew oif wh-at colfcouelcc it was to
have tle Inca in his power. For this purpofc,
lie formed a plan as daring as it was pcrfidiou.
Notv.i'.blianding tit character that le had a.-
fumed of an amilaFiador frum a powerful mo-
narn. wliho courted an all;aice -with the Inca,
:; i:: ';it,!at,:iti of the rei-.cated offers miiich he
!i.ed inade to him of hi J owiv fricndfhip and affii!-
ai..', lie d tcrnminced to avail himself of the ui-
fitfi;iciou. limplicity with which Atahualpa relied
nmI hii prtitLfions, and to fcize the person of the
I ra dJuring thie ii l;icrvi to which he had in-
.'i !.ii:. ii. pri, a: d for the exccution u

i:.,

'i scheme with the fame deliberate arrange-
ment, and with as little compuntion, as if it
had rtlercdcl no disgrace on himself or his
cauntrv. He divided his cavalry into three
iafl fqiuldi-ons, under the command of his
L:ot!icr Ferdinand, Soto, and Benalcazar; his
:I;antrv were formed in one body, except
:acntv of most tried courage, whom he kept
..car his own person to fipport him in the
iangerous service which he reserved for himself;
ti- artillery, confiting of two field-pieces a and
the cross bowmen, were placed opposite to the
zvenue by which Atahualpa was to approach.
All were commanded to keep within the square,
lad not to move until the signal for ation was
pgen.

Early in the morning [Nov. I6] the Peruvian
canp was all in motion. But as Atahualpa was
,olicitous to appear with the greatest splendour
and magnificence in his first interview with the
trangers, the preparations for this were so tedious,
that the day was far advanced before he began
;, march. Lven then, left the order of the
p.ocefiion (hould be derancgd, he moved so
.wlv, that the Spauiards became impatient,
n-d apprehensive that fume fnfpicion of their
:;,ention mi;ht be the cause of this delay. In
,rcicr to remove thi;-, Pizarro dispatched one of
i . cficers withi frelii assurances of his friendly
hispoition. At leng th e Inca approached.
Firi of all appeared four hundred men, in an
-.f:trm dress, as harbingers to clear the way
'fore him. He himself, fitting on a throne or
ciuc!l, adorned with plumes of various colours,

z Xret,, p. i9j.

D D z and

and almost covered with plates of gold and fire
enriched with precious stones, was carried on th,
shoulders of his principal attendants. Behind
him came tome chief officers of his court, carrid
in the fame manner. Several bands of finger
and dancers accompanied this cavalcade; and
the whole plain was covered with troops,
amounting to more than thirty thousand men.

As the Inca drew near the Spanish quarter,

father Vincent Valverde, chaplain to the expe.
dition, advanced with a crucifix in one hand, ar.
a breviary in the other, and in a long discourse
explained to him the doctrine of the creation, the
fall of Adam, the incarnation, the sufferings, an
rcfurrection of Jesus Christ, the appointment of
St. Puter as God's vicegerent on earth, the
tr-anfr.ifion of his apostolic power by succession
to tlhe popes, the donation made to the king of
Caltile by pope Alexander of all the regions in
the New World. In consequence of all this, he
required Atahualpa to embrace the Christian
faith, to acknowledge the fupremejurifdicionof
the pope, and to submit to the king of Cafile as
his lawful sovereign; promising, if lie complied
in:tantly with this requisition, that the Caftilia
monarch would protec his dominions, and per.
mi: him to continue in the exercise of his royal
a;;r;orit-;; but if he (hould impiously refuse to
r' t- this summons, he denounced war againd
i. nm in his master's name, and threatened him
wb-ith the mnoil dreadful effecs of his ecn-
g c
arcc.

T'hi' strange harangue, unfolding deep myfe-

r;it, and a;iiding to unknown fats, of which nr
I} CX r cf c ciucnce could have conveyed at onct

a dfi.:r.:

zdif.inc idea to an American, was so lamely
tranfated by an unicilfuil interpreter, little ac-
quainted with the idiom of the Spanilh tongue,
and incapable of expreliing himelf lwith pro-
priety in the language of the Inca, that its
rennl tencr was altogether incomprehensible to
Ita.hualpa. Some parts in it, of more obvious
mera:ing, filled him with astonishment and indig-
nation. His reply, however, was temperate.
He began with obfer';ing, that he was lord of the

romiiiuons over which he reigned by hereditary
';rceffion ; and added, that he could not c..ri-
c:iVr how a forceign priest should pretend to dif-
pfe of territories which did not belong to him;
:hat iffuch a prepo terous grant had been made,
c, whio was the rightful possessor, refused to
,-ifirm it; that ie had no inclination to re-
:oj:'.c the religious institutions established by
}.is anccltors ; nor would he forsake the service
f tihe Sun, the immortal divinity whom he and
hi, people revered, in order to worship the God
of the Spaniards, who was fubjeEt to death;
:a.- with re:'peCt to other matters contained in
i, discourse, as he had never heard of them
before, and did not' now understand their mean-
i'g, he desired to know where the priest had
L-med things so extraordinary. " In this.
book," answered Valverde, reaching out to him
is breviary. 'Ihe Inca opened it eagerly, and
t'rning over the leaves, lifted it to his ear:
"This," fays he, " is silent; it tells me no-
thing;" and threw it with disdain to the
"nond. The enraged monk, running towards
ha countrymen, cried out, " To arms, Chrilt-
i', t'u arms; thI word of God is insulted;

D D 3 avenge

avcr.ge thi3 profanation on those impions
dops b.

Pizarro,~-sito, during this long conference,

had with difficulty restrained his soldiers, eager
to si'ze the rich spoils of ich they hadnov

i near a vie-.v, immediately gave the fignalof
fn!iult. At. once the martial music fituckup,
tLe c2,:non and mu(kets began to fire, the horie
fasled cut fiercely to the charge, the infantry
rn:lhcd on sword in hand. The Peruvians, afto.
ri'l.ed at 'it: fiddennefa of an attack which they
did rot tx:cCt, and difmrayed with the deltLc-.
ti.c e'!cct of the fire-arms, and the irrefiftibk
imprArficn of the cavalry, fled vith univerfil
c.n!fcrr.;ion cn every fide, without attempting
ei:her to annov the enrme-, or to defend them-
fce;vc-. Pi7arro, at the head of his chosen band,
-c.ancc d dircEtly towards the Inca; and though
his r.,b!cs crowded around him with officios
7e-S, and fell in numbers at his feet, while they
ve'd cne w;th another in sacrificing their own
's, tha: the rright cover the sacred person
u- t'll,:r f':vereign, the Spaniards soon penetrated
:o ;'.c r:.val feat; and Pizarro seizing the Inca
bv the zrm, dragged him to the ground, and
c'ried lim as a prisoner to his quarters, The
if.e of :'e monarch increased the precipitae
fii.-ht' 4-i is followers. The Spaniards pursued
ti.tr . ti.'.vrds every quarter, and withdelibere
a'-! or-kr ting barbarity continued to slaughter
v.-'rct! -(' fugitives, who never once offered to
rt ^::. The carnage did not cease until the cloe
J.£ dz.. Above four thousand Peruvians wnt
;:3. d:. Not a Cngle Spaniard fell, nor was oLe

b S:e N;TE CXXX.

w'G:'-

AT14P~qr JOZ
AW,~~~~~~~~~~~~~ (~~~~~~~~~~~~a~Nnr

wounded but PizaTro himself, whose hand was
Olghtly hurt by one of his own soldiers, while
fruggling eagerly to lay hold on the Inca c.

The plunder of the field was rich beyond any
idea which the Spaniards had yet formed con-
cerning the wealth of Peru, and they were so
transported with the value of the acquisition, as
well as the greatness of their success, that they
paed the night in the extravagant exultation
tatural to indigent adventurers on such an ex-
traordinary change of fortune.

At first the captive monarch could hardly be-
Ieve a calamity which he so little expected tó
be real. But he soon felt all the misery of his
fate, and the dejetion into which he funk was
in proportion to the height of grandeur from
which he had fallen. Pizarro, afraid of losing
all the advantages which he hoped to derive -'
from the possession of such a prisoner, laboured '
to console him with professions of kindness and -
refpe&, that corresponded ill with his aftions. By
refding among the Spaniards, the Inca quickly
discovered their ruling passion, which, indeed,
they were nowise solicitous to conceal, and by
applying to that, made an attempt to recover
his liberty. He offered as a ransom what
astonished the Spaniards, even after all they
now knew concerning the opulence of his king-
dom. The apartment in which he was'confined
was twenty-two feet in length and sixteen in
breadth ;- he undertook to fill it with veflels of
gold as high as he could reach. Pizarro closed
eagerly with this tempting proposal, and a line

' See NOTE CXXXI.

was

was drawn upon the walls of the chamber, t,
mark the stipulated height to which the treasure
was to rife.

Atahualpa, transported with having obtained

some profpecd of liberty, took measures inllant!i
for fulfilling his part of the agreement, by fend-
ing messengers to Cuzco, Quito, and other
places, where gold had been amassed in largei
quantities, either for adorning the temples of
the gods, or the houses of the Inca, to bring
what was neccffary for completing his ranfonr d-
rectly to Caxamalca. Though Atahualpa was
now in the custody of his encmies, yet so much
were the Peruvians accuflorned to refpec r evern
mrrndate issucd by their sovereign, that his order
were executed with the greatest alacrity.
Soothed with hopes of recovering his liber,
by this means, the fubjeas of the Inca vere
afraid of endangering his life by forming any
other fhetme for his relief: and though the force
of the empire was ftili entire, no preparations
wvere made, and no army alTembled to avenge
their own wrongs or those of their monarchd.
The Spaniards remained in Caxamalca tranquil
and unmolested. Small detachments of their
number marched into remote provinces of the
empire, and, instead of meeting with any opp-
fition, were everywhere received with marks of
the moss submissive refpe& e.

Inconsiderable as those parties were, and de-

firous as Pizarro might be to obtain some know-
ledge of the interior state of the country, he
could not have ventured upon any diminution

d Xtr:z, z10. e S= NTZ CXXXII.

of his main body, if he had not about this time
rceived an account of Almagro's having landed
a St. Michael with such a reinforcement as would
amoft double the number of his followerss.
The arrival of this long-expeaed succour was
zot more agreeable to the Spaniards, than
larming to the Inca. He saw the power of
hiz enemies increase; and as he knew neither
the source whence they derived their supplies,
nor the means by which they were conveyed to
Peru, he could not foresee to what a height the
inundation that poured in upon his dominions
night rife. [I533.] While disquieted with
f{ch apprehensions, he learned that some Spa-
riards, in their way to Cuzco, had visited his
brother Huafca in the place where he kept him
confined, and that the captive prince had repre-
sented to them the justice of his own cause, and
,s an inducement to espouse it, had promised
them a quantity of treasure greatly beyond that
which Atahualpa had engaged to pay for his
rnfom. If the Spaniards ihould liften to this
proposal, Atahualpa perceived his own deftruc-
tion to be inevitable; and fufpe&ing that their in-
satiable thirst for gold would tempt them to lend a
avourable ear to it, he determined to sacrifice his
brother's life, that he might save his own; and
his orders for this purpose were executed, like
all his other commands, with scrupulous punc-
tuality g.

Meanwhile, Indians daily arrived at Caxamalca
from different parts of the kingdom, loaded

f X'ez, 204. Hererra, dec. 5. 1ib. iii. c. 1, 2.
'Zrate, lib. ii.-c. 6. Gomara, Hist. c. i5. Herrera,

l.i. lib. iii. c. z.

with

with treasure. A great part of the ftipulaid
quantity was now amafled, and Atahualpa a
fared the Spaniards, that the only thing which
prevented the whole from being brought in, wa
the remoteness of the provinces where it wa,
deposited. But such vast piles of gold presenttd
continually to the view of needy soldiers, had so
inflamed their avarice, that it was impoffblk
any longer to refirain their impatience to obtain
pofletfion of this rich booty. Orders wen
given for melting down the whole, except fomr
pieces of curious fabric, reserved as a present fio
the emperor. After setting apart the fifth
due to the crown, and a hundred thousand
pesos as a donative to the soldiers which arrivec
with Almagro, their remained one million site
hundred and twenty-eight thousand five hun
dred pesos to Pizarro and his followers. The
festival of St. James [July 25], the patron fain
of Spain, was the day chosen for the partition o
this enormous fum, and the manner of conducf
ing it strongly marks the strange alliance o
fanaticism with avarice, which I have more tha:
once had occasion to point out as a ftrikin;
feature in the charaEter of the conquerors of ti
New World. Though assembled to divide th
spoil; of an innocent people, procured by deceit
extortion, and cruelty, the tranfation bega'
with a solemn invocation of the name of Gods
as if they could have expected the guidance o
Heaven in difiributing those wages of iniquity
In this division above eight thousand pesos, a
that time not inferior in effective value to
many pounds tlerling in the present century, fc

Herrcra, dec. 5. lib. iii. c. 3.

the (hare of each horseman, and half that fum
each foot soldier. Pizarro himself, and his
itcrs, received dividends in proportion to
· e dignity of their rank.

There is no example in hiitory of such a
aden acquisition of wealth by military service,
;or was ever a fumn so great divided among so
aa1 a number of soldiers. Many of them
aring received a recompence for their services
;bbeyond their most sanguine hopes, were so
,,aticnt to retire from fatigue and danger, in
cr to spend the remainder of their days in
a:r native country, in ease and opulence, that
:e demanded their discharge with clamorous
:-;rttmity . Pizarro, sensible that from such
;n he could expet neither enterprise in ac-
;. nor fortitude in filffering, and persuaded
at wherever they went, the display of their
.ces would allure adventurers, less opulent but

.e hardv, to his standard, granted their suit

thout rcluctance, and permitted above sixty
; them to accompany his brother Ferdinand,

eorom e feut to Spain with an account of
a fuccfs, and the present destined for the

pnTor i.
The Spaniards, having divided among them
, trtaflre amafled for the Inca's ransom, he
:ited witll them to fulfil their promise of set-
g him at liberty. But nothing was farther
orn Piiarro's thoughts. Dunng his long
rice in the New World, he had imbibed those
:as and maxims of his fellow-foldiers, which

them to confider its inhabitants as an inferior
ze, neither worthy of the name, nor entitled to
' nrreta, dec. 5. lib. iii. c. 4. V'ca, p. 2. lib. i. c. : .

the

the rights of men. In his compact with Aa
hualpa, he had no other obje& than to ari
his captive with such a profpe& of recovernS
his liberty, as might induce him to lend all the
aid of his authority towards collecting the weal:h
of his kingdom. Having now accomplished this
he no longer regarded his plighted faith; and
at the very time when the credulous prince
hoped to be replaced on his throne, he hai
secretly resolved to bereave him of life. Ma2n
circumstances seem to have concurred in prompt.
ing him to this action, the most criminal aci
atrocious that itains the Spanish name, amrid
all the deeds of violence committed in camrrin
on the conquest of the New World.

Though Pizarro had seized the Inca, in im;

tation or Cortes's conduct towards the Mexica
monarch, he did not possess talents for carrin;
on the fame artful plan of policy. Deltitute o
the temper and address requisite for gaining th,
confidence of his prisoner, he never reaped all th
advantages which might have been derived fron
being matier of his person and authority. At2
hualpa was, indeed, a prince of greater abilitit
and discernment than Montezuma, and seems t
have penetrated more thoroughly into the ch2
rader and intentions of the Spaniards. Mutua
suspicion and diflruft accordingly took place be
tween them. The firit attention with whci
it was necessary to guard a captive of fuel
importance, greatly increased the fatigue o
military duty. The utility of keeping him ap
peared inconsiderable; and Pizarro felt him a
an incumbrance, from which he wished to i
delivered k.

k Hcera, dec. 5. lib. iii. c. 4.

Al!;'

Almagro and his followers had made a demand
if an equal Share in the Inca's ransom; and
lough Pizarro had bestowed upon the private
,n the large gratuity which I have mentioned,
ad endeavoured to soothe their leader by pre-
ients of great value, they still continued diffatif-
Etd. They were apprehensive, that as long as
Atahualpa remained a prisoner, Pizarro's soldiers
rould apply whatever treasure {hould be acquired,
o make up what was wanting of the quantity
hpulated for his ransom, and under that pretext
dclude them from any part of it. They insisted
,gerly on putting the Inca to death, that all
ae adventurers in Peru might thereafter be on
n equal footing'.

Pi/arro himself began to be alarmed with ac-
cournt of forces affenibling in the remote pro-
r.ces of the empire, and fufpeced Atahualpa
of having issued orders for that purpose. These
fars and suspicions were artfully increased by
Phlippillo, one of the Indians whom Pizarro
bad carried off from Tumbez in the year one
tioufand five hundred and twenty-feven, and
whom heemployed as an interpreter. Thefunfion
hiich he performed admitting this man to fa-
r.iliar intercourse with the captive monarch, he
prfumed, notwithstanding the meanness of his
.iTth, to raise his affe&ions to a Coya, or de-
icedant of the Sun, one of Atahualpa's wires;
ad feeing no profpecd of gratifying that passion
iiirng the life of the monarch, he endeavoured
t* till the cars of the Spaniards with such accounts
c :he Inca's secret designs and preparations, as

ZAnte, lib. ii. r. 7. Vega, p. z. lib. i. . 7 Hencra,
: . lib. iii. c. 4.

'! I. 1. EE r might

might awaken their jealousy, and incite them to
cut him off.

While Almagro and his followers openly i

manded the life of the Inca, and Philippillo .
boured to ruin him by private machinatios,
that unhappy prince inadvertently contriuted
to haten his own fate. During his confinement
be had attached himself with peculiar affeaion
to Ferdinand Pizarro and Hernando Soto; who,
as they were persons of birth and education
superior to the rough adventurers with whom
they served, were accustomed to behave with
more decency and attention to the captive mo.
narch. Soothed with this refpet from perifo
of such high rank, he delighted in their focietv.
But in the presence of the governor he was al
ways uneasy and overawed. This dread soon
came to be mingled with contempt. Among al
the European arts, what he admired most was
that of reading and writing; and he long deli.
berated with himself, whether he should regard
it as a natural or acquired talent. In order to
determine this, he desired one of the soldien,
who guarded him, to write the name of God on
the nail of his thumb. This he shewed fuccef.
fively to fevcral Spaniards, asking its meaning;
and to his amazement, they all, without hesitation,
rcturned the fame answer. At length Pizarro
entered; and on prtfenting it to him, he
blilhcd, and with some confusion was obliged
to acknowledge his ignorance. From that mo.
ment, Atahualpa confidered him as a mean per.
son, left inltruaed than his own soldiers; and
he had not address enough to conceal the senti-
rre;;:, v.-th which t!is dif2uvrry inspired him.

To be the pbjea of a barbarian's scorn, not
only mortified the pride of Pizarro, but excited
(ach resentment in his brea(f, as added force to
-R the other considerations which prompted him
to put the Inca to death m.

But in order to give some colour of justice to
this violent ation, and that he hinfelf might
k exempted from ifanding singly responsible for
the commiflion of it, Pizarro resolved to try the
hca with all the formalities observed in the
criminal courts of Spain. Pi.arro himself, and
Almagro, with two afiftants, were appointed
judges, with full power to acquit or to con-
main; an attorney-general was named to carry
on the prosecution in the king's name; coun-
IUors were chosen to assist the prisoner in his
&fence; and clerks were ordained to record the
proceedings of court. Before this strange tri-
kbnal, a charge was exhibited fill more ama7ing.
It cnnfifted of various articles; that Atahualpa,
though a bastard, had difpoffefTed the rightful
owner of the throne, and usurped the regal
power; that he had put his brother and lawful
sovereign to death; that he was an idolater, and
had not only permitted, but commanded the of-
faing of human sacrifices; that he had a great
number of concubines; that since his imprison-
Ment he had wafted and embezzled the loval
treasures which now belonged of right to the
conquerors; that he had incited his fubjecds to
take arms against the S:)aniards. On these heads
of accusation, some of which are so ludicrous,
others so absurd, that the effrontery of Pizarro,

Heirera, dec. 5. lib. iii. . 4. Vc.1,a p. 11. lib i.
t 8.

E E 2 in

in making them the foundation of a feriotis po.
edure, is not less surprising than his injuffice,
did this strange court go on to try the fovereia
of a great empire, over whom it had no 'ufdlc.
tion. With refpec to each of the articles, wit.
neffes were examined; but as they delivered thir
evidence in their native tongue, Philippillo had i
in his power to give their words whatever tur
best suited his malevolent intentions. Tojudgts
predetermined in their opinion, this evidence ap
peared sufficient. They pronounced Atahualpi
guilty, and condemned him to be burnt alive.
Friar Valverde proftituted the authority of hi!
sacred fuucqion to confirm this sentence, and by
his signature warranted it to be just. Aftonimfni
at his fate, Atahualpa endeavoured to avert it
by tears, by promises, and by entreaties, that he
might be sent to Spain, where a monarch would
be the arbiter of his lot. But pity never
touched the unfeeling heart o£ Pizarro. He
ordered him to be led instantly to execution;
and, what added to the bitterness of his last mo-
ments, the fame monk who had jult ratified hi;
doom, offered to console, and attempted to con-
vert him. The most powerful argument Valverde
employed to prevail with him to embrace the
Chritlian faith, was a promise of mitigation in
his punishment. The dread of a cruel death
extorted from the trembling victim a desire of
receiving baptism. The ceremony was perform.
ed; and Atahbalpa, instead of being burnt, wa
Itrangled at the flake =.

° Zaratc, lib. i;. c 7. Xerez, a. 33. Vez3, . tII

lib. i. c. 36, 37. Gom3raHit. c 1x7. H racnc .:.
l.b. ii. c. .

H-LPP

Happily for the credit of the Spauifh nation.
men among the profligate adventurers which it
ent forth to conquer and desolate the New
World, there were persons who retained some
tianure of the Castilian generosity and honour.
Though, before the trial of Atahualpa. Ferdi-
nand Pizarro had set out for Spain, and Soto
was sent on a separate command at a diltance
from Caxamalca, this odious transaction was not
arricd on without censure and opposition.
Sveral officers, and among those some of the
greatest reputation and moil refpeAaoDle families
in the service, not only remonstrated,. but pro-
tedsed against this measure of their general, as
disgraceful to their country, as repugnant to
very maxim of equity, as a violation of public
faith, and an usurpation of jurifdifion over an
independent monarch, to which they had no
title. But their laudable endeavours were vain.
Sumbers, and the opinion of such as held every
thing to be lawful which they deemed advanta-
geous, prevailed. Hiftorv, however, records
ten the unfuccefshil exertions of virtue with
applause; and the Spaniih writers, in relating
eents where the valour of their nation is more
conspicuous than its humanity, have not failed
to preserve the names of those who made this
laudable effo't to save their country from the
infamy of having perpetrated fueh a crime °.

On the death of Atahualpa, Pizarro invested
one of his sons with the ensigns of royalty,
hoping that a young man without experience

Vega, p. ilib. ib. c. 37. Xcrez, i. 235. Hercrra,
t 5 ib. b. ii. c. ig t

might prove a more passive instrument in hi
hands, than an ambitious monarch, who had
been accustomed to independent command. Tht
people of Cuzco, and the adjacent country, ac-
knowledged Manco Capac, a brother of Hu3afar,
as Inca P. But neither possessed the authori:v
which belonged to a sovereign of Peru. Th,
violcnt convulsions into which the empire had
been thrown, first by the civil war between the
two brothers, and then by the invasion of the
Spaniards, had not only deranged the order oi
the Peruvian government, but almost diffolv.1
its frame. When they beheld their monarch a
captive in the power of tlrangers, and at lait fu-
fering an ignominious death, the people in fe-
veral provinces, as if they had been set free fro-i
every reitraint of law and decency, broke o::
into the most licentious excesses q. So many de-
fcendants of the Sun, after being treated wi-l
the utmost indignity, had been cut off by A;a-
hualpa, that not only their influence in the state
diminished with their number, but the accuaomrd
reverence for that sacred race sensibly decrcaced.
In consequence of this slate of things, am-
bitious men in different parts of the empire as-
pired to independent authority, and usurped
jurifdition to which they had no title. The
general who commanded for Atahualpa in Quito
seized the brother and children of his ma-:kr
put them to a cruel death, and disclaiming a-.-
conne&ion with either Inca, endeavoured to e;
tablifh a separate kingdom for himfelfr.

P Vega, p . lrb. ii . c. 7. Herrera, - :

lib. ii. c. Iz. lib. iii. c . 5 r Zarate, lib. ii. c. S
Vega, p. i. lib. ii. c. 3, 4.

o IT..

The Spaniards, with pleasure, beheld the
;.irt of discord diffusing itself, and the vigour
f government relaxing among the Peruvians.
They confidered those disorders as symptoms of
2 fate hastening towards its dissolution. Pizarro
aI longer hcfitated to advance towards Cuzco,
iad he had received such considerable reinforce-

tents, that he could venture, with little danger,

to penetrate so far into the interior part of the
cr.,ntrv. The account of the wealth acquired
at Caxamalca operated as he had foreseen. No
foor.r did his brother Ferdinand, with the of-
3'ers and soldiers to xwhom he had given their
discharge after the partition of the Inca's ransom,
r-rile at Panama, and display their riches in the
:svw of their aotonifhed countrymen, than fame
tread the account with such exaggeration
through all the Spanish settlements on the South
ma, that the governors of Guatimala, Panama,
*-.d Nicaragua, could hardly restrain the people
under their jnrifdidion, from abandoning their
-ff'eflions, and crowding to that inexhaustible
'avrce of wealth which fcemed to be opened
3 Peru'. In spite of every check and regula-
:ion, such numbers resorted thither, that Pi-
7arro began his march at the head of five hun-
dred men, after leaving a considerable garrison
in St. Michael, under the command of Benal-
cazar. The Peruvians had assembled some large
:Adies of troops to oppose his progress; Several
fierce encounters happened. But they termi-
aeted IEke all the ations in America; a few
ianiards were killed or wounded; the natives

Gorara, Hist c. 2c5. Vega, p. Ii. lib. ii. c. i.
Ht-rt:a, dec. 5. lib. iii. c. 5.

were

were put to flight with incredible laughter.
At length Pizarro forced his way to zco,
and took quiet pofeffion of that capital. The
riches found there, even after all that the native
had carried off and concealed, either from a fu.
perflitious veneration for the ornaments of their
temples, or out of hatred to their rapacious con.
querors, exceeded in value what had been re.
ceived as Atahualpa's ransom. But as the
Spaniards were now accustomed to the wealth
of the country, and it came to be parcelled out
among a greater number of adventurers, this
dividend did not excite the fame surprise, either
from novelty, or the largeness of the fum that
fell to the share of each individual'.

During the march to Cuzco, that son of

Atahualpa whom Pizarro treated as Inca, died;
and as the Spaniards substituted no person in
his place, the title of Manco Capac seems to
have been universally recognizedu.

While his fcllow-foldiers were thus employed,

Benalcazar, governor of St. Michael, an able
arid enterprising officer, was aShamed of remain-
ing inative, and impatient to have his name
dittinguified among the discoverers and con-
querors of the New World. The seasonable
arrival of a frelh body of recruits from Panama
and Nicaragua, put it n his power to gratify
this passion. Leaving a fuffcient force to pro-
tect the infant settlement entrusted to. his care,
he placed hirmelf at the head of the ref, and
set out to attempt the reducion of Quito, where,
according to the report of the natives, Ata.
hualpa had left the greatest part of his treasure.
Se NOTZ CXXXIL. 9 Hcrrera, dec. 5. lib. v. c. -.

Notwith-

Notwivthftanding the distance of that city from
St. Michael, the difficulty of marching through
a mountainous country covered with woods, and
the frequent and fierce attacks of the best troops
i Peru, commanded by a flulful leader, the
ralour, good conduct, and perseverance of Benal-
cazar surmounted every obstacle, and he entered
Quito with his vicorious troops. But they met
with a cruel mortification there. The natives,
omw acquainted, to their sorrow, with the predo-
sinant passion of their invaders, and knowing
how to disappoint it, had carried off all those
treasures, the profpe& of which had prompted
them to undertake this arduous expedition, and
had supported them under all the dangers and
hardships wherewith they had to struggle in car-
ring it on x.

Benalcazar was not the only Spaniih leader
who attacked the kingdom of Quito. -The
fame of its riches attracted a more powerful ene-
my. Pedro de Alvarado, who had diftinguifled
h;mfelf so eminently in the conquest of Mexico,
having obtained the government of Guatimala as
a recompence for his valour, soon became dif-
gusted with a life of uniform tranquillity, and
longed to be again engaged in the buffleof military
.n-vice. The glory and wealth acquired by the
conquerors of Peru heightened this passion, and
gave it a determined direcion. Believing, or
pretending to believe, that the kingdom of
Quito did not lie within the lim;it of the pro-
vince allotted to Pizarro, he resolved to invade
it. The high reputation of the commander al-

Zrate, lib. ii. c. 9. Vega, p. s. lib. ii.c. ;. Herrera,
wc. 5. lib. iv. c. 1x, tz. lib. v. c. 2, 3. lib. i.. C. 3.

lur.d

lured volunteers from every quarter. He em,
barked with five hundred men, of whom above
two hundred were of such diftincion as to eit
on horseback. He landed at Puerto Viejo, an
without sufficient knowledge of the country,
or proper guides to conducA him, attempted to
march direcly to Quito, by following the courf
of the river Guayquil, and crossing the ridge
of the Andes towards its head. But in thi
route, one of the most impracticable in all Ame.
rica, his troops endured such fatigue in forcing
their way through forests and marshes on the low
grounds, and suffered so much from excessive
cold when they began to ascend the mountains
that before they reached the plain of Quito, a
fifth part of the men and half of their hordei
died, and the ret were so much dispirited and
worn out, as to be almofl uifit for fervicel.
There they met with a body, not of Indians bui
of Spaniards, drawn up in holtile array againfl
them. Pizarro having received an account ol
Alvarado's armament, had detached Almagrc
with some troops to oppose this formidable in.
vader of his jurifdic-ion; and these were joined
by Benalcazar and his victorious party. Alva.
rado, though surprised at the fight of enemie
whom he did not expet, advanced boldly to the
charge. But by the interposition of some mon
derate men in each party, an amicable accomr
modation took place; and the fatal period,
when Spaniards suspended their conquests to enm
brue their hands in the blood of their countrymen,
was postponed a few years. Alvarado engaged
to rtturn to his government, upon Almagro'i

I Sec NOTL CXXXIV.

paying

paying him a hundred thousand pesos to defray
the expence of his armament. Most of his
followers remained in the country; and an
expedition, which threatened Pizarro and his
colony with ruin, contributed to augment its
irength .

[1534.] By this time Ferdinand Pizarro had
landed in Spain. The immense quantities of gold
and filer which he importeda, filled the kingdom
With no less astonishment than they had excited in
Panama and the adjacent provinces. Pizarro
was received by the emperor with the attention
due to the bearer of a present so rich, as to ex-
ceed any idea which the Spaniards had formed
concerning the value of their acquisitions in
America, even after they had been ten years
maifers of Mexico. In recompence of his
brother's fen-ices, his authority was confirmed
with new powers and privileges, and the ad-
ti;on of seventy leagues, extending along the
coa, to the southward of the territory granted
im his former patent. Almagrb received the
honours which he had so longdefired. The title
c Adelantado, or governor, was conferred upon
aim, with jurifdi&con over two hundred leagues
cicountry, firetching beyond the southern limits
d the province allotted to Pizarro. Ferdinand
mfelf did not go unrewarded. He was ad.
ritted into the military order of St. Jago, a dif-
nction always acceptable to a Spaniih gentle-
i2n, and soon set out on his return to Peru,

Zrate, lib. ii. . o-1 3. Vega, p. 1I. 1;b ii. c. r,
:. &c. Gomara, Hist. c. I26, &c. Remefal, Hilt. Gu.
;.-i, .b. iii. c 6. Herrera, det. 5. lib. %L c. 1, 2. 7, S.

S e' No- z CXXXV.

accom-

accompanied by many persons of higher rank
than had yet served in that country b.

Some account of his negotiations reached

Peru before he arrived there himself. Almagr
no sooner learned that he had obtained the
royal grant of an independent government, than,
pretending that Cuzco, the imperial residence
of the Incas, lay within its boundaries, he at.
tempted to render himself matter of that im.
portant fiation. Juan and Gonzalez Pizarro
prepared to oppose him. Each of the contend;ng
parties was supported by powerful adherents, and
the dispute was on the point of being terminated
by the sword, when Francis Pizarro arrived in tie
capital. The reconciliation between him andAl.
magro had never been curdial. The treacheryof
Pizarro in engroluing to himself all the honours and
emoluments which ought to have been divided
with his affuciate, was always present in both
their thoughts. The former, conscious of his
own perfidy, did not expect forgiveness; the
latter, feeling that he had been deceived, wa3
impatient to be avenged; and though avarice
and ambition had induced them not only to dif-
fcmble their sentiments, but even to aft in con.
cert while in pursuit of wealth and power, no
sooner did they obtain poffcfion of these, than
the fame paflions which had formed this tempo-
rary union, gave rife to jealousy and discord.
To each of them was attached a small band of
interefled dependents, who, with the malicious
art peculiar to such men, heightened their sus-
picions, and magnified every appearance of f-

b Zarate, lib. iii. c. 3. Vega, p. 1x. lib. ii. c. 1i
IHnera, dec. 5. lib. vi. c. x3.

fenc'

occ. But with all those feeds of enmity in
Jar minds, and thus assiduously cherished,
2;h was so thoroughly acquainted with the
/ilities and courage of his rival, that they
fisally dreaded the consequences of an open
-.pture. The fortunate arrival of Pizarro at
CLco, and the address mingled with firmness
iich he manifested in his expostulations with
.imagro and his partisans, averted that evil for
ic prcfent. A new reconciliation took place;
se chief article of which was, that Almagro
-u)ld attempt the conquest of Chili ; and if he
£d not find in that province an eft-blifhment
i:quate to his merit and expectations, Pizarro,
:T way of indemnification, ihould yield up to
ha a part of Peru. This new agreement,
sough confirmed [June 12] with the fame
: rcd solemnitics as their fitft contract, was ob.
;-..d with as little fidelity .

Soon after lie concluded this important tranf-
i-irn, Pizarro marched back to the countries
: tihe fea-coaPt, and as he now enjoyed an inter-
n; of tranlquillityi undisturbed by any enemy,
-:er Spanilh or Indian, he applied himfelfwith
^
a perfeverinig ardour, which diftinguifhies his
claCctcr, to introduce a form of regular govern-
.::lt into the extensive provinces subject to his
i;:;rit). Though ill qualified by his education
'. enter into any disquisition concerning the
-::ciplcs of civil policy, and little accustomed
:? his former habits of life to attend to its ar-
.-.gemcnts, his natural sagacity supplied the
e:it both of fcicnce and experience. He dif-
-.juted the country into various diilricts; he

Zarate, iib. ii. c. 13. Vega, p. it. lib. ii. . 19.

i-.z, lia. iii. c. 6. Heirera, dec. 5. lib. vii. c. A.
"OL. ii. F F appointed

appointed proper magiffrates to preside in each
and cftablifhed regulations concerning the ai
niitration of justice, the collection of the ro
revenue, the working of the mines, and
treatment of the Indians, extremely simple,
well calculated to promote the public profperit
But though, for the present, he adapted l
plan to the infant state of his colony, his afpir
ing mind looked forward to its future grander
He confidered himself as laying the foundati
of a great empire, and deliberated long, an
with much solicitude, in what place he
should fix the feat of government. Cuzco,
the Imperial city of the Incas, was situated in
corner of the empire, above four hundred mils.
from the sea, and much farther from Quito,
a province of whose value he had formed an
high idea. No other settlement of the PeruTians
was so considerable as to merit the name of a
town, or to allure the Spaniards to fix thei
residence in it. But, in marching through the
country, Pizarro had been firuck with the
beauty and fertility of the value of Rimac, c~e
of the most extensive and best cultivated in Pern
There, on the banks of a small river, of the
fame name with the vale which it waters and
enriches, at the distance of fix miles from Callao,
the most commodious harbour in the Pacific
Ocean, he founded a city which he destined to
be the capital of his government. He gave i:
the name of Cindad de los Reyes, either from
the circumstance of having laid the firti flone
[Jan. I8, 1535], at that season when the
church celebrates the festival of the Three
Kings, or, as is more probable, in honour c:
Juana and Charles, the joint fovcreign: cf

3

iCiile. This name it still retains among the
Spaniards, in all legal and formal deeds; but
is better known to foreigners by that of Lima,
; corruption of the ancient appellation of the
iley in which it is situated. Under his i.-
irtion, the buildings advanced with such rapi-
iy, that it soon assumed the form of a city,
mich, by a magnificent palace that he ereeed
·ir himself, and by the flately houles built by
beral of his officers, gave, even in its infancy,
;sre indication of its subsequent grandeur d.
In consequence of what had been agreed with
Pizarro, Almagro began his march towards
Cili; and as he piofeffed in an eminent degree
ie virtues most admired by soldiers, boundlefi
Eerality and fearless courage, his itandard was
iolowed by five hundred and seventy men, the
geteil body of Europeans that had hitherto
xen assembled in Peru. From impatience to
Sillh the expedition, or from that contempt of
hrdfhip and danger acquired by all the Spaniards
rho had served long in America, Almagro, in-
icad of advancing along the level country on the
saft, chore to march across the mountains by
a route that was (horter indeed, but almost im-
praaicable. In this attempt his troops were
cipofed to every calamity which men can ftffer,
ifom fatigue, from famine, and from the rigour
if the climate in those elevated regions of the
nrrid zone, where the degree of cold is hardly
aferior to what is felt within the polar circle.
Mlany of them perished ; and the furviyor§, wher
'iy descended into the fertile plains of Chili,

nad new difficulties to encounter. They found

' Herrera, dec. 5. lib. vi. c i. 1b. vii. c. I3. Calancho
C..nica, iib. i. c. 37. BaneJvo, Lima fundata, ii. z94.

F F 2 there

there a race of men' very different from the
people of Peru, intrepid, hardy, independent
and in their bodily constitution, as well as vigo0r
of fpilit, nearly resembling the warlike tib
in North America. Though filed with wondt
at the first appearance of the Spaniards, and fil
more astonished at the operations of their cavalry
and the effeCs of their fire-arms, the Chileft
soon recovered so far from their surprise, as
not only to defend themselves with obstinacy, but
to attack their new enemies with more deter.
mined fierceness than any American nation had
hitherto discovered. The Spaniards, however,
continued to penetrate into the country, and
collected some considerable quantities of gold;
but were so far from thinking of making any set.
tlement amidst such formidable neighbours, that,
in spite of all the experience and valour of their
leader, the final issue of the expedition tlill re.
mained extremely dubious, when they were re.
called from it by an unexpe&ed revolution in
Peruc. The causes of this important event I
shall endeavour to trace to their source.

So many adventurers had flocked to Per

from every Spanish colony in America, and ai
with such high expectations of accumulating ir.
dependent fortunes at once, that, to men pot
sessed with notions so extravagant, any mentior
of acquiring wealth gradually, and by fchenrr
of patient industry, would have been not only )
disappointment,- tut an insult. In order to tire
occupation for men who could not with fafets
be allowed to renain inactive, Pizarro encon.

' Zart-, lib. iii. c. I. Gomara, Hidf. c- 13 . Vega, ,.

lib. ii. c. 2z. Ovalie, Hid. de Chile, lib. iv. c. 15, &t
He~rra, dec. 5. lib. vi. c. 9. lib. x. c. I, &c.

rars

aied some of the mos distinguished officers
,ho bad lately joined him, to invade different
poinces of the empire, which the Spaniards
id not hitherto visited. Several large bodies
iae formed for this purpose; and about the
hue that Almagro set out for Chili, they
,arched into remote diRriAs of the country.
!o sooner did Manco Capac, the Inca, observe
ie inconsiderate security of the Spaniards in
Bus dispersing their troops, and that only a
hndful of soldiers remained in Cuzco, under
Juan and Gonzalez Pizarro, than he thought
tiat the happy period was at length come for
adicating his own rights, for avenging the
Trongs of his country, and extirpating its op-
je.Tors. Though ftritly watched by the
Spaniards, who allowed him to reside in the
lace of his ancestors at Cuzco, he found means
do communicating his scheme to the persons who
were to be entruited with the execution of it.
.mong people accustomed to revere their fove-
rrign as a divinity, every hint of his will carries
h:e authority of a command; and they them-
clves were now convinced, by the daily increase
i the number of their invaders, that the fond
hopes which they had long entertained of their
Toluntary departure were altogether vain. All
perceived that a vigorous effort of the whole
nation was requisite to expel them, and the pre..
prations for it were carried on with the secrecy
and silence peculiar to Americans.

After some unsuccessful attemps of the Inca
to make his escape, Ferdinand Pizarro happen-
ig to arrive at that time in Cuzco [1536], he
obaintd permission from him to attend a great

r F 3 festival

festival which was.to be celebrated a few league,
from the capital. Under pretext of that fcr
lemnitv, the great men of the empire were f.
fembled. As soon as the Inca joined then,
the standard of war was ere&ed ; and in a fho0r
time all the fighting men, from the confines of
Qj;to to the frontier of Chili, were in arm.
Many Spaniards, living securely on the fettle.
mrnts allotted them, were maflacred. Several
detachment;, a; they marched carelessly through
a country which seemed to be tamely fubrri:.
five to their dolr.nion, were cut off to a ma-..
An arr-,.- amotuntli:g (if we may believe the
Spanish writers) to two hundred thousand mer,
attacked Cuzco, which the three brothers r.
deavoured to defend with only one hu:ndred a:.d
seventy Spaniards. Another formidable hod.
invefled Lima, and kept the governor close;
shut up. There was no longer an.' commu:.
cation between the two cities; thc numlneri;
forces of the Peruvians fpreadingr over the cou:-
try, intercepted every messenger; and a' tc
partie-, in Cuzco and Lima were equally un:a
quainted with the fate of their countr.-rren, ed 'i
boded the worst concerning the other, a'r
imagined that they themselves were the ,';:
pcrfons who had survived the general extincuto
of the Spanish name in Peru d.

It was at Cuzco, where the Inca commanded

in person, that the Peruvians made their chi-
effort. During nine months they carried on the

d Vega, p. Il. lib. i. c. 2S. Zarate, lib. iii. (. '

Cieca de Leon, c. z8. Gomara, Hifi, c, x35. HeC,
dec. 5. i.b. vi. c. 5.

i,¢e with incessant ardour, and in various forms
!nd though the) displayed not the fame un-
óajnted ferocity as the Mexican warriors, they
cnduiced some of their operations in a manner
:iiich discovered greater sagacity, and a genius
co.re susceptible of improvement in the military
r:t. They not only observed the advantages
rvhich the Spaniards derived from their difci-
-:'he and their weapons, but they endeavoured

ih'tate the former, and turn the latter againat

H-;.. They armed a considerable body of their
;-.vcfl warriors with the swords, the spears,
a-d bucklers, which thev had taken from the
.':anifh soldiers whom they had cut off in dif-
s-rei: parts of the country. These they endea-
rejrcd to marshal in that regular compat order,
:X which experience had taught them that the

,a:iards were indebted for their irrefiaible
:-'.e in action. Some appeared in the field

'pidl Spanish muskets, and had acquired skill

ir. rcfolution enough to use them. A few of
:ht boldett, among whom was the Inca himself,
.ere mounted on the horses which they had
:aken, and advanced briskly to the charge like
5.anilh cavaliers, with their lances in the reft.
1: was more by their numbers, however, than
'- those imperfet eflays to imitate European
I.zs and to employ European arms, that the
Prilvians annoyed the Spaniardse. In spite of
tbe valour, heightened by despair, with which
the three brothers defended Cuzco, Manco
Capac recovered pofleflion of one half of his
:zpital; and in their various efforts to drive him.
',.t of it, the Spaniards loft Juan Pizarro, the

'c e No'- E CXXXVI.

teang

bes bdoved of all the brothers, together wit
some other persons of note. Worn out with th
fatigue of incessant duty, distressed with want o
provisions, and defpailing of bei;:g ale a,-
longer to reGft an enemy whose numbers da2il
increased, the soldiers became impatient to abLa
don Cuzco, in hopes either of jciiiing thdi
countrymen, if any of them yet furvised, or ci
forcing their way to the sea, and finding soir
means of escaping from a country which had bet
Lo fatal to the Spaniflh name f. While they wen
brooding over those defpouding thoughts, whli
thcir officers laboured in vain to difpcl, Almagrc
appeared fuddenlyin the neighbourhood of Cuzc.

The accounts traifmitted to Almnagro CGr,.

cerning the general infurreEtion of the Peruviai,,
were such as would have induced him, withcu:
hesitation, to relinqulilh the conqueRt of Chili, aLd
haflen to the aid of iis countrymen. But in
this resolution he was confirmed by a motive lcfs
generous, but more intereiting. By the famr.
messenger who brought him intelligence of the
Inca's revolt, he received the royal patent creat.
ing him governor of Chili, and defining t;e
limits of his jurisdiction. Upon confidering the
tenor of it, he deemed it manifett beyond con-
tradiction, that Cuzco lay within the Found-
aries of his government, and he was equally
Solicitous to prevent the Peruvians from recover.
mg poffefion of their capital, and to wrest it
out of the hands of the Pizarros. From im-
patience to accomplilh both, he ventured to
return by a new route; and in marching through
the sandy plains on the coalt, he fufftred, from

t Hcrrea, dec. J. Iib. vi;i. c. 4

hebt

and drought, calamities of a new species,
dlv inferior to those in which he had been
0olved by cold and famine on the summits of
&le Andes.

His arrival at Cuzco [1537] was in a critical
:oment. The Spaniards and Peruvians fixed
aeir eyes upon him with equal solicitude. The
srner, as he did not study to conceal his pre-
enfions, were at a loss whether to welcome him
: a deliverer, or to take precautions against him
, an enemy. The latter, knowing the points
in contest between him and his countrymen,
.attered themselves that they had more to hope
than to dread from his operations. Almagro
-imfelf, unacquainted with the detail of the
cients which had happened in his absence, and
iolicitous to learn the precise posture of affairs,
a::ar.ccd towards the capital slowly, and with'
neat circumfpetion. Various negotiations with
:xth parties were set on foot. The Inca con-
ducted them on his part with much address.
At first he endeavoured to gain the friendship
c; Almagro ; and after many fruitlkfs overtures,
dripairing of any cordial union with a Spaniard,
We attacked him by surprise with a numerous
advy of chosen troops. But the Spanish difci-
>linc and valour maintained their wonted fupe-
-oritv. The Peruvians were repulsed with such
:Iauiter, that a great part of their army dif-
ecftd, and Almagro proceeded to the gates of
Cuyco without interruption.

The Pizarros, as they had no longer to make'
i.tad against the Peruvians, directed all their

:::::i;: towards their new enemy, and took
caf'ia-s to uobiruct his eutry into the capital.

Prudence

Prudence, however, refrained both partiens i
some time from turning their arms against W
another, while surrounded by common enemie,
who would rejoice in the mutual flaughtn.
Different schemes of accommodation were pro.
posed. Each endeavoured to deceive the other,
or to corrupt his followers. The generous, opc,
affable tenr.per of Almagro gained many adherenu
of the Pizarros, who were difgufled with thtir
harih domineering manners. Encouraged by this
dcfeudion, he advanced towards the city by night,
surprised the centinels, or was admitted by them,
and investing the house where the two brothem
resided, compelled them, after an obstinate de
fence, to surrender at discretion. Almagro'3
caim of jurifdi&ion over Cuzco was universally
acknowledged, and a form of adminiftratio0
dcfablified in his name g.

Two or three persons only were killed in this

sirs act of civil hostility; but it was soon followed
by scenes more bloody. Francis Pizarro having
dispersed the Peruvians who had invested Lima,
and received some considerable reinforcements
from Hispaniola and Nicaragua, ordered five
hurdred men, under the command of Alonfode
Alvarado, to march to Cuzco, in hopes of re-
lieving his brothers, if they and their garrison
were not already cut off by the Peruvians.
This body, which, at that period of the Spa-
nifl power in America, mufl be deemed a cr,-
fiderable force, advanced near to the capita
bcfore they knew that they had any enemy.
more formidable than Indians to encounter.

c Zaratr, lib. i;i. c 4. Vega, p. 1 li b ii c. 29 31
Gomuwa, Hid. c. x34. Herrera,dec. 6. lib. ii. c. i-5

1:

It was with astonishment that they beheld their
countrymen posted on the banks of the river
Abancay to oppose their progress. Almagro,
however, wished rather to gain than to conquer
tem, and by bribes andpromifes endeavoured to
fduce their leader. The fidelity of Alvarado
remained unlhaken; but his talents for war
rere not equal to his virtue. Almagro amused
him with various movements, of which he did
not comprehend the meaning, while a large de-
achment of chosen soldiers passed the river
bv night [July 12], fell upon his camp by fdir-
prifc, broke his troops before they had time to
irnn, and took him prisoner, together with his
principal officers f.

By the sudden rout of this body, the conte£
.etiveen the two rivals must have been decided,
i Almagro had known as well how to improve
au how to gair. a vicory. Rodrigo Orgognez,
zn officer of great abilities, who having served
under the constable Bourbon, when he led the
Imperial army to Rome, had been accu2foii.e
to bold and decisive measures, advised him in.
ftntlr to ilTue orders for putting to death Ser-
iranl and Gonzalo Pizarros, Alvarado, and a
fe' other persons whom he could not hope to
gin, and to march direcly with his victoriols
::oops to Lima, before the governor had time
:3 prepare fbt his derence. But Almagro,
:hough he discerned at once the utility of the
c?'nfel, and though he had courage to have
cmrred it into execution, fuffcrcd himfelr to bl
i-.9uenced by sentiments unlike those of a soldier

' Zrare li. iii. c. 6. Gom tli.1. c 138. Vega, p. t1.
:i. c 3. 34.
3 icrrtra dec. 6. lib. ii. c 9.

of

of fortune grown old in service, and by fcrupes
which suited not the chief of a party who hd
drawn his sword in civil war. Feelings of hu.
manity. restrained him from shedding the blckl
of his opponent ; and the dread of being deer.t,
a rebel, deterred him from entering a provirce
which the king had allotted to another. Though!
he knew that arms must terminate the difpi,:
between him and Pizarro, and resolved not to
,hun that mode of decision, yet, w;th a tir.id
delicacy prepoftcrous at such a juncture, he w;-
so solicitous that Iho rival (hould be confidered ,
the aggressor, that he marched quietly back :l
Cuzco, to *iait hi, approach i.

Pizarro was lill unacquainted with all tCe

interesting events which had happened n: a
Cuzco. Accounts of Almagro's return, of t!c
loss of the capital, of the death of one brot:-,
of the imprifonne.t:t of the other two, and of tl.
defeat of Alvarado, were brought to him at once.
Such a tide of misfortunes almost overVihelmred
spirit which had continued firm and ereci u;.C:
the rudefr shocks of adversity. But the nccc
fity of attending to his own safety, as well;a
the desire of revenge, prcfcrvcd him from fi;:k.
ing undr it. He took measures for both wi:h
his wonted sagacity. As lie had the cn.ma:
of the sea-coast, and expected conliderablc sup-
plies both: of men and military itorcr, it; :
no less his interest to gain t n t, and to a'u;:
acRion, than it was that of Allnagro to piecip.-
tate operations, and bring the contdt to a
speedy issue. He had recourse to arts which !.
had formerly pracifed with fuccef, and Aln.-.

i Herrri3, dec. 6. lib. ii. c. ,c, Il.

r*-')

w was again weak enough to susser himself to

9i arufed with a profpet of terminating their
jerences by some amicable accommodation.
,! varying his overtures, and shifting his ground
.often as it suited his purpose, sometimes seem-
. to yield every thing which his rival could
eire, and then retracting all that he had
rcnted, Pizarro dexterously protracted the ne-
,:iation to such a length, that though every
:a- was precious to Almagro, several months
:?psed without coming to any final agreement.
V.nile the attention of Almagro, and of the
:icers with whom he consulted, was occupied

detecting and eluding the fraudulent inten-
*.-s of the governor, Gonzalo Pizarro and Al-
nrado found means to corrupt the soldiers to
rhole cuitody they were committed, and not
:;iv made their escape themselves, but persuaded
;'v of the men who formerly guarded them to
acompany their flight k. Fortune having thus
ilvered one of his brothers, the governor
i:rupled not at one act of perfidy more to pro-
cire the release of the other. He proposed,
*i.t every point in controversy between Almagro
t;d himself should be submitted to the decision
;' their sovereign; that until his award was
-.,own,eacl should retain undisturbed possession of
rwatever part of the country he now occupied;
:hat Ferdinand Pizarro {hould be set at liberty,
ud return instantly to Spain, together with the
oficers, whom Almagro purposed to fend thither
o represent the justice of his claims. Obvious
- the design of Pizarro was in those propositions,
:d familiar as his artifices might now have been

ZarLe, lib . iii. c, 8. Herrera, dec. 6. ibii. c. 14.
VO. II. G G to

to his opponent, Almagro, with a credulitv 2,
proaching to infatuation, relied on his fincr't,
and concluded an agreement on these terms1.

The moment that Ferdinand Pizarro recorvri

his liberty, the governor, no longer frttere:.
his operations by anxiety about his brother's life
threw off every difguifc which his concern sorn
had obliged him to assume. The treaty w
forgotten ; pacific and conciliating measures wet
no more mentioned ; it was in the field he opern:
declared, and not in the cabinet ; by arms, ar;
not by negotiation; that it must now be de
termined who should be maftcr of Peru. Th,
rapidity of his preparations snited such a decif.;.
resolution. Seven hundred men were soon readc
to march towards Cuzco. [1538] The corr
mand of there was given to his two brothers,:
whom he could pcrfectlv confide for the excc.-
t'on of his moit violent scheme;, as they wvte
nrged on, not only by the enmity flowing froi
the riva!fhip betwveen their family and Almar,,,
but animated with the desire of vengeance, C.
ctcd by rccollection of their own recent difgrnc-
and suffering';. After an unsuccessful attcm;:
to cross the rrountain; in the dirccet road betweer
Lima and C'' co, thelc-v arched towards .:
south along the roast as far as Nafca, and :4F
turning to the left, penetrated through the c-
files in that branch of the Ande; which la'r t1-
tween them and the capital. Almagro, infac:
cf hearkening to tome of his officers, lwho ad,\i;'
him to attempt the defence of those diffici'.
passes, waited the approach of the enemy in t.-

: Her-era, Cec . i i .

.

li. 9 7. ratc , ib. i;.

2'r]r,; Hi-^ '. I :0to. Vegi', D. IT.
I ib. ii. c

:j of Cuzco. Two reasons seem to have in-
:ed him to take this resolution. His followers
oanted hardly to five hundred, and he was
aid of weakening such a feeble body by fend-
, ,yv detachment towards the mountains.
;, cavalry far exceeded that of the adverse
rrtv, both in number and discipline, and it
' only in an open country that he could avail
fIls of that advantage.
The Pizarros advanced without any obitruc-
hn, but what arose from the nature of the de-
. and horrid regions through which they
rarched. As soon as they reached the plain,
o:h factions were equally impatient to bring
his long-protraced contest to an issue. Though
suntrymen and friends, the fubjets of the fame
[roereign, and each with the rayal standard dif-
iayed ; and though they beheld the mountains
Bat surrounded the plain in which they were
&awn up, covered with a vast multitude of
idians, assembled to enjoy the fpe&acle of their
r.itual carnage, and prepared to attack what.
-:er party remained master of the field; so fell
;:.d implacable was the rancour which had taken
pofrcfion of every breafi, that not one pacific
counsel, not a tingle overture towards accom.
r.cdation proceeded from either fide. Unfor.
'jnately for Almagro, he was so worn out with
tne fatigues of service, to which his advanced
a;c was unequal, that, at this crisis of his fate,
:c could not exert his wonted activity ; and he
nva, obliged to commit the leading of his troops
·o Orgognez, who, though an officer of great
.-crit, did not possess the fame ascendant either
c.er the spirit or affeftions of the soldiers, as the

G G 2 chief

chief whom they had long been accustomed t
follow and revere.

The conflict was fierce, and maintained by eadc

party with equal courage [April 26]. On tl,
fide of Almagro were more veteran soldier, ani
a larger proportion of cavalry; but these wen
counterbalanced by Pizarro's superiority in nur
bers, and by two companies of well-difcipline
mulketeers, which, on receiving an account
the infurreftion of the Indians, the emperor hac
sent from Spain m. As the use of fire-arms wa~
not frequent anong the adventurers in Americal,
hastily equipped for service, at their own ex
pence, this imall band of soldiers, regular:
trained and armed, was a novelty in Peru, and
decided the fate of the day. Wherever it ad.
vanced, the weight of a heavy and well-fuftained
fre bore down horse and foot before it; and
Orgognez, while he endeavoured to rally and
animate his troops, having received a dangerous
wound, the rout became general. The bar.
barit) of the conquerors stained the glory which
they acquired by this complete vi&tor. The
violence of civil rage hurried on some to flaugh-
ter their countrymen with indiscriminate cruelty;
the meanness of private revenge initigated other,
to single out individuals as the objets of their
vengeance. Orgognez and several officers of
diftindion were massacred in cold blood; above
a hundred and forty feldiers fell in the field; a
large proportion, where the number of corr.
batants were few, and the heat of the contet
loon over. Almagro, though so feeble that he

HF-errtra, dec. 6. lib. iii. c. S.
uZa.ra, lib. iii. c. .3

cocl.

-uid not bear the motion of a horse, had in.
E.d on being carried in a litter to an eminence
siich overlooked the field of battle. From
once, in the utmost agitation of mind, he viewed
x various movements of both parties, and at

beheld the total defeat of his own troops,

r.h all the pafionate indignation of a veteran
odcr long accustomed to victory. He endea-
ourcd to save himfilf by flight, but was taken
-:oner, and guarded with the itricdeft vigi-

:cc B.
Tie Indians, instead of executing the refolu-
;a whlich they had formed, retired quietly after
:-battle was over; and in the history of the
.: \ World, there is not a more ltriking instance
.: h wonderful alcendant which the Spaniards
:¢ acquired over its inhabitants, than that after
-:.nr one of the contending parties ruined and
:.3rsed, and the other weakened and fatigued,
-n had not courage to fall upon their enemies,
;~m fortune preferned an opportunity of attack-
:Z them with such advantage P.
Cuzco was pillaged by the victorious troops,
1o found there a considerable booty, confilting
:-.iv of the gleanings of the Indian treasures,

partly of the wealth amassed by their an-
f:onits from the spoils of Peru and Chili. But
', ar did this, and whatever the bounty of their
.adcr could add to it, fall below the high ideas
. the recompence which they conceived to be
:e to their merit, that Ferdinand Pizarro, un-
: to gratify such extravagant expectations, had

Zarate, lib iii. c. ix, 12. Vega, p. rI lib. ii. c. 36.

: - e

H rera, dec. 6. lib. iii. c. lo-i-.lb. iv. c i-6.
; Z.:a:;,b. iii. c. Ix. Vega, p. i. libii. c. ;a.

C C 3 recourse

recourse to the fame expedient which his broth
had employed on a similar occasion, and end.
voured to find occupation for this turbucl
assuming spirit, in order to prevent it frrt
breaking out into open mutiny. With this vice
he encouraged his most adtive officers to atter,;
the discovery and reduction of various province
which had not hitherto submitted to the Sa
niards. To every fiandard ereted by the leade
who undertook any of those new expeditico:.
volunteers resorted with the ardour and hor
peculiar to the age. Several of Almagro's f:.
diers joined them, and thus Pizarro had the fat!
faaion of being delivered both from the imp.,
tunitv of his difcotennted friends, and the dre:
of his ancient enemies q.

Almagro himself remained for several month

in custody, under all the anguish of fufpenf.
For although his doom was determined by t!.i
Pizarros from the moment that he fell into their
hands, prudence constrained them to defer grati
fying their vengeance, until the soldiers wh:
had served under him, as well as several of tle:
own followers in whom they could not perfec&!v
confide, had left Cuzco. As soon as they ft:
out upon their different expeditions, Almagro
was impeached of treason, fonnally tried, arc
condemned to die. The sentence astonished hir.;
and though he had often braved death with un.
daunted spirit in the field, its approach unde
this ignominious form appalled him so much,
that he had recourse to abjea supplications, ur,-
worthy of his former fame. He besought tL:

q Zarate, lib. iii. c. Iz. Gomara, HiI. c. 141. Her:e:;,
dec 6. lib. iv. c. 7.

Pizar.-i

ptzarros to remember the ancient friend(hip be-
,ween their brother and him, and how much he
'd contributed to the prosperity of their family;
be reminded them of the humanity with which,
icppofition to the repeated remonftTances of
i;s own most attached friends, he had spared
their lives when he had them in his power; he
conjured them to pity his age and infirmities,
2nd to susser him to pass the wretched remainder
cf his days in bewailing his crimes, and in making
hi, peace with Heaven. The entreaties, fays a
Spanish historian, of a man so much beloved,
touched many an unfeeling heart, and drew tears
from many a tern eye. But the brothers re-
rnained inflexible. As soon as Almagro knew
hi; fate to be inevitable, he met it with the
dignity and fortitude of a veteran. He was
Wrangled in prison, and afterwards publicly be-
headed. He suffered in the feventy-fifth year
of his age, and left one son by an Indian woman
of Panama, whom, though at that time a prisoner
in Lima, he named as successor to his govern-
ment, pursuant to a power which the emperor
had granted him r.

1539] As, during the civil dissentions in Peru,

all inctrcourfe with Spain was suspended, the
drtait of the extraordinary tranfacaions there
did not soon reach the court. Unfortunately
for the victorious fation, the first intelligence
was brought thither by some of Almagro's offi-
cers, who left the country upon the ruin of their
cause ; and they related what had happened, with

' Zarate, lib. iii. c. Iz. Gomara, Hit. c. 141. Vega,
; 1 . lib. ii. c. 39. Herrera, dec. 6. lib. iv. c. 9. lib. v.

_C~ ~
I ~.~every

every

every circumstance unfavourable to Pizarro and
his brothers. Their ambition, their breach of
the most solemn engagements, their violence and
cruelty, were painted with all the malignity and
exaggeration of party-hatred. Ferdinand Pi
zarro, who arrived soon after, and appeared i;
court with extraordinary fple.idour, endeavourtd
to efface the impression which their accusations
had made, and to justify his brother and himself
by representing Almagro as the aggressor. The
emperor and his ministers, though they could
not pronounce which of the contending factiorn
was most criminal, clearly discerned the fatal
tendency of their diffentionq. It was obviou-,
that while the leaders, entrusted with the con-
d:& of two infant colonies, employed the arms
which fiould have been turned against the corr.-
mon enemy in destroying one another, all at-
tention to the public good must cease, and there
was reason to dread that the Indians might in.
prove the advantage which the disunion of the
Spaniards presented to them, and extirpate both
the victors and vanquished. But the evil wa3
more apparent than the remedy. Where the
information which had been received was so dc-
fective and suspicious, and the scene of acion
so remote, it was almost impoflible to chalk olt
the line of conduEt that ought to be followed;
and before any plan that should be approved of
in Spain could be carried into execution, the
lituation of the parties, and the circumstances of
affairs, might alter so entirely as to render its
effctts extremely pernicious.

Nothing therefore remained but to fend a
pcrfon to Peru, veiled with extcnfive and difcre-

tionary

·onary power, who, after viewing deliberately
he posture of affairs with his own eyes, and
Squiring upon the spot into the condut of the
ifferent leaders, should be authorised to establish
te government in that form which he deemed
nolt conducive to the interest of the parent state,
ad the welfare of the colony. The man fe-
itted for this important charge was Chriftoval
Vaca de Carfro, a judge in the court of royal
zadience at Valladolid; and his abilities, inte-
itv, and firmness, juitified the choice. His
zlsrucions, though ample, were not such as to
ietter him in his operations. According to the
different afpeft of affairs, he had power to take
:pon him different characers. If he found the
gowernor still alive, he was to assume only the
t:tle of judge, to maintain the appearance of
cuing in concert with him, and to guard against
giving any julL cause of offence to a man who
had merited so highly of his country. But if
Pizarro were dead, he was entrulled with a
crmmiffion that he might then produce, by which
hit was appointed his successor in the govern.
.ent of Peru. This attention to Pizarro, how-
vcr, seems to have flowed rather from dread of
his power, than from any approbation of his
rr.tafures; for at the very time that the court
(:emed so solicitous not to irritate him, his bro-
thtir Ferdinand was arrested at Madrid, and
cr.hnned to a prison, where he remained above
twenty years '.

5+0c] While Vaca de Castro was preparing
:r; his voyage, events of great moment happened

Gomrara, Hilt. c. 142. Vcga, p. II. lib. ii. c. 40.
H::rera, dec. 6. lib. viii. c. 10, , lib. x. c. x,

in

in Peru. The governor, confidering himfil,
upon the death of Almagro, as the unrialtd
possessor of that vast empire, proceeded to pared
out its territories among the conquerors; and had
this diviiion been made with any degree of ia.
partiality, the extent of country which he hw,
to beflow, was ufficient to have gratified hi!
friends, and to have gained his enemies. Bu!
Pizarro conducted this tranfa&ion, not with t.t
equity and candour of a judge attentive to diL
cover and to reward merit, but with the illibera
spirit of a party-leader. Large diLtri&s, in part
of the country most cultivated and populou:,
were set apart as his own property, or granted
to his brothers, his adherents, and favouritei,
To others, lots less valuable and inviting were
afligned. The followers of Almagro, among.
whom were many of the original adventurers t.
whose valour and perseverance Pizarro was in
debted for his success, were totally excluded from
any portion in those lands, towards the acquifi.
tion of which they had contributed so largely,
As the vanity of every individual set an in:
moderate value upon his own services, and the
idea of each concerning the recompence due to
them rose gradually to a more exorbitant height
in proportion as their conquefls extended, ail
who were disappointed in their expetations ex-
claimed loudly against the rapaciousness and par-
tiality of the governor. The partisans of Ai-
magro murmured in fccret, and meditated re-
venge .

Vcga, !. I. lib. iii. c. 2. Herrcra, dec. 6. lib.

C.
Ra

Ra; '

Rapid as the progress of the Spaniards in
u,th America had been since Pizarro landed in
a, their avidity of dominion was not yet
rifed. The officers to whom Ferdinand Pi-
a:ro gave the command of different detach-
e:it, penetrated into several new provinces;
id though some of them were exposed to great
dflhips in the cold and barren regions of the
,ides, and others suffered distress not inferior
ridft the woods and marshes of the plains,
iev made discoveries and conquefs which not
-.l extended their knowledge of the country,
;- added considerably to the territories of Spain
; the New World. Pedro de Valdivia reaffumed
UImagro's scheme of invading Chili, and not-
rithftanding the fortitude of the natives in de-
ending their possessions, made such progress in
ae conquest of the country, that he founded
he city of St. Jago, and gave a beginning to
he eftablihment of the Spanish dominion in that
:rovince u. But of all the enterprizes undertaken
bhout this period, that of Gonzalo Pizarro was
'.'e molt remarkable. The governor, who seems
;i have resolved that no person in Peru should
?)iffs any station of distinguished eminence or
.athority but those of his own family, had de-
prived Benalcazar, the conqueror of Quito, of
hai command in that kingdom, and appointed
.: brother Gonzalo to take the government of
.. He inftru&ed him to attempt the discovery
E.d conquest of the country to the east of the
Andes, which, according to the information of
·' e Indians, abounded with cinnamon and other
*.:uable spices. Gonzalo, not inferior to any
c Zarate, lib, iii. c. 13. Ovalle, lib.ii, c. I, &c.

of

of his brothers in courage, and no less ambitic.
of acquiring distinction, eagerly engaged in ti
difficult service. He set out from Quito at te
head of three hundred and forty soldiers, nea
one half of whom were horsemen, with sot
thousand Indians to carry their provisions. In
forcing their way through the defiles, or ova
the ridges of the Andes, excess of cold and fa.
tigue, to neither of which they were accuftomd,
proved fatal to the greater part of their wretchd
attendants. The Spaniards, though more robust
and inured to a variety of climates, suffered con.
fiderably, and loft some men; but when they
descended into the low country their distress in.
creased. During two months it rained inccf.
fantly, without any interval of fair weatherlong
enough to dry their clothes x. The immense
plains upon which they were now entering,
either altogether without inhabitants, or occu-
pied by the rudest and lealt industrious tribes
in the New World, yielded little subsistence.
They could not advance a ftep but as they
cut a road through woods, or made it through
marshes. Such irceffant toil, and continual
scarcity of food, seem more than sufficient to
have exhausted and dispirited any troops. But
the fortitude and perfcverance of the Spaniards
in the fixtecnth century were insuperable. Al-
lured by frequent but false accounts of rich
countries before them, thty persisted in struggling
on, until they reached the banks of the Coca or
Napo, one of the large river; whose waters pour
into the Maragnon, and contribute to its gran-
d&ur. There, with infinite labour, they buil:

x Zarat% ilb, iv. c. 2.

a bark,

Prbl-LPeJ44
~~~~ ~~~~~~~-" :

bark, which they expeEed would prove of
pat utility, in conveying them over rivers, in
ocung provisions, and in exploring the
0antry. This was manned with fifty soldiers,
der the command of Francis Orellana, the
icer next in rank to Pizarro. The stream
Ered them down with such rapidity, that they
ce soon far a-head of their countrymen, who
lvowed slowly and with difficulty by land.
At this distance from his commander, Orella-
, a voung man of an aspiring mind, began to

Icy ilimfelf independent, and transported with
predominant passion of the age, he formed

: scheme of diitinguifhing himself as a disco-
irer, bv following the course of the Maragnon,
z:il it joined the ocean, and by surveying the
-i regions through which it flows. This scheme
:GSrellana's was as bold as it was treacherous.
Tor, if he be chargeable with the guilt of having
rolated his duty to his commander, and with
Br-:g abandoned his fellow-foldiers in a path-
-; desert, where they had hardly any hopes of
f:;czf, or even of safety, but what were
i::nded on the service which they cxpected from
5.bark; his crime is, in some measure, ba-
aced by the glory of having ventured upon a
,-igatiun of near two thousand leagues, through
::.'nown nations, in a vessel hastily conftruted,
i:h green timber, and by very unskilful hands,
r::nout provilions, without a compass, or a pilot.
E:t his courage and alacrity supplied every de-
:-.. Committing himself fearlessly to the guid-
c-os the stream, the Napo bore him along to
f loutli, until he reached the great channel of

:: Maragnon. Turning with it towards the
VOL. II. H H coait,

coza, he held on his course in that dire0tio.
He made frequent descents on both fides ofth~
river, sometimes seizing by force of arms thepro!
visions of the fierce savages feated on its banks;
and sometimes procuring a supply of food ba
friendly intercourse with more gentle tnrib
After a long series of dangers, which he en
countered with amazing fortitude, and of dif
tresses which he supported with no less magna
nimity, he reached the ocean Y, where new peril
awaited him. There he likewise surmounted
and got safe to the Spanish settlement in the
island Cuhagua; from thence he failed to Spain
The vanity natural to travellers who visit regior
unknown to the relt of mankind, and the art ofar
adventurer, solicitous to magnify his own merit
concurred in prompting him to mingle an a
traordinarv proportion of the marvellous in th,
narrative of his voyage. He pretended to hart
difcovcred nationS so rich, that the roofs ofthei
temples were covered with plates of gold; ac
described a republic of women so warlike anc
powerful,as tohave extended their dominion ovr
a considerable tract of the fertile plains whici
he had visited. Extravagant as those tales were
they gave rife to an opinion, that a region abound
ing wvth gold, di!inulnifh d by the name of £
Dora.?, and a community of Amazons, were t:
be fc'.nn in this part of the New World; ant
such is the propensity of mankind to b!een:
what is wonderful, that it has been flowlv anc
with difficulty that reason and observation ha:
exDloded those fables. The voyage, hovwe':-
even when Rripped of every romantic embeL.:.-

Y See NOTE CXXXVII.

;et, deserves to be recorded, not only as one
f the most memorable occurrences in that ad-
Icaturous age, but as the first event which led
to any certain knowledge of the extensive coun-
ties that stretch eaitward from the Andes to the
ocean Z.

No words can describe the consternation of
Pizarro, when he did not find the bark at the
confluence of the Napo and Maragnon, where he
had ordered Orellana to wait for him. He
would not allow himself to fufpet that a man,
-hom he had intruded with such an important
command, could be so base and so unfeeling, as
to desert him at such a juncure. But imputing
his absence from the place of rendezvous to some
snknown accident, he advanced above fifty
agues along the banks of the Maragnon, ex-
Pctiug every moment to fee the bark appear
with a supply of provisions. [ 54I ] At length
he came up with an officer whom Orellana had
kft to perish in the desert, because he had the
courage to remonstrate against his perfidy. From
him he learned the extent of Orellana's crime,
zad his followers perceived at once their own
&lperatc situation, when deprived of their only
irduurce. The spirit of the stoutest hearted
eteran funk within him, and all demanded to be
ld back inifantly. Pizarro, though he assumed
in appearance of tranquillity, did not oppose
teir inclination. But he was now twelve hun-
drtd miles from Quito; and in that long march
the Spaniards encountered hardships greater

Zarace, lib. iv c. 4. Gomara, Hist c 86. Vega,

t . lib. iii . . 4 Herrera, dec. 6. lib. ix. c. 2- 5.
R;jig uez El Maragnon y Amazonas, lib. i. c. 3.

H H 2 than

than those which they had endured in their pro.
grefs outward, without the alluring hopes v.hich
then soothed and animated them under thi:
sufferings. Hunger compelled them to feed 0e
roots and berries, to eat all their dogs and horse.,
to devour the mool loathsome reptiles, and even
to gnaw the leather of their saddles and sword.
belts. Four thcufand Indians, and two hundred
and ten Spaniards, perifled in this wild difaftrou
expedition, which continued near two yean:
and as fifty men were aboard the bark witl
Orellana, only fourscore got back to Quito
These were naked like savages, and so emaciate
with famine, or worn out with fatigue, the
they had more the appearance of fpeetres thai
of men z.

But, instead of returning to enjoy the repo:;

which his condition required, Pizarro, on endt
ing Quito, received accounts of a fatal eve'c
that threatened calamities more dreadful to hir
than those through which he had passed. Fror
the time that his brother made that partial divi
sion of his conquells which has been mentioned,
the adherents of Almagro, confidcring themfelve!
as ptofcribed by the party in power, no long"
entertained any hope of bettering their condition.
Great numbers in despair resorted to Lima, wv.cre
the house of young Almagro was always open !t
them, and the slender portion of his father'!
fortune which the governor allowed -him to c-.
joy, was spent in affording them fubfiflence.
The warm attachment with which every pcrfc:n

Zara-e, lib. iv. c 2- 5. Vega, p. I i. lb. ii. c.,

4, . 1. Htrrera, dec. 6. lib. viii. c. 7, g. lb. ix. c. 2-c.-
cc. -. lb. ii; . . . Pizar. .. 341,/.s,, s

v~th5

rho had served under the elder Almagro de-
;otcd himself to his interest, was quickly tranf-
orred to his son, who was now grown up to
he age of manhood, and possessed all the qualities
which captivate the affections of soldiers. Of a
:Taceful appearance, dexterous at all martial
sercife:-, bold, open, generous, he seemed to be
:rmncd for command; and as his father, conscious
f lhis own inferiority, from the total want of
:ducation, had been extremely attentive to have
ia inttructed in evern science bccoming a gen-
rmanl; the accomplishments which he had ac-
:'ircd heightened the refpc&t of his followers, as

ycv gave him dilinc&ion and eminence among
:.'.rate adventurers. In this young man the
.lmagrians found a point of union which they
anecd, aid looking up to him as their head,
;tre ready to undertake any thing for his ad-
r.ctment. Nor was afcction for Almagro their
:-iv incitement ; they were urged on by their
:.;i diltreffes. Many of them, destitute ofcom-
,n necessaries2, and weary of loitering away
.:-, a burden to their chief, or to fiuch of their
ELciiatcs as had saved some remnant of their for-
:.:t from pillage and confiscation, longed im-
:-;ieitly for an occasion to exert their activityand
.jragc, and began to deliberate how they might
. ;tngtd on the authorof all their misery. Their
-qu;ucnt cabals did not pass unobserved; and the
:;;.rnor was warned to be on his guard againift
-- lwho meditated some desperate deed, and had
::o.Ition to execute it. But either from the
;.';. intrepidity of his mind, or from contempt
:.. .'insv whofc poverty seemed to render their

See NT-rTF CXXXVIII.

h Hi 3 machina-

machinations of little consequence, he disregard.
ed the admonitions of his friends. " Be in no
pain," said he carelessly, " about my life; it is
perfecly safe, .is long as every man in Peru
knows that I can in a moment cut off any head
x.hich dare, to harbour a thought against it."
This fecuritv gave the Almarrians full leisure to
digest and ripen teery part of their Tcheme; and
Juan de Hcrrada, an officer of great abilities,
who had the charge of Almagro's education,
took th: direction of their consultations, with all
the zeal wh;ch this connecriou inspired, and wi:h
all the authlrity wvhich the ascendant that Th
was known to have over the mind of his psil
gave him.

On Sunday, the twentv-fixth of June, at mid.

day, the season of tranquillity and repose in al
sultry climates, Herrada, at the head of eighteen
of the most determined conspirators, sallied o':'
of Almagro's house in complete armour; a.-
drawing their swords a; they advanced hafil
towards the governor's palace, cried oj:,
" Long live the king, but let the tyra-'
die !" Their associates, warned of their motin-
by a signal, were in arms at different ftatio-'
ready to support them. Though Pi/arro ,':s
usually surrounded by such a numerous tra::
of attendants as fjited the magnificence of t:
most opulent fubjeet of the age in which he livi.
yet as he was uft risen from table, and rr-'
of his dometlics had retired to their own apl
mcnts, the conspirators passed through the tw:
outer courts of the palace unobserved. T?-
were at the bottom of the stair-case, bef',r
page in waiting could give the alarm to hi; r

ter, who was converting with a few friends in a
large hall. The governor, whose tfeady mind
no form of danger could appal, starting up,
caled for arms, and commanded Francisco de
Chaves to make fast the door. But that of-
sicer, who did not retain so much presence of
mind as to obey this prudent order, running to
the top of the stair-case, wildly asked the confpi-
rators what they meant, and whither they were
going ? Instead of answering, they stabbed him
to the heart, and burlt into the hall. Some of
:he persons who were there tllrew themselves
from the windows; others attempted to fly;
and a few drawing their swords, followed their
leader into an inner apartment. The confpira-
tors, animated with having the objeA of their
vengeance now in view, rushcd forward after
them. Pi7arro, with no other arms than his
sword and buckler, defended the entry, and sup-
ported by his half brother Alcantara, and his
little knot of friends, he maintained the unequal
contest with intrepidity worthy of his past ex-
plo;t>, and with the vigour of a youthful com-
batant, " Courage!" cried he, "companions,
we are yet enow to make those traitors repent
of their audacity !" But the armour of the
conspirators proteced them, while every thrust
:hey made took effect. Alcantara fell dead at
his brother's feet; his other defenders were
mortally wounded. The governor, so weary
that he could hardly wield his sword, and no
longer able to parry the many weapons furiously
aimed at him, received a deadly thrust full in
lii tll:oat, funk. to the ground, and expired.

As

As soon as he was slain, the assassins ran out

into the streets, and waving their bloody swords,
proclaimed the death of the tyrant. Above
two hundred of their aflociates having joined
them, they conductd young Almagro in so.
lemn procession through the city, and assembling
the magistrates and principal citizens, compelled
them to acknowledge him as lawful successer to
hli father in hi, government. The palace of
Pizarro, together with the houses of several of
his adherents, were pillaged by the soldiers,
who had the satisfaction at once of being aveng.
ed on their enemies, and of enriching therfelves
by the spoils of those through whose hand:; all
the wealth of Peru had passed .

The boldnef; and success of the conspiracy,

a; well as the name and popular qualities of
Almagro, drew many soldiers to his itandard.
Every adventurer of desperate fortune, all who
were dissatisfied with Pizarro, and from the
rapaciousness of his government in the latter
years of his life, the number of malcontents
was considerable, declared without hesitation in
favour of Almagro, and he was soon at the
head of eight hundred of the mot gallant vete-
rans in Peru. As hiL youth and Inexperience
disqualified him from taking the command of
them himself, he appointed Herrada to at as
general. But though' Almagro speedily col-
stEted such a respectable force, the acquiescence
in his government was far from being general.

b Zarate, lib. iv. c. 6-8. Crnara Hilt. c. 14., 145.

Vega, p. r. lib. iii. c. 5-7. Herrrz, dec. 6. lib. x. c. 4-7.
Piz.rro Var. Illust. p. IS3.

Pizano

Pizarro had left many friends to whom his
memory was dear; the barbarous assassination of
a man to whom his country was so highly in-
debted, filled every impartial person with horror.
The ignominious birth of Almagro, as well as
:he doubtful title on which he founded his pre-
:erfions, led others to confider him as an usurper.
The officers who commanded in some provinces
refused to recognize his authority, until it was
confirmed by the emperor. In others, particu-
iarlv at Cuzco, the royal standard was ereced,
and preparations were begun in order to revenge
:he murder of their antient leader.

Those feeds of discord, which could not have
Xan lot:g dormant, acquired great vigour and
ativity, when the arrival of Vaca de Castro was
i..wn. After a long and disastrous voyage,

'.t was driven by stress of weather into a small

harbour in the province of Popayan; and pro-
cecding from thence by land, after a journey no
;cfs tedious than difficult, he reached Quito.
In his way he received accounts of Pizarro's
death, and of the events which followed upon
::. He immediately produced the royal com-
-.ifflon appointing him governor of Peru, with
:he fame privileges and authority ; and his ju-
rifdition was acknowledged without hesitation
'v Benalcazar, adelantado, or lieutenant-general,
fJr the emperor in Popayan, and by Pedro de
Puclles, wio, in the absence of Gonzalo Pizarro,
I;ad the command of the troops left in Quito.
Vaca de Caltro not only assumed the supreme
cthurity), but shewed that he possessed the ta-
:.:, which the extrcife of it at that junture
:tquired. By his influence and addrcfs lie soon

afrembled

aifembled such a body of troops, as not only set
him above all fear of being exposed to any in.
fult from the adverse party, but enabled him to
advance from Quito with the dignity that be.
came his character. By difpatchung persons of
confidence to the different settlements in Peru,
with a formal notification of his arrival and of
his commission, he communicated to his coun.
trymen the royal pleasure with refpec to the
government of the country. By private emil.
saries, he excited such officers as had discovered
their disapprobation of Almagro's proceedings,
to manifest their duty to their sovereign by sup.
porting the person honoured with his commission
Those measures were producive of great effeie
Encouraged by the approach of the new go
vernor, or prepared by his machinations, thi
loyal were confirmed in their principles, ant
avowed them with greater boldness; the tirnl
ventured to declare their sentiments; the neutra
and wavering, finding it necessary to chute a fide
began to lean to that which now appeared to bI
the safest, as well as the most ju ft.

Almagro observed the rapid progress of thi

spirit of difaffetion to his canfe, and in order ti
give an effe&ual check to it before the arrival o
Vaca de Castro, he set out at the head of hi
troops for Cuzco [1542], where the moit con
fiderable body of opponents had erecced thi
royal standard, under the command of Pcdr
Alvarez Holguin. During his march thither
Herrada, the skilful guile of his youth and o
his counsels, died; and from that time his mea

Benzon, lib iii c 9. Z rae, ib. iv. c. Ir. Gormir
c. 41 , i.-. HeTrIra3, cc, 6. lib . C. c. 1, , 3. 7, &c.

furt-

fures were conspicuous for their violence, but
concerted with little sagacity, and executed with
no addrcfs. Holguin, who, with forces far in-
ferior to those of the opposite party, was de-
scending towards the coast at the very time that
Almragro was on his way to Cuzco, deceived his
nnexperieleced adversary by a very simple strata-
pgm, avoided an engagement, and effected a
ijaCtion with Alvarado, an officer of note, who
had been the first to declare again Almagro as
an uiurper.

Soon after, Vaca de Castro cntered their camp
ri.:h the troops which he brought from Quito,
zd erecting the royal standard before his olwn
:::rt, he declared, that, as governor, he would
cicharge in person all the funltions of general
cG their combined forces. Though formed by
Ibt tc'iour of his past life to the habits of a fe-
dear.yr and pacific profcfflon, he at once as-
fd.ed the activity and discovered the decision of
:, (oficer long accuitomed to command. Know-
-.1 iis rcngth to be now far fuperiorto that of
::e enemy, he was impatient to terminate the
co.tc:! by a battle. NIor did the followers of
!Almagro, who had no hop, of obtaining a par-
djn for a crime so atrocious as the murder of the
;vernor, decline that mode of decifi!.n. They
met at Chupaz [Sept. i6], about two hundred
r.les from Cuzco, ard fought with all the fierce
i~rmofity inspired by the iiolence of civil rage,
;:e rancour of private enmity, the eagerness of
-::erge, and the last efforts of despair. Vitory,
--:r remaining long doubtful, declared at lait

Vaca de Caitro. The superior number of
..:i- tru,~), hiz oui in trpepid it', n:id the martial

tal3icts

talents of Francisco de Carvajal, a veteran of
ficcr formed under the great captain in the wan
of Italy, and who on that day laid the founda-
tion of his future fame in Peru, triumphed o=r
the bravery of his opponents, though led on 1v
young Almagro with a gallant spirit, worthyl (f
a better cause, and dcferring another fate. The
car:,age was great in proportion to the numbe-
of the combatants. Many of the vanquilhed,
efrpcially such as were cor.( ious that thyc might
be charged with being acceftory to the affaf:-.
ation of Pizarro, rushing on the fwvords of t'.e
er.em, chose to fail like soldiers, rather th'.
vait an ignominious do ,m. Of fourteen h::.-
dred men, the total amounlt of combatants rin
both fides, tive hundred lay dead on the field,
and the number of the wounded -was lti
greater '.

if the rr.ilitr- talents difplav-cd by Vaca de

Ca;tro, both in the council and in the field, fur-
priecd the adventurer, in Peru, thlev were f;il
mure aitn;rtihed at his condcii after the vidorv.
As he i-a, by nature a rigid dispenser of ju!ic'r,
and persuaded that it required examples of ex-
traordinary fcveri:v to rcitrain the licentious fpi-
r:t of soldiers so far removed from the feat of
government, he proceeded directly to try hi"
prisoners as rebels. Forty were condemned to
susser the death of traitors, others were banished
from Peru. 'Their leader, who made his efca,
from the battle, bcing betrayed by some of h:b
officers, was publicly beheaded in Cuzco; a;.'

d Zara'e, lib. iv c. rz-19 Comara, c. 14S. V'-,

p. I 1. ID. ill c. l I- 11. H rr.ra, tcc. 7. lib. i. c. i 2, .,
!lb. ,1i. c. 1-II..

!;im the name of Almagro, and the spirit of
: party, was extint c
During those violent convulsions in Peru, the
-r'eror and his ministers were intently employed
: preparing regulations, by which they hoped
:;: only to re-eltablifh tranquillity there, but to
,:roduce a more perfect system of internal policy
-:o all their settlements in the New World.
: is manifest from all the events recorded in the

o::ur; of America, that rapid and extensive as
: Spanish conquests there had been, they were

carried on by any regular exertion of the

::ornal force, but by the occasional efforts of
:.'ate adventurers. After fitting out a few of
-: rit armaments for discovering new regions,
- court of Spain, during the bufv reigns of
:r-dinand and of Charles V., the former the
-::. intriguing prince of the age, and the latter

mouf ambitious, was encumbered with such a

-:iplicity of schemes, and involved in war with

..avy nations of Europe, that it had not
r.:r to attend to dihtant and less intercting
.tC:;. The care of prosecuting discovery, or
':c'empting conquclt, was abandoned to indi-
,;.'js; and with such ardour did men push
.zard in this new career, on which novelty,
'f.: irit of adventure, avarice, ambition, and
": hope of meriting heaven, prompted them
C::h combined influence to enter, that

I-f; than half a century almost the whole
that extensive empire which Spain now
:'.;Tfes in the New World, was fubjefcd
-.:. dominion. As the Spanilh court contri_

Zarate, lib. iv. c. 2z. omara, c. 15o. Herrera,

. lib. iii. c, . z lib. vi. c. i.
L 1.. I butcd

buted nothing towards the various expeditio:
undertaken in America, it was not entitled:.
claim much from their success. The fovereigr,-
of the conquered provinces, with the fifth c
the gold and silver, was reserved for the crow;
cvecry thing else was seized by the aflociates
each expedition as their own right. The plundte
of the countries which they invaded served t&
indemnify them for what they had expended:{
equipping themselves for the service, and th,
conquered territory was divided among ther,
according to rules which custom had introduced,
as permanent establishments which their successs!
valour merited. In the infancy of those sett;.
ments, when their extent as well as their val;
were unknown, many irregularities escaped oi-
servation, and it was found necessary to connri
at man) excesses. The conquered people WX:
frequently pillaged with deftrucive rapacity, aic
their country parcelled out among its new rra.
tcrs in exorbitant shares, far exceeding the highte
recompence due to their services. The rude c,.
querors of America, incapable of forming the
eltablifhments upon any general or extensive pla
of policy, attentive only to private interest, u.
willing to forego present gain from the profpec
of remote or public benefit, seem to have had nc
object but to amass sudden wealth, without rt
garding what might be the consequences of t.:
means by which they acquired it. But whe
time at length discovered to the Spaniih cour
the importance of its American poffeflions, th
necessity of new-modelling their whole frame be
came obvious, and in place of the maxims a-..
practices prevalent among military adventurer

:; was found requisite to substitute the inftitu-
Cons of regular government.

One evil in particular called for an immediate
remedy. The conquerors of Mexico and Peru
iitated the fatal example of their countrymen
-ttled in the islands, and employed themselves
ftcarching for gold and si'.. r with the fame in-
considerate eager;.efs. Similar effects followed.
The natives, employed in this la 'our by matters
who, in imposing tasks. had no regard either to
what they felt or to what rttv were able to per-
iorm, pined away and pcrillied fu fast, that there
wat realon to apprehend that Spain, inltead of
pofcffing cuntries peopled to such a degree as
: be susceptible of progressive improvement,
would soon remain proprietor only of a vatl un-
:ihahited desert.

The emperor and his ministers were so sensible
tithi;, and so solicitous to prevent the extinc-
'on of the Indian race, which threatened to
:"der their acquifit:ons of no value, that from
ir.T.e to time various laws, which I have men-
.oned, had been made for fccuring to that un-
Iappy people more gentle and equitable trcat-
aelt. But the distance of America from the
;at of empire, the feebleness of government in
'e new colonies, the avarice and audacity of
:ildiers unaccustomed to restraint, prevented
-efe salutary regulations from operating with
c- considerable influence. The evil continued
:' grow, and at this time the emperor found an
a'trval of leisure from the affairs of Europe to
nke it into attentive consideration. He con-
:2:ed not only with his ministers and the mem-
:- of the council of the Indies, but called

11 upon

upon several persons who had resided long in tn
New World, to aid them with the result
their experience and observation. Fortunatt:
for the people of America, among these v.u
Bartholomew de las Casas, who happened to '-
then at Madrid on a mission from a chapter r
his order at Chiapas. Though, since the rr.
carriage of his former schemes for the relief ,f
the Indians, he had continued shut up in tL
cloifier, or occupied in religious fun&ions, L,
7eal in behalf of the former objects of his pi:r
was so far from abatig, that, from an increaft.
knowledge of their sufferings, its ardour h-s
augmented. He seized eagerly this opportuni:v
of reviving Iis favourite maxims concerning the
treatrr.elnt of the Indians. With the movir:
eloquence natural to a man on whose mind t!.
scenes which he had beheld had made a dee;
impression, he described the irreparable waste c
the human species in the New World, the India-
race almost totally swept away in the Island; i:
less than fifty years, and hastening to extinetis,
on the continent with the fame rapid decay
With the decisive tone of one itrongly prep,.:
sesscd with the truth of his own system, heir
puted all this to a tingle cause, to the exacti,:
and cruelty of his countrymen, and conteind'
that nothing could prevent the depopulation
Ameri, a, but the declaring of its natives to t
freemen, and treating them as fubjeEts, not 2
slaves. Nor did he confide for the success of tt
proposal in the powers of his oratory ai-e
In order to enforce them, he corpofcd h
famous treatise concerning the destruction

f Rcrne:al, HiL. .e Chiapa, p. 146.

Arr.e::

imnerica g, inl which he relates, with many hor.
id circumltances, but with apparent marks of
2aggerated description, the devastation of every
;rovlnce vwhich had been visited by the
ipaniards.
The emperor was deeply affliced with the re-
::-i of so many actions shocking to humanity.
!?t as his views extended far beyond those of
,as Casas, he perceived that relieving the In-
'ians from oppression wvas but one ftep towards
-'dcring his possessions in the New World a
ciuable acquisition, and would be of little avail,
.-is he could circumscribe the power and ufur-
'iions of his own fubjcEts there. The con-
..:rors of America, however great their merit
;d been towards their country, were mostly
.-ron; of such mean birth, and of such an ab-
; rank in society, as gave no diflinction in the

of a monarch. The exorbitant wealth with
,Th fio, e of them returned, gave umbrage to
:, are not accuftorned to fee men in inferior con-
iiou: elevated above their level, and rising to
.r;late or to surpass the antient nobility in
;lcr.dour. The territories which their leaders
:.d appropriated to themselves were of such
-ormnous extent h, that if the country should
:;r be improved in proportion to the fertility
ftihe foil, they must grow too wealthy and too
,^.crful for fubjeAs. It appeared to Charles
:'!at this abuse required a remedy no less than
.he other, and that the regulations concerning
Atmh mull be enforced by a mode of government
more vigorous than had yet been introduced into
A.T.crica.
; Remefal, p. xgz, 199. h See NOT-r CXXXIX.

1 3 With

With this view he framed a body of laws, cor,

taining many salutary appointments with refptc.
to the constitution and powers of the supreme
co'incil of the Indies; concerning the station and
jurisdiction of the royal audiences in differer.
parts of America ; the administration ofjuftic;
the order of government, both ecclefiattical a-.c
civil. These were approved of by all ranks c
men. But together with them were issued ti,
following regulations, which excited univerfa
alarm, and occasioned the most violent con;u!
sions " That as the repatlimientos or shares c
land seized by several persons appeared to be cx
c.tfi;'e, the roval audiences are empowered to
reduce them to a moderate extent: That upc
the death of any conqueror or planter, the land
and Indians granted to him (hall not dcfcend to
hi;; widow or children, but return to the crow::
That the Idrlians shall henceforth be exemp
from personal service, and Ihall not be compellc
to cam- the baggage of travellers, to labour :
the mines, or to dive in the pearl fifherie;
That the stated tribute due by them to thci
superior (hall be ascertained, and they (hall b
paid as servants for any work they voluntaril
perform: That all persons who are or have bee
in public offices, all ecclesiastics of every dcne
ruination, all hospitals and monasteries, shall b
deprived of the lands and I ndians allotted to ther
and these be annexed to the crown: That ever
person in Peru, who had any criminal conccr
in the contests between Pizarro and Almagr!
should forfeit his lands and Indians ."

' herTera, dec. 7. lib. 'i, c. 5. Fe-nandez, H;. !'
C. * 2.

,.:

All the Spanish ministers who had hitherto
Been entrusted with the direcion of American
Lairs, and who were best acquainted with the
?2te of the country, remonstrated againif those
tgulations as ruinous to their infant colonies.
They represented, that the number of Spaniards
7ho had hitherto emigrated to the New World
vas so extremely small, that nothing could be
:.pected from any effort of theirs towards im-
:?oving the vast regions over which they w-ere
f:ittered; that the success of every scheme for
:-ii purpose must depend upon the ministry and
'rvice of the Indians, whofc native indolence
;d aversion to labour, no profpe't of benefit or
:-omife of reward could surmount; that the
-oment the right of imposing a task, and ex-

ing the performance of it, was taken from
:.ir mailers, every work of induftrv muff cease,
:.,d all the sources from which wealth begun to
our in upon Spain muff be ftopt for ever. But
Charles, tenacious at all times of his own opinions,
.-d so much impressed at present with the view
., the disorders which reigned in America, that
-.. was willing to hazard the application even of
dangerous remedy, persisted in his resolution
- publishing the laws. That they might be
arried into execution with greater vigour and
ithority, he authorised Francisco Tello de
..,ndoval to repair to Mexico as VJfiaador or fu-
:-rintendant of that country, and to co-operate
-i'h Antonio de Mendoza, the viceroy, in en-
,rcing them. He appointed Blasco Nugnez
V.la to be governor of Peru, with the title of
Viceroy; and in order to itrengthen his admi-
-:.ration, he establishcd a court of royal audi-

ence

ence in Lima [i;433, in which four lawyer c;
eminence were to preside as judges k.

The viceroy and fuperintendant failed at t':

fame time; and an account of the laws which
they were to enforce reached America before
them. The entry of Sandoval into Mexico wvas
viewed as the prelude of general ruin. The ur-
limited grant of liberty to the Indians afifrcd
every Spaniard in America without diftinciur.,
and there was hardly one Who might not on forr.
pretext be included under the other regu!atio.-,
and susser by them. But the colony in NC..
Spain had now been so long accuftoined to t.-
restraints of law and authority under the fteazc.
and prudent adminiftratioii of Mendoza, tha:
how much soever the spirit of the new flatute,
was detested and dreaded, no attempt was mad:
to obflruct the publication of them by any act Ls
violence unbecoming subjects. The magiltraice
and principal inhabitants, however, prcfenttr
dutiful addrefits to the viceroy and superintend-
ent, representing the fatal confcquences of er.-
forcing them. Happily for them, IMndoza,
by long residence in the country, was so tho-
roughly acquainted with its fta:e, that he knit.
what was for its interest as well as what it cou'd
bear; and Sandoval, though new in office, di:-
played a degree of moderation seldom pofcflitd
by persons jult entering upon the exercise of
power. They engaged to suspend, for some
time, the execution of what was offellfivt in the
new laws, and not only conrented that a depu-
tation of citizens flould be sent to Europe to

k Zarate, lib. iii. c. z4. Goma:a, c. 15. Vegl,
p. 2. iib. ii. c. zo.

'.v before the emperor the apprehenflons of his
bjeis in New Spain with refpec to their ten-
..lcv and effeas, but they concurred with them
i:; ipporting their sentiments. Charles, moved
H' the opinion of men whose abilities and inte-
-its entitled them to decide concerning what
(:.. immediately under their own view, granted
.'h a relaxation of the rigour of the laws as
--eftablimled the colony in its former tran-
-illit)y
In Peru the storm gathered with an aspet still
,.ore fierce and threatening, and was not so
:rin dispelled. The conquerors of Peru, of a
:sak much inferior to those who had subjected
MIcxico to the Spanilh crown, farther removed
f:om the infpe&ion of the parent-ftate, and in-
:.xicated with the sudden acquisition of wealth,
carried on all their operations with greater
licence and irregularity than any body of ad-
venturers in the New World. Amidst the ge-
n.ral subversion of law and order, occasioned by
two fucceflive civil wars, when each individual
was at liberty to decide for himself, without

guide but his own interest or passions, this

:- i;lent spirit rose above all sense of fubordina-
.:).. To men thus corrupted by anarchy, the
^:roduction of regular government, the power
of a viceroy, and the authority of a refpetable
cLurt of judicature, would of thcmiclves have
appearcd formidable refcraints, to which they
would have submitted with reluctance. But they

i Fernadez, Hist. lib. i c. 3,4, 5 Vega, p. r. lib iii.

c. 2 z1, Hcrreia, dec. 7. lib. v. c. 7. liD. vii. c. ,, I5,
7;:quem. Mood. Ir.d. lib. v. c. 13.

revolted

revolted with indignation against the idea of
complying with laws by which they were to bs
itripped at once of all they had earned so hardly
during many years of service and suffering. A'
the account of the new laws spread fucceffiseiv
through the different settlements, the inhabitant;
ran together, the women in tears, and the men
exclaiming against the injustice and ingratitude
of their sovereign in depriving them, unheard a:.p
unconvi&ted, of their possessions. " Is this,'
cried they, " the recompence due to perfor.:
vwho, without public aid, at their own expernc.
and by their own valour, have fubjeEted to t':
crown of Caflile territories of such immense ex
tent and opulence ? Are these the rewards be
stowed for having endured unparalleled difrtef:
for having encountered every species of dange
in the service of their country ? WVhofe merit
so great, whose conduct has been so irreproach
able, that he mav not be condemned by forr.
penal clause in regulations, conceived in terms a
loose and comprehensive, as if it had been in
tended that all should be entangled in thte
snare ? Every Spaniard of note in Peru has hell
some public office, and all, without distinction
have been constrained to take an ative part i:
the contest between the two rival chiefs. 'Wer
the former to be robbed of their property becau'.
they had done their duty? WVere the latter t,
be punished on account of what they could r.c'
avoid ? Shall the conquerors of this great err.
pire, instead of receiving marks of diltinction, t
deprived of the natural consolation of providinr
for their widosw and children, and leave them :c

pc'?'.

depend for subsistence on the feanty supply they
can extort from unfeeling courtiers I ? We are
.o: able now, continued they, to explore unknown
rerions in quest of more secure settlements; our
constitutions debilitated with age, and our bodies
covered with wounds, are no longer fit for aftive
service; but still we possess vigour sufficient to
aiTrt our just rights, and we will not tamely
:fser them to be wrested from us n."

By discourses of this fort, uttered with vehe-
-.ence, and listened to with universal approba-
::on, their passions were inflamed to such a pitch,
:ha: they were prepared for the most violent
-.cafures; and began to hold consultations in
di:Terent places, hu\v they might oppose the en-
:-ance of the viceroy and judges, and prevent not
..,v the execution but the promulgation of the
.::w lao s. From this, however, they were di-
vrned by the address of Vaca de Castro, who
z.:tered them with hopes, that, as soon as the

-erloy and judges should arrive, and had leisure

:j examine their petitions and remonstrances,
hiev would concur with them in endeavouring
', procure fune mitigation in the rigour of laws

nkich had been framed without due attention

t:her to the state of the country, or to the
:ntimtnts of the people. A greater degree of
icccmJmodation to these, and even some con-
r:ihins on the part of government, were now
z'cme requisite to compose the present ferment,
:-.id o soothe the colonists into submission, by in-
;r;ing them with confidence in their superiors.

r Herrera, dec. 7. lib. v:. c. 14, ;.

Gomara, c. 152. Herrera, Cdc. 7. l;b. vi. c. 10, I1.

*:ii, F. 1. .b. iii c. 22.
2 . 1. ci . C. , a.

Bilu

But without profound discernment, conciliati r
manners, and flexibility of temper, such a plan
could not be carried cn. The viceroy possessed
none of these. Of all the qualities that fit rr.e
for high command, he was endowed only with
integrity and courage ; the former, harsh and un.
complying, the latter bordering so frequently on
rashness or obflinacy, that in his situation they
were defec.s rather than virtues. From the mo-
ment that he landed at Tumbez [March 4.,
Nugne, Vela seems to have confidtred himfdte
merely as an executive officr, without any dif.
cretionary power; and, regardless of whatcver
he observed or heard concerning the state of the
country, he adhered to the letter of the regula-
tions with unrelenting rigour. In all the town.s
through which he passtd, the natives were d.
clared to be free, every perfion in public office wa;
deprived of his lands and fervallts; and as ar,
example of obedience to others, he would not
susser a single Indian to be employed in carrvyiig
his own baggage in his march towards Lir.3.
Amazement and contternation went before him
as he approached; and so little solicitous was he
to prevent these from augmenting, that, on er.-
tering the capital, he openly avowed that he car.e
to obey the orders of his sovereign, not to dif-
penfe with his laws. This harsh declaration wva
accompanied with what rendered it still more in-
tolerable, haughtiness in deportment, a tone ci
arrogance and decision in discourse, and an is.-
folence of office grievous to men little accufionr.ed
to hold civil authority in high refpe&. Every
attempt to procure a suspension or mitigation c;
the new laws, the viceroy conlidered as flowing

frQ:i.

Tom a spirit of difaffetion that tended to rebel-
oa. Several peifons of rank were confined, and
onme put to death, without any form of trial.
i'aca de Castro was arrelted, and notwithstanding
:e dignity of his former rank, and his merit, in
aving prevented a general insurrection in the
:olony, he was loaded with chains, and shut up
n the common jail °.
But however general the indignation was
gzainft such proceedings, it is probable the hand
of authority would have been strong enough to
Lupprefs it, or to prevent it bursting out with
open violence, if the malcontents had not been
provided with a leader of credit and eminence to
nite and to direct their efforts. From the time
:hat the purport of the new regulations was
ijown in Peru, every Spaniard there turned his
Yes towards Gonzalo Pizarro, as the only person
able to avert the ruin with which they threatened
the colony. From all quarters, letters and ad-
Cresses were sent to him, conjuring him to stand
:rth as their common protector, and offering to
!upport him in the attempt with their lives and
iortunes. Gonzalo, though inferior-in talents
vJ his other brothers, was equally ambitious, and
o: courage no less daring. The behaviour of
az ungrateful court towards his brothers and
inmfelf, dwelt continually on his mind. Ferdi-
Dand a Itate prisoner in Europe, the children of
the governor in custody of the viceroy, and sent
aboard his fleet, himself reduced to the condition

Zarate, lib. iv. c. 23, 24, 25. Gorrara, c. I53-155.

Yga, p. Ii. lib. iv. . c .
, 5. ter.andez, Ib. i. c. 6-

L..
VOL. 11. 1 K of

of a private citizen in a country, for the disc<
ven- and conquest of which Spain was indebtd
to his family. These thoughts prompted him
seek for vengeance, and to assert the rights of i;
family, of which he now confidered himself a
the guardian and the heir. But as no Spaniard
can eafilv surmount that veneration for his finu
reign wilich seems to be interwoven in his frarn,
the idea of marching in arms againit the rovl
fiandard filled him with horror. He hesitate
long, and was still unresolved, when the violenc
of the viceroy, the universal call of his countnr
men, and the certainty of becoming soon a v:c
tim himself to the severity of the new lawjI
moved him to quit his residence at Chuquifaca dt
la Plata, and repair to Cuzco. All the inhabi:-
ants went out to meet him, and received him wi:.
transports of joy as the deliverer of the colony.
In tle fervour of their zeal, they elected him
procurator-genleral of the Spanish nation in Peru,
to solicit the repeal of the late regulations
They empowered him to lay their remonstrance
before the royal audience in Lima, and upeC
pretext of danger from the Indians, author.scd
him to march thither in arms. [1544.] Undc:
fantion of tlis norrination Pizarro took pc:-
fefion of the royal treasure, appointed officer.
levied foldicrs, seized a large train of artiller
which Vaca de Castro had deposited in GumM-
ga, and fct out for Lima, as if he had been acd
vancing againit a public enemy. Difaffe&io;
having now assumed a regular form, and bti;-
united under a chief of such diflinguifhed nar:,
many perfuns of note resorted to his flar.da::

, .

rd a considerable part of the troops, raised by
*;, viceroy to oppose his progress, deserted to
:n in a body P.
Before Pizan-o reached Lima, a revolution had
.-ppened there, which encouraged him to pro-
C:ed with almost certainty of success. The vio-
;:.ce of the viceroy's administration was not
wore formidable to the Spaniards of Peru, than
: overbearing haughtiness was odious to his as-
Xciates, tliejudges of the royal audience. During
'heir voyage from Spain, some symptoms of cold-
:ifs between the viceroy and them berNan to ap-
-,ar1. But as soon as they entered upon the
uercife of their refpedive offices, both parties
were so much exasperatcd by frequent contests,
ciiing from interference ofjurifdiction, and con-
--icty of opinion, that their mutual disgust soon
r-:: nto open enmity. The judges thwarted
;..e viceroy in every measure, set at liberty pri-
baers whom he had confined, jullified the mal-
:ir:tents, and applauded their remonstrances.
.: a time when both departments of govern-
-.,it lliould have united against the approaching
::"r.-.-, thlie were contending with each other

ir neno-ir.y. The judges at length prevailed.
n. .i:c'-rov, univerfallv odious, and abandoned
-.en by lis own guards, war seizcd in his palace
-.ept. i93], and carried to a desert ifand on the
,ai:, to be kept there until he could be sent
:;ie tO Opain.

Zarate, lb. v. c. I. Gomara, c. 156, 157. Vega,

: 1l . i . iv, c. 4-12. Fernandez, lib. i. c. I2- 17.
::ir:ri, Cc. 7 I:b vii, c. 13, &c. lib vii. c. 1-5.
i Gmr.ara, c. 17I.

R K 2 The

The judges, in consequence of this, havin

assumed the supreme direcion of affairs into their
own hands, issued a proclamation suspending t!h
execution of the obnoxious laws, and sent a
message to Pizarro, requiring him, as they had
already granted whatever he could request, to ds.
miss his troops, and to repair to Lima with fifteta
or twenty attendants. They could hardly e.
pea that a man so daring and ambitious would
tamely comply with this requisition. It was
made, probably, with no such intention, but orly
to throw a decent veil over their own conduct
for Cepeda, the president of the court of audi.
ence, a pragmatical and aspiring lawyer, seems to
have held a fecrct correspondence with Pizarro,
and had already formed the plan, which he after.
wards executed, of devoting himself to his ler.
,ice. The imprifonnent of the viceroy, the
usurpation of the ji:dges, together with the uni.
versal confusion and anarchy consequent upon
events so singular and unexpeced, opened new
and vast prope&s to Pizarro. He now beheld
the supreme power within his reach. Nor did
he want courage to push on towards the object
which fortune presented to his view. Carvaja!,
the prompter of his resolutions, and guide of all
his a&tions, had long fixed his eye upon it as the
only end at which Pizarro ought to aim. Instead
of the inferior function of procurator for the
Spanifl settlements in Peru, he openly demanded
to be governor and captain-general of the who!:
province, and required the court of audience t;
gra.t him a commiflion to that effect. At the
bead of twelve hundred men, within a mile cf

Li .2,

L[ma, where there was neither leader nor army
D oppose him, such a request carried with it the
athority of a command. But the judges, either
h0m unwillingness to relinquish power, or from a
!tire of preserving some attention to appearances,
,-itated, or seemed to hesitate, about complying
ith what he demanded. Carvajal, impatient of
ieav,and impetuous in all his operations, marched
s.o the city by night, seized several officers of
ianction obnoxious to Pizarro, and hanged

an wiithout the formality of a trial. Next
rrning the court of audience issued a com-

oiion in the emperor's name, appointing Pizarro

.j7ernor of Peru, with full powers, civil as well
i.ilitary, and he entered the town that day with
-:raordinary pomp, to take poffeflion of his new
C .,n~iy r.

Oct. 28.] But amidst the disorder and turbu-
rice which accompanied this total dissolution of
t:i frame of government, the minds of men, set
;.ofe from the ordinary restraints of law and au-
?-grity, acted with such capricious irregularity,
2t events no less extraordinary than unexpected
'owed in a rapid succession. Pizarro had fearcely

n to exercise the new powers with which

: 'as invested, when he beheld formidable ene-
.es rife up to oppose him. The viceroy having
rtn put on board a vessel by the judges of the
i:er.ce, in order that he might be carried to
:i;n under custody of Juan Alvarez, one of their
a .'number ; as soon as they were out at sea,
;aircz, either touched with remorse or moved

Za-, -lib. v. c. S-io. Vega, p. l. lib. iv. c. 13
:3. Gmara, c. 59-16 3. Fermandez, lib. i. c. Ix-
Her:era), uic 7. lib. viii. c. lo- 0o.

KK 3 by

by fear, kneeled down to his prisoner, declaring
him from that moment to be free, and that.;.
himfeif, and every person in the ship, would obe.
him as the legal representative of their fovereig.
Nugnez Vela ordered the pilot of the veffclo
shape his course towards Tumbez, and as soon ai
he landed there, erected the royal standard, and
resumed his functions of viceroy. Several perfoli
of note, to whom the contagion of the feditiou;
spirit which reigned at Cuzco and Lima had not
reached, instantly avowed their resolution to sup.
port his authority '. The violence of Pizarro':
government, who observed every individual wi-'
the jealousy natural to usurpers, and who pS
nimhed every appearance of disaffection with :.
forgiving severity, soon augmented the numbe
of the viceroy's adherents, as it forced some lead
ing men in the colony to fly to him for refuge
While he was gathering such ttrength at Tur.
bez, that his forces began to assume the appe-r
ance of what was confidered as an army in Arre
rica, Diego Centeno, a bold and aAive office
exasperated by the cruelty and oppression of P
zarro's lieutenant-governor in the province
Charcas, formed a conspiracy againlf his life, c.
him off, and declared for the viceroy .

1545.] Pizarro, though alarmed wihthth:

appearances of hoitility in the opposite extrccr
of the empire, was not disconcerted. He pr.
pared to assert the authority to which he had .
tained, with the spirit and conduct of an cfi;

Zara', lib. v. c. 9. Gomara, c. 165. Ferr.r.:
... i. c. t. H rrera, dec. . io. vii . c. .I

Zarate, ii. v. c. JS. Gomira c, 169. He::-
dec. 7. Jb. .:. C. 27.

accui':o:

ccuftomed to command, and marched direcly
against the viceroy as the enemy who was nearest
, aell as most formidable. As he was master of
:he public revenues in Peru, and most of the mi-
i:ary men were attached to his family, his troops
wcre so numerous, that the viceroy, unable to
ace them, retreated towards Quito. Pizano
5llowed him; and in that long march, through
wild mountainous country, suffered hardships
and encountered difficulties, which no troops but
:hose accustomed to serve in America could have
.,dured or furmountedu. The viceroy had scarcely
-cached Quito, when the van-guard of Pizarro's
!rces appeared, led by Carvajal, who, though
:.ar fourscore, was as hardy and ative as any
Younng soldier under his command. Nugnez Vela
.ftantly abandoned a town incapable of defence,
and with a rapidity more resembling a flight than
a retreat, marched into the province of Popayan.
Pizarro continued to pursue; but finding it im-
0oflible to overtake him, returned to Quito.
From thence he dispatched Carvajal to oppose
Centeno, who was growing formidable in the
southern provinces of the empire, and he him-
seif remained there to make head against the
:Iceroy x.

By his own acaivity, and the assistance of Be-
.alcazar, Nugnez Vela soon assembled four hun-
dred men in Popayan. As he retained, amidst
:1 his disasters, the fame elevation of mind, and
the fame high sense of his own dignity, he re-

Cee NOTE CXL.
Za ate, I.b. v, c. c, 16-24. Gomara, c. 167. Vega,

F. . Jib. iv. c. 25-2S. Fernandez, lib. i. c. 34. 40.
Ectera, dec. 7. lib. viii . . 6. ac--27.

jec+d

jected with disdain the advice of some of his so!.
lowers, who urged him to make overtures of
accommodation to Pizarro, declaring that it was
only by the sword that a contest with rebels
could be decided. With this intention he
marched back to Quito [1546]. Pizarro, rely.
ing on the superior number, and still more on
the discipline and valour of his troops, advanced
resolutely to meet him [January 18]. The battle
was fierce and bloody, both parties fighting
like men who knew that the possession ofa great
empire, the fate of their leaders, and their own.
future fortune, depended upon the ifife of that
day. But Pizarro's veterans pushed forward
with such regular and well-directed force, that
they soon began to make impression on their
enemies. The viceroy, by extraordinary exer-
tions, in which the abilities of a commander and
the courage of a soldier were equally difplaved,
held vi~tory for some time in suspense. At length
he fell, pierced with many wounds; and the rout
of his followers became general. They were
hotly pursued. His head was cut off, and placed
on the public gibbet in Quito, which Pizarro
entered in triumph. The troops affcmbled by
Centeno were dispersed soon after by Carvajal,
and he himself compelled to fly to the moun-
tains, where he remained for several months con-
cealed in a cave. Every person in Peru, from
the frontiers of Popayan to those of Chili, sub-
mitted to Pizarro; and by his fleet, under Pcdro
de Hino;ofa, he had not only the unrivalled co:n-
rand of the South-Sea, but had taken poffcfiion
of Panama, and placed a garrifun in Nombre dc
Dio,, o:1 the opposite fide of the illhmus, which

rendered

,dered him master of the only avenue of com-
:unication between Spain and Peru, that was
icd at that period Y.
After this decisive vi&ory, Pizarro and his
Jiowers remained for some time at Quito, and
;.ring the firfi transports of their exultation,
,eC ran into every excess of licentious indulgence,
rth the riotous spirit usual among low adven-
jrers upon extraordinary success. But amidst
his dissipation, their chief and his confidents
were obliged to turn their thoughts sometimes
o what was serious, and deliberated with much
9licitude concerning the part that he ought
;ow to take. Carvajal, no less bold and dcci-
!;e in counsel than in the field, had from the
gginning warned Pizarro, that in the career on
nhich he was entering, it was vain to think of
:.,ding a middle course; that he must either
:oicly aim at all, or attempt nothing. From the
:.T,C that Pizarro obtained possession of the go-
i:xnment of Peru, he inculcated the fame maxim
iv:h greater earnelfnefs. Upon receiving an
;ccount of the victory at QMuito, he remonstrated
;ih him in a tone still more peremptory.
'You have ufurIpcd (said he, in a letter written
:Pizarro on that occasion) the supreme power
ihis country, in contempt of the emperor's
:.mmiffion to the viceroy. You have marched,

L!oitile array, against the royal standard; you
:ve attacked the representative of your fove-
::ign in the field, have defeated him, and cut

Zarate, lib. v. c. 31, 32. Gomira, c. 170. Vega,
1: ;;b. iv. c. 33, 34. Fernandez, lib. i. c. 51-54.

-rera, decc. 7 1

lb. x. 2. 19-Zi. dec. . lib. i. c. 1--3.
.az%, iLb. iii. c. Iz.

off

off hit head. Think not that ever a monarcn
will forgive such insults on his dignity, or thr.
any reconciliation with him can be cordial r,
sincere. Depend no longer on the precario;s
favour of another. Assume yourself the fote.
reignty over a country, to the dominion of which
your family has a title founded on the rights both
of discovery and conquest. It is in your power
to attach every Spaniard in Peru of any cons,.
quence inviolably to vour interest by liberl
grants of lands and of Indians, or by inflitutir.
ranks of nobility, and creating titles of hono::
similar to those which are courted with so much-
eagerness in Europe. By eflabliihing orders c:
knighthood, with privileges and distinctions r.
ferrbling those in Spain, you may bestow a gra.
tification upon the otficers in your fcrvice, fuitc-
to the ideas of military men. Nor is it to vo'-
countrrr,e:i only that you ought to attend ; e-
deavour to gain the natives. By marrying i;
Coya, or daughter of the Sun next in fuccclii
to the crown, you , ill induce the Indians, o'-
of veneration fur the blood of their antier:
princes, to unite with the Spaniards in fuppoe
of your authority. Thus, at the head of t:
antient inhabitants of Peru, as well as of the inc;
fettlcrs there, you may set at defiance the prow:
of Spain, and repel with eale any feeble for..-
which it can fend at such a diltance." Ceped.
the lawyer, who wa; now Pizarro'%s confident!a
counsellor, warmrrly Lfconded Carvajal's exhlor.
ations, and emplo-ed whatever learning he p.-
festfd in demon!trating, that all the founders;
great monarchies hadbeen raied to pre-cminenc,
not by the airiqu itv of their lineage, or the

;ity of their rights, but by their own aspiring
ilour and personal merit z.
Pizarro listened attentively to both, and could
,t conceal the fatisfacion with which he con-
:r.plated the object that they presented to his
:cw. But happily for the tranquillity of the
rorld, few men possess that superior strength of
r.;d, and extent of abilities, which are capable
. forming and executing such daring schemes,
.. cannot be accomplished without overturning
he eltablifhed order of society, and violating
-ofe maxims of duty which men are accustomed
: hold sacred. The mediocrity of Pizarro's
ients circumscribed his ambition within more
r.,rov limits. Instead of aspiring at independent
?ower, he confined his views to the obtaining
:om the court of Spain a confirmation of the
;tl'tority which he now possessed; and for that
;,rpofe he sent an officer of diflincion thither,
, give such a representation of his conduct, and
.:the state of the country, as might induce the
emperor and his ministers, either from inclination
- from necessity, to continue him in his present

While Pizano was deliberating with respect
:j the part which he should take, consultations
zere held in Spain, with no less solicitude, con-
c:rning the measures which ought to be pursued
: order to rc-eftablifh the emperor's authority in
Pru. Though unacquainted with the last ex-
c.fTcs of outrage to which the malcontents had
.:oceeded in that country, the court had received
. account of the insurrection against the vice-

Vega, p. 1 . lib. iv. c.40. Fern3ndez, lh i. c. 34.
;.;i, c. i. 49. Herrera, dec. 8. lib. ii. c. 10.

roy,

roy, of his imprisonment, and the usurpation 0
the government by Pizarro. A revolution £,
alarming called for an immediate interposition c
the emperor's abilities and authority. But
he was fully occupied at that time in GermanyI
in conducting the war against the famous league
of Smalkalde, one of the moti interesting and
arduous enterprises in his reign, the care of pro
viding a remedy for the disorders in Peru devolved
upon his son Philip, and the counsellors whon
Charles had appointed to aflift him in the go
vernment of Spain during his absence. At fie
view, the acions of Pizarro and his adherer:
appeared so repugnant to the duty of subjer.
towards their sovereign, that the greater part o
the ministers insisted on declaring them inftanti
to be guilty of rebellion, and on proceeding t'
punish them with exemplary rigour. But whe
the fervour of their zeal and indignation begz
to abate, innumerable obstacles to the executio
of this measure presented themselves. The vete
ran bands of infantry, the strength and glory o
the Spanish armies, were then employed in Ger
many. Spain, exhausted of men and money b
a long series of wars, in which she had been is
volved by the restless ambition of two fucceffli
monarchs, could not easily equip an armament c
sufficient force to reduce Pizarro. To tranfpor
any refpeAable body of troops to a country
remoteas Peru, appeared almost impoflible. Wil
Pizarro continued mailer of the South-Sea, th
direct route by Nombre de Dios and Panama wa
impraticable. An attempt to march to Quit
by land through the new kingdom of Granada
and the province of Popayan, across regions

prodigios

prodigious extent, desolate, unhealthy, or in-
habited by fierce and hostile tribes, would be
attended with unsurmountable danger and hard-
lips. The paflage to the South-Sea by the
Straits of Magellan was so tedious, so uncertain,
and so little known in that age, that no confidence
could be placed in any effort carried on in a
course of navigation so remote and precarious.
Nothing then remained but to relinquish the
system which the ardour of their loyalty had first
suggested, and to attempt by lenient measures
what could not be effected by force. It was
mianifeft, from Pizarro's solicitude to represent
his conduEt in a favourable light to the em-
peror, that, notwithstanding the excesses of which
he had been guilty, he still retained sentiments of
veneration for his sovereign. By a proper ap-
plication to these, together with some such con-
cessions as should discover a spirit of moderation
and forbearance in government, there was still
room to hope that he might be yet reclaimed,
or the ideas of loyalty natural to Spaniards
might so far revive among his followers, that
they would no longer lend their aid to uphold his
usurped authority.

The success, however, of this negotiation, no
less delicate than it was important, depended en-
tirely on the abilities and address of the person
to whom it should be committed. After weigh-
ing with much attention the comparative merit
of various persons, the Spanish ministers fixed
with unanimity of choice upon Pedro de la
Gafca, a priest in no higher itation than that of
counsellor to the Inquisition. Though in no
public office, he had been occasionally employed
VOL. 11. L L by

by government in affairs of trust and consequence,
and had conducted them with no less skill than
success; displaying a gentle and insinuating
temper, accompanied with much firmness; pro.
bity, superior to any feeling of private interest;
and a cautious circumfpecion in concerting mea.
fures, followed by such vigour in executing them,
as is rarely found in alliance with the other.
These qualities marked him out for the function
to which he w-as deltined. The emperor, to
whom Gafca was not unknown, warmly ap-
proved of the choice, and communicated it to
him in a letter containing expressions of good-
will and confidence, no less honourable to the
prince who wrote, than to the subject who re-
ceived it. Gafca, notwithitanding his advanced
age and feeble conititution, and though, from
the appreheinio:is natural to a man, who, during
the course of his life, had never been out of his
own country, he dreaded the effets of a long
voyage, and of an unhealthy climate a, did not
hesitate a moment about complying with the will
of his sovereign. But as a proot that it was from
this principle alone he acted, he refused a bi-
fhopric which was offcred to him, in order that
he might apptar in Peru with a more dignified
character; he would accept of no higher title
than that of prefidcnt of the court of audience
in Lima; and declared that he would receive no
falarv on account of his discharging the duties
of that office. All he required was, that the
expcnce of supporting his family should be de.
frayed by the public, and a hle was to go like a
mi:.ittcr of peace with his gown and breviary,

'Fe:rndz., lib ii. c. :-.

a.d

and without any retinue but a few domestics,
this would not load the revenue with an) enor-
mous burden b

But while he discovered filch disinterested mo-
deration with refpe&t to whatever related person-
ally to himself, he demanded his official powers in
a very different tone. He infifled, as he was to
be employed in a country so remote from the
feat of government, where he could not have
recourse to his fovcreign for new instructions on
every emergence; and as the whole success of
hi, negotiations muff depend upon the confidence
ihiclh the people with whom he had to treat
could place in the extent of his powers, that lie
ought to be invested with unlimited authority;
that his jurifdic'ton must reach to all persons and
:o all causes; that he muit be empowered to
pardon, to punish, or to reward, as circumitances
and the behaviour of different men might require;
that in cafe of reffitance from the malcontents,
he might be authorised to reduce them to obe-
dience by force of arms, to levy troops for that
purpose, and to call for alriftance from the go-
vernors of all the Spanish settlements in America.
These powers, though manifeitly conducive to
the great objccts of his mission, appeared to the
Spanish ministers to be inalienable prerogatives of
royalty, which ought not to be delegated to a
fibjcct, and they refuied to grant them. But
the emperor's views were more enlarged. As,
[ from the nature of his employment, Gafca must
be entrusted with difcretionaiy power in several

Zar3te, lib vi. c. 6. Comara, c. 174. Fernandrz,

. ii. c. 14-- 6. Vega, p. l 1 lib. v. c. . Heriera,
C. S. li. i. c 4, &c.

L L 2 point%,

points, and all his efforts might prove ineffe&al
if he was circumscribed in any one particular,
Charles scruplcd not to invest him with authority
to the full extent that he demanded. Highly
satisfied with this fresh proof of his master's con.
fidence, Gafca hastened his departure, and, with.
out either money or troops, set out to quell a
formidable rebellion '

On his arrival at Nombre de Dios [July 27],

he found Herman Mexia, an officer of note,
posted there, by order of Pizarro, with a con-
fiderable body of men to oppose the landing of
any hostile forces. But Gafca appeared in such
pacific guise, with a train so little formidable,
and with a title of no such dignity as to excite
terror, that he was received with much refpe&.
From Nombre de Dios he advanced to Panama,
and met with a similar reception from Hinojofa,
whom Pizarro had entrusted with the govern-
ment of that town, and the command of his fleet
stationed there. In both places heheld the fame
language, declaring that he was sent by their
sovereign as a messenger of peace, not as a mi.
nifter of vengeance; that he came to redress all
their grievances, to revoke the laws which had
excited alarm, to pardon- palt offences, and tc
re-establish order and justice in the government
of Peru. His mild deportment, the simplicity ol
his manners, the fancdity of his profession, and
winning appearance of candour, gained credit tc
his declarations. The veneration due to a perfor
clothed with legal authority, and asing in virtue
of a royal commission, began to revive among
men accustomed for some time to nothing mor

c Fcnandez, ,ib. ii. c. s6-8-.

refpeaable

refpedable than an usurped jurifdition. Hino-
jofa, Mexia, and feveial other officers of diftinc-
tion, to each of whom Gafca applied separately,
were gained over to his interell, and waited only
for some decent occasion of declaring openly in
his favour 'I

This the violence of Pizarro soon afforded
them. As soon as he heard of Gafca's arrival
at Panama, though he received, at the fame
time, an account of the nature of his commifion,
and was informed of hia offers not only to render
every Spaniard in Peru easy concerning what was
pals, by an acd of general oblivion; but secure
with refpec% to the future, by repealing the ob-
noxious lawss; instead of accepting with grati-
tude his sovereign's gracious concessions, he was
so much exasperated on finding that he was not
to be continued in his station as governor of the
country, that he inRtantly resolved to oppose
the president's entry into Peru, and to pre-
vent his exercising any jurifdicion there. To
this desperate refoTution he added another highly
preposterous. He sent a new deputation to
Spain to justify this condut, and to insist, in
name of ail the communities in Peru, for a con-
frmation of the government to himself during
life, as the only means of preserving tranquillity
there. The persons entrusted with this strange
commission, intimated the intention of Pizarro
to the president, and required him, in his name,
to depart from Panama and return to Spain.
They carried likewise secret inftructionsto Hino-

.;a, directing him to offer Gafca a present of

' Fernandez, ib.ii c ,2, &c. r-,b.

7 vi. c. 6,7.
o*s:;a,:c. 175. \era, y pi hb. v. c, 3.

L L 3 fifty

fifty thousand pesos, if he would comply volum.
tarily with what was demanded of him; and if
he should continue obstinate, to cut him offeither
by afaffination or poison '

Many circumffances concurred in pushing on

Pizarro to those wild measures. Having been
once accustomed to supreme command, he could
not bear the thoughts of descending to a private
Ration. Conscious of his own demerit, he sus.
peced that the emperor studied only to deceive
him, and would never pardon the outrages which
he had committed. His chief confidents, no
less guilty, entertained the fame apprehensions.
The approach of Gafca without any military
force excited no terror. There were now above
fix thousand Spaniards fettled in Peru f; and at
the head of these he doubted not to maintain
his own independence, if the court of Spain
Ihould refute to grant what he required. But
he knew not that a spirit of defedion had al.
ready begun to spread among those whom he
trusted most. Hinojofa, amazed at Pizarro'i
precipitate resolution of setting himself in op-
position to the emperor's commission, and dif-
daining to be his instrument in perpetrating the
odious crimes pointed out in his secret initruc.
tions, pubiicly recognized the title of the pre-
sident to the supreme authority in Peru. The
officers undrr his command did the fame. Such
was the contagious influence of the example,
that it reached even the deputies who had been
sent from Peru; and at the time when Pizarro

Zar3te, lib. v. c. S. Ferrandez, lib. ii, c. 33, !4.
HS- ri, dec. 8. ';b ii. c. 9, 1o.

f .icrrera, dec . lS .
ib. ,ii, c. ,

expce:.

cxpe&ed to hear either of Gafca's return to
Spain, or of his death, he received an account of
bis being master of the. fleet, of Panama, and of
the troops stationed there.

1547.] Irritated almost to madness by events
so un-xpeced, he openly prepared for war; and
in order to give some colour of jutice to his
anms, appointed the court of audience in Lima to
proceed to the trial of Gafca, for the crimes of
having seized his ships, seduced his officers, and
prevented his deputies from proceeding in their
voyage to Spain. Cepeda, though acing as a
judge in virtue of the royal commission, did not
icruple to prostitute the dignity of his fun&ion
by finding Gafca guilty of treason, and con-
demning him to death on that account g. Wild,
and even ridiculous as this proceeding was, it
mnpofed on the low illiterate adventurers, with
whom Peru was filled, by the semblance of a
legal fanEtion warranting Pizarro to carry on
hoflilities against a convicoted traitor. Soldiers
accordingly resorted from every quarter to his
itandard, and he was loon at the head of a thou-
lad men, the best equipped that had ever taken
tie field in Peru.

Gafca, on his part, perceiving that force must
be employed in order to accomplish the purpose
of his mission, was no less assiduous in collecting
;:oops from Nicaragua, Carthagena, and other
!;:tiementson the continent; and with such fuc-
cdi, that he was loon in a condition to detach a
:r' aron of his fleet, with a considerable body of
:.diu-rs, to the coast of Peru [April]. Their ap-

'-nandez, lib. ii. c. 5;. Vega, p. II, lib. v. c. 7.

i-::r , *.-c, , 1. ht ia
ii. C.

pearance

pearance excited a dreadful alarm; and though
they did not attempt for some time to make any
descent, they did more effectual service, by setting
ashore in different places persons who dispersed
copies of the act of general indemnity, and the
revocation of the late edits; and who made
known everywhere the pacific intentions, as well
a3 mild temper, of the president. The effec of
spreading this information was wonderful. All
who were dissatisfied with Pizarro's violent ad-
ministration, all who retained any sentiments of
fidelity to their fovcreign, began to meditate re-
volt. Some openly deserted a cause which they
now deemed to be unjut. Centeno, leaving the
cave in which he lay concealed, assembled about
fifty of his former adherents, and with this feeble
half-armed band advanced boldly to Cuzco. By
a sudden attack in the night-time, in which he
displayed no less military skill than valour, he
rendered himself matter of that capital, though
defended by a garrison of five hundred men.
Mloft of these having ranged themselves under
his banners, he had loon the command of a re.
fpe&able body of troops h.

Pizarro, though aitonifhed at beholding one

enemy approaching by sea, and another by lard,
at a time when he trulled to the union of all
Peru in his favour, was of a spirit more undaunt-
ed, and more accustomed to the viciflitudes of
fortune, than to be disconcerted or appalled. As
the danger from Ccntcno's operations was the
most urgent, he instantly set out to oppose him.
Having provided horses for all his soldiers, h,

h Zara:c, E1.. i. c. 1;--6. Gomara, c. I o, ISI
Fernar.Jcz, I;b. ii. c. 23. 64, &c.

marchle

Larched with amazing rapidity. But every
itorning he found his force diminished, by num-
bers who had left him during the night; and
Jhough he became suspicious to excess, and pu-
li~ed without mercy all whom he fufpeded, the
rage of desertion was too violent to be checked.
Before he got within fight of the enemy at Hu-
ina, near the lake Titiaca, he could not muster
sore than four hundred soldiers. But these he
jilly confidered as men of tried attachment, on
Thom he might depend. They were indeed
the boldest and most desperate of his followers,
conscious, like himself, of crimes for which they
rould hardly expet forgiveness, and without any
hope but in the success of their arms. With
these he did not hesitate to attack Centeno's
troops [O&ober 20], though double to his own
in number. The royalists did not decline the
combat. It was the most obstinate and bloody
that had hitherto been fought in Peru. At
iength the intrepid valour of Pizarro, and the
Sfperiority of Carvajal's military talents, tri-
imphed over numbers, and obtained a complete
ictory. The booty was immenfei, and the
treatment of the vanquished cruel. By this
signal success the reputation of Pizarro was re-
ttablified, and being now deemed invincible
in the field, his army increased daily in num-
ber".

But events happened in other parts of Peru,
which more than counterbalanced the splendid
ri ory at Huarina. Pizarro had scarcely left

i Sc, NOT. CXI.. k Zarate, lib. vii. c. z, 3.
Gorrara, c. 11g. Vega, ?. x. lib v. c. il, &c. Ser-
andez, lib. ii. c. 79. Hcrrera, dec. S. lib. iv. c. 1, 2.

Lima,

Lima, when the citizens, weary of his opprefse
dominion, erefed the royal standard, and Al-
dana, with a detachment of soldiers from th
fleet, took poffcffion of the town. About the
fame time 1, Gafca landed at Tumbez with site
hundred men. Encouraged by his pretence,
every settlement in the low country declared for
the king. The situation of the two parties wus
now perfectly reverted; Cuzco and the adjacent
provinces were possessed by Pizarro; all the rei
of the empire, from Quito southward, acknow-
ledged the jurifdicion of the prefidcnt. Ashil
numbers augmented fail, Gafca advanced into
the interior part of the country. His behaviour
fill continued to be gentle and unassuming; he
expressed on every occasion, his ardent wieh of
terminating the contelt without bloodshed. More
solicitous to reclaim than to punish, he up-
braided no man for pafi offences, but received
them as a father receives penitent children re-
turning to a sense of their duty. Though de.
firous of peace, he did not flacken his prepara.
tions for war. He appcinted the general ren.
dezvous of his troops in the fertile valley of
Xauxa, on the road to Cuzco m. There he re-
mained for some monthR, not only that he might
have time to make another attempt towards an
accommodation with Pi/arro, but that he might
train his new soldiers to the iife of arms, and ac-
custom them to the discipline of a camp, before
he led them again it a body of victorious veterans.
Pizarro, intoxicated with the success which had
hitherto accompanied his arms, and elated with

I Zara3:, jib. vi. c. I7.

Z3raie, iia. vii. c. 9. Fernandez, ib. ii, c. 77. hz.

having

having again near a thousand men under his
command, refused to liften to any terms, al-
though Cepeda, together with several of his
officers, and even Carvajal himfelfn, gave it as
their advice to close with the president's offer of
2 general indemnity, and the revocation of the ob-
noxious laws °. Gafca having tried in vain every
expedient to avoid imbruing his hands in the
blood of his countrymen, began to move to-
wards Cuzco [Dec. 29], at the head of sixteen
hundred men.

Pizarro, confident of vitory, suffered the roy-
alifts to pass all the rivers which lie between Gua-
manga and Cuzco without opposition [1548],
and to advance within four leagues of that capital,
fattering himself that a defeat in such a situation
as rendered escape impraaicable would at once
terminate the war. He then marched out to
meet the enemy [April 9], and Carvajal chose
his ground, and made the disposition of the troops
with the discerning eye, and profound knowledge
in the art of war conspicuous in all his operations.
As the two armies moved forwards slowly to the
charge, the appearance of each was iingular.
In that of Pizarro, composed of men enriched
with the spoils of the most opulent country in
America, ever- officer, and almost all the pri.
aite men, were clothed in fluffs of silk, or bro-
cde, embroidered with gold and silver; and
their horses, their arms, their Itandards, were
'mrned with all the pride of military pomp P.
That of Gafca, though not so splendid, exhi-
bited what was no less firiking. He himself,

S' S NOTE CXLII. Zarate, lib. vii. c. 6.

HV@2

- " .
X!. r:b. v. c. -, P Zarat, lib. vi. c. Ii.

accompanied

accompanied by the archbishop of Lima, the
bishops of Quito and Cuzco, and a great numbe
of ecclesiastics, marching along the lines, bless.
ing the men, and encouraging them to a refo.
lute discharge of their duty.

When both armies were just ready to engage,

Cepeda set spurs to his horse, galloped off, and
surrendered himself to the president. Gard.
lasso de la Vega, and other officers of note, fol.
lowed his example. The revolt of persons in
such high rank struck all with amazement
The mutual confidence on which the union and
strength of armies depend, ceased at once. Dif.
trust and consternation spread from rank to rank
Some silently flipped away, others threw down
their arms, the greatest number went over to
the royaliils. Pizarro, Carvajal, and some lead.
ers, employed authority, threats, and entreatis,
to flop them, but in vain. In less than halfan
hour, a body of men, which might have decided
the fate of the Peruvian empire, was totally dif.
perfed. Pizarro, feeing all irretrievably loft
cried out in amazement to a few officers whc
fill faithfully adhered to him, "- T- .at remain!
for us to do ?"-" Let us rush," replied onebl
them, " upon the enemy's firmest battalion, and
die like Romans." Dejeted with such a reverT
of fortune, he had not spirit to follow this fol.
dierly counsel, and with a tameness difgracefoi
to his former fame, lie surrendered to one ol
Gafca's officers. Carvajal, endeavouring to
escape, was overtaken and seized.

Gafca, happy in this bloodles:s i;or-.-, did

not liain it with cruelt:. Pizarro, Carvajal, and
fi:r.ail .urber of th n:j!t: diitinguifhed or r.oto-

r.-.

__________ m lii~F011 Th#- -O-
GAS CA ~ ~ (.

ous offenders, were punished capitally. Pizarro
Is beheaded on the day after he surrendered.
Ie submitted to his fate with a composed dig-
ity, and seemed desirous to atone by repentance
)r the crimes which he had committed. The
d of Carvajal was suitable to his life. On his
nia he offered no defence. When the sentence
!judging him to be hanged was pronounced, he
relefsly replied, " One can die but once."
)uring the interval between the sentence and
elcution, he discovered no sign either of remorse
sr the past, or of solicitude about the future;
offing at all who visited him, in his usual far-
ftic vein of mirth, with the fame quickness of
ipartee and gross pleasantry as at any other pe-
iod of his life. Cepeda, more criminal than
ther, ought to have shared the fame fate; but
de merit of having deserted his associates at such
critical moment, and with such decisive effeEt,
hred him from immediate punishment. He was
jut, however, as a prisoner to Spain, and died
h confinement q.
In the minute detail which the contemporary
istorians have given of the civil dissensions that
nred in Peru, with little interruption, during
te years, many circumstances occur so striking,
nad which indicate such an uncommon state of
nanners, as to merit particular attention.

Though the Spaniards who first invaded Peru
fire of the lowest order in society, and the
peater part of those who afterwards joined them
tere persons of desperate fortune, yet in all the

Za.ate, lib. vii. c. 6, 7, S. Gomara, c. 185, i86.

v-, p. 1 I. lib. v. c. 30, &c. Fernandez, lib. ii. c. 86,
1. Herrera, dec. 8. ib. iv. c. 14, &c.
rOL. 11. M M bodies

bodies of troops brought into the field bv tb,
different leaders who contended for fuperiOitv
not one man aced as a hired soldier, that folleo-
his standard for pay. Every adventurer in Pen
confidered himself as a conqueror, entitled
by his services, to an establishment in tha
country which had been acquired by his valour
In the contests between the rival chiefs, eac!
chose his fide as he was dire&ed by his ow
judgment or affetions. He joined his corn
mander as a companion of his fortune, and di:
dained to degrade himself by receiving the wage
of a mercenary. It was to their sword, not t
pre-eminence in office, or nobility of birth, tha
most of the leaders whom they followed wer
indebted for their elevation; and each of the:
adherents hoped, by the fame means, to open
way for himself to the possession of power an
wealth r.

But though the troops in Peru served withot

any regular pay, they were raised at immenl
expence. Among men accustomed to divide th
spoils of an opulent country, the desire of o.
taining wealth acquired incredible force. Th
ardour of pursuit augmented in proportion t
the hope of success. Where all were intent o
the fame objeA, and under the dominion of th
fame passion, there was but one mode of gaini;
men, or of securing their attachment. Officr
of name and influence, betides the promise of fu
ture establishments, received in hand large gr-
tuities from the chief with whom they engaged
Gonzalo Pizarro, in order to raise a thous..

' Vega, p. ix. lib. iv. c. 35. 41.

ni=

en, advanced five hundred thousand pesoss.
Gafca expended in levying the troops which he
kd against Pizarro nine hundred thousand pesos',
The distribution of property, bellowed as the
reward of services, was still more exorbitant.
Cepeda, as the recompence of his perfidy and
iddrefs, in persuading the court of royal audi-
.nce to give the fanEion of its authority to the
sfurped jurifdi&ion of Pizarro, received a grant
of lands which yielded an annual income of a
snndred and fifty thousand pefosu. Hinojofa,
dho, by his early defecion from Pizarro, and
hrrender of the fleet to Gafca, decided the fate
of Peru, obtained a dltrict of country affording
to hundred thousand pesos of yearly value x.
While such rewards were dealt out to the prin-
c;al officers, with more than royal munificence,
proportional shares were conferred upon those of
lferior rank.
Such a rapid change of fortune produced its
atural effects. It gave birth to new wants,
nd new desires. Veterans, long accustomed to
i.rd(hip and toil, acquired of a sudden a taste
;- profuse and inconsiderate dissipation, and
ndulged in all the exceffcs of militaxy licentious-
:ess. The riot of low debauchery occupied
.me; a relish for expensive luxuries spread
;-ong others . The meanest soldier in Peru
Tould have thought himself degraded by march-
g on foot; and at a time when the prices of
vrses in that country u ere exorbitant, each in-

Fernandez, lib. ii. c. 54.
Zarate, lib. vii. c. o1. Heera, dec. 8. lib. v. c. 7.
G'Jmara, c. E64. x Vega, p 1 . lib. vi. c. 3.
Hcrrera, dec. 5. lib. ii. c. 3. dec. S. lib. viii. c. io.

M Ml 2 sifted

sifted on being furnished with one before he
would take the field. But though less patient
under the fatigue and hardships of service, they
were ready to face danger and death with a;
much intrepidity as ever; and animated by the
hope of new rewards, they never failed, o0
the day of battle, to display all their anti..
valour.

Together with their courage, they retained

all the ferocity by which they were originalh
distinguished. Civil dikcord never raged with
more fell spirit than among the Spaniards i,
Peru. To all the passions which usually envenor:
contests among countrymen, avarice was added
and rendered their enmity more rancorou:
Eagerness to seize the valuable forfeitures ex
pected upon the death of every opponent, fhs'
the door against mercy. To be wealthy, was
itself sufficient to expose a man to accusation, o
to subject him to punishment. On the flight:.
suspicions, Pizarro condemned many of the mc:
opulent inhabitants in Peru to death. CarvajL
without searching for any pretext to justify LE
cruelty, cut off many more. The number ,
those who suffered by the hand of the exec-
tioner, was not much inferior to what fell in th
fieldz; and the greater part was condenr.'.
without the formality of-any legal trial.

The violence with which the contending pa:

ties treated their opponents was not accompan::
with its usual attendants, attachment and fideli:i
to those with whom they acted. The tiet
honour which ought to be held sacred am,:
soldiers, and the principle of integrity, in:c

Z Sec NOTE CXLIII.

V.-0 .:

wrven as thoroughly in the Spanish character
a in that of any nation, seem to have been
equally forgotten. Even regard for decency,
and the sense of shame, were totally loft. During
their dissensions, there was hardly a Spaniard in
Peru who did not abandon the party which he
had originally espoused, betray the associates
-ith whom he had united, and violate the en-
ggements under which he had come. The
viceroy Nugnez Vela was ruined by the treachery
of Cepeda and the other judges of the royal au-
dience, who were bound by the duties of their
fanstion to have supported his authority. The
chief advisers and companions of Gonzalo
Pizarro's revolt were the first to forsake him,
and submit to his enemies. His fleet was given
up to Gafca, by the man whom he had singled
out among his officers to entrust with that im-
portant command. On the day that was to de-
cide his fate, an army of veterans, in fight of the
enemy, threw down their arms without striking
a blow, and deserted a leader who had often
conducted them to viCtory. Instances of such
general and avowed contempt of the principles
and obligations which attach man to man, and
bind them together in social union, rarely occur
in history. It is only where men are far removed
from the feat of government, where the restraints
of law and order are little felt, where the pro-
spect of gain is unbounded, and where immense
wealth may cover the crimes by which it is ac-
cuired, that we can find any parallel to the
levity, the rapaciousness, the perfidy, and cor-
ruption prevalent among the Spaniards in
Pru.

M M 3 On

On the death of Pizarro, the malcontents in

every corner of Peru laid down their arms, and
tranquillity seemed to be perfe&ly re-eftablih.
ed. But two very interesting objecs still re.
mained to occupy the president's attention. The
one was to find immediately such employment
for a multitude of turbulent and daring adven-
turers with which the country was filled, ai
might prevent them from exciting new commo-
tions. The other to bestow proper gratifications
upon those to whose loyalty and valour he had
been indebted for his success. The former of
these was in some measure accomplished, by ap-
pointing Pedro de Valdivia to prosecute the con-
quest of Chili; and by empowering Diego Can.
teno to undertake the discovery of the vast regions
bordering on the river De la Plata. The repu.
tation of those leaders, together with the hopes
of acquiring wealth, and of rising to confequencc
in some unexplored country, alluring many of the
most indigent and desperate soldiers to follow
their standards, drained off no inconsiderable
portion of that mutinous spirit which Gafca
dreaded.

The latter was an affair of greater difficulty,

and to be adjusted with a more attentive and
delicate hand. The repartimientos, or allotment:
of lands and Indians which fell to be ditlributcd,
in consequence of the death or forfeiture of the
former possessors, exceeded two millions of pefoi
of yearly rent a. Gafca, when now abfo!u:e
maifer of this immense property, retaincd th!
fame disinterested sentiments which he had or-

Veg2, p. 1I. lib. vi. c.4.

gina"7

rinally professed, and refused to reserve the
nalleft portion of it for himself. But the
iumber of claimants was great; and whilt the
-anity or avarice of every individual fixed the
rlue of his own services, and estimated the re-
:ompence which he thought due to him, the
)retensions of each were so extravagant,that itwas
mpoffible to satisfy all. Gafca lltened to them
mne by one, with the most patient attention;
rnd that he might have leisure to weigh the
omparative merit of their several claims with
Lccuracy, he retired, with the archbishop of
Lima and a single secretary, to a village twelve
agues from Cuzco. There he spent several
iavs in allotting to each a diftri& of lands and
lumber of Indians, in proportion to his idea of
:htir past services and future importance. But
hat he might get beyond the reach of the fierce
Aorm of clamour and rage, which he foresaw
vould burst out on the publication of his decree,
rnowithftanding the impartial equity with which
he had framed it, he set out for Lima, leaving
:he instrument of partition fealed up, with orders
sot to open it for fume days after his departure.
The indignation excited by publishing the decree
of partition [Aug. 24] was not less than Gafca
had expeEted. Vanity, avarice, emulation, envy,
Ihame, rage, and all the other passions which
most vehemently agitate the minds of men when
both their honour and their interest are deeply
affeAed, conspired in adding to its violence. It
'.oke out with all the fury of military insolence.
C!'imny-, threats, and curses, were poured out
pim',y upon the president. He was accused of

ingratitude,

ingratitude, of partiality, and of injufiicc.
Among soldiers prompt to action, such seditious
discourse would have been soon followed by deeds
no less violent, and they already began to turn
their eyes towards some discontented leaders,
expecting them to stand forth in redress of their
wrongs. By some vigorous interpositions oi
government, a timely check was given to thii
mutinous spirit, and the danger of another civi
war was averted for the present b.

1549.] Gafca, however, perceiving that the

flame was suppressed rather than extinguilhed
laboured with the utmost assiduity to soothe the
malcontents, by betlowing large gratuities or
some, by promising repartimientot, when they fel
vacant, to others, and by caressing and flatterin;
alL But that the public security might reft or
a foundation more stable than their good assec
tion, he endeavoured to strengthen the hands o
his fucceifors in office, by re-establishing the re
gular administration of justice in every part o
the empire. He introduced order and fimplicit;
into the mode of collecting the royal revenue
Hie issued regulations concerning the treatmen
of the Indians, well calculated to protec then
from opprefion, and to provide for their inftruc
tion in the principles of religion, without de
priving the Spaniards of the benefit accruing
from their labour. Having now accomplifhe
every object of his miflion [ 55o], Gafca,longin.
to return again to a private ilation, committed ti?

b Zaratc, lib. vii. c 9. Coma-a, c. I'7. Vega, p. il

lib. vii. c. l, kc Fernandez, p. I;. lib. i. c. r, &c
H-rrera, dec, 8. l;b. iv, c. 17, &c.

governmme

government of Peru to the court of audience,
and set out for Spain [Feb. ]. As, during the
anarchy and turbulence of the four last years,
there had been no remittance made of the royal
revenue, he carried with him thirteen hundred
thousand pesos of public money, which the eco-
corny and order of his administration enabled him
to save, after paying all the expences of the

var.

He was received in his native country with

universal admiration of his abilities, and of his
;i:tue. Both were, indeed, highly conspicuous.
Without army, or fleet, or public funds; with
a train so simple, that only three thousand ducats
were expended in equipping him C, he fee out to
oppose a formidable rebellion. By his address
and talents he supplied all those dcfcds, and
seemed to create initruments for executing his
deiigns. He acquired such a naval force, as
gave him the command of the sea. He raised
a body of men able to cope with the veteran
bands which gave law to Peru. He vanquished
their leader, on whose arms vicDory had hitherto
attended, and in place of anarchy and usurpation,
he eitablifhed the government of laws, and the
authority of the rightful fovcreign. But the
praise bestowed on his abilities was exceeded by
that which his virtue merited. After residing
in a country where wealth presented allurements
which had seduced every person who had hi-
therto possessed power there, he returned from
that trying fation with integrity not only un-
tainted but unfufpeted. After distributing

Fernandez, Ib. ii. c. IS.

among

among his countrymen poffeflions of greater ex.
tent and value than had ever been in the dif.
pofal of a subjet in any age or nation, he hi..
self remained in his original state of poverty;
and at the very time when he brought such l
large recruit to the royal treasury, he \-:
obliged to apply by petition for a small fum tc
discharge some petty debts which he had con
traaed during the course of his service'
Charles was not insensible to such difintereftcc
merit. Gafca was received by him with the
most diftinguihing marks of esteem, and being
promoted to the bishopric of Palencia, he passcd
the remainder of his days in the tranquillity ol
retirement, refpeeted by his country, honoured
by his sovereign, and beloved by all.

Notwithstanding all Gafca's wife regulations,

the tranquillity of Peru was not of long continu.
ance. In a country, where the authority oi
government had been almoil forgotten during
the long prevalence of anarchy and misrule,
where there were disappointed leaders ripe for
revolt, and seditious soldiers ready to follow
them, it was not difficult to raise combustion.
Several fucceflive infurre&ions desolated the
country for some years. But as those, though
fierce, were only transient storms, excited rather
by the ambition and turbulence of particular
men, than by general or public motives, the
detail of them is not the object of this hiftorv.
These commotions in Peru, like every thing of
extreme violence either in the natural or political
body, were not of long duration, and by carry-

d MS. Sers me.

ing

ing off the corrupted humours which had given
rife to the disorders, they contributed in the
end to strengthen the society which at first they
threatened to destroy. During their fierce con-
teRi, several of the first invaders of Pelu, and
man)' of those licentious adventurers whom the
fame of their success had allured thither, fell by
each other's hands. Each of the parties, as
they alternately prevailed in the flruggle, gra-
dually cleared the country of a number of tur-
bulent spirits, by executing, proscribing, or
banishing their opponents. Men less enter-
prifing, less desperate, and more accustomed to
move in the path of fober and peaceable in-
duftry, fettled in Peru; and the royal autho-
rity was gradually established as firmly there as
i:i the other Spaniih colonies.

NOTES

# NOTES AND ILLUSTRATIONS.

# NOTE LIV. p. 3.

# NOTE LV. p. 3.

NOTES

AND
ILLUSTRATIONS.

NOTE LIV. p. 3.
THE number of the filh in the rivers of South America

is so extraordinary, as to merit particular notice.
' In the Maragnon (fays P. Acugna) fish are so plenti-

t..hat, without any art, they may take them with the
.'ns'." p. 13. " In the Orinoco, (fays P. Gumilla,)
ttdes an infinite variety of other fish, tortoise or turtle
y'und in such numbers, that I cannot find words to
nirefs it. I doubt not but that such as read my ac-
::unn will accuse me of exaggeration ; but I can affirm,
:-it it is as difficult to count them as to count the sands
tr the banks of that river. One may judge of their
umber by the amazing consumption of them ; for all
:: nations contiguous to the river, and even many who
;-: at a distance, flock thither at the season of breeding,
;d not only find futfenance during that time, but carry
:5 great numbers both of the turtles and of their eggs,
: " Hist. de l'Orenoque, ii. c. ai. p. 59. M. dela
C3ndamine confirms their accounts, p. I59-

NOTE LVp.. 3.

Piso describes two of these plants, the Cururnape, and
": Guajana-Tirbo. It is remarkable, that though they
L-e this fatal effeft upon filhes, they are so far from
ti:g noxious to the human species, that they are used
v01, 1 N in

# NOTE LVI. p. 6.

# NOTE LVII. p. 7.

in medicine with success. Pifo, lib. iv. c. 88. Bancrs!:
men'ions another, the HMarree, a small quantity of whl:
is fuff-lint to inebriate a!l the fish to a confiderds.:
dillance, so that in a few minutes they float motion;,!
on the furfice of the water, and are taken with ta'
Nat. Hilt. of Gu.ana, p. sc6.

NOTE LVI. p. 6.

REMARXABLE inflances occur of the calami.:

which rude na-ions susser by famine. Alvar Nuzr,
Cabeca de Vaca, one of the most gallant and viriru.
of the Spanilh adventurers, lefided almost nine )t:
among the 'avages of Florida. They were unacqua;r':
with ever species of agriculture. Their fubfilece .rc
Foor and p ecarious. " They live chiefly (fa)s ":
upon rooti of diffcrent plants, wlhch they procure v.
great difficulty, wandering from place to place in f:a'.
of them. S( metimes they kill game, fomecimes :':
catch filh, but in fucih small quantities, that their hur.:
is so extreme as compels them to eat spiders, the eS,
of ants, worms, lizards, serpents, a kind of unf8uo,
earth, and I am persuaded, that if in this country the
were any fionts, they would swallow there. They pre
serve the bones of fi'hes and serpents, which they gr.:
into powder, and eat. The only season when they c
not susser much from famine, is when a certain fru.
which he cails Trras, is ripe. This is the fame w
the Opjar;a, or prickly pear, of a reddilh and yellc
colour, with a sweet and insipid taste. They are form
tumes obliged to travel far from their usual place
residence, in order to find them." Naufragias, c. x'.
p. 20, 21, 22. In another place, he observes t'
they are frequently reduced to pass two or three di
without food, c. xxiv. p. 27.

NOTE LVI. p. 7.

M. FrnMIN has given an accurate description of I,
two species of manioc, with an account of its cu.tor

# NOTE LVIII. p. 8.

# NOTE LIX. p. 9.

to which he has added some experiments, in order to
ircertain the poisonous qualities of the juice extracted
from that species which he calls the bitter cassava.
,.mong the Spaniards it is known by the name of
1:a irava. Defcr. de Surin. tom. i. p. 66.

NOTE LVIII. p. 8.

THE plantain is found in Asia a:d Africa, as well
i in America. Oviedo contends, that it is not an in-
o;ztnous plant of the New World, but was introduced
into the island of Hispaniola, in the year 1516, by
:sher Thomas de Berlanga, and that he transplanted it
f:om the Canary Islands, whither the original flips had
ten brought from the East Indies. Oviedo, lib. viii.
c I. But the opinion of AcofRa and other naturalists,
.ho reckon it an American plant, seems to be better
fiunded. Acofi. Hifl. Nat. hb. iv. 2. It was culti-
a:etd by rude tribes in America, who had little inter-
:c.rfe with the Spaniards, and who were deflitute of
J-.i ingenuity, which disposes men to borrow what is
uteful from foreign nations. Gumil. iii. 186. Wa-
Itr'i Voyage, p. 87.

NOTE LIX. p. 9.

IT is remarkable, that Acofta, one of the molf ac-
rc-ate and belt informed writers concerning the Weft
lo,:es, affirm, that maize, though cultivated in the
ccn:;nent, was not known in the island-, the inhabit-
an's of which had none but caffada bread. Hilt. Nat.
. .iv. c. 16. But P. Martyr, in the sirs book of his
frft Decad, which was writen in the year r493, upon
::; return of Columbus from his first voyage, expressly
re.ntions maize as a plant which the islanders culti-
'a'ed, and of which they made bread, p. 7. Gomara
i.:ewife afferrs, that they were acquainted with the cul-
're of maize. Hiftor. Gener. cap. zg. Oviedo de-
*;iibes maize without any intimation of its being a
:ant that was not natural to Hispaniola. Lib. vii.
; I.

N N 2

# NOTE LX. p. 16.

# NOTE LXI. p. 16.

NOTE LX. p. 16.

New HoLLAND, a country which formerly was only

known, has lately been visited by intelligent obfervenr
It lies in a region of the globe where it muff enjoy a
very favourable climate, as it stretches from the icth
to the 38th degree of northern latitude. It is of great
extent, and from its square form muff be much more
than equal to all Europe. The people who inhabit the
various parts of it appear to be of one race. They are
evidently ruder than moR of the Americans, and have
made fill less progress in improvement and the arts of
life. There is not the leaR appearance of cultivation ;.
any part of this vast region. The inhabitants are ex.
tremely few, so that the country appears almost defo-
late. Their tribes are fill more inconsiderable than
those of America. They depend for subsistence, almost
entirely, on fishing. They do not fettle in one place,
but roem about in quefs of food. Both sexes go flarlk
naked. Their habitations, utensils, &c. are more
simple and rude than those of the Americans. Voyages,
by Hawkefworth, iii. 6z2, &c. This, perhaps, is the
country where man has been discovered in the earliest
flage of his progress, and it exhibits a miserable fpeci.
men of his condition and powers in that uncultivated
slate. If this country shall be more fully explored by
future ravigators, the comparison of the manners of
its inhabitants with those of the Americans will prove
an inltruaive article in the hiflory of the human
species.

NOTE LXI. p. I6.

P. GABIIEL MAR sT, who travelled from hit

flation among the Illinois to Machillimakinac, thuo
describes the face of the country " We have marched
twelve days without meeting a tingle human creatorr.
Sometimes we found ourselves in vast meadows, e
which we could not fee the boundaries, through whici
there flowed many brooks and rivers, but without anm

pa:'

# NOTE LXII. p. 17.

psah to conduct us. Sometimes we were obliged to
,,cn a passage across thick forests, through bushes, and
.nderwood filled with briars and thorns. Sometimes
,w had to pass through deep m rfhes, in which we
f.nk up to the middle. After being fatigued through
*:: day, we had the earth for our bed, or a few leaves,
:xofed to the wind, the rain, and all the injuries of
:nM air." Lettr. Edifiantes, ii. 36o. Dr. Brickell, in
In excursion from North Carolina towards the moun-
tains, A. D. 1730, travelled fifteen days without meet-
ir, with a human creature. Nat. Hist. of North Ca-
ro:;na, 3'9. Diego de Ordas, in attempting to make
f-.tlement in South America, A. D. 1531, marched
ff:y days through a country without one inhabitant.
Herrera, dec. 5. lib. i. c. 1.

NOTE LXII..p. 7.

I STRON-GLY fufpec that a community of goods,

ar'.J n urdivided btore, are known only among the
rdeft tribes of hunters ; and that as soon as any species
of agriculture or regular induflry is known, the idea
t an exclusive right of property to the fruits of them
ii in:roduced. I am confirmed in this opinion by ac-
cnunts which I have received concerning li-" Itate of pro-
ptty among the Indians in very different regions of
A.merica. " The idea of the natives of Brasil concern-
,rg property is, that if any person cultivate a field, he
one ought to enjoy the produce of it, and no other
:.-s a title to pretend to it. If an individual or family
p a-hunting or fishing, what is caught belongs to the
.-.ividual or to the family, and they communicate no
:-. of it to any lut to their cazique, or to such of their
k.n'.red as happen to be indisposed. If any person in
-,e village c-,me to their hut, he may fit do.vn freely,
and eat without ail.'ng liberty. But this is the confe-
-.r-ne of their general principle of hof;,i:ality; for I
rrecr obfcrved any partition of the Increase of their
*;4. or the produce of the chace, w'ic h i could con-
Lt;; a; the refuit of any idea conrcetrnng a coammuniy

N 3 of

# NOTE LXIII. p. 18.

of goods. On the contrary, they are so much attached
to what they deem to be their property, that it would
be extremely dangerous to encroach upon it. As far
as I have seen, or can learn, there is not one tribe oi
Indians in South America, among whom that comma.
nity of goods which has been so highly extolled is knowr.
The circumstance in the government of the Jesuits,
most irksome to the Indians of Paraguay, was the com.
munity of goods which those fathers introduced. T!ii
was repugnant to the original ideas of the Indians.
They were acquainted with the rights of private ex-
clufive property, and they submitted with impatience tr
regulations which defiroycd them." M. le Cheval. de
Pinto, MS. erne: me. " Acual possession (fays a
missionary who resided several years among the Ind!ar;
of the Five Nations gives a right to the foil, but wher.
ever a possessor fees fit to quit it, another has as gc-S
right to take it as he who left it. This law, c-
custom, refpeas not only the particular spot on wliic2
be erefs his house, but also his planting-ground. If a
man has prepared 3 particular spot of ground, on whict
he designs in future to build or plant, no man has a
right to incommode him, much less to the fruit cf
his labours, until it appears that he voluntarily giv;r
up hi, views. But I never heard of any formal con.
veyance from one Indian to another in their nartras
state. The limits of every cantor, are circumfcribedi
that is, they are allowed to hunt as far as such a river
on this hand, and such a mountain on the othc-.
This area is occupied and improved by individuals and
their families. Individuals, not the community, have
the use and profit of their own labours, or success ic
hunting." MS. of Mr. Gideon Hawley, penes me.

NOTE LXIII. p, i8.

TIes difference of temper between the Americsr,

and negrces is so remarkable, that it is a prover;:'
aysing in the French ifiarni, " Regarder un fauz-.-

, .

# NOTE LXIV. p. 19.

# NOTE LXV. p. 33.

de travers, c'eft le battre ; le battre, c'eft Ie tuer ; battre
un negre, c'eft le nourrir.' Tertre, ii. 490.

NOTE LXIV. p. 19.

TH description of the political slate of the people of

Cinaloa perfecly resembles that of the inhabitants of
North America. " They have neither laws nor kings
'fays a missionary who resided long among them) to
punfh any crime. Nor is there among them any fpe-
cies of authority, or political government, to restrain
them in any part of tteir condu&. It is true, that they
acknowledge certain Caziques, who are heads of their
families or villages, but their authority appears chiefly
in war, and the expeditions against their enemies.
T:iia authority the Caziques obtain not by hereditary
r.ght, but by their valour in war, or by the power and
r.umber of their families and relations. Sometimes
ihey owe their pre-eminence to their eloquence in dif-
playing their own exploits." Ribas, Hiftor. de las
Triumph. &c. p. I . The fiate of the Chiquitos in South
America is nearly the fame. " They have no regular
form of government, or civil life; but in matters of pub-
lic concern they lilten to the advice of their old men,
and usually follow it. The dignity of Cazique is not
hereditary, but conferred according to merit. as the
rtward of valour in war. The union among them is
imperfe&. Their society resembles a republic without
any head, in which every man is matter of himself, and
upon the least disgust, separates from those with whom
he seemed to be conne&ed." Relacion Hiflorical de
las Mitffones de los Chiquitos, por P. Juan Patr. Ser-
nandez, p. 32, 33- Thus, under very different cli-
mates, when nations are in a similar slate of society,
thtir institutions and civil government assume the fame
form.

NOTE LXV. p. 33.

" I IAVZ known the Indians (fays a person well
icq'jairted with their mode of life) to go a tbouland

miles

# NOTE LXVI. p.  33.

# NOTE LXVII. p. 36.

# NOTE LXVIII. p. 36.

miles for the purpose of revenge, in pathless woodi,
over hills and mountains, through huve cane swamps,
exposed to the extremities of heat ard cold, the viciffi.
tude of seasons, to hunger and thirdt. .'uch is the,r
over-boiling revengeful temper, that they utterly con.
temn all those things as imaginary trifles, if they are so
happy as to get the scalp of the murderer, or enemy, t'
farisfy the craving ghofis of their deceased relations."
Adair's Hist. of Amer. Indians, p. i5o.

NOTE LXVI. p. 33.

IN the account of the great war between the Algon-

quins and Iroquois, the atchievements of Pilkaret, a
famous chief of the Algonquins, performed moflly by
himself alone, or with one or two companions, make a
capital figure. De la Potherie, i. 297, &c. Colder'i
Hist. of Five Nations, zj, &c.

NOTE LXVII . .36.

THE life of an unfo;runare leader is often in danzer,

and he is always degraded from the rank which he had
acquired by his former exploits. Adair, p. 388.

NOTE LXVIII. p. 36.

As the ideas of the North Americans, with refpea to

the mode of carryonp on war, are generaily known, I
hive founded my obfervatlons chiefly upon the teflimony
of the authors who defcr.be them. But the fame max-
ims rook place among other nations in the New World.
A udicious mifflonary has given a view of the military
operations of the people in Gran Chaco, in So,uth Am.-
rica, perfecly similar to those of the Iroquois. " T!.y
a2e much addiecd to war (fays he), which they carry
on irecuently among ,hcmftlvcs, but perpetually a-a.rt
the Span:ards. But they may ra her he cal!ed thic'ts
than focdiers, for they never nmake head aeainfl tl.
Spaniards, unless when tl-ey can ajauit .:em Ly lieal'h,::

# NOTE LXIX. p. 37.

have guarded against any mischance by spies, who may
be called indefatigable j they will watch the settlements
of the Spaniards for one, two, or three years, observing
by night every thing that passes with the utmofl soli-
ciude, whether they may expeEt resistance or not ; and
until they are perfecly secure of the tvent, they will
not ventu-e upon an attack so that wvhen they do give
the assault, they are certain of success, and free from
all danger. These spies, in order that they may not be
obfcrsed, will creep on all-four like cats in the night,
but if they are discovered, make their escape with much
retxterity. But, although they never choose to face the
Spaniards, if they be surrounded in any place, whence
they cannot escape, they will fight with desperate valour,
and fell their lives very dear." Lozano, Defcrip. del
Gran Chaco, p. 78.

NOTE LXIX. p. 37.

LztR, who was an eyewitness of the proceedings

of the Toupinambos, a Brafilian tribe, in a war against a
powerful nation of their enemies, describes their courage
and ferocity in very striking terms: Ego cum Gallo
altero, paulo curiofius, magno noftro periculo, (si enim
ab hoflibus capti aut lefi fuiffemus, devorationi fuiffemus
devoti,) barabros noflros in militiam euntes comitari
volui. Hi, numero 400o capita, cum hoflibus ad littus
decertarunt, tanta fcrocitate, ut vel rabidos et furiosos
quofque fuperarent. Cum primum hostes confpexere,
in magnos atque editos ululatus perruperunt. Haec gens
adeo sera eft & truculenta, ut tantifper dum virium vel
tantillum reflat, continuo dimicent, fugamque nunquam
capeffant. Quod a natura illis inditum effe reor. Teflor
interea me, qui non femel, tum peditum tum equitum
copias ingentes, in aciem inftruaas hic confpexi, tanta
nunquam voluptate videndis peditum legionibus armis
fulgentibus, quanta turn pugnantibus iltis percuffum
fLiffe. Lery, Hist. Navigat. in Brasil. ap. de Bry, iiL
%?7, 2C8, z29.

# NOTE LXX. p. 38.

# NOTE LXXI. p. 43.

# NOTE LXXII. p. 44.

NOTE LXX. p. 38.

IT was originally the practice of the Americans, ai

well as of other savage nations, to cut off the heads of
the enemies whom they flew, and to carry them away
as trophies. But, as they found these cumbersome in
their retreat, which they always make very rapidly, and
often through a v-.s extent of country, they became
fa'isfied with tearing off their scalps. This cuflom,
though most prevalent in North America, was not un.
known among the Southern tribes. Lozano, p. 79.

NOTE LXXI. p. 43.

THz terms of the war song seem to be ditated by

the fame fierce spirit of revenge: " I go to war to
revenge the death of my brothers; I (hall kill; I shall
exterminate; I shall burn my enemies; I shall bring
aw.ay flaes i I (hall devour thtir heart, dry their fleCr,
drink their blood i I (hail tear off their scalps, and make
cups of their fkul;s." Eoifu's Travels through Louifi-
ana, vol. i. p. ro2. I am inlormed, by persons on whole
telhimony I can rely, that as the number of people in the
Indian tribes has decreased so much, almost none of
their prisoners are now put to death. It is confidered
as better policy to spare and to adopt them. Those
dreadful scenes which 1 have described occur now so
rarely, that miffonaries and traders who have resided
long among the Indians, never were witnelfes to
them.

NOTE LXXII. p. 44.

ALL the travellers who have visited the mofl un-

ciilized of the American tribes, agree in this. It is
c.-nfirmed by two remarkable circumfiances, wh Th
occurred in the conquest of diffcrent provinces. In the
expedtion of Narvaez into Florida in the )ear i528, the
Spaniards were reduced to such extreme difhlefs by
famine, that, in orczr to preserve their own lives,

they

# NOTE LXXIII. p. 45.

# NOTE LXXIV. p. 48.

they ate such of their companions as happened to
die. This appeared so (hocking to the natives, who
were accustomed to devour none but prisoners, that it
tfiled them with horror and indignation against the
Spaniards. Torquemada, Monarch.. Ind. ii. p. 584-
Naufragios de Alv. Nugnez Cabeca de Vaca, c. xiv.
p. 1 . During the siege of Mexico, though the Mexi-
cans devoured with greediness the Spaniards and Tlaf-
calans, whom they took prisoners, the utmost rigour
oi the famine which they suffered could not induce them
to touch the dead bodies of their own countrymen.
B:rn. Diaz. del Castillo Conquift. de la N. Efpagna,
p. 1.6.

NOTE LXXIII. p. 5.

MA NY singular circumsfances concerning the treat-

mnnt of prisoners among the people of Brasil, are con-
tairtd in the narrative of Stadius, a German officer in
t'.c fervce of the Portugutfe, published in the year
15 6. lie was taken prisoner by the Toupina,.bcs, and
r-;iained in captivity nine years. He was often present
at thfe horrid festivals which he describes, and was
dcstincd himself to the faine cruel fate with other pri-
foners But he saved his life by extraordinary efforts of
courage and addrefi. De Bry, iii. p. 34, &c. M. De
Ltry, who accompanied M. De Villegagnon in his expe-
di:ion 'o Brasil, in the year x556, and who resided some
tinie in that country, agrees with Stadius in every cir-
curnfance of importance. He was frequently an eye-
w.',cf, of the manner in which the Brafilians treated
ti. ;r piifoners. De Bry, ii:. 210. Several striking
pa;ir:u'ars omitted by them are mentioned by a Portu-
guefe author. Purch. Itilgr. iv. 1294, &c.

NOTE LXXIV. .p 48.

THO:UG I have followed that opinion concerning

t!. apathy of the Americans, which appeared to me
most rational, and fuppo:ted by the authority of the

most

# NOTE LXXV. p. 50.

# NOTE L XXVI. p. 51.

moit refpeaable authors, other theories have been
formed with regard to it, by writers of great eminence.
D. Ant. Ulloa, in a late work, contends, that the texture
of the skin and bodily habit of the Americans is such,
that they are less sensible of pain than the reft of man-
kind. He produces several proofs of this, from the
manner in which they endure the most cruel chirur-
gical operations, &c. Noticias Americanas, p. 313, 314.
The fame obfervarion has been made by surgeons in
Brasil. An Indian, they fay, never complains under
Fain, and will bear the amputation of a leg or arm
without uttering a single groan. MS. cen:s mre.

NOTE LXXV. p. 5c.

THSis is an idea natural to all rude nations. Among

the Romans, in the early periods of their common-
wvealth, i: was a maxim that a prifuner, " turn deceffife
videtur cum captus eft." Digest. l:b. xlix. tit. r5. c. ig.
And afterwards, when the progress of refinement ren-
dered them more indulgent with refpet to this article,
they were obliged to employ two fieicns of law to
secure the property, and perm:t the return of a captive,
the one by the Lex Cornelia, and the other by the Jus
Pofiliminii, Heinec. Elem. Jur. Civ. sec. ord. Pand. ii.
p. 294. Among the negroes the fame ideas prevail.
No ransom was ever accepted for a prifcner. As soon
as one is taken in war he is reputed to be dead ; and he
is Co in effe& to his country and his family. Voy. du
Cheval. des Marchais, i. p. 369.

NOTE LXXVI. p. 51.

THm people of Chili, the most galiant and high-

spirited of all the Americans, are the only exception
to this observation. They attack their enemies in the
open field; their troops are ranged in regular order;
their battalions advance to the charge not only with
courage, but with discipline. The North American:,
though many of them have substituted the European

fir:.

# NOTE LXXVII. p. 54.

# NOTE LXXVIII. p. 55.

re-arms in place of their own bows and arrows,
I.11 adhere to their ancient maxims of war, and carry it
an according to their own peculiar fyflem. But the
:hilefe nearly resemble the warlike nations of Europe

Ad Asia in their military operations. Ovalle's Rela-
,on of Chili. Church. Coll. iii. p. 71. Lozano's Hist.
'arg. i. 144, 145.

NOTE LXXVII. p. 54.

HERRERA gives a remarkable proof of this. In
yucatan, the men are so solicitous about their dress, that
::,ey carry about with them mirrors, probably made of
tone, like those of the Mexicans, Dec. iv. lib. iii. . 8.
:n winch they delight to view themselves; but the wo-
r.cn never use them. Dec. iv. lib. x. c. 3. He takes
crtice, that among the fierce tribe of the Pancbes, in the
r.tw kingdom of Granada, none but diflinguifhed war-
*;rs were permitted either to pierce their lips and to
ytar green fione in them, or to adorn their heads
..:h plumes of feathers. Dec. vii l. . ix. c. 4. In
Line provinces of Peru, though that empire had made
considerable progress in civiliza:ion, the slate of women
was little improved. All the toil of cultivation and
'cmeftic work was devolved upon them, and they
aere not permitted to wear bracelets, or other orna-
,nents, with which the men were fond ot dc,knng them-
't;'cs. Zarate, Hifl. de PIu, i. p. 15, 6.

NOTE LXXVIII. p. 55.

I HAVE ventured to call this mode of anointing and
Painting their bodies, the dref of the Americans. This
,! agreeable to their own idiom. As they never Itir
i-ioad if they are not completely anointed; they ex.
i.t(c themselves when in this situation, by faying, that
*:ey cannot appear because they are naked. Gumilla,
n-,;:. de l'Orenoque, i. 9 1.
VCL. II, 0 0

# NOTE LXXIX. p. 56.

# NOTE LXXX. p. 57.

NOTE LXXIX. p. 56.

SoMe tribes in the province of Cinaloa, on the gull

of Caliornma, seem to be among the rudest peopleoi
America united in the social (tate. They neither cuiu-
vate nor fo.v; they have no houses in which they re-
f-ie. TI-of in the inland country fubfit by hunting;
those on the sea co ft chiefly by hihing. Both deperd
u) ,n the fp-a'aneous productions of the earth, fruiti,
piin-s, and ro:es of various kinds. In the rainy sea.
son, as they have no habitations to afford them fheler,
they gatlicr bundles of reeds, or itrong grass, and
h.nd;ng heni rtogether at one end, they open them a.
the other, and fitt.ng them to their heads, they art
covered as w.:h a larg, cap, which like a pent houfi
thro'.v ors the rain, an-d will keep them dry for several
hours. During the war-n season, they form a (hel
wilh the hranches of trees, which protecs them from
the sultry rays of the fun. When expo'sed to cold the)
make largc firs, rc.un 1 which they seep in the opet
air. H!:toria de los Triumphos de Nueltra Santa Si
entre C-ntes las mis barbars, &c. por P. And. Perez d
Ribas, p. 7, &c.

NOTE LXXX. p. 57.

THIsE houses refSenble barns. " We have mea

fured some which we-e a hund-ed and fifty paces ionz
and tv.enty paces br.ad. Above a hundred perfnr
rehfi: n so re of them." Wilson's Account of Guiana
Puwch. Pilgr. vol. iv. p. t262. Ibid. I291. "The Indi,
houfcs,' fays Mr. Barrere, " have a most vwrercbe
appearance, and are a Rtriking image of the rudenel
of early times. Their huts are commonly built o
some riling ground, or on the banks of a river, hud
died fume-imes together, fometines straggling an
al m3ys without any order. Their aspet is melanchc
a?'d .!r:ee ab'.e. ()ne fres nothing but vwht is hide-.
an, i age. Thie uncu..:ivatcd silds have no gait,.

i,

# NOTE LXXXI. p. 59.

# NOTE LXXXII. p. 59.

The silence which reigns there, unless when interrupted
by the disagreeable notes of birds, or cries of wild
beasts, is extremely dismal." Relat. de la France Equin.
i, 146.

NOTE LXXXI. p.59.

SOM! tribes in South America can fend their arrows
to a great difiance, and with considerable force, without
ihe aid of the bow. They make use of a hollow reed,
about nine feet long, and an inch thick, which ib ca'ltd
dSabacane. In it they lodge a small arrow, with some
tr.;un cotton wound about its great en! ; this con-
rnes the air, so that they can blew it with astonishing
-pidity, and a sure aim, to the diflance of above a

nrdr8c paces. These small arrows are always poison-
-:. Frn.in. Defer. de Surin. i. 55. Bancroft's Hist.
cfCuJara, p. Si , &c. The Sarbacane is much used
. fcme parts of the East Indies.

NOTE LXXXII. p. 59.

I ,IGHT produce many inflances of this, hut shall
: y.f.fy myself with one, taken from the ES:imaux.
"Their greatell ingenuity (fays Mr. Ellis) is shewn in

e firulture of their bows, made commonly of three
pecc- of wood, each making Fiart of the fame arch,
rtry nicely and exacfly joined together. They are com-
mionly of fir or larch; and as this wants flrength and
tlafticity, they supply both by bracing the back of the
tew, with a kind of thread, or line, made of the
frcws of their deer, and the how-firing of the fame
iaterials. To make them draw more ft.ffly, they dip
'rem into water, which causes both the back of the
,cw and the firing to conrra&, and consequently gives
i the greater force ; and as they praaife from their
?ou'h, they shoot with very great dexterity." -Voyage
Hudson's Bay, p. 138.

002

# NOTE LXXXIII. p. 60.

# NOTE LXXXIV. p. 60.

# NOTE LXXXV. p. 62.

NOTE LXXXIII. p. 60.

NECEsSITY is the great prompter and guide of

mankind in their inventions. There is, however, such
inequality in some parts of their progress, and fomt
nations get so far the start of others in circumfiancei
nearly similar, that we mufl ascribe this to some events
in their story, or to some peculiarity in their situation
with whi:h we are unacquainted. The people in tiL
island of Oaheite, lately discovered in the South Sea,
far excel moil of the Americ'ns in the knowledge and
praacce of the arts of ingenuity, and yet :hey had not
invented any method of boiling water; and having 2n
vessel that would bear the fire, they had no more idea
that water could be made hot, than that it could be
made solid. Voyages by Hawkefworth, i 466. 484.

NOTE LXXXIV. p. 60.

ONE of these boats, which could carry nine men

weighed only sixty pounds. Gofnol. Relat. des Voy.
la Virgin. Rec de Voy. au Nord, tom. v. p. 403.

NOTE LXXXV. p. 62.

A RMA^ rABLL proof of this is produced by Lloi

In weaving hammocks, coverlets, and the other coari
cloaths, which they are accustomed to manufature
their industry has discovered no more expeditious me
thod, than to take up thread after thread, and aftr
counting and forting them each time, to pass the woc
between them, so that in finishing a small piece of thol
fluffs, they frequently spend more than two year
Voyage, i. 336. Bancroft gives the fame description
the Indians of Guiana, p. tSc. According to Adat
the ingenuity and diCpatch of the North American It
dians are not greater, p. 4z2. From one of the engra
ings of the Mexican paintings in Purchas, vol. i
p. 1io6, I think it probable that the people
Mexico were unacquainted with any better or rre

expei:t;ic

# NOTE LXXXVI. p. 64.

# NOTE LXXXVII. p. 66.

# NOTE LXXXVIII. p. 67.

expeditious mode of weaving. A loom was an invention
beyond the ingenuity of the mofl improved Americans.
In all their works they advance so slowly, that one of
their artifis is two months at a tobacco-pipe with his
knife before he finishes it. Adair, p. 423.

NOTE LXXXVI. p. 64.

THE article of religion in P. Lafitau's Mhiurs des
Sauvages, extends to 347 tedious page. in quarto.

NOTE LXXXVII. p. (.6.

I H.AVE referred the reader to several of the authors

vho describe the molt uncivilbzed nations in America.
Th-ir testimony is uniform. Thatof P. Ribas concern-
,rs the people of Cinaloa, coinci..es with the ref. " I
na; extremely attentive (fays he) during the )ears I
rrie-d among them, to ascertain whether they were to
he confidered as idolaters and it may be affirmed wi:h
the most perfea exactness, that though among some of
t' em there may be traces of idolatry, yet others have
ro' tLe least k; owledge of God, or even of any false
:. , n^r pay any formal adoration to the Supreme
ET-:nr, who exercises dominion over the world i nor
hive thly any conception of the providence of aCreator
or Governor, from whom they expec in the next life,
r.- reward of their good, or the punishment of their evil
Ctte:. Neither do they publicly join in any a: of
s.vire worship." Ribas, Triumphos, &c. p. 16.

NOTE LXXXV1II. p. 67.

TiFE people of Brasil were so much affrighted hy

tr:.-ricr, which is frequent and awful in their country,
1! :ell as in other parts of the torrid zcne, that it was
ro only the objtet of religious reverence; but the m)ft

prefrfive name in their language for the Deity, was

5:an, the lame by which they diflinguifhed thunder.
r,i, de MJecc. Erafil, p. 8. Nieulioff. Lhurch. Coil. li.

o
3 3

# NOTE LXXXIX. p. 74

# NOTE XC. p. 82.

# NOTE XCI. p. 83.

# NOTE XCII. p.86.

NOTE LXXXIX. p. 74.

BY the account which M. Dumont, an eye witnels,

gives of the funeral of the great chief of the Natchez, it
appears, that the feelings of the persons who suffered on
that occasion were very different. Some clicited the
honour with eagerness; others laboured to avoid their
doom, and several saved their lives by flying to the
woods. As the Indian Bramins give an intoxicating
draught to the women, who are to be burnt together
with the bodies of their husbands, which renders them
insensible of their apprcaching fate, the Natchez obliged
their viaimrs to swallow several large plls of tobacco,
which produce a similar effea. Mem. de Louis. i. 1z7.

NOTE XC. p. 82.

ON some occasions, particularly in dances intfituted

for the recovery of persons who are indisposed, they a,¢
extremely licentious and indecent. De la Pothsrie,
Hist. &c. ii. p. 41. Charlev. N. Fr. iii. p. 319. But
the nature of their dances is commonly such as I have
described.

NOTE XCI. p. 83.

TaR Orl:maroas, a tribe feated on the banks of the

Orinoco, employ for the fame purpose a composition,
which they call Tupa. It is formed of the feeds of an
unknown plant, reduced to powder, and certain shells
burnt and pulverized. The effets of this when dra.-n
up into the nostrils are so violent, that they referrbl
madness rather than intoxication. Gumilla, i. z86.

NOTE XCII. p. 86.

THOUGH this observation holds true among the

greater part of the southern tribes, there are some :
which the intemperance of the women is as excessive ni
that of the men. Bancroft's Nat. Hilt. of Guiana,
P. 75.

# NOTE XCIII. p. 91.

# NOTE XCIV. p. 93.

NOTE XCIII. p. 91.

EVEN in the most intelligent writers concerning the

manners of the Americans, one meets with inconsistent
and inexplicable circumfiances. The Jesuit Charlevoix,
Nho, in consequence of the controversy between his
order and that of the Franciscans, with refpea to the
talents and abilities of the North Americans, is disposed
to represent their intellecual as well as moral qualities
in the most favourable light, asserts, that they are en-
gaged in continual negotiations with their neighbours,
and conduct thtfe with the most refined address. At
the fame time he adds, " that it behoves their envoys
or plenipotentiaries to exert their abilities and eloquence,
for if the terms which they offer are not accepted of,
they had need to iland on their guard. It frequently
happens, that a blow with a hatchet is the only return
given to their propositions. The envoy is not out of
danger even if he is so fortunate as to avoid the broke,
he may expect to be pursued, and if taken, to be
burnt." Hist. N. Fr. iii. 25. What occurs vol. ii.
p. l61. concerning the manner in which the Tlafcalans
treated the ambassadors from Zempoalla, corresponds
with the fact related by Charlevoix. Men capable of
such ats of violence, seem to be unacquainted with the
first principles upon which the intercourse between na-
tions is founded ; and inflead of the perpetual negotia-
tions which Charlevoix mentions, it seems almost im-
possible that there should be any correspondence what-
ever among them.

NOTE XCIV. p. 93.

It is a remark of Tacitus concerning the Germans,
Gaudent muneribus, fed nec data imputant, nec ac-

ceFtls obligantur." C. z2. An author who had a good
opportunity of observing the principle which leads fa-
vages neither to express gratitude for favours which
th;, had received, nor to expec any return for such as
they bcitcwed, thus explains their ideas " If, fay

they,

# NOTE XCV. p. 106.

# NOTE XCVI. p. 106.

they, you give me this, it is because you have no need
of it yourself; and as for me, I never part with that
which I think necessary to me." Memoir fur le
Galibis; Hifl. des Plantes de la Guiane Francoise par
M. Aublet, ton. ii. p. i Jo.

NOTE XCV. p. 1o6.

AND. BEERSALDES, the contemporary and friend of

Columbus, has preserved some circumflances concerning
the bravery of the Caribbees, which are not mentioned
by Don Ferd nand CclJmbus, or the other hifto:iant
of that period, wvhofe works h3ve been publilhed. A
Caribbean canoe, wi;h four men, two women, and a
boy, fell in unexpectedly with the feet of Columbus in
his second voyage, as it was fleering through their
islands. At first they were firuck almost t1upid w,'h
aflonifhment at such a firange fpecdacle, and hardly
moved from the spot for above an hour. A Span fh
bark, with twenty five men, advanced towards them,
and the fleet gradually surrounded them, so as to cut off
their communication with the (hore. " When they
saw that it was impossible to escape, (fays the hiflorian,)
they seized their arms with undaunted resolution, and
began the attack.

" I use the expression, with undaurtedrreflutrin, for they

were few, and beheld a vast number ready to assault
them. They wounded fc.eral of the Spaniards, althcueh
they had targets, as well as other dtfenfive armour
and even after their canoe was ovcrfet, it was with no
lile difficulty and danger that part of them were taken,
ai they cont.nued to defend ihemfelves, and to use thtir
bows with great dexterity whle swimming in the sea."
Hist- de D. Fern. y Yfab. MSS. c. i 19.

NOTE XCVI. p. Tic.

A PP.OBABLE conjeciure may be formed with re-

fpeQ to the cause of the difmndcion in characler betwren
the Car;bbecs and the inhabitants of the larger iflanas.

7L.

# NOTE XCVII. p. 107.

The former appear manifeitly to be a separate race.
Their language is totally different from that of their
neighbours in the large illands. They themselves
have a tradition, that their ancestors came originally
from some part of the continent, and having conquered
and exterminated the ancient inhabitants, took poffeflion
of their lands, and of their women. Rochefort, 384.
Tertre, 360. Hence they call themselves Banaree, which
signifies a man come from beyond sea. Labat. vi.
131. Accordingly, the Caribbees still use two difiin&
languages, one peculiar to the men, and the other to
the women. Tertre, 361. The language of the men
has nothing common with that spoken in the large
islands. The dialea of the women considerably re-
fembles it. Lahar. 129. This strongly confirms the
tradition which I have mentioned. The Caribbees them-
selves Imagine, that they were a colony from the Galibis,
a powerful nation of Guiana, in South America.
Tertre, 361. Rochefort, 348. But as their fierce
manners approach nearer to those of the people in the
northern continent, than to those of the natives of South
America; and as their language has likewise some as-
finity to that spoken in Florida, their origin should be
deduced rather from the former than from the latter.
Labat. zg2, &c. Herrera, dec. i. lib. ix. c. 4. In their
wars, they fill observe their ancient praaice of de-
firoying all the males, and preserving the women either
for servitude or for breeding.

NOTE XCVII. p. 107.

OUR knowledge of the events which happened in the

conquest of New Spain, is derived from sources of in-
formation more original and authentic than that of any
tranfa&ion in the history of America. The letters of
Cortes to the emperor Charles V. are an historical mo-
nument, not only first in order of time, but of the
greatest authenticity and value. As Cortes early as-
fumed a command independent of Velasquez, it became
necessary to convey such an account of his operations to

Madrid,

Madrid, as might procure him the approbation of his
sovereign.

The firfi of his di'patches has never been made pub.

Iic. It was sent from Vera Cruz, July 16th, 1519.
As I imagined that it might not reach the emperor,
until he arrived in Germany. for which he set out early
in the year 152o, in order to receive the Imperial
crown I made diligent search for a copy of this dif-
parch, both in Spain and in Germany, but without
success. This, however, is of less consequence, as it
could not contain any thing very material, being written
so loon after Cones arrived in New Spain. But, in
searching for the letter from Cortes, a copy of one from
the colony of Vera Cruz to the emperor has been dif-
covered in the Imperial library at Vienna. Of this I
have given some aczount in its proper place, vol.ii.
p. I41. The second dispatch, dated Odober
3:th, 51io, was publilhed at Seville, A. D. 15z,
and the third and fourth loon after they were received.
A Latin translation of them appeared in Germany,
A.D. 1 532 Ramufio loon after made them more ge-
nerally known, by inferring them in his valuable col-
legion. They con!ain a regular and minute history of
the expedition, with many curious particulars concern-
ing the policy and manners of the Mexicans. The
work does honour to Cortes; the flyle is simple and
perspicuous ; but as it was manifefily his interest to
represent his own aaions in the fairest light, his vicories
are probably exaggeraied, his losses dim;nifhed, and his
acs of rigour and violence softened.

The next in order is the Chronica de la Neuva Es-

pagna, by Francisco Lopcz de Gomara, publihed
A. D. 1554. Goma:a s lifiorical merit is considerable.
His mode of rarration is cle-r, fiowing, always agree-
able, and fomet..i.cs ciegant. But he is frequently in-
accurate and credulous; and a. he was the domestic
chaplain of Cores after his return from New Spain, and
probably composed his work at his desire, it is manifest
that he labours to magnify the merit of his hero, and

to

to conceal or extenuate such tranfafions as were un-
favourable to his characer. Of this Herrera accuses
him in one inflance. Dec. ii. lib. iii. c. 2. and it is
not once only that this is conspicuous. He writes,
however, with so much freedom concerning several
measures of the Spanilh court, that the copies both of
his Hifloria de las Indias, and of his Chronica, were
called in by a decree of the council of the Indies, and
they were long confidered as prohibited hooks in Spain;
it is only of late that licence to print them has been
granted. Pinelo, Biblioth. 539.

The Chronicle of Gomara induced Pernal Diaz del

Caflilio to compose his Hiftoria Verdadera de la Con.
autila de la Nueva Efpagna. He had been an adven
turer in each of the expeditions to New Spain, and was
tihe companion of Cortes in all his battles and perils.
Wh'-n he found that neither he himself, nor many of
his iel'ow soldiers, were once mentioned by Gomara, but
liat the fame of all their exploits was ascribed to Cor-
tes; the gallant veteran laid hold of his pen with In-
dignation, and composed his true history. It contains
a prolix, minute, confuted narrative of all Cortes's
operations, in such a rude vulgar flyle as might be
expected from an illiterate soldier. But as he relates
tranfaclions of which he was witness, and in which he
performed a considerable part, his account bears all the
marks of authenticity, and is accompanied with such a
pleasant naivete, with such interefling details, with such
amusing vanity, and yet so pardonable in an old soldier
who had been (as he boafis) in a hundred and nineteen
battles, as renders his book one of the most singular
that is to be found in any language.

Pet. Martyr ab Angleria, in a treatise de Infulis nuper

inventis, added to his Decades de Rebus Oceanicis &
Nrvn Orbe, gives some account of Cortes's expedition.
But he proceeds no farther than to relate what happened
aser his first landing. This work, which is brief and
flight, seems to contain the information transmitted by
Cortes in his first dispatches, embellished with several

particulars

particulars communicated to the author by the officen
who brought the letters from Cortes.

But the book to which the greater part of moder

historians have had recourse for information concerning
the conquest of New Spain, is Hiftoria de la ConquiRa
de Mexico, por D. Antonio de Solis, first published A.D.
1684. I know no author in any language whose literary
fame has risen so far beyond his real merit. De Solis is
reckoned by his countrymen one of the purest writers
in the Cafliian tongue ; and if a foreigner may venture
to give his opinion concerning a matter of which Spa-
niards alone are qualified to judge, he is entitled to that
praise. But, though his language be corret, his tafle
in composition is far from being just. His periods are
so much laboured as to be often fliff, and sometimes
tumid; the figures which he employs by way of orna-
ment, are frequently trite or improper, and his oh-
servations superficial. ThefeblemiShes, however, might
easily he overlooked, if he were not defective with
refpec to all the great qualities of an historian. Defli.
tute of that patient indultry in research, which conduts
to the knowledge of truth; a firanger to that impar-
tiality which weighs evidence with cool attention; and
ever eager to eflablilh his favourite fyflem of exalting
the charaAer of Ccrtes into that of a perfeA hero, ex-
empt from error, and adorned with every virtue; he is
less solicitous to discover what was true, than to relate
what might appear fplendid.When he attempts anycritical
discussion, his reasonings are fallacious, and founded
upon an imperfec view of fads. Though he sometimes
quotes the dijpatcbes of Cones, he seems not to have con-
fulted them; and though he sets out with some censure
on Gomara, he frequently prefers his authority, the
most doubtful of any, to that of the other contemporary
hiflorians.

But of all the Spanish writers, Herrera furnishes the

fullest and most accurate information concerning the
conquest of Mexico, as well as every other tranfaaion r.!
America. The indufiry and attention with which hi

conf-!.t:

# NOTE XCVIII. p. 110.

# NOTE XCIX. p. 112.

consulted not only the books, but the original papers
and public records, which tended to throw any light
upon the subjeA of his inquiries, were so great, and
he usually judges of the evidence before him with so
much impartiality and candour, that his decads may be
ranked among the most judicious and useful hiflorical
colle&ions. If, by attempting to relate the various oc-
currences in the New World in a Itria chronological
order, the arrangement of events in his work had not
been rendered so perplexed, difconne&ed, and obscure,
that it is an unpleasant talk to colle& from different
parts of his book, and piece together the detached
(hreds of a flory, he might jufily have been ranked
among the molt eminent historians of his country.
He gives an account of the materials from which he
composed his work, Dec. vi. lib. iii. c. 19.

NOTE XCVIII. p. ilo.

COR TES purpored to have gone in the train of Ovando

when he set out for his government in the year 1 502,
but was detained by an accident. As he was attempt-
ing in a dark night to scramble up to the window of a
lady's bed-chamber, with whom lie carried on an in-
trigue, an old wall, on the top of which he had mount-
ed, gave way, and he was so much bruised by the fall
as to be unfit for the voyage. Gomara, Cronica de la
Nueva Efpagna, cap. 1.

NOTE XCIX. p. 11z.

CoRTzs had two thousand pesos in the hands of
Andrew Duero, and he borrowed four thousand. These
fums are about equal in value to fifteen hundred pounds
fierling; but as the price of every thing was extremely
high in America, they made but a scanty flock when
applied towards the equipment of a military expedition.
Herrera, dec. ii. lib. ii c. c. B. Diaz, c. zo.
VOL. II. P

# NOTE C. p. 116.

# NOTE CI. p. 118.

NOTE C. p. 1i6.

THs names of those gallant officers which will often

occur in the subsequent story, were Juan Velasquez de
Leon, Alonfo Hernandez Portocarrero, Francisco de
Montejo, Chriftoval de Olid, Juan de Efcalante, Fran-
cisco de Morla, Pedro de Alvarado, Francirco de Sal-
ceda, Juan de Efcobar, Gines de Nortes. Cortes himfeif
commanded the Capitana, or Admiral. Francisco de
Orczco, an officer formed in the wars of Italy, had
the command of the atillery. The experienced Ala-
munus aded as chief pilot.

NOTE CI. p. 118.

IS those different conflifls, the Spaniards loft on'y

two men, but had a considerable number wounded.
Though there be no occasion for recourse to any super.
natural cause to account either for the greatness of their
vietrines, or the smallness of their loss; the Spanih h.s-
torians fall not to afcnrbe both to the patronage of St.
Jago, the tutelar Saint of their country, who, as they
relate, fought at the head of their countrymen, and by
his prowess gave a turn to the fate of the battle. Go-
mara is the first who mentions this apparition of St.
James. It is amusing to observe the embarrassment of
B. Diaz de Castillo, occasioned by the firuggle between
his superstition and his veracity. The former disposed
him to believe this miracle; the latter restrained him
from atteiling it. " I acknowledge," fays he, " that
all our exploits and victories are owing to our Lord
Jesus Christ, and that in this battle there was fucha
number of Indians to every one of us, that if each had
thrown a handful of earth they might have buried us, il
by the great mercy of God we had not been proteced.
It may be that the person whom Gomara ment ons as
having appeared on a mottled grey horse, was the g'o-
rious apofile Signor San Jago or Signor San Pedro, and
that I, as being a finner, was not worthy to fee him.
Thbi I know, that I saw Francifca de Morla on such a

borfie

# NOTE CII. p. 124.

# NOTE CIII. p. 130.

# NOTE CIV. p. 143.

,orfe, but as an unworthy transgressor, did not deserve
ro fee any of the holy apofiles It may have been the
wil of God, that it was so as Gomara relates, but until
I read his Chronicle I never heard among any of the
:onquerors that such a thing had happened." Cap. 34.

NOTE CII. p. 124.

SEERAL Spanish historians relate this occurrerce

in such terms, as if they wilhed it ihould be believed,
that the Indians, loaded with the presents, had carried
them from the capital in the fame short space of time
that the couriers performed that journey. This is in-
credible, and Gomara mentions a circumflance which
shews, that nothing extraordinary happened on this oc-
cafion. This rich present had been prepared for Gri-
ja!va, when he touched at the fame place some months
beore, and was now ready to be delivered, as soon as
Montezuma sent orders for that purpose. Gomara,
Cron. c. xxvii. p. 28.

According to B. Diaz del Caflillo, the value of the
ilver plate representing the moon, was alone above
twenty thousand pesos, about five thousand pounds
fltrlng.

NOTE CIII. p. 130.

THis private traffic was direfly contrary to the in-

fiructiors of Velafqxuez, who enjoined, that whatever
wvs acquired by trade should be thrown into the coin-
mon flock. But it appears, that the fuldiers had each
a priva e assortment of toys, and other goods proper
for the Indian trade, and Cortes gained their favour by
encouraging this under hand barter. B. Diaz, c. 41.

NOTE CIV. p. 143.

GOMARA has publi(hed a catalogue of the various

articles of which this present consisted. Cron. c. 49.
P. Martyr ab Angleria, who saw them after they were
brought to Spain, and who seems to have examined

p p them

# NOTE CV. p. 150.

them with great attention, gives a description of each,
which is curious, as it conveys some idea of the progrefi
which the Mexicans had made in several arts of eleganc_.
De Infulis nuper inventis Liber, p. 354, &c.

NOTE CV. p. I5o.

THRtE is no circumfiance in the history of the con-

que:f of America, which is more questionable than the
account of the numerous armies brought into the field
against the Spaniards. As the war with the republic of
Tlafcala, though of Ihort duration, was one of the mod
confiderahle which 'he Spaniards waged in America, the
account given of the Tlafcalan armies merits some at.
tention. The only authentic information concerning
this is derived from three authors. Cortes, in his
second dispatch to the emperor, dated at Segura de la
Frontera, Ociober 30, 520, thus estimates the number
of their troops i in the firRf battle 6coo j in the second
battle ioo,cooj in the third battle I5o,ooo. Relat.
ap. Ramus. iii. z28. Bernal Diaz del Caltillo, who was
an eye-witness, and engaged in all the acions of this
war, thus reckons their numbers in the first battle
300o, p. 43 i in the second battle 6000oo, ibid. ; in the
third battle 5o,ooo, p. 45. Gomara, who was Cor-
tes's chaplain after his return to Spain, and published
his Crmnca in 15 2, follows the computation of Cortes,
except in the second battle, where he reckons the
Tlafcalans at go,o0o, p. 49. It was manifeitly the
interest of Cortes to magnify his own dangers and ex-
ploits. For it was only by the merit of extraordinary
services, that he could hope to atone for his irregular
conduf, in assuming an independent command. Bern.
Diaz, though abundantly disposed to place his own
prowess, and that of his fellow-conquerors, in the mod
advantageous point of light, had not the fame tempt-
ation to exaggerate ; and it is probable, that his account
of the numbers approaches nearer to the truth. The
assembling of an army of 15o,ooo men requires
many previous arrangements, and such provision for

theb

# NOTE CVI. p. 154.

# NOTE CVII. p. 156.

,heir fubfifience as seems to be beyond the foresight of
Americans. The degree of cultivation in Tlafcala does
not seem to have been so great, as to have furnished
such a vast army with provisions. Though this province
was so much better cultivated than other regions of New
-;ain, that it was called the country ofbread yet the
Spaniards in their march suffered such want, that they
were obliged to fubtift upon Tunas, a species of fruit
which grows wild in the fields. Herrera, Dec. ii.
!:b, vi. c. 5. p. 182.

NOTE CV1. p. 154.

THESE unhappy vi&ims are said to be persons of
diftineion. It seems improbable that so great a number
as fifty should be employed as spies. So many prisoners
had been taken and dismissed, and the Tlafcalans had
lent so many meflages to the Spanish quarters, that
there appears to be no reason for hazarding the lives of
so many considerable people, in order to procure in-
formation about the position and state of their camp.
The barbarous manner in which Cortes treated a people
unacquainted with the laws of war efiabl;fhed among
polished nations, appears so (hocking to the later Spanilh
wrlters, that they diminish the number of those whom
he punished so cruelly. Herrera fays, that he cut off
the hands of seven, and thumbs of some more. Dec. ii.
!:b. ii. c. . De Solis relates, that the hands of fourteen
or fifteen were cut off, and the thumbs of all the reft,
L;b. ii. c. 20. But Cortes himself, Relat. p. 228, b.
and after him Gomara, c. 48, affirm, that the hands of
ai the fifty were cut off,

NOTE CVII. p. 156.

THE horse, were objets of the greatest aftoni(hment

to all the people of New Spain. At first they imagined
the horse and his rider, like the Centaurs of the ancients,
to be some monfirous animal of a terrible form i and
supposing that their food was the fame as that of men,

f P 3 brought

# NOTE CVIII. p. 162.

# NOTE CIX. p. 163.

brought fielh and bread to nourish them. Even after
they discovered their mistake, they believed the horse,
devoured men in battle, and when they neighed,
thought that they were demanding their prey. It wai
not the interelt of the Spaniards to undeceive them.
Herrera, dec. ii. lib. vi. c. ii,

NOTE CVIII. p. 162.

ACCORDING to Bart. de las Casa;, there was no

reason for this massacre, and it was an at of wanton
cruelty, perpetrated merely to trike terror into the peo-
ple of New Spain. Relac. de la Deftruyc. p. 17, &c.
But the zeal of Las Cafasi often leads him to exaggerate.
In opposition to him, Bern. Diaz, c. 83, asserts, that the
first missionaries sent into New Spain by the emperor,
made ajudicial inquiry into this tranfaaion ; and having
examined the priests and elders of Cholula, fo-nd that
there was a real conspiracy to cut off the Spaniards, and
that the account given by Cortes was exactly true.
As it was the cbjedc of Cortes at that time, and manl-
feflly his interest, to gain the good will of Montezuma,
it is improbalble, that he should have taken a flep which
tended so visibly to alienate him from the Spaniards, if
he had not believed it to be necessary for his own pre-
servation. At the fame time, the Spaniards who served
in America had such contempt for the natives, and
thought them so little entitled to the common rights ci
men, that Corres might hold the Cholulans to be guilty
upon flight and imperfec evidence. The severity of the
punilhment was certainly excessive and atrocious.

NOTE CIX. p. 163.

THIs description is taken almost literally from Bernai

Diaz del Castillo, who was so unacquainted with the
art of composition, as to be incapable of embellifhir.g
h's narrative. He relates in a simple and rude style
what passcd in his own mind, and that of his fellow-
soldiers, on tla: cccalicn " And let it not be thouet:

itrangc.

# NOTE CX. p. 175.

# NOTE CXI. p. 178.

firange, fays he, that 1 (houid write in this manner of
what then happened, for it ought to be confidered, that
it is one thing to relate, another to have beheld things
that were never before seen, or heard, or spoken of
among men." Cap. 86. p. 64, b.

NOTE CX. p. 175.

B. DIAS del Castillo gives us some idea of the fatigue

and hardships they underwent in performing this, and
other parts of duty. During the nine months that they
remained in Mexico, every man, without any diftin&ion
between officers and soldiers, slept on his arms in his
quilted jacket and gorget. They lay on mats, or itraw
spread on the floor, and each was obliged to hold himself
as alert as if he had been on guard. " This," adds he,
I became so habitual to me, that even now in my ad-
vanced age, I always sleep in my clothes, and never in
any bed. When I visit my Encomienda, I reckon it suit-
able to my rank, to have a bed carried along with my
other baggage, but I never go into it; but, according to
cultom, I lie in my clothes, and walk frequently during
the night into the open air, to view the liars as I was
wont when in service." Cap. io8.

NOTE CXI. p. 178.

COPRTl himself, in his second dispatch to the em-

peror, does not explain the motives which induced him
either to condemn Qualpopoca to the flames, or to put
Montezuma in irons. Ramus. iii. 236. B. Diaz is
silent wi:h refptc to his reasons for the former ; and
the only cause he assigns for the latter was, that he might
meet with no interruption in executing the sentence
pronounced against Qualpopoca, c. xcv. p. 75. But
as MIontezuma was his prisoner, and absolutely in his
power, he had no reason to dread him, and the insult
offered to that monarch could have no effect but to
irritate him unneceifarily. Gomara supposes, that
Cc;;e. La' no zther object than to occupy Montezuma

wth

# NOTE CXII. p. 182.

with his own difirefs and sufferings, that he might
give less attention to what besel Qualpopoca. Cron.
c. 89. Herrera adopts the fame opinion. Dec. ii.
lib. viii. c. 9. But it seems an odd expedient, in order
to make a person bear one injury, to load him with
another that Is greater. De Solis imagines, that Cor!e
had nothing else in view than to intimidate Montezuma,
to that he might make no attempt to rescue the vic.
tims from their fate ; but the spirit of that monarch
was so fubmffiw'e, and he had so tamely given up the
prisoners to the disposal of Cortes, that he had no cause
to apprehend any opposition from him. If the explana-
tion which I have attempted to give of Cortes's pro.
ceedings on this occasion be not admitted, it appears to
re, that they must be reckoned among the wanton
and barbarous acs of oppreflion which occur too often
in the hiflory of the conquell of America.

NOTE CXII. p. 182.

Dr S'-rs afftrts, lib. iv. c. 3. that the proposition

of doing homage to the King of Spain, came from Mon-
tezuma himself, and was made in order to induce the
Spaniards to depart out of his dominions. Hedefcribes
his conduce on this occasion, as if it had been founded
upon a scheme of profound policy, and executed with
Cuch refined address, as to deceive Cortes himself. But
there is no hint or circumfiance in the contemporar)
hflorians, Cortes, Diaz, or Gomara, to justify th.i
theory. Montezuma on other occasions discovered nc
fich extent of art and ab li-ies. The anguish which he
felt in performing this humbling ceremony is natural,
if we fuppofeit to have been involuntary. But, accord.
ing to the theory of De Solis, which supposes tha:
Montezuma was executing what he himself had pro.
posed, to have assumed an appearance of sorrow, would
have been preposterous and inconfitient with his owv
design of deceiving the Spaniards.

# NOTE CXIII. p. 185.

# NOTE CXIV. p. 186.

NOTE CXIII. p. i85.

I several of the provinces, the Spaniards, with all

their induflry and influence, could collec no gold. In
others, they procured only a few trinkets of frall
value. Montezuma assured Cortes, that the present
which he offered to the king of Castile, after doing
homage, confitled of all the treasure amassed by his
father; and told him, that he had already distributed
the reft of his gold and jewels among the Spaniards.
B. Diaz, c. 1c4. Gomara relates, that all the silver
colleced amounted to 500 marks. Cron. c 93. This
agrees with the account given by Cortes, that the royal
fifth of silver was lo0 marks. Relat. z39, B. So that
the fum total of silver was only 4000 ounces, at the
rate of eight ounces a mark, which demonstrates the
proportion of ilver to gold to have been exceedingly
[mall.

NOTE CXIV. p. 186.

Dz SOLIS, lib. iv. c. I. calls in question the truth of

this tranfation, from no better reason than that it was
inconfirtent with that prudence which distinguishes the
character of Cortes. But he ought to have recolleced
the impetuosity of his zeal at Tlafcala, which was no
less imprudent. He asserts, that the evidence for it refts
upon the testimony of B. Diaz del Castillo, of Gomara,
and of Herrera. They all concur indeed, in mentioning
this inconsiderate flep which Cortes took ; and they had
good reason to do so, for Cortes himself relates this
exploit in his second dispatch to the emperor, and teems
to glory in it. Cort. Relat. Ramus. iii. 14o, D. This
is one instance, among many, of De Solis's having
consulted with little attention the letters of Cortes to
Charles V. from which the mot authentic information
with refpeo to his operations must be derived.

# NOTE CXV. p. 190.

NOTE CXV. p. I90.

HIRRZRE A and De Solis suppose, that Velasquez was

encouraged to equip this armament against Cortes, by
the accounts which he received from Spain concerning
the reception of the agents (ert by the colony of Vera
Cruz, and the warmth with which Fonseca bishop cf
Burgos had espoused his interest, and condemned the
proceedings of Cortes. Herrera, dec. ii. lb. ix. c. ig.
De Solis, hb. iv. c. j. But the chronological order of
events refutes this supposition. Portccarrero and Mon'ejo
failed from Vera Cruz, July 26, S519. Herrera, dec. ii.
lib. v. c. 4. They landed at St. Lucar in OQober,
according to Herrera, ibid. But P. Martyr, who at-
tended the court at that time, and communicated every
occurrence of moment to his correspondents day by day,
mentions the arrival of these agents for the first time,
in December, and speaks of it as a recent event.
Epift. 6 r. All the historians agree, that the agents of
Cortes bad their first audience of the Emperor at Torde-
fillas, when he went to that town to visit his mother
in his way to St. Jago de Compoftella. Herrera, dec. ii.
jib. v. c. 4. De So'is, lib. iv. c. 5. But the emperor
set out from Valladolid for Tordefillas, on the I lth of
March 5zo2 ; and P. Martyr mentions his having seen
at that time the presents made to Charles, Epift. 1665.
The armament under Narvaez failed from Cuba in April
152c. It is manifest then, that Velasquez could not
receive any account of what p3aTed in this interview
at Tordefiilas, previous to his hostile preparations aga Alt
Cortes. His real motives seem to be those which I
have mentioned. The patent appointing him Adcar,.tai
of New Spain, with such exrenfive powers, bears date
November 13, 15i9. Herrera, dec. ii. lib. iii. c. ii.
He might receive it about the beginning of January
Gomara takes notice, that as soon as this patent was
delivered to him, he began to equip a fleet and levy
forces. Cron. c. 96.

# NOTE CXVI. p. 193.

NOTE CXVI. p. 193.

DE SoLIs contends, that as Narvaez had nointerpre-
tcrs, he could hold no intercourse with the people of the
provinces, nor converse with them in any way but by
tins, and that it was equally impossible for him to carry
on any communication with Montezuma. Lib. iv.
c. vii. But ir is upon the authority of Cortes himself
Ilht I relate all the particulars of Narvaez's corre-
fpondence both with Montezuma and with his fubjets
:n the maritime provinces. Relat. Ramus. iii. 241, A.C.
Cortes affirms, that there was a mode of intercourse
between Narvaez and the Mexicans, but does not ex-
plain how it was carried on. Bernal Diaz supplies this
~esec, and informs us, that the three deserters who
pined Narvaez a&ed as interpreters, having acquired a
:mpetent knowledge of the language, c. Ilo. With
his usual minuteness, he mentions their names and
:haracers, and relates, in chapter izi, how they were
p'nifhed for their perfidy. The Spaniards had now
r-fided above a year among the Mexicans; and it is not
surprising, that several among them Lhould have made
some proficiency in speaking their language. This seems
to have been the cafe. Herre.a, dec. ii. lib.x. c. I.
Both B. Diaz, who was present, and Herrera, the moit
a:curate and belt informed of all the Spanith writers,
itree with Cortes in his account of the secret corre-
fpondence carried on with Montezuma. Dec. ii. lb. ix.
c. 18, 19. De Solis seems to confider it as a discredit
to Cortes, his hero, that Montezuma should have been
ready to engage in a correspondence with Narvaez.
He supposes that monarch to have contracted such a
wonderful affecion for the Spaniards, that he was not
solicitous to be delivered from them. After the indig-
-'y with which he had been treated, such an affetion
is incredible; and even De SHlis is obliged to acknov.w
ledge, that it m,-if he looked upon as one of the mi-
racleswhich G.:d had wrought to facilitate theconqueft,
hb. iv. c. 7. The truth is, Montezuma, however much
clerawed by his dread of the Spaniards, was extremely
uinpatent to recover his liberty.

# NOTE CXVII. p. 208.

# NOTE CXVIII. p. 214.

NOTE CXVII. p. 208.

THErs words I have borrowed from the anonymou,

Account of the European Settlements in America, pub.
lifhed by Dodfey, in two volumes, Svo. a work of f
much merit, that I Chould think there is hardly any
writer in the age who ought to be a(hamed of acknow.
Icdging himself to be the author of it.

NOTE CXVIII. p. 2t4.

THE contemporary historians differ considerably with

respect to the loss of the Spaniards on this occasion.
Cortes, in his second dispatch to the emperor, makei
the number only 5So. Relat. ap. Ramus. iii
p. 249, A. But it was manifeflly his interest, at thai
juncure, to conceal from the court of Spain the
full extent of the loss which he had fuflained. De Solii
always fludions to diminish every misfortune that befe
his countrymen, rates their loss at about two hundred
men, lib. iv. c. 19. B. Diaz affirms, that they lot
8;o men, and that only 440 escaped from Mexico
c. x28. p. 108, B. Palafox, bishop of Los Angeles
who seems to have enquired into the early tranfalioDo
of his countrymen in New Spain with great attention
confirms the account of B. Diaz, with refpet to the
extent of their loss. Virtudes del Indio, p. 22. Go.
mara flates their lots at 450 men. Cron. c. Ic9
Some months afterwards, when Cortes had receivec
several reinforcements, he muflered his troops, and
found them to be only 59c. Relat. ap. Ramus. i;
p. z55, E. Now, as Narvaez brought 880 men
into ew Spain, and about 4co of Cortes's foldierswer
then alive, it is evident, that his loss, in the retreal
frcm Mexico, muf have been much more confiderabli
than what he mentions. B. Diaz, foiicitous tomagnilf
the dangers and sufferings to which he and his fellow.
corquerors were expo(ed, may have exaggerated thein
loss; but, in my opinion, it cannot well be eflimatcd
at left thin 600 men.

# NOTE CXIX. p. 234.

# NOTE CXX. p. 242.

# NOTE CXXI. p. 248.

NOTE CXIX. p. 234.

SoME remains of this great work are fill visible, and
the spot where the brigantines were built and launched,
is trill pointed out to ttrangers. Torquemada viewed
them. Monarq. Indiana, vol. i. p. 531.

NOTE CXX. p. 242.

THN station of Alvarado on the causeway of Tacuba
was the nearest to the city. Cortes observes, that
there they could diftinAly observe what passed when
their countrymen were sacrificed. Relat. ap. Ramus. iii.
p. zl, E. B. Dmaz, who belonged to Alvarado's
division, relates what he beheld with his own eyes.
C. r5z. p. 148, b. I49) a. Like a man whose courage
was so clear as to be above suspicion, he describes with
his usual simplicity the impression which this fpeltacle
made upon him. " Before," fays he, " I saw the
breasts of my companions opened, their.hearts, yet
flttering, offered to an accursed idol, and their flesh
devoured by their exulting enemies; I was accustomed
to enter a battle not only without fear, but with high
spirit. But from that time I never advanced to fight
the Mexicans without a secret horror and anxiety; my
heart trembled at the thoughts of the death which I
had seen them susser." He takes care to add, that as
s:on as the combat began, his terror went off; and,
indeed, his adventurous bravery on every occasion is
full evidence of this. B. Diaz, c. 156. p. 157, a.

NOTE CXXI. p. 248.

ONE circumstance in this siege merits particular

no-ice. The account which the Spanish writers give
of the numerous armies employed in the attack or de-
fence of Mexico, seems to be incredible. According to
Conres himself, he had at one time X o,ooo auxiliary
Indians in his service. Relat. Ramus. iii. y75,igm:GPr-
mara afterts, that they were above zoo,0oc. Cron.
VOL. 1I. QOQ c. 136.

c. i 6. Herrera, an author of higher authority, fai,
they were about 2co,occ. Dec. iii. lib. i. c. !r
Nore of the contemporary writers afcerrain expliciti!
the number cf persons in Mexico during the siege. BAu
Cortes on several occasions mentions the number c(
M]exicans who were lain, or who perifted for want oi
food; and. if we may rely en rhofe circumflance', it is
prrhh'e that above two hundred thousand mufl ha:;
been shut up in the town. But the quantity of pro-
vlficr.s rtceffaiy for the fubfiflence of such vast multi.
tudes aftcmbled In one place during three months, is so
great, and it requires so much foiefight and arrange.
ment to coilec these and lay them up in magazines, so
a; to be certain of a regular supply, that one can hardly
beneve That this could be accomplrfed in a country
where agriculture was so imperfect as in the Mexican
empire, where there were no tame animals, and by a
people naturally so improvidten, and so incapable ot
executing a complicated plan as tl e molt improved
Americans. The Spariards, with all tieir care and
attenrion, fared very poorly, arid were often reduced to
extreme cifirefs for want ofprovifions. B. Diaz, p. 147.
Corres, Relat. 2 7 , D. Cortes on rne cccafion men:icrt
flghtiy the fubfifience of his army ; and after acknow.
ledgirg that they were ofen in ereat want, adds, that
they received supplies from the people of the country,
of fish, and of fcme fruit, which he calls the cherries oi
the country. Ibid. B. Diaz fays, that they had cake;
of maize, and ferafas cc la tierra; and when the feafrn
of tecfc was over, another fruir, which he calls Turna;
but their mofl comfortab'e fuhfiflerce was a root which
the Irdians use at io .d, to which lie gves the name i!
{ulhreir, p. 4.2. The Indian auxiliaries had one meant
of fubfiflence more than the Spaniards. They fed upon
the bodies o: the Mexicans whom they killed in battle
Cor. Relat. 176, C. B. Diaz confirms his relation, and
adds, that when the Indians returned from Mex'co tc
their own country, tlhey carried with them larFe
qtntities of the eefh of the Mexicans (alted or dried. ar

a mcll

# NOTE CXXII. p. 263.

a tr.fl acceptable present to their friends, that they
tDizht have the pleafurt of feeding upon the bodies of
their enemies in their feltivals, p. 157. De Solis, who
(fems to confider it as an imputation of discredit to his
countrymen, that they should acd in concert with aux-
i.a;ies who fed upon human fiefi, is felicitous to prove,
that tne Spaniards endeavoured to prevent their affo-
ciates from eating the bodies of the Mexicans, lib.v.
c. 24. But he has no authority for this from the ori-
ginal historians. Neilher Cortes himself, nor B. Diaz,
seem to have had any such scruple; and, on many oc-
cafins. mention the Indian repafis, which were be-
come familiar to them, without any mark of abhor-
rence. Even with this additional flock of food for the
Indians, it was hardly, possible to procure subsistence for
armies amounting to such numbers as we find in the
Spanish writers. Perhaps the befl solution of the diffi-
culty is, to adop. the opinion of B. Diaz del Caflillo.
the most artless of all the Hifisriadorelprimitivos. ' When
Gomara (fays he) on some occasion relates, that there
were so many thousand Indians our auxiliaries, and on
others, that there were so many thousand houses in this
or that town, no regard is to be paid to his enumera-
tion, as he has no authority for ir, the numbers not
being in reality the fifth of what he relates. If we add
together the different numbers which he mentions, that
country would contain more millions than there are in
Caflile." C. 119. But though some considerable de-
duction should certainly be made from the Spanish ac-
counts of the Mexican forces. they muff have been very
numerous i for nothing but an immense superiority in
number could have enabled them to withrfand a body
of nine hundred Spaniards, conducted by a leader of
such abilities as Cortes.

NOTE CXXII. p. 263.

I, relating the opprcffive and cruel proceedings of the

conquerors of Ntw Spain, I hve not followed B. de las
Casas as my guide. His account of them, Relat. de

I, Q z la

# NOTE CXXIII. p. 266.

la Deflruyc. p. i8, &c. is manifeflly exaggerated. Itt
from the teflimony of Cortes himself and of Gomars,
who wrote under his eye, that I have taken my account
of the punilhment of the Panucans, and they relate it
without any disapprobation. B. Diaz, contrary to hit
usual cufrom, mentions it only in general terms, c. 162.
Herrcra, solicitous to extenuate this barbarous aaion cf
his countrymen, though he mentions 63 caziques, and
4co men of rnoe, as being condemned to the fiames,
asserts that thirty only were burnt, and the reft par.
doned. Dec. iii. lib. v. c. 7. But this is contrary to tLt
teflimony of the original hiflorians, particularly of Go.
mara, whom it appears he had consulted, as he adopts
several of his exprefflons in this passage. The punlmh.
ment of Guatimozin is related by the most authentic cf
the Spanish writers. Torquemada has extraeed from
a hiflory of Tezeuco, compoled in the Mexican tongue,
an accountof this tranfacion, more favourable toGua-.
mozin than that of the Spanish authors. Mon. Irni-
ana, i. 575. According to the Mexican account, Cortes
had scarcely a shadow of evidence tojuflify such a wan-
ton aó of cruelty. B. Diaz affirms, that Guatimozin
and his fellow-fufferers asserted their innocence with
their last breath, and that many of the Spanish soldiers
condemned this aeion of Cortes as equally unneceffart
and unjult, p. 200, b. zos, a.

NOTE CXXIII. p. 266.

THE motive for undertaking this expedition was to

punish Chrifloval de Olid, one of his officers. who had
revolted againfi him, and aimed at eflablifhing an in-
dependent jurifdiAion. Cortes regarded this infurreaion
as of such dangerous example, and dreaded so much
the abilities and popularity of its author, that in person
he led the body of troops defined to suppress it. He
marched, according to Gomara, three thousand miles,
through a country abounding with thick forests, rugged
mountains, deep rivers, thinly inhabited, and cultivated

only

# NOTE CXXIV. p. 267.

tnly in a few places. What he suffered from famine,
romn the hostility of the natives, from the climate, and
rtom hardships of every species, has nothing in history
,prallel to it, but what occurs in the adventures of
:1: other difcovereis and conquerors of the New World.
Cor:es was employed in this dreadful service above two
:ears, and though it wa, not distinguished by any fplen-
:.d event, he exhibited, during the couife of ii, grei:er
pcrfonal courage, more fortitude of mind, more per-
ir.erance and patience, than in any other period or
icene in his life. Herrera, dec. iii. lib vi. vii. viii. ix.
Gemara, Cron. c. 163-167. B. Diaz, 174-- gc.

ltes, MS. penes me. Were cne to write a life of
.r c,, the account of th;s expedition Ihould occupy a
.ndid place in it. In a general hiflory of America,
,. he expedttion was produ&cve of no great event, the
:..:Ilion of it is sufficient.

NOTE CXXIV. p. 267.

Acco DING to Herrera, the treasure which Cortes
:3ught with him, consistcd of fifteen hundred marks
: wrought plate, two hundred thousand pesos of fine
r-id, and ten thousand of inferior flandard. many rich
c'els, one in particular, worth forty thousand pesos,
,Id several trinkets and ornaments of value. Dec. iv.
.. iii. c.i.. lib. iv. c. . He afterwards engaged to
se a portion with his daughter of a hundred thou-
:ind pesos. Gomara, Cron. c. -t7. Tihe fortune
which he left his sons was very considerable. But, as
w. have before related, the fum divided among tile
conquerors on the firfl reduction of Mexico was very
I(nall. There appears then to be some reason for sus-
-..ing th it the accusations of Cortes's enemies were not
i:together deflitute of foundation. They charged him
with having applied to his own use a difproporticnate
:r.are of the Mexican spoils ; with ha"ing concealed tht
syal treasures of Montezuma and Guatimozin j witi
:.ia.':n ng the king of hit tiitil a';d roboing hs fol-

- . -OSSaC.F

# NOTE CXXV. p. 271.

lowers of what was due to them. Herrera, dec.iii.
lib. viii. c. 5. dec. iv. lib. iii. c. S. Some of the con.
querors themselves entertained suspicions of the famr
kind, with refpe& to this part of his condut. B. Diaz,
c. 157.

NOTE CXXV. p. 271.

IN tracing the progress of the Spanish arms in New

Spain, we have followed Cortes himself as our mon
certain guide. His dispatches to the emperor contain a
minute account of his operations. But the unlettered
conqueror of Peru was incapable of relating his own
exploits. Our information with refpea to them, and
other tranfaaions in Peru, is derived however from con.
temporary and refpeaable authors.

The most earl, account of Pizarro's tranfaaions it

Peru, was publih.ed by Francisco de Xerez, his secretary
It is a simple unadorned narrative, carried down no
farther than the death of Atahualpa, in 1533; for the
author returned to Spain in I514, and soon after h
landed, printed at Seville his (hort History of the Con
quest of Peru, addrefled to the emperor.

Don Pedro Sancho, an officer who served unde

Pizarro, drew up an account of his expedition, whic]
was translated into Italian by Ramufio, and inserted ii
his valuahle collecion, but has never been published ii
its original language. Sancho returned to Spain at th
fame time with Xerez. Great credit is due to what both
these authors relate concerning the progress and opera
dions of Pizarro; but the residence of the Spaniards in
Peru had been so short, at the time when they left it
and their intercourse with the natives so slender, tha
their knowledge of the Peruvian manners and cuftorr
is very imperfet.

The next contemporary hiflorian is Pedro Cieza

Leon, who published h E Cronica del Peru, at Seville, i
1553. If be had finitfed all that he proposes in the g
neral division of his work, it would have been the rrm
complete hiflcry which had been published of any r

go

gion in the New World. He was well qualified to exe-
cute it, having served during seventeen years in Ame-
rica, and having visited in person most of the provinces
concerning which he had occasion to write. But only
the first part of his Chronicle has been printed. It con-
tains a description of Peru, and several of the adjacent
provinces, with an account of the institutions and cuf-
toms of the natives, and is written with so little art,
and such an apparent regard for truth, that one must
regret the loss of the other parts of his work.

This loss is amply supplied by Don Augustine Zarate,

who published, in x555, his Hiftoria del Defcubri-
miento y Conquefta de la Provincia del Peru. Zarata
was a man of rank and education, and employed in
Peru as comptroller-general of the public revenue. His
hiflory, whether we attend to its matter or composition,
is a book of considerable merit: as he had an oppor-
tunity to be well informed, and seems to have been
inquisitive with refpet to the manners and tranfaaions
of the Peruvians, great credit is due to his testimony.

Don Diego Fernandez published his Hiftoria del Peru

in 1 571. His sole object is to relate thediffenfions and
civil wars of the Spaniards in that empire. As he
served in a public flation in Peru, and was well ac-
quainted both with the country, and with the principal
aaors in those singular scenes which he describes, as he
polfeffed found underflanding and great impartiality,
his work may be ranked among those of the historians
most diflinguifhed for their induflry in research, or
their capacity in judging with refpea to the events
which they relate.

The last author who can be reckoned among the

contemporary hifiorians of the conquest of Peru, is
Garcilaffo de la Vega, Inca. For though the first part
of his work, intitled, Commentaris Reales del Origen de los
Incas Reis del Peru, was not published sooner than the
year 1609, seventy fix years after the death of Atahu-
alpa the las emperor, yet as he was born in Peru, and
was the son of an officer of difiinOtion among the Spanifl

conquerors,

# NOTE CXXVI. p. 276.

conquerors, by a Cya, or lady of the royal race, on ac.
count of which he always took the name of Inca; as
he was master of the language spoken by the Incas, and
acquainted with the traditions ot his countrymen, his
authority is rated very high, and often placed above that
of all the other hitorians. His work, however, is little
more than a commentary upon the Spanish writers cf
the Peruvian story, and ccmpofed of quotations taken
from the authors whom 1 have mentioned. This is the
idea which he himself gives of it. Lib i. c. to. Nor s
it in the account of fBfs only that he follows them ser-
vilely. Even in explaining the institutions and rites of
his ancestors, his information seems not to be more per.
fle than theirs. His explanation of the QuipJs is al-
most the fame with that of Acofta. He produces no
fpecamen of Peruvian poerry, but that wretched one
which he borrows from Bias Valera, an early misTir.-
ary, whose memoirs have never been published. Lib. ii.
c. rr. As for composition, arrangement, or a capacity
oi diflinguifhing between what is tabulous, what is pro-
bable, and what is true, one searches for them In vain
in the commentaries of the Inca. His work, however,
notwithstanding its great defeits, is not altogether defli-
tute of use. Some traditions which he received from his
countrymen are preserved in it. His knowledge of tile
Peruvian language has enabled him to correct Come
errors of the Spanish writers, and he has inserted in it
some curicus faas, taken from authors whose wioks
were never publifed, and are now loft.

NOTE CXXVI. p. 276.

ONE may form an idea both of the hardships which

they endured, and of the unheal:hful climate in the re-
gions which they visited, from the extraordinary mor-
tality that prevailed among them. Pi7arro carried out
Tlr men, Almagro -o. In less than nine months rjo
of these died. Few fell by the fvord; nmoft of them
w-- c.t c-' by difaf'-s. Xert7, '. rie.

# NOTE CXXVII. p. 279.

# NOTE CXXVIII. p. 295.

# NOTE CXXIX. p. 296.

NOTE CXXVII. p. 279.

TtIS island, fays Herrera, is rendered Co uncom-
sortable by the unvholefomenefs of its climate, its im-
penetrable woods, its rugged mountains, and the mul-
tliude of infelts and reptiles, that it is seldom any fofier
epithet than that of infernal is employed in describing
it. The fun is almost never seen there, and through-
out the )ear it haidly ever ceases to rain. Dec. 3.
Lb. x. c. 3. Dampitr touched at this island in the year
i68s ; and his account of the climate is not more
favourable. Vol. i. p. 72. He, daring his cruise on
the coast, visited most of the places where Pizarro
landed, and his description of them throws light on the
narrations of the early Spanish historians.

NOTE CXXVIII. p. 295.

BY this time horses had multiplied greatly in the Spa-
rilsh settlements on the continent. When Cortes began
his expedition in the year 1518, though his armament
waj more considerable than ,hat of Pizarro, and com-
posed of persons superior in rank to those who in-
vaded Peru, he could procure no more than sixteen
horses.

NOTE CXXIX. p. 296.

I1: the year 1740, D. Ant. Ulloa, and D. George
Juan, travelled from Guayquil to Motupe, by the fame
route which Pizarro took. From the description of
their journey, one may form an idea of the difficulty
of his march. The Candy plains between St. Michael
de Pieura and Motupe extend go miles, without water,
without a tree, a plant, or any green thing, on a
dreary firetch of burning sand. Voyage, tom. i. p. 399,
kc.

# NOTE CXXX. p. 302.

# NOTE CXXXI. p. 303.

NOTE CXXX. p. 3c2.

Tais extravagant and unfeafonab!e discourse cfva'.

verde has been censured by all hifloriana, and Stithlu:.
tice. But though he seems to have been an illitera
and higoted monk, nowise resembling the good (01.
medo, who accompanied Cortes, the absurdity of hs
addrcfs to Aiahualpa mufl not be charged wholly upon
him. His harangue is evidently a trmnflation or par..
prase of that form, concerted by a junto of Spanilh
divines and lawyers in the year 1 5-9, for explaining the
right of their king to the sovereignty of the New World,
and for direaing the officers employed in America how
they should take pofleffion of any new country. See
Vul. i. Note xxiii The sentiments contained in Val.
verde's harangue muRt not then be imputed to the bi-
goted imbecili'y of a particular man, but to that of the
age. But Gomara and Benzoni relate one circumftancc
concerning Valverde which, if authentic renders him
an objet, not of contempt only, but of horror. They
assert, that during the whole acton, Valverde continued
to excite the soldiers to (laughter, calling to them to
firike the enemy, not with the edge, but with the poinut
of their swords. Gom Cron. c. 113. Benz. Hiflor.
Nov. Orbis, lib. iii. c. 3. Such behaviour was very dii.
ferent from that of the Roman Catholic clergy in other
parts of America, where they uniformly exerted the,r
influe.ce to proect the Indians, and to moderate the
ferocity of their countrymen.

NOTE CXXXI. p. 303.

Two different fyflems have been formed concerning

the conduc of Atahualpa. The Span:lh writeis, in
order to jufiify the violence of their countrymen, ccn-
tend, that all the Inca's professions of frierdlhip were
iezgr.ed ; and that his intention in agreeing to an in-
teriecw with Pizarro at Caxarr.alca, v as to cut off himr
arc his fcllcvitc at one blcw i that for tli. purFofet l

advarcet

vA3nced with such a numerous body of attendants, who
iad arms concealed under their garments to execu'e this
f:heme. This is the account given by Xerez and Zarate,
and adopted by Herrera. But if it had been the plan of
the Inca to destroy the Spaniards, one can hardly ima-
zne that he would have permitted them to march un-
molefled through the desert of Motupe, or have ne-
glecled to defend the passes in the mountains, where
they might have been attacked with so much advantage.
Ii the Peruvians marched to Caxamalca with an inten-
tion to fall upon the Spaniards, it is inconceivable, that
of so great a body of men prepared for aAlon, not one
hIould attempt to make refifance, but all tamely susser
themselves to be butchered by an enemy whom they
vcte armed to attack. Atahualpa's mode of advancing
to 'he interview, has the aspet of a peaceable pio-
cetfion, not of a military enterprize. He himself and
h s followers were, in their habits of ceremony, pre-
cedtd, as on days of solemnity, by unarmed harbingers.
Though rude nations are frequently cunning and false,
yet, if a scheme of deception and treachery muff be im-
t.u'ed either to a monarch, that had no great reason
to be alarmed at a visit from strangers who solicited
admission into his presence as friends. or to an adven-
turer so daring, and so little scrupulous as Pizarro, one
cannot hesitate in determining where to fix the prefump.
ni n of guilt. Even amidst the endeavours of the Spa-
ni!h wri-ers to palliate the proceedings of Pizarro, one
ih rly percives, that it was his intention, as well as
hsm nereft, to seize the Inca, and that he had taken
r-asures for that purpose previous to any suspicion of
that monarch's designs.

Garcilaffo de la Vega, extremely solicitous to vindl-

cate his countrymen, the Peruvians, from the crime of
having concerted the defirufion of Pizarro and his
ffllowers, and no less afraid to charge the Spaniards
wi:h improper condu& towards the Inca, has framed
another fyitem. He relates, that. a man of majestic
Lmrni, with a long beard, and garments reaching to the

ground,

ground, having appeared in a vision to Viracocha, t.o
eighth Inca, and declared that he was a child of tbh
Sun, that monarch built a temple in honour of his per.
son, and erefed an image of him, resembling as nearly
as possible the singular form in which he had exhibited
himself to his view. In this temple, divine honours
were paid to him, by the name of Viracocha. P. i
lib. iv. c.s . lib. v c. 22. When the Spaniards firfi
appeared in Peru, the length of their beards, and the
dress they wore, firuck every person so much with their
likeness to the image of Viracocha, that they supposed
them to be children of the Sun, who had descended from
heaven to earth. All concluded, that the fatal period
of the Peruvian empire was now approaching, and that
the throne would be occupied by new possessors. Ata.
hualpa himfelf,confidering the Spaniards as meffengen
from heaven, was so far from entertaining any thoughts
of refifling them, that he determined to yield implici:
obedience to their commands. From those sentiments
flowed his professions of love and refpe&. To thoft
were owing the cordial reception of Soto and Ferdinand
Pizarro in his camp, and the submissive reverence wich
which he himself advanced to visit the Spanish general
in his quarters ; but from the gross ignorance of Phili-
pillo the interpreter, the declaration of the Spaniards,
and his answer to it, were so ill explained, that by
their mutual inability to comprehend each other's in-
tentions, the fatal rencounter at Caxamalca, with all iu
dreadful consequences, was occasioned,

It is remarkable, that no traces of this fuperflitious

veneration of the Peruvians for the Spaniards, are to
be found either in Xerez, or Sancho, or Zarate, previous
to the interview at Caxamalca; and yet the two for.
mer served under Pizarro at that time, and the latter
vifi;ed Peru soon after the conquest. If either the Inca
himself, or his meflengers, had addrcffed the Spaniards
in the words which Garcilaffo puts in their mouths,
they must have been firuck with Cuch fubmiflive de-
clarations i and they would certainly have availed them-

fcli

selves of them to accomplish their own designs with
greater facility. Garcilaffo himself, though his narrative
of the intercourse between the Inca and Spaniards, pre-
ceding the tencounter at Caxamalca, is founded on the
supposition of his believing them to be Viracocbas, or
divine beings, p. ii. lib. i. c. 17, &c. yet with his usual
inattention and inaccuracy he admits, in another place,
that the Peruvians did not recollea the resemblance
between them and the god Viracocha, until the fatal
disasters fubfequtnt to the defeat at Caxamiaca, and then
only began to call them Viracochas. P. i. lib. v. c. 21.
This is confirmed by Herrera, dec. 5. lib. ii. c. Ia. In
many different parts of America, if we may believe the
Spanish writers, their countrymen were confidered as
divine beings who had descended from Heaven. But in
this inflance, as in many which occur irf the intercourse
between nations whose progress in refinement is very
unequal, the ideas of those who used the expression were
different from the ideas of those who heard it. For such
is the idiom of the Indian languages, or such is the fimpli-
city of those who speak them, that when they fee any
thing with which they were formerly unacquainted, and
of which they do not know the origin ; they fay, that it
came down from Heaven. Nugnez. Ram. iii. 327, C.

The account which I have given of the sentiments
2nd proceedings of the Peruvians, appears to be more
natural and confifent than either of the two preceding,
and is better supported by the fads related by the con-
temporary hiflorians.

According to Xerez, p. 0oo, two thousand Peruvians
were killed. Sancho makes the number of the slain
fix or seven thousand. Ram. iii. 274, D. By Gar-
cilaffo's account, five thousand were massacred. P. ii.
lib. i. c. 5. The number which I have mentioned,
being the medium between the extremes,, may probably
be nearent the truth.
VOL. It.

# NOTE CXXXII. p. 304.

# NOTE CXXXIII. p. 316.

# NOTE CXXXIV. p. 318.

NOTE CXXXII..p. 304.

NOTHI.NG can be a more striking proof of this, than

that three Spaniards travelled from Caxamalca to Cuzco.
The distance between them is fix hundred miles. In
every place throughout this great extent of counry,
they were treated with all the honours which the Pe-
ruv-ans paid to their sovereigns, and even to their di-
vinities. Under pretex' of amalting what was wanting
for the ransom of the Inca, they demanded the plates
of gold with which the walls of the Temple of the Sur.
in Cuzco were adorned; and though the priefis were
unwilling to alienate those sacred ornaments, and the
people rtfufed to violate the shrine of their God, the
three Spaniards, with their ovn hands, robbed the
Temple of part of this valuable treasure; and such was
the reverence of the n3 ive; for their perrons, that
though they beheld this aa of sacrilege with aflonii'h-
men,, they did not attempt to prevent or diflurb :k:
commtffion of it. Zara:e, ho. ii. c. 6. Sancho ap.
Rarrmuc. iI. 375, D.

NOTE CXXXII. p. 316.

AccoDIN.G to Herre-', the spoil of Cuzco, after

fettini apart the king's,': f, was divided among 4Eo
persons. Each received 4-,oo pesos. This amounts to
1,91 ,-oo pesos. Dec. 5. lib. vi. c. 3. But as the
gereral, and other offCrs, were entitled to a lhare far
greaer than that of the private men, the fum total
mu.t Kave ri'fn much beyond what I have mentioned.
Gomara, c. 12z. *nd Zarae, lib. ii. c. 8. satisfy them-
selves with asserting in general, that the plunder ol
Cuzco was of greater value than the ransom of Ata-
hualpa.

NOTE CXXXIV. p. 318.

.o expedition in the New VWorld was condufc'
with more pe'feverng courage than that of Alvaradi

2,.

# NOTE CXXXV. p. 319.

# NOTE CXXXVI. p. 327.

and in none were greater hardships endured. Many of
the persons engaged in it were, like their leader, vete-
rans who had served under Cornes, inured to all the
rigour of American war. Such of my readers as have
not an opportunity of perusing the firiking description
ci their sufferings by Zarate or Herrera, may form rome
idea of the nature of their march from the sea-coast to
Quito, by consulting the account which D. Ant. Ulloa
gives of his own journey in 1736, nearly in the fame
route. Voy. tom. i. p. 1 78, &c. or that of M. Bouguer,
who proceeded from Puerto Viejo, to Quito, by the
fame road which Alvarado took. He compares his own
journey with that of the Spanish leader, and by the
comparison, gives a most striking idea of the boldness
and patience of Alvarado, in forcing his way through
si many obstacles. Voyage du Perou, p. z8, &c.

NOTE CXXXV. p. 319.

ACCORDING to Herrera, thete were entered on ac-
count of the king in gold, 155,300 pesos, and 54oo
marks (each 8 ounces) of silver, besides several vessels
and ornaments, some of gold, and others of silver;
on account of private persons, in gold 499,oco pesos,
and 54,000 maiks of silver. Dec. j. lib. vi. c. 13.

NOTE CXXXVI. p. 327.

THE Peruvians not only imitated the military arts
of the Spaniards, but had recourse to devices of their
ovn. As the cavalry were the chief obje& of their
terror, they endeavoured to render them incapable of
acing, by means of a long thong with a sone fafiened
to each end. This, when thrown by a skilful hand,
twifled about the horse and its rider, and entangled
them so as to obflruE their motions. Herrera mentions
this as an invention of their own. Dec. 5. lib. viii.
c. 4. But as I have observed, vol. ii. book iv. this weapon
is common among sEveral barbarous tribes towards the

R E 2 extremity

# NOTE CXXXVII. p. 346.

extremity of South America; and it is more probable,
that the Peruvians had observed the dexterity with
which they used it in hunting, and on this occasion
adopted it themselves. The Spaniards wereconfiderably
annoyed by it, Herrera, ibid. Another instance of the
ingenuity of the Peruvians deserves mention : By turn-
ing a river out of its channel, they overflowed a valley,
in which a body of the enemy was ported, so suddenly,
that it was with the utmost difficulty the Spaniards
made their escape. Herrera, dec. 5. lib. viii. c. .5

NOTE CXXXVII. p. 346.

HERRERA's account of Orellana's voyage is the

most minute, and apparently the most accurate. It
was probably taken from the journal of Orellana himself.
But the dates are not diftinaly marked. His navigation
down the Coca, or Napo, begun early in February 154';
and he arrived at the mouth of the river on the 6th
of August, having Gpent near seven months in the
voyage. M. de la Condamine, in the year 1742,. failed
from Cuenca, to Para, a settlement of the Portuguese at
the mouth of the river, a navigation much longer than
that of O-eilana, in less than four months. Voyage,
p. 179. But the two adventurers were very differently
provided for the voyage. This hazardous undertaking,
to which ambition prompted Orellana, and to which
the love of science led M. de la Condamine, was under.
taken in the year r 769, by Madame Godin des Odonais,
from coniugal affe&ion. The narrative of the hard.
Ships which she suffered, of the dangers to which she
was exposed, and of the disasters which besel her, is
one of the most singular and affe&ing stories in any
language, exhibiting in her conduc a striking piaure of
the fortitude which distinguishes the one sex, mingled
with the sensibility and tenderness peculiar to the other.
L.ttre de M. Godin, a M. de la Condamine.

# NOTE CXXXVIII. p. 349.

# NOTE CXXXIX. p. 361.

# NOTE CXL. p. 375.

NOTE CXXXVIII. p. 349.

HEZRERA gives a firiking piaure of their indigence.

Twelve gentlemen who had been officers of diflincion
under Almagro, lodged in the fame house, and having
but one cloak among them, it was worn alternately by
him who had occasion to appear in public, while the
reft, from the want of a decent dress, were obliged to
keep within doors. Their former friends and com-
panions were so much afraid of giving offence to Pi-
zarro that they durfi not entertain or even converse with
them. One may conceive what was the condition, and
what the indignation of men once accuflomed to power
and opulence, when they felt themselves poor and def.
pifed, without a roof under which to [helter their heads,
while they beheld others, whose merit and feryices were
not equal to theirs, living with splendour in sumptuous
edifices. Dec. 6. lib. viii. c. 6.

NOTE CXXXIX. p. 361.

HERRERA, whose accuracy entitles him to great

credit, asserts, that Gonzalo Pizarro possessed domains
in the neighbourhood of Chuquefaca de la Plata, which
yielded him an annual revenue greater than that of the
archbishop of Toledo, the belt endowed fee in Europe.
Dec. 7. lib, vi. c. 3.

NOTE CXL. p. 375.

ALL the Spanish writers describe his march, and the

difireffes of both parties, very minutely. Zarate ob-
serves, that hardly any parallel[ to it occurs in hiflory,
eiher with refpea to the length of the retreat, or the
ardour of the pursuit. Pizarro, according to his com-
putation, followed the viceroy upwards of three thou.
sand miles. Lib. v. c. 16. 26.

# NOTE CXLI. p. 389.

# NOTE CXLII. p. 391.

# NOTE CXLIII. p. 396.

NOTE CXLI. p. 389.

IT amounted, according to Fernandez, the best in.

formed hJftorian of that period, to one million fonr
hundred thousand pesos. Lib. ii. c. 79.

NOTE CXLII. p. 39.

CARVAJAL, from the beginning, had been an ad-

vocate for an accommodation with Gafca. Finding
Pizarro incapable of holding that bold course which he
originally suggested, he recommended to him a timely
submission to his sovereign as the safest meafurF When
the prcfident's offers were first communicated to Car-
vajal, " By our Lady, (said he, in that firain of buffoon-
ery which was familiar to him,) the pries issues gra-
cious bulls. He gives them both good and cheap; let
us not only accept them, but wear them as reliques
about our recks." Fcrnandez, lib. ii. c 63.

NOTE CXLIII. p. 396.

DuINGs the rebellion of Gonzalo Pizarro, seven

hundred men were killed in battle, and three hundred
and eighty were hanged or beheaded. Herrera, dec. S.
lib. iv. c. 4. Above three hundred of these were cut off
by Carvajal. Fernandez, lib. ii. c. g9. Zarate makes
the number of those put to a violent death five hundred.
Lib. vii. c. I.

THE END OF THE SECOND VOLUME.
Pri:ted by A, S;rabin, Ptinter-S.rrfe, Lnin.
