THE

H I S T O R Y
HISTORY

OF THE
R E IGN

OF THE
EMPEROR CHARLES V.

VOL. .

VOL. II.
I

' '

THE
HISTORY

OF THE
R E I G N

OF THE
EMPEROR CHARLES V.

WITH

A VIEW ofthePROGRESS of SOCIETY
in Eu oP , from the Subversion of the Roman Empire,

to the Beginning of the Sixteenth Century.

IN THREE VOLUMES.

By WILLIAM ROBERTSON, D. D.

PRINCIPAL of the UNIVERSITY of EDINBURGHi and
HISTORIOCRAPHER to hisMAJSTYforSCOTLA ND.

A NEW EDITION.

VOL. II.

D U B L IN:

Printed for W. WHITESTONE, W. SLEATER, M. HAY,

D. CHAMBERLAINE, . POTTS, J. HOEY, L. L.
FLIN, J. WILLIAMS, W. COLLES, W.

WILSON, J. PORTTR, W. HALHEAD,

T. T. FAULKNER, and J. EXSHAW,

MDCCLXXVII,

# THE HISTORY OF THE REIGN OF THE EMPEROR CHARLES V. BOOK I.

THE
HISTORY

OF THE
R E I G N

OF THE
EMPEROR CHARLES V.

BOOK I.

CHARLES V. was born at Ghent on the BooK I.
C twenty-fourth day of February, in the ^
year one thoufapd five hundred. His father, Chrl, v.
Philip the Handsome, Archduke of Austria,
was the son of the Emperor Maximilian, and of
Mary, the only child of Charles the Bold, the
last prince of the house of Burgundy. His mo-
ther, Joanna, was the second daughter of Ferdi-
nand and Isabella, king and queen of Castile and
Aragon.

A LONG train of fortunate events had opened Hisdomin-

the way for this young prince to the inheritance evnt^ by
of more extensive dominions, than any European which he
monarch, finceCharlemagne, had possessed. Each thm.
of his ancestors had acquired kingdoms or pro-
vinces, towards which their profpe& of fuccef-
sion was extremely remote. The rich possessions
of Mary of Burgundy were destined for another

VOL. II. B family,

Boor I. family, he having been contraced by her father

to the only son of Louis XI. of France; but
that capricious monarch, indulging his hatred to
her family, chose rather to strip her of part of
her territories by force, than to secure the whole
by marriage; and by this mifconduC, fatal to
his posterity, threw all the Netherlands and
Franche Comte into the hands of a rival. Ifa-
bella, the daughter of John II. of Castile, far
from having any prospect of that noble inheri-
tance which mhe transmitted to her grandson, pass-
ed the early part of her life in obscurity and in-
digence. But the Castilians, exasperated against
her brother Henry IV. an ill-advifed and vicious
prince, publickly charged him with impotence,
and his Queen with adultery. Upon his demise,
reje&ing Joanna, whom the King had uniform-
ly, and even on his death-bed, owned to be his
lawful daughter, and whom an afembly of the
states had acknowledged to be the heir of his
kingdom, they obliged her to retire into Portu-
gal, and placed Isabella on the throne of Castile.
Ferdinand owed the crown of Aragon to the un-
expected death of his elder brother, and acquired
the kingdoms of Naples and Sicily by violating
the faith of treaties, and disregarding the ties of
blood. To all these kingdoms, Christopher Co-
lumbus, by an effort of genius and of intrepidity,
the boldest and most successful that is recorded in
the annals of mankind, added a new world, the
wealth of which was one considerable source of
the power and grandeur of the Spaniih monarchs.

t. ;p a.i DoN JOHN, the only son of Ferdinand and

..^' 11,Isabella, and their eldest daughter, the Queen
other. i- ,f Portugal, being cut off in the flower of
'"'"i. youth, all their hopes centered in Joanna and

her poierity. But as her husband, the Arch-
duke, was a stranger to the Spaniards, it was

thought

thought expedient to invite him into Spain, that Boo I.
by residing among them, he might accustom ''
himself to their laws and manners; and it was
expeted that the Cortes, or assembly of states,
whose authority was then so great in Spain, that
no title to the crown was reckoned valid unless
it received their fantion, would acknowledge
his right of succession, together with that of the
Infanta, his wife. Philip and Joanna, passing
through France in their way to Spain, were ,50o.
entertained in that kingdom with the utmost
magnificence. The archduke did homage to
Louis XII. for the earldom of Slanders, and
took his feat as a peer of the realm in the par-
liament of Paris. They were received in Spain
with every mark of honour that the parental
affetion of Ferdinand and Isabella, or the ref-
pect of their subje&s, could devise, and their ti-
tle to the crown was fnon after acknowledged by
the Cortes of both kingdoms

BUT amidst there outward appearances of fa- erdinand

tisfa&tion and joy, some secret uneasiness preyed Philip
upon' the mind of each of these princes. The Powe-
stately and reserved ceremonial of the Spanish
court, was so burdensome to Philip, a prince
young, gay, affable, fond of society and of
pleasure, that he soon began to express a desire
of returning to his native country, the manners
of which were more suited to his temper. Ser-
dinand, observing the declining health of his
Queen, with whose life his right to the govern-
ment of Castile must cease, easily foresaw, that
a prince of Philip's dirpofition, and who already
discovered an extreme impatience to reign, would
never consent to his retaining any degree of au-
thority in that kingdom; and the profpe of
this diminution of his power, awakened the jea-
lousy of that ambitious monarch.

B 2 ISABELLA

BooK T. ISABELLA beheld, with the sentiments natural
'-'"-," to a mother, the indifference and negleEt with
solitude, which the Archduke treated her daughter, who
t"hilhr'ip was destitute of those beauties of person, as well
herda.gh- as thole accomplilhments of mind, which fix
ter" the affctions of an husband. Her underltand-

ing, always weak, was often disordered. She
doated on Philip with such an excess of childish
and indiscreet fondness, as excited disgust rather
than affetion. Her jealousy, for which her
hulband's behaviour gave her too much cause,
was proportioned to her love, and often broke
out in the most extravagant aions. Isabella,
though sensible of her defecs, could not help
pitying her condition, which was soon rendered
altogether deplorable, by the Archduke's abrupt
resolution of setting out in the middle of winter
for Slanders, and of leaving her in Spain. Ifa-
bella intreated him not to abandon his wife to
grief and melancholy, which might prove fatal
to her, as he was near the time of her delivery.
Joanna conjured him to put off his journey for
three days only, that she might have the plea-
lure of celebrating the festival of Christmas in
his company. Ferdinand, after representing the
imprudence of his leaving Spain, before he had
time to become acquainted with the genius, or
to gain the affe&ions of the people who were
one day to be his subje&s, besought him, at
least, not to pass through France, with which
kingdom he was then at open war. Philip,
without regarding either the dictates of huma-
nity, or the maxims of prudence, persisted in
his purpose, and on the twenty-fecond of De-
cember set out for the Iow Countries, by the
v;ay of France '

FROM
1 Petri Mr ri Anglerii Epiftolz, 250. 253.

FROM the moment of his departure, Joanna BOOK I.
funk into a deep and fullen melancholy b and .Diordr

·

, , s r . Disorder of

while he was in that situation bore Ferdinand Joana,'s
her second son, for whom the power of his mid.
brother Charles afterwards procured the king- Ferdinand,
doms of Hungary and Bohemia, and to whom mp,'or
he at last transmitted the Imperial sceptre. Jo-
anna was the only person in Spain who disco-
vered no joy at the birth of this prince. Insen-
fible to that, as well as to every other pleasure,
the was wholly occupied with the thoughts of re-
turning to her hulband; nor did he, in any de-
gree, recover tranquility of mind, until (he ar-
rived at Brussels next year c. '504

PHILIP, in passing through France, had an

interview with Louis XII, and signed a treaty
with him, by which he hoped that all the differ-
ences between France and Spain would have
been finally terminated. But Ferdinand, whose
affairs, at that time, were extremely prosperous
in Italy, where the superior genius of Gonfalvo
de Cordova, the great captain, triumphed on
every occasion over the arms of France, did not
pay the least regard to what his fon-in-law had
concluded, and carried on hostilities with greater
ardour than ever.

FROM this time Philip seems not to have taken Death of

any part in the affairs of Spain, waiting in quiet Ifbella.
till the death either of Ferdinand or of Isabella
should open the way to one of their thrones.
The latter of these events was not far distant.
The untimely death of her children had made
a deep impreflion on the mind of Isabella; and
as he could derive but little consolation for the
losses which he had sustained either from her

daughter

b Id. Epift. 255. c Mariana, lib. 27. c. 1l. 14.
Flechier Vie de Xmen. . 191.

BoOK I. daughter Joanna, whose infirmities daily in-
' -- creased, or from her fon-in-law, who no longer

preserved even the appearance of a decent re-
fpet towards that unhappy princefE, her spirits
and health began gradually to decline, and after
languishing some months, fe died at Medina del
Campo on the twenty-fixth of November, one
thouland five hundred and four. She was no less
eminent for virtue, than for wisdom; and whe-
ther we confider her behaviour as a queen, as a
wife, or as a mother, he is justly entitled to the
high encomiums bestowed on her by the Spanif
historians d.

Her winl A FEW weeks before her death, he made her
ppoting last will, and being sensible of Joanna's incapa-
Ferdinand
regt of city to aflume the reins of government into
ciie. her own hands, and having no inclination to

commit them to Philip, with whole conduct he
was extremely dissatisfied, he appointed Ferdi-
nand regent or administrator of the affairs of
Castile until her grandson Charles hould attain
the age of twenty. She bequeathed to Ferdi-
nand likewise one half of the revenues which
lhould arise from the Indies, together with the
grand materlhips of the three military orders;
dignities, which rendered the person who pof-
sessed them almost independent, and which Ifa-
bella had, for that reason, annexed to the crown'.
But before ihe signed a deed so favourable to Ser-
dinand, he obliged him to swear that he would
not, by a fccond marriage, or by any other
means, endeavour to deprive Joanna or her
posterity of their right of fucceflion to any of
his kingdomss.

IMMEDIATELY

d P. Mart. Ep. 279. e P. Martyr. Ep. 277. Mar.

Hilt. lib. 28. c. 1. Ferreras Hilt. Gener. d'Efpagne, tom.
viii. 263. f Mar. Hilt. lib. 28. c. 14.

IMMEDIATELY upon the queen's death, Ser- Booz 1.

dinand resigned the title of king of Castile, and ' '
commanded Joanna and Philip to be publickly
proclaimed the sovereigns of that kingdom.
But, at the fame time, he assumed the charafter
of Regent, in consequence of Isabella's testa-
ment, and not long after he prevailed on the
Cortes of Castile to acknowledge his right toFerdinand
that office. This, however, he did not procure ledk d a
without difficulty, nor without discovering such regent by
symptoms of alienation and disgust among the therte.
Castilians as filled him with great uneasiness. The Cti-
The union of Castile and Aragon, for almost ,ti^d.
thirty years, had not so entirely extirpated the
ancient and hereditary enmity which subsisted
between the natives of these kingdoms, that the
Castilian pride could submit, without murmur-
ing, to the government of a king of Aragon.
Ferdinand's own character, with which the Caf-
tilians were well acquainted, was far from ren-
dering his authority desirable. Suspicious, dif-
cerning, evere, and parsimonious, he was ac-
customed to observe the most minute actions
of his fubje&ts with a jealous attention, and to
reward their highest services with little libe-
rality and they were now deprived of Isabella,
whose gentle qualities, and partiality to her
Castilian subjects, often tempered his austerity,
or rendered it tolerable. The maxims of his
government were especially odious to the Gran-
dees for that artful prince, sensible of the dan-
gerous privileges conferred upon them by the
eudal institutions, had endeavoured to curb
their exorbitant power g, by extending the royal
jurifdi&ion, by protecing their injured vassals,
by increasing the immunities of cities, and by

other
e Marian. lib. 28. c. z2.

Boo I. other measures equally prudent. From all these
~'" causes, a formidable party among the Castilians

united againt Ferdinand; and though the per-
sons who composed it, had not hitherto taken
any publick ftep in opposition to him, he plain-
ly law that upon the least encouragement from
their new king, they would proceed to the most
violent extremities.

Philip en- THERE was no less agitation in the Nether-
oinl tb, lands upon receiving the accounts of Isabella's
go-mCt death, and of Ferdinand's having assumed the
of Caiile. b

government of Castile. Philip was not of a
temper tamely to susser himself to be supplanted
by the unnatural ambition of his father-in-law. If
Joanna's infirmities, and the non-age of Charles,
rendered them incapable of government, he, as
a hulband, was the proper guardian of his wife,
and, as a father, the natural tutor of his son.
Nor was it sufficient to oppose to thee just
rights, and to the inclination of the people of
Castile, the authority of a testament, the ge-
nuinenefs of which was perhaps doubtful, and
its contents certainly iniquitous. A keener edge
was added to Philip's resentment, and new vi-
gour infused into his councils, by the arrival of
Don John Manuel. He was Ferdinand's am-
baffador at the Imperial court, but upon the
first notice of Isabella's death repaired to Bruf.
fels, flattering himself that under a young and
liberal prince, he might attain to power and ho-
nours which he could never hope for in the
efrvice of an old and frugal master. He had
early paid court to Philip during his residence
in Spain, with such affiduitv as entirely gained
his confidence; and having been trained to bufi-
ness under Ferdinand, could oppose his schemes
with equal abilities, and with arts not inferior

to

to those for which that monarch was diftin- Boor I.
guifhed h.

BY his advice, ambassadors were difpatchedHe equire

Ferdinand

to require Ferdinand to retire into Aragon, and to reig the
to resign the government of Castile to those per- regecy.
sons whom Philip should entrust with it until
his arrival in that kingdom. Such of the Caf-
tilian nobles as had discovered any diffatisfa&ion
with Ferdinand's administration, were encou-
raged by every method to oppose it. At the
fame time a treaty was concluded with Louis
XII. by which Philip flattered himself that he
had secured the friendihip and afiftance of that
monarch.

MEANWHILE, Ferdinand employed all the

arts of address and policy, in order to retain
the power of which he had got pofleffion. By
means of Conchillos, an Aragonian gentleman,
he entered into a private negociation with
Joanna, and prevailed on that weak princess to
confirm, by her authority, his right to the re-
gency. But this intrigue did not escape the
penetrating eye of Don John Manuel; Joanna's
letter of consent was intercepted; Conchillos
was thrown into a dungeon; he herself con-
fined to an apartment in the palace, and all
her Spanish domefticks secluded from her pre-
fence'.

THE mortification which the discovery of this Ferdinand

scheme occasioned to Ferdinand, was much in- tbendc-
creased by his observing the progress that Philip's tilia no-
emissaries made in Castile. Some of the nobles bies'
retired to their castles; others to the towns in

which

h Zurita Anales de Aragon, tom. vi. p. z.
i P. Mart. Ep. 287. Zurita Anales vi p. 14.

BooK I. which they had influence; they formed them-
'. .-., selves into confederacies, and began to assemble

their vaflals. Ferdinand's court was almost to-
tally deserted; not a person of diftin&ion but Xi-
menes, archbishop of Toledo, the duke of Alva,
and the marquis of Denia, remaining there;
while the houses of Philip's ambassadors were
daily crowded with those of the highest rank.

Ferd;ind EXASPERATED at this universal defection, and
reolveto mortified perhaps with feeing all his schemes
orde to e- defeated by a younger politician, Ferdinand re-
du~ghtie solved, in defiance of the law of nature, and of
from te decency, to deprive his daughter and her pofte-

"oae rity of the crown of Cafile, rather than renounce

the regency of that kingdom. His plan for
accomplishing this was no less bold, than the
intention itself was wicked. He demanded in
marriage Joanna, the supposed daughter of
Henry IV. on the belief of whose illegitimacy
Isabella's right to the crown of Castile was
founded; and by reviving the claim of this
princess, in opposition to which he himself had
formerly led armies, and fought battles, he hoped
once more to get pofeffion of the throne of that
kingdom. But Emanuel, king of Portugal, in
whose dominions Joanna resided, being married
to one of Ferdinand's daughters by Isabella,
refused his conent to that unnatural match;
and the unhappy princess herself, having loft all
reliih for the objecs of ambition, by being long
immured in a convent, discovered no less aver-
sion to itk.

Maies a THE resources, however, of Ferdinand's am-
niece of the
French te bition were not exhauted. Upon meeting with
kins. a repulse

k Sandov. Hit. of Civil Was in Caflile. Lond. 165 5.
p. 5. Zurita Anales de Aragon, tom. vi. p. 213.

a repulse in Portugal, he turned towards France, BooK r.
and fought in marriage Germaine de Foix, a
daughter of the viscount of Narbonne, and of
Mary, the sifter of Louis XII. The war which
that monarch had carried on against Ferdinand
in Naples, had been so unfortunate, that he
listened with joy to a proposal, which furnished
him with an honourable pretence of concluding
peace: And though no prince was ever more
remarkable than Ferdinand for making all his
passions bend to the maxims of interest, or be-
come subservient to the purposes of ambition,
yet so vehement was his relentment against his
fon-in-law, that the desire of gratifying it ren-
dered him regardless of every other consideration.
In order to be revenged of Philip, by detaching
Louis from his interest, and in order to gain a
chance of excluding him from his hereditary
throne of Aragon, and the dominions annexed to
it, he was ready once more to divide Spain into
separate kingdoms, though the union of these
was the great glory of his reign, and had been
the chief obje& of his ambition; he consented
to restore the Neapolitan nobles of the French
fation to their possessions and honours; and sub-
mitted to the ridiculeof marrying, in an advanced
age, a princess of eighteen'.

THE conclusion of this match, which deprived

Philip of his only ally, and threatened him with
the loss of so many kingdoms, gave a dreadful
alarm to him, and convinced Don John Manuel
that there was now a neceflity of taking other
measures with regard to the affairs of Spain m.
He accordingly inftru&ed the Flemilh ambaffa-
dors in the court of Spain, to testify the firong

desire

I P. Mart. Ep. 290. 292. Mariana, lib. 28. c. 16, 17.
n p. Mart. Ep. 293.

BooK I. define which their master had of terminating all
"--'- differences between him and Ferdinand in an

amicable manner, and his willingness to consent
to any conditions that would re-establish the
friendhi' which ought to subsist between a fa-

A treaty tner and a fon-in-law. Ferdinand, though he
Serinnd had made and broken more treaties than any
d Philip. prince of any age, was apt to confide so far in

the sincerity of other men, or to depend so much
upon his own address and their weakness, as to
be always extremely fond of a negociation. He
litened with eagerness to there declarations, and
so. 4- soon concluded a treaty at Salamanca; in which

it was stipulated, that the government of Castile
should be carried on in the joint names of Joan-
na, of Ferdinand, and of Philip; and that the
revenues of the crown, as well as the right of
conferring offices, ihould be shared between Ser-
dinand and Philip by an equal division n.

'p id 56. NOTHING, however, was farther from Philip's

Janna et thoughts than to observe this treaty. His sole
Spai n intention in proposing it was to amuse Ferdi-

nand, and to prevent him from taking any mea-
fures for obstructing his voyage into Spain. It
had that effet. Ferdinand, sagacious as he
was, did not for some time fufpe& his design;
and though when he perceived it, he prevailed
on the king of France not only to remonstrate
against the archduke's journey, but to threaten
hotilities if he hould undertake it; though he
solicited the duke of Gueldres to attack his son-
in-law's dominions in the Low Countries, Philip
and his consort nevertheless set fail with a nume-
rous fleet and a good body of land forces.
They were obliged by a violent tempest to take

lhelter

Zurita Anales de Aragon, vi. 9. P.Mart. Ep. 293,
z9,~.

shelter in England, where Henry VII. in com- BOOK I.
pliance with Ferdinand's solicitations, detained "~
them upwards of three months"; at last they
were permitted to depart, and after a more
prosperous voyage, they arrived in safety at Co- April AS.
runna in Galicia; nor durst Ferdinand attempt,
as he had once intended, to oppose their landing
by force of arms.

TH Castilian nobles, who had been obliged Thenobility

hitherto to conceal or to diiemble their senti- f Canle
ments, now declared openly in favour of Philip. Philip.
From every corner of the kingdom, persons of
the highest rank, with numerous retinues of
their vaflals, repaired to their new king. The
treaty of Salamanca was universally condemned,
and all agreed to exclude from the government
of Castile a prince, who, by consenting to disjoin
Aragon and Naples from that crown, discovered
so little concern for its true interests. Ferdi-
nand, meanwhile, abandoned by almost all the
Castilians, disconcerted by their revolt, and un-
certain whether he should peaceably relinquish
his power, or take arms in order to maintain it,
earnestly solicited an interview with his fon-in-
law, who by advice of Manuel tudioufly avoid-
ed it. Convinced at last, by feeing the number
and zeal of Philip's adherents daily increase,
that it was vain to think of refiting such a tor-
rent, Ferdinand consented, by a treaty, to resign June 27.
the regency of Castile into the hands of Philip, regns the
to retire into his hereditary dominions of Ara- regency of
gon, and to reft satisfied with the masterships of retiesntod
the military orders, and that share of the revenue Aragon.
of the Indies, which Isabella had bequeathed to
him. Though an interview between the princes
was no longer, necessary, it was agreed to on

both
° Ferrer. Frift. viii. 285.

Boos I. both fide? from motives of decency. Philip re-
-'*" paired to the place appointed with a splendid

retinue of the Castilian nobles, and a confidera-
ble body of armed men. Ferdinand appeared
without any pomp, attended by a few followers,
mounted on mules, and unarmed. On that
occasion Don John Manuel had the pleasure of
displaying before the monarch whom he had
deserted, the extensive influence which he had
acquired over his new mailer: While Ferdinand
suffered in presence of his former fubjets the
two most cruel mortifications which an artful and
ambitious prince can feel; being at once over-
reached in conduct, and stripped of power P.
J.;y. NOT long after, he retired into Aragon; and

hoping that some favourable accident would soon
open the way for his return into Castile, he took
care to protest, though with great secrecy, that
the treaty concluded with his fon-in-law, being
extorted by force, ought to be deemed void of
all obligation q.

Phlip in PHILIP took possession of his new authority
ki".,e-d with a youthful joy. The unhappy Joanna,
a k r imd from whom he derived it, remained during all
bctc^c. thee contests, under the dominion of a deep

melancholy; he was seldom allowed to appear
in publick; her father, though he had often de-
fired it, was refused access to her; and Philip's
chief obje& was to prevail on the Cortes to
declare her incapable of government, that an
undivided power might be lodged in his hands,
until his son should attain to full age. But such
was the partial attachment of the Castilians to

their

ZYurita Anale; de Arag. vi. 64. Mar. lib. 28. c. 19,

2c P. Mar. Lp. 304, 305, &c. q Zurita Anales
de Arag. vi. p. 68. Ferrer. Hilt. viii. 290.

their native princes, that though Manuel had Book I.
the address to gain some members of the Cortes '
alfcmbled at Valladolid, and others were willing
to gratify their new sovereign in his first re-
quest, the great body of the representatives re-
fused their content to a declaration which they
thought so injurious to the blood of their mo-
narchs r. They were unanimous, however, in
acknowledging Joanna and Philip queen and
king of Castile, and their son Charles prince of
Asturias.

THIS was almost the only memorable event Death of

during Philip's administration. A fever put Philip
an end to his life in the twenty-eighth year of sept. 5.
his age, when he had not enjoyed the regal dig-
nity which he had been so eager to obtain full
three months .

THE whole royal authority in Castile ought The d;ror-

of course to have devolved upon Joanna. But a's ind
the shock occasioned by a disaster so unexpeted i.crefes.
as the death of her husband, completed the dif-
order of her understanding, and her incapacity
for government. During all the time of Phi-
lip's sickness, no intreaty could prevail on her,
though in the sixth month of her pregnancy, to
leave him for a rmoment. When he expired,
however, she did not hed one tear, or utter a
single 'groan. Her grief was silent and fettled.
She continued to watch the dead body with the
fame tenderness and attention as if it had been
alive t, and though at last he permitted it to
be buried, he soon removed it from the tomb
to her own apartment. There it was laid upon
a bed of state, in a splendid dress; and having

heard

r Zurita Anales de Arag. vi. p. 75. f Marian.
lib. 28. c. 23. ' P. Mart. Ep. 36.

Boor I. heard from some monk a legendary tale of a

""*' king who had revived after hehad been dead four-

teen years, he kept her eyes almost constantly
fixed on the body, waiting for the happy mo-
ment of its return to life. Nor was this caprici-
ous affetion for her dead husband less tin&ured
with jealousy, than that which he had born to
him while alive. She did not permit any of
her female attendants to approach the bed on
which his corpse was laid; he would not susser
any woman who did not belong to her family
to enter the apartment; and rather than grant
that privilege to a midwife, though a very aged
one, had been chosen of purpose, she bore the
princess Catherine without any other assistance
than that of her own domestics .

She ; ocn- A WOMAN in such a state of mind was little
P.,o capable of governing a great kingdom; and

Joanna, who made it her sole employment to
bewail the loss, and to pray for the foul of her
huiband, would have thought her attention to
publick affairs an impious neglect of those duties
which he owed to him. But though she de-
clined assuming the administration herself, yet,
by a frange caprice of jealousy, he refused to
commit it to any other person; and no intreaty
of her fubjeds could persuade her to name a re-
gent, or even to sign such papers as were necef-
fary for the execution ofjuftice, and the security
of the kingdom.

.s: miin THE death of Philip threw the Castilians into
.n:FFe" the greatelt perplexity. It was necessary to ap-

dnc... point a regent, both on account of Joanna's
it'??or frenzy, and the infancy of her son; and as there

was

u Mar. Hill. lib. 29. c. 3 & c. P. Mart E. p. 318.
324- 328. 33.z

was not among the nobles, any person so emi- Boo I.
nently distinguished as to be called by the pub- ' '
lick voice to that high office, all naturally
turned their eyes either towards Ferdinand, or
towards the emperor Maximilian. The former
claimed that dignity as administrator for his
daughter, and by virtue of the teRament of
Isabella; the latter thought himself the legal
guardian of his grandson, whom, on account of
his mother's infirmity, he already confidered as
king of Castile. Such of the nobility as had
lately been most active in compelling Ferdinand
to resign the government of the kingdom, trem-
bled at the thoughts of his being restored so
soon to his former dignity. They dreaded the
return of a monarch, not apt to forgive, and
who, to those defects with which they were al-
ready acquainted, added that resentment which
the remembrance of their behaviour, and reflec-
tion upon his own disgrace, must naturally have
excited. Though none of thep objecions held
against Maximilian, he was a stranger to the
laws and manners of Castile; he had not either.
troops or money to support his pretensions; nor
could his claim be admitted without a public
declaration of Joanna's incapacity for govern-
mert; an indignity, to which, notwithfnding
the notoriety qs her diRemper, the delicacy of
the Ciftilians could not bear the thoughts of
fubje&ing her.

DONJOHN MANUEL, however, and a few of

the nobles, who confidered themselves as molt
obnoxious to Ferdinand's displeasure, declared
for Maximilian, and offered to support his claim
with all their interest. Maximilian, always en-
terprizing and decisive in council, though feeble
and dilatory in execution, eagerly embraced the
offer. But a series of ineffetual negociations

VOL. 1I. C was

BooK I. was the only consequence of this tranfation.

v- --1 The Emperor, as usual, asserted his rights in a

high strain, romiifd a great deal, and per-
formed nothing x.
Ferdcnr A FEW days before the death of Philip, Ser-

t1,ert bl dinand had set out for Naples, that by his own

kingdom of presence he might put an end, with the greater
Mpiei. decency, to the vice-royalty of the great captain,

whose important services, and cautious condu&t,
did not screen him from the suspicions of his
jealous master. Though an account of his son-
in-law's death reached him at Porto-fino, in the
territories of Genoa, he was so solicitous to dif-
cover the secret intrigues which he supposed the
great captain to have been carrying on, and to
establish his own authority on a firm foundation
in the Neapolitan dominions, by removing him
from the supreme command there, that rather
than discontinue his voyage, he chose to leave
Castile in a state of anarchy, and even to rifque,
by this delay, his obtaining poflffion of the go-
vernment of that kingdom Y.

Acqire NOTHING but the great abilities and prudent
CR'fi^ condut of his adherents, could have prevented
chiefly the bad effeats of this absence. At the head of
ceof ,cr- there was Ximenes, archbishop of Toledo, who,
diml Xi- though he had been raited to that dignity by

Isabella, contrary to the inclination of Ferdi-
nand, and though he could have no expetation
of enjoying much power under his jealous ad-
ministration, was nevertheless so disinterested, as
to prefer the welfare of his country before his
own grandeur, and to declare, that Castile could
never be so happily governed as by a prince,

whom

x Mariana, lib. 29. c. 7. Zcrita Anales de Arag. vi.
p. 93. y Zurita Anales de Arag. vi. p. 85.

whom long experience had rendered thoroughly Boo I.
acquainted with its true interest. His zeal to '
bring over his countrymen to this opinion, in-
duced him to lay aside somewhat of his usual
austerity and haughtiness. He condescended, 'so7.
on this occasion, to court the difafctded nobles,
and employed address, as well as arguments, to
persuade them. Ferdinand seconded his endea-
vours with great art; and by concessions to
some of the grandees, by promises to others, and
by letters full of complaisance to all, he gained
many of his most violent opponents . Though Aug. at.

Ferdinand

many cabals were formed, and some commo-eturns t
tions were excited, yet when Ferdinand, after Spin.
having fettled the affairs of Naples, arrived in
Castile, he entered upon the administration with-
out opposition. The prudence with which he
exercised his authority in that kingdom, equalled
the good fortune by which he had recovered it.
By a moderate, but steady administration, free His rrudent
„* *r i r r E aminiiltrs-
from partiality and from resentment, he en- tion.
tirely reconciled the Castilians to his person, and
secured to them, during the remainder of his
life, as much domeftick tranquillity, as was
consistent with the genius of the feudal govern-
ment, which still subsisted among them in full
vigour a.

NoR was the preservation of tranquillity in

his hereditary kingdoms, the only obligation
which the Archduke Charles owed to the wife
regency of his grandfather; he had the satis-
fa&ion, during that period, of feeing very im-
portant acquisitions added to the dominions over
which he was to reign. On the coast of Bar-Conquer of
bary, Or.n, and other conquests of no small ""'

C 2 value,

z Zurita Anales c'e Arag vi. p. 87. 94. Io9. a Ma-
riana, lib. 29. c. io.

Boot I. value, were annexed to the crown of Castile by

w'- cardinal Ximenes, who, with a spirit very un-

' common in a monk, led in person a numerous

army against the Moors of that country; and,
with a generosity and magnificence still more
ingular, defrayed the whole expence of the ex-
pedition out of his own revenues b. In Europe,
Ferdinand, under pretences no less perilous than
unjust, as well as by artifices the most hameful
and treacherous, expelled John d'Albret, the

Acqnif i.n lawful sovereign, from the throne of Navarre;
' lvr.re. and seizing on that kingdom, extended the li-

mits of the Spanish monarchy from the Pyrenees
on the one hand, to the frontiers of Portugal on
the other c.

Fcre;r. IT was not, however, the desire of aggran-
bhi gon. dizing the Archduke,' which influenced Ferdi-
charlcs. nand in this, or in any other of his a&iorns. He

was more apt to confider that young prince as
a rival, who might one day wrest out of his
hands the government of Castile, than. as a
grandson, for whose behoof he was entrusted
with the administration. This jealousy oon
begot aversion, and even hatred, the symptoms
i;9. of which he was at no pains to conceal. Hence

proceeded his immoderate joy when his young
queen was delivered of a son, whose life would
have deprived Charles of the crowns of Aragon,
Naples, Sicily, and Sardinia; and upon the un-
timely death of that prince, he discovered, for
the ame reason, an excessive solicitude to have
other children. This impatience hastened, in
all probability, the acceflion of Charles to the
crown of Spain. Ferdinand, in order to pro-
cure a blcfling, of which, from his advanced

age,

b ,ariana, lib. 29. c. 13. c Mar. lib. 30. c. .
12. 1:. 2 .

age, and the intemperance of his youth, he BOOK I.
could have little profpe&, had recourse to his -v -
physicians, and by their prescription took one 1513.
of those potions, which are supposed to add
vigour to the constitution, though they more
frequently prove fatal to it. This was its effec
on a frame so feeble and exhausted as that of
Ferdinand; for though he survived a violent
disorder which it at first occasioned, it brought
on such an habitual languor and dejection of
mind, as rendered him averse from any serious
attention to publick affairs, and fond of frivolous
amusements, on which he had not hitherto be-
flowed much time d. Though he now despaired
of having any son of his own, his jealousy of
the Archduke did not abate, nor could he help
viewing him with that aversion, which princes
often bear to their successors. In order to gra- g,15.
tify thiss unnatural pafion, he made a will, ap- diiior'
pointing prince Ferdinand, who having been his power,
born and educated in Spain, was much beloved fvou'f i
by the Spaniards, to be regent of all his king- Ferdinand.
doms, until the arrival of the Archduke his
brother; and by the fame deed he fettled upon
him the grand-mafterfhip of the three military
orders. The former of these grants might have
put it in his power to have disputed the throne
with his brother; the latter would, in any event,
have rendered him almost independent.

FERDINAND retained to the last that jealous

love of power, which was so remarkable through
his whole life. Unwilling to resign it even at
the approach of death, he removed continually
from place to place, in order to fly from his
diflemper, or to forget it. Though his strength

declined

d Zurita Anales de Arag. vi. p. 347. P. Mart. Ep.
531. Argenfola Anales de Aragon, lib. i. p. 4.

Boor I. declined every day, none of his attendants durst
- ~ mention his condition; nor would he admit his

father confefibr, who thought such silence cri.
minal and ui-iLriftian, into his prelence. At
last the dai;ger became io imminent, that it
could be no longer concealed. Ferdinand re-
ceived the intimation with a decent fortitude
and touched, perhaps, with compuncion at the
injustice which he had done his grandobn, or
influenced by the lioneft remonstrances of Car-
vajal, Zapata, and Vargas, his molt ancient and
faithful counsellors, who represented to him, that
by investing prince Ferdinand with the regency,
he would infallibly entail a civil war on the two
brothers, and by bel!owing on him the grand-
mastership of the military orders, would strip
the crown of its noblek ornament and chief
strength, he consented to alter his will in both

5;16 these particulars. By a new deed he left Charles
. tlfrt the sole heir of all Li; dominions, and allotted to
wi.!, prince Ferdinand, intead of that throne of which

he thought himself almost secure, an inconfide-
rable establishment of fifty thousand ducats a
nd dir. year e. He died a few hours after signing this

will, on the twenty-third day of January, one
thousand five hundred and sixteen.

yraction CHARLES, to whom such a noble inheritance
o Chairles
v. l descended by his death, was near the full age

of sixteen. He had hitherto resided in the Low
Countries, his paternal dominions. Margaret
of Austria, his aunt, and Margaret of York,
the sifter of Edward IV. cf England, and widow
of Charles the Bold, two princeifes of great
virtue and abilities, had the care of forming his

early

e Mar. Hist. lib. 30. c. ult. Zrita Anales de Arag. vi.

401. P. Mart. Ep. 565, 566. Argenfola Anales de Arag.
lib. . p. If.

early youth. Upon the death of his father, the BooK I.
Flemings committed the government of the Low `~'
Countries to his grandfather, the Emperor ls6.
Maximilian, with the name rather than the au-
thority of regent f. Maximilian made choice of
William de Croy lord of Chievres to superintend
the education of the young prince his grand-
son g. That nobleman possessed, in an eminent

degree,

f Pontius Heuterus Rerum Aufiriacarum, lib. xv. Lov.

364q. lib. 7. c. 2. p. 155.

g The French hitorians, upon the authority of M. de

Bellay, Mem. p. i. have unanimously affered, that Philip,
by his lars will, having appointed the king of France to
have the direc&ion of his on's education, Louis XII. with
a difintereifednefs suitable to the confidencerepofed in him,
named . hievres for that office. Even the president Henaut
has adopted this opinion. Abrege Chron. A. D. 1507.
Varillas, in his usual manner, pretends to have seen Philip's
testament. PraE. de 1' education des Princes, p. 16. But
the ,F.ni(h, German, and Flemish historians concur in con-
traditfing this affettion of the French authors. It appears
from Heuterus, a contemporary Flemith historian of great
authority, that Louis Xll. by consenting to the marriage
of Germaine de Foix with Ferdinand, had loft much of
that confidence which Philip once placed in him; that this
disgust was increased by the French King's giving in mar-
riage to the count of Angouleme his eldest daughter, whom
he had formerly betrothed to Charles. Heuter. Rer. Aufir.
lib. v. p. 15 : T'hat the French, a Ihort time before Philip's
death, had violated the peace, which fubfiled between
them and the Flemings, and Philip had complained of this
injury,'and was ready to resent it. Heuter. ibid. All
these circumflances render it improbable that Philip, who
made his will a few days before he died, Heuter. p. 152,
hould commit the education of his on to Louis XII. In
confirmation of these plausible conjectures, positive teltimo-
ny can be produced. It appears from Heuterus, that Phi-
lip, when he let out for Spain, had entrusted Chievres both
with the care of his son's education, and with the govern-
ment of his dominions in the Low Countries, Heuter. lib,
vii. p. 153. That an attempt was made, soon after Philip's
death, to have the Emperor Maximilian appointed regent,
during the minority of his grandion; but this being op-
posed, Chicvres seiem to have continued to discharge both

the

Boax I. degree, the talents which fitted him for such an
'V important office, and discharged the duties of

,56- it with great fidelity. Under Chievres, Adrian

of Utrecht aed as preceptor. This prefer-
ment, which opened his way to the highest dig-
nities an Ecclesiastic can attain, he owed not to
his birth, for that was extremely mean; nor to
his interest, for he was a stranger to the arts of
a court; but to the opinion which his country-
men entertained of his learning. He was indeed
no inconsiderable proficient in those frivolous fci-
ences, which, during several centuries, assumed
the name of Philosophy, and had publihed a
commentary, which was highly eteemed, upon
The Book of Sentences, a famous treatise of Petrus
Lombardus, confidered, at that time, as the
standard system of metaphysical theology. But
whatever admiration these procured him in an
illiterate age, it was oon found that a man ac-
customed to the retirement of a college, unac-
quainted with the world, and without any
tinture of taste or elegance, was by no means
qualified for rendering science agreeable to a
young prince. Charles, accordingly, discovered
an early aversion to learning, and an excessive
fondness for those violent and martial exercises,
to excel in which was the chief pride, and almost

the

the offices which Philip had committed to him. Heat.
ibid. 53. 15S. That in the beginning of the year 15o8,
the Flemings invited Maximilian to accept of the regency;
to which he consented, and appointed his daughter Mar-
garet, together with a council of Flemings, to exercise the
supreme authority, when he himself honld, at any time,
be absent. He 1,kewife named Chievres as governor, and
Adrian of Utrecht as preceptor to his son. Heut. ibid. 1 5S.
157. What Heuterus relates with refpe& to this matter is
confirmed by Moringus in Vita Adriani, apud Analeda
Cafp. Burmanni de Adriano, cap. o; byBarlandus Chro-
nic. Brabant. ibid. p. a ; and by Haraus Annal. Brab.
vol. ii. 520, &c.

the only fudy of persons of rank in that age. Boo I.
Chievres encouraged this taste, either from a"
desire of gaining his pupil by indulgence, or iSi6.
from too flight an opinion of the advantages of
literary accomplishments b. He inftruted him,
however, with great care in the arts of govern-
ment; he made him study the history not only
of his own kingdoms, but of those with which
they were connected; he accustomed him, from
the time of his assuming the government of
Slanders in the year one thousand five hundred
and fifteen, to attend to business; he persuaded Tbe firR
him to peruse all papers relating to public hiP chic.l
affairs; to be present at the deliberations of his ter.
privy counsellors, and to propose to them him-
self those matters, concerning which he required
their opinion . From such an education, Charles
contracted habits of gravity and recolle&ion
which scarcely suited his time of life. The first
openings of his genius did not indicate that fu-
periority which its maturer age displayed . He
did not discover in his youth that impetuosity
of spirit which commonly ulhers in an active
and enterprizing manhood. Nor did his early
obsequiousness to Chievres, and his other favour-
ites, promise that capacious and decisive judg-
ment, which afterwards dire&ed the affairs of
one half of Europe. But his fubjets, dazzled
with the external accomplishments of a graceful
figure and manly address, and viewing his cha-
racter with that partiality which is always hown
to princes during their youth, entertained fan-
guine hopes of his adding lustre to those crowns
which descended to him by the death of Ser-
dinand.

THE

h Jovii Vita Adriani, p. 91. Struvii Corpus, Hist.

Germ. ii. 967. P. Heuter. Rer. AuRfr. lib. vii. c. 3. p 157.

i Memoires de Bellay, 8vo. Par. 573. p. . P. Heuter.
lib. viii. c. . p. 184. k P. Martyr, Ep. 569.655.

Boor . THE kingdoms of Spain, as is evident from

e.----1 the view whikh I have given of their political

'516. constitution, were, at that time, in a fituadon,

Sate of
si .e- which require. an administration, no lels vigo-
qio , 'i- rous than prudent. Tne fe.idai institutions,
nizin.rau- which had been introduced into all its different

provinces by the Goths, the Suevi, and the Van-
dals, fub5ifed in great force. The nobles, who
were Fowerful nd warlike, had long possesed
all the exorbitant privileges, which there initi-
tutions veited in their order. The cities in Spain
were more numerous and more considcrable,
than the genius of feudal government, naturally
an enemy to commerce, and to regular police,
seemed to admit. The personal rights, and po-
litical influence, which the inhabitants of these
cities had acquired, were extensive. The royal
prerogative, circumscribed by the privileges of
the nobility, and by the pretensions of the peo-
ple, was confined within very narrow limits.
Under such a form of government, the prin-
ciples of discord were many; the bond of union
was extremely feeble; and Spain felt not only
all the inconveniences occasioned by the defecs
in the feudal system, but was exposed to difor-
ders arising from the peculiarities in its own con-
ititution.

DuRInx the long administration of Ferdi-

nand, no internal commotion, it is true, had
arisen in Spain. His superior abilities enabled
him to restrain the turbulence of the nobles, and
to moderate the jealousy of the commons. By
the wisdom of his domestic government, by the
sagacity with which he conducted his foreign
operations, and by the high opinion that his
fubjeds entertained of both, he preserved among

themn

them a degree of tranquillity, greater than was BooK I.
natural to a constitution, in which the feeds of '*
dilcord and difordcr were o copiously mingled. '56
But, by the death of Ferdinand, thele restraints
were at once withdrawn; and faction and dif-
content, from being long repressed, were ready
to break out with fiercer animosity.

IN order to prevent those evils, Ferdinand Ferdinnd

had in his last will taken a most prudent pre- ed dCinal
caution, by appointing Cardinal Ximenes, arch- Ximenes
bishop of Toledo, to be sole regent of Castile, reget.
until the arrival of his grandson in Spain. The
singular chara&er of this man, and the extra-
ordinary qualities which marked him out for
that office, at such a jun&ure, merit a particu-
lar description. He was descended of an honour- His rire ai
able, not of a wealthy family; and the circum- chara'r.
itances of his parents, as well as his own incli-
nations, having determined him to enter into
the church, he early obtained benefices of great
value, and which placed him in the way of the
highet preferment. All these, however, he re-
nounced at once; and after undergoing a very
severe noviciate, alfumed the habit of St. Francis
in a monastery of Obfervantine friars, one of
the most rigid orders in the Romish Church,
There he soon became eminent for his uncom-
mon austerity of manners, and for those excesses
of fuperltitious devotion, which are the proper
charateriftics of the monaftick life. But not-
withstanding these extravagances, to which weak
and enthusiastic minds alone are usually prone,
his understanding, naturally penetrating and de-
cifive, retained its full vigour, and acquired
him such great authority in his own order,
as raised him to be their provincial. His repu-
tation for san&ity oon procured him the office
of father confessor to queen Isabella, which he

accepted

Boor . accepted with the utmost reluctance. Hepre-
`v- 'served in a court the fame austerity of man-
$516. ners, which had diftinguilhed him in the cloister.

-ie continued to make all his journies on foot;
he ubfifted only upon alms; his a&s of morti-
fication were as severe as ever; and his pe-
nances as rigorous. Isabella, pleaed with her
choice, conferred on him, not long after, the
Archbilhoprick of Toledo, which, next to the
Papacy, is the ricteft dignity in the church of
Rome. This honour he declined with a firm-
ness, which nothing but the authoritative injunc-
tion of the Pope was able to overcome. Nor
did this height of promotion change his man-
ners. Though obliged to display in public
that magnificence which became his flation, he
himself retained his monaftick severity. Under
his pontifical robes he constantly wore the coarse
frock of St. Francis, the rents in which he used
to patch with his own hands. He at no time
used linen; but was commonly clad in hair-
cloth. He slept always in his habit, most fre-
quently on the ground, or on boards, rarely in
a bed. He did not taste any of the delicacies
which appeared at his table, but satisfied him-
self with that simple diet which the rule of his
order prescribed '. Notwithstanding thefepecu-
liarities, so opposite to the manners of the
world, he possessed a thorough knowledge of
its affairs; and no sooner was he called by his
station, and by the high opinion which Ferdi-
nand and Isabella entertained of him, to take
a principal lhare in the administration, than he
displayed talents for business, which rendered
the fame of his wisdom equal to that of his
sanctity. Bold and original in all his plans, his

political

Hiftoire de l'adminiftration do Card. Ximen. par Mich.
Bandier, to. 1635. p. 13.

political condu& flowed from his real characer, BooK I.
and partook both of its virtues and its defe&ts. [ -
His extensive genius suggested to him schemes,
vast and magnificent. Conscious of the inte-
grity of his intentions, he pursued these with
unremitting and undaunted firmness. AcLuf-
tomed from his early youth to mortify his own
passions, he shewed little indulgence towards
those of other men. Taught by his fylIem of
religion to check even his most innocent desires,
he was the enemy of every thing to which he
could affix the name of elegance or pleasure.
Though free from any suspicion of cruelty, he
discovered in all his commerce with the world
a evere inflexibility of mind, and austerity of
characer, peculiar to the monaftick profession,
and which can hardly be conceived in a country.
where that is unknown.

SUCH was the man to whom Ferdinand corn- c,,;~,l

mitted the regency of Castile, and though Adrianap
Ximenes was then near fouricure, and perfectly Pent by
acquainted with the labour and difficulty of the charies
office, his natural intrepidity of mind, and zeal
for the public good, prompted him to accept
of it without hesitation. Adrian of Ut!echt,
who had been sent into Spain a few months
before the death of Ferdinand, produced full
powers from the archduke to assume the name
and authority of regent upon the demise of his
grandfather; but such was the aversion of the
Spaniards to the government of a stranger, and
so unequal the abilities of the two competitors,
that Adrian's claim would at once have been
rejected, if Ximenes himself, from complaisance
to his new matier, had not consented to acknow-
ledge him as regent, and to carry on the govern-
ment in conjuntion with him. By this, how-

ever,

Boor 1. ever, Adrian acquired a dignity merely nominal,
~-- Ximenes, though he treated him with great de-

xam,,, cency, and even refpe&, retained the whole
otain t :e power in his own hands m.
sole dirc-
on o: as-
ir. THE Cardinal's first care was to observe the
;i, p,. motions of the Infant Don Ferdinand, who
~sinft having been flattered with so near a prospect of
Dro FPcdi- supreme power, bore the disappointment of his
"-C~ hopes w.th greater impatience than could have

been expeced of a prince so young. Ximenes,
under pretence of providing more effecually
for his lfcty, removed him from Guadaloupe,
the place in which he had been educated, to
Madrid, where he fixed the residence of the
court. There he was under the Cardinal's own
eye, and his cenduct, with that of his domestics,
was watched with the utmost attention ".

THEr firi intelligence he received from the

Low Countries, gave greater diiquiet to the
Cardinal, ahd convinced him how difficult a
talk it would be to conduat the affairs of a
young prince, under the influence of counsellors
unacquainted with the laws and manners of
Spain. No Sooner dii the account of Ferdi-
nand's death reach BrufTels, than Charls, by
the adv e of his Flem a!'ll ministers, resolved to

Ctr:t - aflume the tidle of l: g. By the laws of Spain,
rfe . the sole right tc the crowns both of Castile and
M ..i. of Aragon beiongc-d to Joanna; and though

her infirmities dilqualified her from governing
this incapacity had not been declared by any
publick aC of the Cortes in either kingdom; so
that the Spaniards confidered this resolution,
not only as a dire& violeton of their privileges,

but

m Gometius de rch. e. Ximen;;, p. io.'f. Compl,

s;69 n iana Cr.tin. Mlaiana, lib. . c. 2.
Baudier, Hill. de Xi.cnes, p. 8.

but as an unnatural usurpation in a son on the BOOK I.
prerogatives of a mother, towards whom, in her 6
present unhappy situation, he manifested a less '5,6.
delicate regard than her fubjeas had always ex-
pressed. The Flemish court, however, having
prevailed both on the Pope and on the Emperor
to address letters to Charles as king of Castile;
the former of whom, it was pretended, had a
right, as head of the church ; and the latter, as
head of the empire, to confer this title; inftruc-
tions were sent to Ximenes, to prevail on the
Spaniards to acknowledge it. Ximenes, though
he had earnestly remonstrated against the mea-
sure, as no less unpopular than unnecessary,
resolved to exert all his authority and credit in
carrying it into execution, and immediately
assembled such of the nobles as were then at
court. What Charles required was laid before
them; and when, initead of complying with
his demands, they began to murmur aainft
such an unprecedented encroachment on their
privileges, and to talk high of the rights of
Joanna, and their oath of allegiance to her,
Ximenes hastily interposed, and with that firm Regn;ized
and decisive tone which was natural to him, told inflence f
them, that they were not called now to deli-ximene.
berate, but to obey; that their sovereign did
not apply to them for advice, but expected sub-
miflion.; and "this day, added he, Charles shall April xj.
be proclaimed king of Castile in Madrid, and
the reft of the cities will follow its example."
On the spot he gave orders for that purpose P;
and notwithstanding the novelty of the pra&ice,
and the secret discontents of many persons of
diftin&ion, Charles's title was universally recog-
nized. In Aragon, where the privileges of the

fubje&

oP. Mart. Ep. 68. P Gometius, p. 152, &c.
Baudier His. de Ximen. p. 121.

Boox I. subject were more extensive, and the abilities as
'-V"3 well as authority of the archbilhop of Saragossa,

5ó' whom Ferdinand had appointed regent, were

far inferior to those of Ximenes, the fame obfe-
quiouinefs to the will of Charles did not appear,
nor was he acknowledged there under any other
chara&er but that of prince, until his arrival in
Spain .
Hfr ichrme XIMENES, though poflefled only of delegated

ih p- power, which, from his advanced age, he could
oatve- not expe& to enjoy long, assumed, together with

the chara&er of regent, all the ideas natural to
a monarch, and adopted schemes for extending
the regal authority, which he pursued with as
much intrepidity and ardour, as if he himself
had been to reap the advantages resulting from
their success. The exorbitant privileges of the
Castilian nobles circumscribed the prerogative
of the prince within very narrow limits. These
the cardinal confidered as so many unjust ex-
tortions from the crown, and determined to re-
duce them. Dangerous as the attempt was,
there were circumstances in his situation which
promised him greater fuccefithan any king of
Castile could have expeced. His ftri& and
prudent ceconomy of his archiepiscopal reve-
nues furnilhed him with more ready money
than the crown could at any time command;
the fancity of his manners, his charity and mu-
nificence, rendered him the idol of the people;
and the nobles themselves, not fufpedcing any
danger from him, did not observe his mnotons
with the fame jealous attention, as they would
have watched those of one of their monarchs.

IMMEDIATELY
0 ". Mart Ep. 57z.

IMMEDIATELY upon his accession to the re- BooK I.

gency, feverai of the nobles, fancying that the '~['i
reins of government would of consequence be By dpre-
somewhat relaxed, began to affenble their vaf-logh. n-
lals, and to prosecute, by force of arms, private
quarrels and pretensions, which the authority of
Ferdinand had obliged them to dissemble, or to
relinquish. But Ximenes, who had taken into
pay a good body of troops, opposed and de-
feated all their designs with unexpe&ed vigour
and facility; and though he did not treat the
authors of these disorders with any cruelty, he
forced them to as of fubmiflion, extremely
mortifying to the haughty spirit of Castilian
grandees.

BUT while the Cardinal's attacks were con-By forming

fined to individuals, and every a& of rigour tbodyf
was justified by the appearance of necessity, peding on
founded on the forms of justice, and tempered the'"owa"
with a mixture of lenity, there was scarcely room
ifor jealousy or complaint. It was not so with
his next measure, which, by striking at a privi-
lege essential to the nobility, gave a general
alarm to the whole order. By the feudal con-
ftitution, the military power was lodged in the
hands of the nobles, and men of an inferior
condition were called into the field only as their
vassals, and to follow their banners. A king
with scanty revenues, and a limited prerogative,
depended on these potent barons in all his ope-
rations. It was with their forces he attacked
his enemies, and with them he defended his
own kingdom. While at the head of troops at-
tached warmly to their own lords, and accustomed
to obey no other commands, his authority was
precarious, and his efforts feeble. From this
Itate Ximenes resolved to deliver the crown;
and as mercenary lfanding armies were unknown

VOL. . D under

Boo I. under the feudal government, and would have
'-~ been odious to a martial and generous people,
156' he issued a proclamation, commanding every

city in Castile to enrol a certain number of its
burgefies, in order that they might be trained
to the use of arms on Sundays and holidays; he
engaged to provide officers to command them
at the publick expence; and as an encourage-
ment to the private men, promised them an ex-
emption from all taxes and impositions. The
frequent incursions of the Moors from Africa,
and the necessity of having fume force ready to
oppose them, furnished a plausible pretence for
this innovation. The object really in view was
to secure the king a body of troops independent
of his barons, and which might serve to coun-
terbalance their power r. The nobles were not
ignorant of his intention, and saw how effecually
the scheme which he had adopted would ac-
compliih his end; but as a measure which had
the pious appearance of resisting the progress of
the Infidels was extremely popular, and as any
opposition to it arising from their order alone,
would have been imputed wholly to interested
motives, they endeavoured to excite the cities
themselves to refuse obedience, and to remon-
ftrate againit the proclamation, as inconsistent
with their charters and privileges. In confe-
quence of their infigations, Burgos, Valladolid,
and everal other cities, rose in open mutiny.
Some of the grandees declared themselves their
protetors. Violent remonstrances were pre-
sented to the king. His Flemiih counsellors
were alarmed. Ximenes alone continued firm
and undaunted; and partly by terror, partly by
intreaty; by force in some instances, and by
forbearance in others, he prevailed on all the

refractory
r Minians Continuatio Mariana, fol. Hag. '733, p. 3.

refratory cities to comply . During his ad- BooK I
miniltration, he continued to execute his plan. "

-Stó.

with vigour, but oon after his death it was en-
tirely dropt.

His success in this scheme for reducing the y re-aing

. the grants

exorb:tant power of the nobility, encouraged him f former
to attempt a diminution of their poffeofions rmnarchs

t. t the n-

which were no less exorbitant. During the con- bility.
tests and disorders inseparable from the feudal
government, the nobles, ever attentive to their
own interest, and taking advantage of the weak-
ness or distress of their monarchs, had seized
iome parts of the royal demelhes, obtained grants
of others, and having gradually wrested almost
the whole out of the hands of the prince, had
annexed them to their own estates. The rights,
by which most of the grandees held these lands,
were extremely defecive; it was from ome fuc-
cefsful usurpation, which the crown had been
too feeble to dispute, that many derived their
only title to polliflion. An enquiry carried
back to the origin of these encroachments, which
were almost co-eval with the feudal system, was
impracticable; and as it would have stripped
every nobleman in Spain of great part of his
lands, it must have excited a general revolt.
Such a ftep was too bold; even for the enterpriz-
ing genius of Ximenes. He confined himself
to the reign of Ferdinand; and beginning with
the pensions granted during that time, refused
to make any farther payment, because all right
to them expired with his life. He then called
to account such as had acquired crown lands
under the administration of that monarch, and
at once resumed whatever he had alienated. The
effects of these revocations extended to many

D 2 persons
P. Mart. Ep. 556, &c. Gometius, p. 160, &c.

BooK . perions of high rank; for though Ferdinand

ó-~* was a prince of little generosity, yet he and Ifa-
. bella having been raised to the throne of Castile

by a powerful fation of the nobles, they were
obliged to reward the zeal of their adherents
with great liberality, and the royal demesnes
were their only fund for that purpose. The
addition made to the revenue of the crown by
thee revocations, together with his own frugal
ceconomy, enabled Ximenes not only to discharge
all the debts which Ferdinand had left, and to
remit considerable fums to Slanders, but to pay
the officers of his new militia, and to eftablilh
magazines more numerous, and better furnished
with artillery, arms, and warlike stores, than
Spain had ever possessed in any former age .
The prudent and difnterefted application of
these fums, was a full apology to the people for
the rigour with which they were exated.

Tho Lk:s THE nobles, alarmed at these repeated at-
rahjri, tacks, began to think of precautions for the

safety of their order. Many cabals were form-
ed, loud complaints were uttered, and def-
perate resolutions taken; but before they pro-
ceeded to extremities, they appointed some of
their number to examine the powers in confe-
quence of which the Cardinal exercised ats of
such high authority. The admiral of Castile,
the duke de Infantado, and the conde de Bene-
vento, grandees of the first rank, were entrusted
with this commiflion. Ximenes received them
with cold civility, and in answer to their de-
mand, produced the testament of Ferdinand by
which he was appointed regent, together with
the ratification of that deed by Charles. To
both these they objeced; and he endeavoured

to
t Flechier Vie de Ximen. ii. 6oo.

to establish their validity. As the conversation BOOK I.
grew warm, he led them insensibly towards a --
balcony, from which they had a view of a large b.t Si,,out
body of troops under arms, and of a formidablerucces,.
train of artillery. " Behold," fays he, pointing
to these and railing his voice, " the powers
which I have received from his Catholick ma-
jefty. With these I govern Castile; and with
these I will govern it, until the king your master
and mine takes possession of his kingdom ." A
declaration so bold and haughty silenced them,
and astonished their associates. To take arms
against a man aware of his danger, and prepared
for his defence, was what despair alone would
dictate. All thoughts of a general confederacy
against the Cardinal's ad niniftration were laid
aside; and except from fme flight commotions,
excited by the private efentment of particular
noblemen, the tranquillity of Castile suffered no
interruption,

IT was not only from the opposition of the Thwarted

Spanish nobility that obstacles arose to the exe- Fc 'i s
cution of the Cardinal's schemes; he had a con- miifter..
tant struggle to maintain with the Flemish mini-
fters, who, presuming upon their favour with the
young king, aimed at direting the affairs of
Spain, as well as those of their own country.
Jealous 'of his great abilities, and independent
spirit, they confidered Ximenes rather as a rival
who might circumscribe their power, than as a
minister who by his prudence and vigour was
adding to the grandeur and authority of their
master. Every complaint against his admini-
ftration was listened to with pleasure by the cour-
tiers in the Low Countries. Unnecessary ob-
ftruaions were thrown by their means in the

way
o Flech.ii. 5t. Ferreras, Hit. viii. 433.

1.

Boor I. way of all his measures; and though they could
'-V-.- not either with decency or safety deprive him of

1;16. the office of regent, they endeavoured to lessen

his authority by dividing it. They sion dif-
covered that Adrian of Utrecht, already joined
with him in office, had neither genius nor spirit
sufficient to give the keat check to his proceed-

An additi- ings; and therefore Charles, by their advice,
on-' u- added to the conmiffion of regency La Chau, a
gent - Flemish gentleman, and afterwards Amerftorf,
t'o"ned a nobleman of Holland; the former diftin-

guified for his address, the latter for his firmness.
Ximenes, though no stranger to the malevolent
intention of the Flemiih courtiers, received hefe
new associates with all the external marks of dif-
tin&ion due to the ossie with which they were
invested; but when they came to enter upon
business, he abated nothing of that air of fupe-
riority with which he had treated Adrian, and

xirte-ftill retained the sole direcion of affairs. The
,on tb di- Spaniards, more averse, perhaps, than any other
Ssir,. people to the government of frangers, approved

of all his efforts to preserve his authority. Even
the nobles, influenced by this national passion,
and forgetting their jealousies and discontents,
chose rather to fee the supreme power in the
hands of one of their countrymen, whom they
feared, than in those of foreigners, whom they
hated.

w (fccCf- XIMENES, though engaged in such great
,,l ren schemes of domefltick policy, and embarrafled by

the artifices and intrigues of the Flefni mi-
nifrers, had the burden of two foreign wars to
support. The one was in Navarre, invaded by
its unfortunate monarch, John d'Albret. The
death of Ferdinand, the absence of Charles, the
discord and dilaffetion which reigned among

the

the Spanihf nobles, seemed to present him with BooK I.
a favourable opportunity of recovering his do- -
minions. The Cardinal's vigilance, however, 15I6
defeated a measure so well concerted. As he
foresaw the danger to which that kingdom might
be exposed, one of hs first a&s of adminiftra-
tion was to order thither a considerable body of
troops. While the king was employed with
one part of his army in the siege of St. Jean
Pied en Port, Villalva, an officer of great ex-
perience and courage, attacked the other by
surprise, and cut it to pieces. The king in-
ftantly retreated with precipitation, and an end
was put to the war x. But as Navarre was filled
at that time with towns and castles, slightly
fortified, and weakly garrisoned, which being
unable to resist an enemy, served only to furnish
him with places of retreat; Ximenes, always
bold and decisive in his measures, ordered every
one of there to be dismantled, except Pampe-
luna, the fortifications of which he proposed to
render very strong. To this uncommon pre-
caution Spain owes the possession of Navarre.
The French, since that period, have often en-
tered, and have as often over-run the open
country ; but while they were exposed to all the
inconveniencies attending an invading army, the
Spaniards have easily drawn troops from the
neighbouring provinces to oppose them; and
the French, being destitute of strong towns to
which they could retire, have been obliged to
abandon their conquest with as much rapidity as
they gained it.

The war which he carried on in Africa, His operati-

against the famous adventurer Horuc Barba- ons's inAfri
roffa, who, from a private corsair, raised him- ate.
self, by his singular valour and address, to be

king
* P. Mart. Ep. 570,

Bool T. king of Algiers and Tunis, was far from being
t'equally fuczefsful. The ill condu& of the
15t6. Spanish general, and the rash valour of his

troops, presented Barbarossa with an easy victory.
Many perilhed in the battle, more in the retreat,
and the remainder returned into Spain covered
with infamy. The magnanimity, however, with
which the Cardinal bore this dirgrace, the only
one he experienced during hi$ administration,
added newluftre to his character Y. Great com-
pofure of temper under a disappointment, was
not expected from a man so remarkable for the
eagerness and impatience with which he urged
on the execution of all his schemes.

Cormpt, THIS disaster was soon forgotten; while the
ofA iS-s conduct of the Flemish court proved the cause
fter, par- of constant uneasiness, not only to the Cardinal,
Ct-htf but to the whole Spanish nation. All the great

qualities of Chievres, the prime minister and
favourite of the young king, were sullied with
an ignoble and fordid avarice. The accession of
his matter to the crown of Spain, opened a
new and copious source for the gratification of
this passion. During the time of Charles's refi-
dence in Slanders, the whole tribe of pretenders
to offices or to favour resorted thither. They
soon discovered that, without the patronage of
Chievres, it was vain to hope for preferment;
nor did they want sagacity to find out the proper
method of securing his protection. Vast fums
of money were drawn out of Spain. Every
thing was venal, and disposed of to the highest
bidder. After the example of Chievres, the in-
ferior Flemili ministers engaged in this traffick,
which became as general and avowed, as it was

infamous.
y Gometlus, lib. vi. p. 179.

infamous z. The Spaniards were filled with BOOK I.
rage when they beheld offices of great import- '--.
ance to the welfare of their country, set to Li6'
tile by strangers, unconcerned for its honour or
its happiness. Ximenes, disinterested in his
whole administration, and a stranger, from his
native grandeur of mind, to the passion of ava-
rice, inveighed with the utmost boldness against
the venality of the Flemings. He represented
to the King in strong terms, the murmurs and
indignation which their behaviour excited among
a free and high spirited people, and besought
him to let out without loss of time for Spain,
that, by his pretence, he might dissipate the
clouds which were gathering all over the king-
dom a.

CHARLES was fully fenible that he had de- cbarieRpr-

layed too long to take poffeflion of his domi- i.edbyt
nions in Spain. Powerful obstacles, however, visit Spai.
stood in his way, and detained him in the Low
Countries. The war which the league of Cam-
bray had kindled in Italy, still fubfifed; though,
during its course, the armies of all the parties
engaged in it, had changed their destination and
their objects. France was now in alliance with
Venice, which it had at first combined to destroy.
Maximilian and Ferdinand had for some years
carried on hostilities against France, their origi-
nal ally, to the valour of whose troops the con-
federacy had been indebted for all its success.
Together with his kingdoms, Ferdinand tranf-
mitted this war to his grandson; and there was
reason to expect that Maximilian, always fond of
new enterprizes, would persuade the young
monarch to enter into it with ardour. But the
Flemings, who had long possessed an extensive

commerce,
z Miniana, Contin. 1. i. c. . P. Mart. Ep. 576.

B-oK I. commerce, which, during the league of Cam-
'--".bray, had grown to a great height upon the
156. 'ruins of the Venetian trade, dreaded a rupture

with France; and Chievres, sagacious to discern
the true interest of his country, and not warped
on this occasion by his love of wealth, warmly
declared for maintaining peace with the French
nation. Francis I. destitute of allies, and soli-
citous to secure his late conqueRs in Italy by a
treaty, listened with joy to the first overtures of
accommodation. Chievres himself conducted
the negociation in name of Charles. Gouffier
appeared as plenipotentiary for Francis. Each
of them had presided over the education of the
prince whom he represented. They had both
adopted the fame pacific sysem; and were
equally persuaded that the union of the two mo-
narchs was the happiest event for themselves, as
well as for their kingdoms. In such hands the
A , negociation did not languish. A few days after

,it o.opening their conferences at Noyon, they con-

-^a. 3, eluded a treaty of confederacy and mutual de-
516- ' fence between the two monarchs; the chief ar-

ticles in which were, that Francis (hould give in
marriage to Charles his eldeR daughter, the prin-
cess Louise, an infant of a year old, and as her
dowry, should make over to him all his claims
and pretensions upon the kingdom of Naples;
that in consideration of Charles's being already
in pofleffion of Naples, he should, until the ac-
complihment of the marriage, pay an hundred
thousand crowns a year to the French king;
and the half of that fum annually, as long as
the princess had no children; that when Charles
lhall arrive in Spain, the heirs of the king of
Navarre may represent to him their right to
that kingdom; and if he do not give them fa-
tisfacion, Francis should be at liberty to afift

them

them with all his forces b. This alliance not BooK I.
only united Charles and Francis, but obliged'- -
Maximilian, who was unable alone to cope with Jsl
the French and Venetians, to enter into a treaty
with those powers, which put a final period to
the bloody and tedious war that the league of
Cambray had occasioned. Europe enjoyed a
few years of universal tranquillity, and was in-
debted for that blessing to two princes, whose
rivalfip and ambition kept it in perpetual dif-
cord and agitation during the remainder of their
reigns.

By the treaty of Noyon, Charles secured aThe Flem-

safe passage into Spain. It was not, however, ',Chrle'
the interest of his Flemilh ministers, that he vifittoSpain
should visit that kingdom soon. While he re-
fided i Slanders, the revenues of the Spanish
crown were spent there, and they engrossed,
without any competitors, all the effets of their
monarch's generosity; their country became the
feat of government, and all favours were dif-
pensed by them. Of all there advantages, they
run the rifque of feeing themselves deprived,
from the moment that their sovereign entered
Spain. The Spaniards wotid naturally assume
the direction of their own affairs; the Low
Countries would be confidered only as a Pro-
vince of that mighty monarchy; and they who
now distributed the favours of the prince to
others, must then be content to receive them
from the hands of strangers. But what Chievres Afraid of
chiefly wihed to avoid was, an interview be-ximene"'
tween the king and Ximenes. On the one
hand, the wisdom, the integrity, and the mag-
nanimity of that prelate, gave him a wonderful
ascendant over the minds of men; and it was

extremely
b Leonard Recueil des Traitez, tom. ii. 69.

Bool I. extremely probable, that these great qualities,
' ~" added to the reverence due to his age and office,

56.' would command the refpe& of a young prince,

who, capable of noble and generous sentiments
himself, would, in proportion to his admiration
of the Cardinal's virtues, leflen his deference
towards persons of another characer. Or, on
the other hand, if Charles should allow his
Flermih favourites to retain all the influence
over his councils which they at present possessed,
it was easy to foresee that the Cardinal would
remonstrate loudly against such an indignity to
the Spanish nation, and vindicate the rights of
his country with the fame intrepidity and fuc-
cess, that he had asserted the prerogatives of
the crown. For there reasons, all his Flemih
counsellors combined to retard his departure;
and Charles, unfufpicious, from want of expe.
rience, and fond of his native country, suffered
himself to be unnecessarily detained in the Ne-
therlands a whole year after signing the treaty
of Noyon.

',,7. THE repeated entreaties of Ximenes, the ad-

,,,,
^ vice of his grandfather Maximilian, and the
s- impatient murmurs of his Spanish subje&s, pre-

vailed on him at last to embark. He was
attended not only by Chievres, hs prime mini-
fter, but by a numerous and splendid train of
the Flemilh nobles, fond of beholding the gran-
deur, or of fiaring in the bounty of their prince.
. - After a dangerous voyage, he landed at Villa

Viciofa, in the province of Asturias, and was
received with such loud acclamations of joy, as
a new monarch, whose arrival was so ardently
desired, had reason to expe&. The Spanish
nobility resorted to their sovereign from all
parts of the kingdom, and displayed a magni-

ficence

ficence which the Flemings were unable to BooK I.
emulate. c.

51l7.

XIMENES, who confidered the presence of the Hi;rlram;

king as the greatest blessing to his dominions, e'ndeu
was advancing towards the coast, as faf as the to Preveat
infirm state ot his health would permit, in order ;'en'hi,
to receive him. During his regency, and not- xime,.
withstanding his extreme old age, he had abated,
in no degree, the rigour or frequency of his
mortifications; and to these he added such la-
borious assiduity in business, as would have
worn out the most youthful and vigorous con-
ftitution. Every day he employed several hours
in devotion; he celebrated mass in person; he
even allotted ome space for study. Notwith-
1tanding these occupations, he regularly attended
the council; he received and read all papers
presented to him; he dictated letters and in-
fruaions; and took under his infpetion all
business, civil, ecclesiastical, or military. Every
moment of his time was filled up with some
serious employment. The only amusement in
which he indulged himself by way of relaxation
after business, was to canvass, with a few friars
and divines, ome intricate article in scholastic
theology. Wafted by such a course of life, the
infirmities of age daily grew upon him. On
his journey, a violent disorder seized him at Bos
Equillos, attended with uncommon symptoms;
which his followers confidered as the effec of
poison d, but could not agree whether the crime
ought to be imputed to the hatred of the
Spanish nobles, or to the malice of the Flemish
courtiers. This accident obliging him to stop
short, he wrote to Charles, and with his usual

boldness

c P. Mart. Ep. S99. 601. d Miniana, Contin.
lib. i. c. 3.

Booz I. boldness advised him to dismiss all the strangers
'-""D in his train, whose numbers and credit gave
chi.^i._ offence already to the Spaniards, and would ere
,rtide to long alienate the affections of the whole people.
Xms" At the fame time, he earnestly desired to have

an interview with the king, that he might inform
him of the state of the nation, and the temper
of his subje&s. To prevent this, not only the
Flemings, but the Spanibh grandees, employed
all their address, and industriously kept Charles
at a distance from Aranda, the place to which
the Cardinal had removed. Through their fug-
geftions, every measure that he recommended
was rejeted; the utmost care was taken to
make him feel, and to point out to the whole
nation, that his power was on the decline ; even
in things purely trivial, such a choice was always
made, as was deemed most disagreeable to him.
Ximenes did not bear this treatment with his
ulual fortitude of spirit. Conscious of his own
integrity and merit, he expeaed a more grateful
return from a prince, to whom he delivered a
kingdom more flourishing than it had been in
any former age, together with authority more
extensive and better eftablilhed, than the most
illustrious of his ancestors had ever pofeffed.
He could not, therefore, on many occasions,
refrain from giving vent to his indignation and
complaints. He lamented the fate of his coun-
try, and foretold the calamities which it would
susser from the insolence, the rapaciousness, and
ignorance of strangers. While his mind was
ag.kated by these passions, he received a letter
from the king, in which, after a few cold and
formal expreflions of regard, he was allowed to
retire to his dioccfe; that after a life of such
continued labour, he might end his days in
Hu dc::h. tranquillity. This message proved fatal to

Ximcncs, his haughty mind, it is probable,

would

would not survive disgrace; perhaps his gene- Boo I.
rous heart could not bear the profpe& of the
misfortunes ready to fall on his country. Which- '5s'7
soever of these opinions we enbrace, certain it
is that he expired a few hours after reading the Nov. s.
letter e. The variety, the grandeur, and the
success of his schemes, during a regency of only
twenty months, leave it doubtful, whether his
sagacity in council, his prudence in condut, or
his boldness in execution, deserve the greatest
praise. His reputation is still high in Spain, not
only for wisdom, but for san&ity; and he is the
only prime minifler mentioned in history, whom
his contemporaries reverenced as a faint f, and to
whom the people under his government ascribed
the power of working miracles.

SOON after the death of Ximenes, Charles .I5s.

made his publick entry, with great pomp, into CV,,alld
Valladolid, whither he had summoned the Cortes lid.
of Castile. Though he assumed on all occasions
the name of king, that title had never been
acknowledged in the Cortes. The Spaniards
confidering Joanna as possessed of the sole right
to the crown, and no example of a son's having
enjoyed the title of king during the life of his
parents occurring in their hilory, the Cortes
discovered all that scrupulous refpe& for ancient
forms, and that aversion to innovation, which
are conspicuous in popular assemblies. The
presence, however, of their prince, the address,
the artifices, and the threats of his ministers,
prevailed on them at last to proclaim him king, DecIres
in conjuntion with his mother, whose name k`h'
they appointed to be placed before that of her

son

e Marfollier, Vie de Ximenes, p. 447. Gometius, lib.

vii p. 2z6, &c. Baudier Hill. de Ximen p. 28.
f Flechier, Vie de Ximen. ii. 745.

BooK I. son in all publick acts. But, when they made
'hs this conceflion, they declared that, if at any
13'1. future period Joanna hould recover the exer-

cife of reason, the whole authority should
return into her hands. At the fame time, they
voted a free gift of fix hundred thousand ducats
to be paid in three years, a fum more confider-
able than had ever been granted to any former
monarch s.

Dircon:ert NOTWITHSTANDING this obsequiousness of
,, Cu the Cortes to the will of the king, the most
the aof, violent symptoms of diflatisfacion with his go-

vernment began to break out in the kingdom,
Chievres had acquired over the mind of the
young monarch the ascendant not only of a
tutor, but of a parent. Charles leemed to have
no sentiments but those which his minister in-
spired, and scarcely uttered a word but what he
put into his mouth. He was constantly fur-
rounded by Flemings; no person got access to
him without their permission; nor was any ad-
mitted to audience but in their pretence. As
he spoke the Spanish language very imperfeLcly,
his answers were always extremely fliort, and
often delivered with hesitation. From all these
circumstances, many of the Spaniards were led
to believe that he was a prince of a flow and
narrow genius. Some pretended to discover a
strong resemblance between him and his mother,
and began to whisper that his capacity for go-
vernment would never be far superior to hers;
and though they who had the best opportunity
of judging concerning his chara&er, maintained,
that notwithitanding such unpromising appear-
ances, he poffefied a large fund of knowledge

as

g Miniira, Contin. lib. i. c. 3. P. Mart. Ep. 608.
Sandr. p. iz.

as well as of sagacity h; yet all agreed in con- Boo I.
demning his partiality towards his countrymen, ---
and his attachment to his favourites, as unrea- I5'8'
fonable and immoderate. Unfortunately for
Charles, these favourites were unworthy of his
confidence. To amass wealth seems to have
been their only aim; and as they had reason to
fear, that either their malter's good sense, or
the indignation of the Spaniards, might oon
abridge their power, they hastened to improve
the present opportunity, and their avarice was
the more rapacious, because they expected their
authority to be of no long duration. All
honours, offices, and benefices, were either en-
grossed by the Flemings, or publickly fold by
them. Chievres, his wife, and Sauvage, whom
Charles, on the death of Ximenes, had impru-
dently railed to be chancellor of Castile, vied
with each other in all the refinements of extor-
tion and venality. Not only the Spanih hifto-
rians, who, from resentment, may be fufpeced
of exaggeration, but Peter Martyr Angleria, an
Italian, who resided at that time in the court
of Spain, and who was under no temptation to
deceive the persons to whom his letters are
addressed, give a description which is almost
incredible, of the insatiable and ihamelefs covet-
oufnefs of the Flemings. According to An-
gleria's calculation, which he asserts to be ex-
tremely moderate, they remitted into the Low
Countries, in the space of ten months, no less
a fum than a million and one hundred thousand
ducats. The nomination of William de Croy,
Chievres' nephew, a young man not of cano-
nical age, to the Archbifhoprick of Toledo,
exasperated the Spaniards more than all these
exations. They confidered the elevation of a
stranger to the head of their church, and to the
richeit benefice in the kingdom, not only as an

VOL. II. E injury,

h Sandoval, p. 31. P. Mart. Ep. 655.

BooK I. injury, but as an insult to the whole nation;
z- 1' both clergy and laity, the former from interest,
15 '8 the latter from indignation, joined in exclaiming

against it.'

Ch.rles CHARLES leaving Castile thus disgusted with
cot' o his administration, set out tor Saragossa, the
Aragon. capital of Aragon, that he might be present in

the Cortes of that kingdom. On his way thither,
he took leave of his brother Ferdinand, whom
he lent into Germany on the pretence of visiting
their grandfather, Maximilian, in his old age.
To this prudent precaution, Charles owed the
preservation of his Spanilh dominions. During
the violent commotions which arose there soon
after this period, the Spaniards would infallibly
have offered the crown to a prince, who was
the darling of the whole nation; nor did Ser-
dinand want ambition, or counsellors, that might
have prompted him to accept of the offer k.

The Argo- THE Aragonefe had not hitherto acknow-
Untr-aoie ledged Charles as king, nor would they allow
than the the Cortes to be aflembled in his name, but in

that of the Juftiza, to whom, during an inter-
regnum, this privilege belonged '. The oppo-
fition Charles had to struggle with in the Cortes
of Aragon, was more violent and obstinate than
that which he had overcome in Castile; after
long delays, however, and with much difficulty,
he persuaded the members to confer on him the
title of king, in conjuncion with his mother.
At the fame time he bound himself by that so-
lemn oath, which the Aragonefe exacted of their
king, never to violate any of their rights or
liberties. When a donative was demanded, the

members

i Sandoval, 28-31. P. Mart. Ep. 608, 611, 613. 614,
6z2, 62z, 639. Miniana, Contin. lib. i. c. 3. p. 8.

k P. Martyr, Ep 619. Ferreras, viii. 460.
P. Martyr, Ep. 65.

members were still more intractable; many BooK I.
months elapsed before they would agree to grant 'v"
Charles two hundred thousand ducats, and that '5'8
fum they appropriated so ftricly for paying
debts of the crown, which had long been for-
gotten, that a very finall part of it came into the
king's hands. What had happened in Caf-
tile, taught them caution, and determined them
rather to satisfy the claims of their fellow-citi-
zens, how obsolete soever, than to furnish ftran-
gers the means of enriching themselves with the
spoils of their country m.

DURING these proceedings of the Cortes, am-

baffadors arrived at Saragofla from Francis I.
and the young king of Navarre, demanding the
restitution of that kingdom in terms of the treaty
of Noyon. But neither Charles, nor the Cafti-
lian nobles whom he consulted on this occasion,
discovered any inclination to part with this ac-
quifition. A conference held oon after at
Montpelier, in order to bring this matter to an
amicable issue, was altogether fruitlesss, while
the French urged the injustice of the usurpation,
the Spaniards were attentive only to its im-
portance .

FROM Aragon, Charles proceeded to Cata-

lonia, where he wafted as much time, encoun-
tered more difficulties, and gained less money.
The Flemings were now become so odious in
every province of Spain by their exacions, that
the desire of mortifying them, and of difap-
pointing their avarice, augmented the jealousy
with which a free people usually conduc their
deliberations.

E 2 THE

rn P. Martyr, Ep. 61 5-634. n . Martyr, Ep. 605.
633. 40.

BooK I. THE Caffilians, who had felt most sensibly
'-' the weight and rigour of the oppressive schemes
cobiS- carried on by the Flemings, resolved no longer
tion of s

to submit with a tamenels fatal to themselves,

aglino h, and which rendered them the objecs of scorn
Semi mi- among the red of the Spaniards. Segovia,

Toledo, Seville, and several other cities of the
first rank, entered into a confederacy for the de-
fence of their rights and privileges; and not-
withfLanding the silence of the nobility, who, on
this occalion, discovered neither the public fpi-
rit nor the resolution which became their order,
the confederates laid before the king a full view
of the state of the kingdom, and of the mal-
adminifiration of his favourites. The prefer-
ment of strangers; the exportation of the cur-
rent coin, the increase of taxes, were the griev-
ances of which they chiefly complained; and of
thee they demanded redress with that boldness
which is natural to a free people. These remon-
ftrances, presented at first at Saragossa, and re-
newed afterwards at Barcelona, Charles treated
with great neglet. The confederacy, however,
of these cities at this juncture, was the begin-
ning of that famous union among the com-
mons of Castile, which not long after threw
the kingdom into such violent convulsions as
hook the throne, and almost overturned the
constitution .

Deth of SOON after Charles's arrival at Barcelona, he
the Empe-
rraximi- received the account of an event which inte-
ia. - refted him much more than the murmurs of the-

. Catilians, or the scruples of the Cortes of Cata-

lonia. This was the death of the Emperor
Maximilian; an occurrence of small importance
in itself, for he was a prince conspicuous neither

for
o P. Martyr, Ep. 630. Ferreras, viii. 464.

for his virtues, nor his power, nor his abilities BooK .
but rendered by its consequences more memo- --'
rable than any that had happened during feve- '159'
ral ages. It broke that profound and universal
peace which then reigned in the Christian world;
it excited a rivalhip between two princes, which
threw all Europe into agitation, and kindled
wars more general, and of longer duration, than
had hitherto been known in modern times.

THE revolutions occasioned by the expedition

of the French king, Charles VIII. into Italy,
had inspired the European princes with new ideas
concerning the importance of the Imperial dig.
nity. The claims of the empire upon some of
the Italian states were numerous, its jurifdition
over others was extensive; and though the for-
mer had been almost abandoned, and the latter
seldom exercised, under princes of slender abi-
lities, and of little influence, it was obvious,
that, in the hands of an Emperor pofleffed of
power or genius, they would be employed as
engines for firetching his dominion over the
greater part of that country. Even Maximi-
lian, feeble and unsteady as his conduc always
was, had availed himself of the infinite preten-
sions of the empire, and had reaped advan-
tage from every war and every negotiation in
Italy durirg his reign. These considerations,
added to the dignity of the station, confefiedly
the first among Christian princes, and to the
rights inherent in the office, which if exerted
with vigour, were far from being inconsiderable,
rendered the Imperial crown more than ever an
obje& of ambition.

Maximilian

NOT long before his death, Maximilian had had endea-

discovered great solicitude to preserve this dig- secure the
nity in the Austrian family, and to procure the ImPerial

kicrown to his
king grandson.

Book . king of Spain to be chosen his ficceffor. But

-'
V he himself having never been crowned by the
'5'9 Pope, a ceremony deemed essential in that age,

was confidered only as Emperor elet. Though
historians did not attend to that diltinction, nei-
ther the Italian or German chancery bestowed
any other title upon him than that of king of
the Komans; and no example occurring in his-
tory of any person's being chosen a successor to
a king of the Romans, the Germans, always
tenacious of their forms, and unwilling to con-
ser upon Charles an office for which their con-
ititution knew no name, obl!inately refused to
gratify Maximilian in that point P.

Chirle nd BY his death, this difficulty was at once re-
F,'i,,r, moved, and Charles openly apired to that dig-
fr the cm- nity which his grandfather had attempted, with-

out success, to secure for him. At the fame
time, Francis I. a powerful ri'.al, entered the
lifts againff him; and the attention of all Europe
was fixed upon this competition, no less illuftri-
ous from the high rank of the candidates, than
from the importance of the prize for which they
contended. Each of them urged his preten-
sions with sanguine expecations, and with no
unpromising profpic: of success. Charles con-

A'd hopn fidered the Imperial crown as belonging to him
otchharis. of right, from its long continuance in the Au-

itrian line; he knew that none of the German
princes poffefled power or influence enough to
appear as his antagonist, he flattered himself,
that no consideration would induce the natives
of Germany to exalt any foreign prince to a
dignity, which during so many ages had been
deemed peculiar to their own nation; and least

of

P Guicciardini, lib. 13. p. 5. Hil. Gener. d'Allemaane,

par P. Barre, tom. viii part i. p 087. P. Heater. Rer.
Auftr. lib. vii. c. 17. 179. lib. vii. . . p. 183.

of all, that they would confer this honour upon Boo I.
Francis I. the sovereign of a people whose genius ,e*
and laws, and manners, differed so widely from '5'9
those of the Germans, that it was hardly possible
to eftablilh any cordial union between them; he
trusted not a little to the effe& of Maximilian's
negociations, which, though they did not attain
their end, had prepared the minds of the Ger-
mans for his elevation to the Imperial throne,
but what he relied on as a chief recommenda-
tion, was the fortunate situation of his heredi-
tary dominions in Germany, which served as a
natural barrier to the empire against the en-
croachments of the Turkish power. The con-
quests, the abilities, and the ambition of Sultan
Selim II. had spread over Europe, at that time,
a general and well-founded alarm. By his vic-
tories over the Mamalukes, and the extirpation
of that gallant body of men, he had not only
added Egypt and Syria to his empire, but had
secured to it such a degree of internal tranquil-
lity, that he was ready to turn against Chrilten.
dom the whole force of his arms, which nothing
hitherto had been able to resist. The most es
fetual expedient for stopping the progress of
this torrent, seemed to be the ele&ion of an Em-
peror, possessed of extensive territories in that
country, where its first impression would be felt,
and who, besides, could combat this formidable
enemy with all the forces of a powerful monar-
chy, and with all the wealth furnihed by the
mines of the new world, or the commerce of
the Low Countries. These were the arguments
by which Charles publickly supported his claim;
and to men of integrity. and refletion, they ap-
peared to be not only plausible, but convincing.
He did not, however, trust the success of his
cause to these alone. Great fums of money
were remitted from Spain all the refinements

and

Boo L. and artifice of negociation were employed; and

a conliderable body of troops kept on foot by the
'S'9 fates of the Circle of Suabia, was secretly taken

into his pay. The venal were gained by pre-
sents; the objections of the more scrupulous
were answered or eluded; some feeble princes
were threatened and over-awed q.
of Fnci. ON the other hand, Francis supported his

claim with equal eagerncfs, and no less confi-
dence of its being well founded. His emifiaries
contended that it was now high time to convince
the princes of the houle of Austria that the Impe-
rial crown was eletive, and not hereditary; that
ether persons might apire to an honour which
their arrogance had come to regard as the pro-
perty of their family; that it required a fove-

ign of maturejudgment, and of approved abili-
ties, to hold the reins of government in a coun-
try where such unknown opinions concerning
religion had been publiihed, as had thrown the
minds of men into an uncommon agitation,
which threatened the most violent eff&s; that a
young prince, without experience, and who had
hitherto given no specimens of his genius for
command, was no equal match for Selim, a mo-
narch grown old in the art of war, and in the
course of vitory; whereas a king, who in his
early youth had triumphed over the valour
and discipline of the Swiss, till then reckoned
invincible, would be an antagonist not unworthy
the Conqueror of the Eaf; that the fire and
impetuosity of the French cavalry, added to the
discipline and lability of the German infantry,
would form an army so irrefiftable, that, instead
of waiting the approach of the Ottoman forces,

it

q Guic. lib. 13. 9. Sle;dar, PiR. of the Reformat. 14.
Stmui Corp. Hit. German. ii. 971. Not. 20.

it might carry hostilities into the heart of their BooK I.
dominions; that the election of Charles would -'
be inconsistent with a fundamental constitution, '5'19
by which the person who holds the crown of
Naples, is excluded from aspiring to the Impe-
rial dignity; that his elevation to that honour
would soon kindle a war in Italy, on account of
his pretensions to the duchy of Milan, the effets
of which could not fail of reaching the Empire,
and might prove fatal to it'. But while his
ambassadors enlarged upon these and other to-
picks of the fame kind, in all the courts of
Germany, Francis, sensible of the prejudices en-
tertained againt him as a foreigner, unacquaint-
ed with the German language or manners, en-
deavoured to overcome these, and to gain the
favour of the princes by immense gifts, and by
infinite promises. As the expeditious method
of transmitting money, and the decent mode of
conveying a bribe by bills of exchange was then
little known, the French ambassadors travelled
with a train of horses loaded with treasure, an
equipage not very honourable for that prince
by whom they were employed, and infamous for
those to whom they were sent .

THE other European princes could not re- yiews and

ntereft of

main indifferent fpetators of a contet, the deci- other nftes.
sion of which so nearly affe&ed them. Their
common interest ought naturally to have formed
a general combination, in order to disappoint
both competitors, and to prevent either of them
from obtaining such a pre-eminence in power
and dignity, as might prove dangerous to the
liberties of Europe. But the ideas with refpe&
to a proper distribution and balance of power

were

r Guicc.lib. 13. 60. Sleid.p. 6. Geor. Sabini deelet.
Car.V. Hiftoria apud Scardii Script. Rer. Germ.vol. ii. p. 4.

· Memoires de Marech. de Fleuranges, p. 296.

Boox I. were so lately introduced into the system of Eu-

ropean policy, that they were not hitherto ob-
15 9 jects of sufficient attention. The paflions of

some princes, the want of foresight in others,
and the fear of giving offence to the candidates,
hindered such a salutary union of the powers of
Europe, and rendered them either totally negli-
gent of the publick safety, or kept them from
exerting themselves with vigour in its behalf.
or the THE Swiss Cantons, though they dreaded the

elevation of either of the contending monarchs,
and though they wiihed to have seen some prince
whose dominions were less extensive, and whole
power was more moderate, feated on the Im-
perial throne, were prompted, however, by their
hatred of the French nat.in, to give an open pre-
ference to the pretensions of Charles, while they
used their utmost influence to frustrate those of
Francis'.
Of e Ve- THE Venetians easily discerned, that it was

D . the interest of their Republick to have both the

rivals set aside; but their jealousy of the house
of Austria, whose ambition and neighbourhood
had been fatal to their grandeur, would not per-
mit them to at up to their own ideas, and led
them hastily to give the fanrion of their appro.
barion to the claim of the French king.

Of Henry IT was equally the interest, and more in the
vU.L power of Henry VIII. of England, to prevent

either Francis or Charles from acquiring a digi
nity which would raise them so far above other
monarchs. But though Henry often boasted,
that he held the balance of Europe in his hand,
he had neither the steady attention, the accurate
discernment, nor the difpafionate temper which

tbhat
t Sabims, p,6.

that delicate funcion required. On this occa- Boo I.
sion it mortified his vanity bo much, to lee him- --
self excluded from that noble competition which 'S'9
reflected iuch honour upon the two antagonists,
that he took the resolution of fending an am-
baffador into Germany, and of declaring himself
a candidate for the Imperial throne. The am-
baffador, though loaded with caresses by the
German princes and the Pope's nuncio, informed
his matter, that he could hope for no success in
a claim which he had been so late in preferring.
Henry, imputing his disappointment to that cir-
cumftance alone, and soothed with this oftentati-
ous display of his own importance, seems to have
taken no farther part in the matter, either by
contributing to thwart both his rivals, or to pro-
mote one of them . .

LEo X. a pontiff no less renowned for hisofLeoX.

political abilities, than for his love of the arts,
was the only prince of the age who observed the
motions of the two contending monarchs with a
prudent attention, or who discovered a proper
solicitude for the public safety. The Imperial
and Papal jurisdiction interfered in so many
inltances, the complaints of usurpation were so
numerous on both fides, and the territories of
the church owed their security so little to their
own force, and so much. to the weakness of the
powers around them, that nothing was so for-
midable to the court of Rome as an emperor
with extensive dominions, or of enterprizing
genius. Leo trembled at the profpet of be-
olding the Imperial crown placed on the head
of the king of Spain and of Naples, and the
master of the new world; nor was he less afraid

of

u Memoires de Fleuranges, 314. Herbert, Hilt. of
Henry VIII.

BooK I. of feeing a king of France, who was duke of

v- Milan and lord of Gen'a, cxaitd to that dig-
5' nity. ILe frt:old that the election of either of

them would be fatal to the independence of the
holy fee, to the peace of Italy, and perhaps to
the liberties of Europe. But to oppose them
with any profpe& of success, required address
and caution in proportion to the greatness of
their power, and their opportunities of taking
revenge. Leo was defetive in neither. He fe-
cretly exhorted the German princes to place one
of their own number on the Imperial throne,
which many of them were capable of filling
with honour. He put them in mind of the
conifitution by which the kings of Naples were
for ever excluded from that dignity . He
warmly exhorted the French King to persist in
his claim, not from any desire that he hould
gain his end, but as he foresaw that the Ger-
mans would be more disposed to favour the
king of Spain, he hoped that Francis himself,
when he discovered his own chance of success to
be desperate, would be itimulated by resent-
ment and the spirit of rivallhip, to concur with
all his interest in railing some third person to
the head of the Empire; or on the other hand,
if Francis should make unexpected progress, he
did not doubt but that Charles would be in-
duced by similar motives to a& the fame part,
and thus by a prudent attention, the mutual
jealousy of the two rivals might be so dexterous-
ly managed as to disappoint both. But this
scheme, the only one which a prince in Leo's
situation could adopt, though concerted with
great wisdom, was executed with little difcre-
tion. The French ambassadors in Germany fed

their

x Goldafti Constitutiones Imperiales. Francof. 1673.
voL i. 439.

their mafier with vain hopes; the pope's nuncio, BOOK I.
being gained by them, altogether forgot the --v--
infru&tions which he had received; and Francis ' '9
persevered so long and with such obstinacy in
urging his own pretensions, as rendered all Leo's
measures abortive r.

SucH were the hopes of the candidates, and The dit

the views of the different princes, when the ,,n 17th.
diet was opened according to form at Frankfort.
The right of chufing an Emperor had long
been vested in seven great princes, diftinguiihed
by the name of Ele&ors, the origin of whose
office, as well as the nature and extent of their
powers, have already been explained. These
were, at that time, Albert of Brandenburgh,
archbishop of Mentz; Herman count de Wied,
archbishop of Cologne; Richard de Greiffen-
klau, archbishop of Treves; Lewis, king of
Bohemia; Lewis, count Palatin of the Rhine;
Frederick, duke of Saxony; and Jnachim I.
marquis of Brandenburgh. Notwithstanding V:ewsofthe
the artful arguments produced by the ambaffa- Elaors.
dors of the two kings in favour of their refpec-
tive matters, and in spite of all their solicitations,
intrigues, and presents,. the Elecors did not
forget that maxim on which the liberty of the
German constitution was thought to be found-
ed. Among the members of the Germanick
body, which is a great republick composed of
states almost independent, the first principle
of patriotism is to depress and limit the power
of the Emperor; and of this idea, so natu-
ral under such a form of government, a Ger-
man politician seldom loses fight. No prince
of considerable power, or extensive dominions,

had
y Guicciar. lib. t3. 16z.

Boot I. had for some ages been raised to the Imperial
"-5'1 throne. To this prudent precaution many of
5l9' the great families in Germany owed the plen-

dour and independence which they had ac-
quired during that period. To elec either of
the contending monarchs, would have been a
grols violation of that salutary maxim; would
have given to the Empire a master, instead
of an head; and would have reduced them-
selves from the rank of equals, to the condition
of subje&s.

Ofer the FULL of these ideas, all the elecors turned
cr,. 0their eyes towards Frederick, duke of Saxony,
F.j'ickofa prince of such eminent virtue, and abilities,

OD, as to be diftinguilhed by the name of the Sage,

and with one voice they offered him the Im-
perial crown. He was not dazzled with that
object, which monarchs so far superior to him
in power courted with such eagerness; and after
deliberating upon the matter a short time, he re-
jeted it with a magnanimity and disinterested-

«ho rjse ness, no less singular than admirable. Nothing,
.' he observed, could be more impolitick, than an

obtinate adherence to a maxim which, though
found and just in many cafes, was not applica-
ble to all. In times of tranquillity, said he,
we wish for an Emperor who has not power to
invade our liberties; times of danger demand
one who is able to secure our safety. The
Turkitb armies, led by a gallant and vitorious
monarch, are now assembling. They are ready
to pour in upon Germany with a violence un-
known in former ages. New conjuncures call.
for new expedients. The Imperial sceptre must
be committed to some hand more powerful than
mine, or that of any other German prince. We
pofels neither dominions, nor revenues, nor

authority,

authority, which enable us to encounter such a BooK I.
formidable enemy. Recourse must be had in '"'
this exigency to one of the rival monarchs. Each '5'9
of them can bring into the field forces sufficient
for our defence. But as the king of Spain is
of German extracion; as he is a member and
prince of the empire by the territories which
descend to him from his grandfather; as his
dominions firetch along that frontier which lies
most exposed to the enemy; his claim is pre-
ferable, in my opinion, to that of a stranger to
our language, to our blood, and to our country;
and therefore I give my vote to confer on him
the Imperial crown.

THis opinion, dictated by such uncommon

generosity, and supported by arguments so plau-
fible, made a deep imprefion on the Eletors.
The king of Spain's ambassadors, sensible of and refues
the important service which Frederick had done fyrYmrei't.
their master, sent him a considerable urn ofCharle's
money, as the first token of' that prince's grati- dors.
tude. But he who had greatness of mind to re-
fuse a crown, disdained to receive a bribe; and
upon their entreating that, at least, he would
permit them to distribute part of that fum
among his courtiers, he replied, That he could
not prevent them from accepting what should be
offered, but whoever took a tingle forin should
be dilmiffed next morning from his service .

No

r P. Daniel, an hiltorian of considerable name, seems to

call in question the truth of this account of Frederick's be-
haviour in refuting the imperial crown, because it is not
mentioned by GeorgiusSabinus in his history of the eleaion
and coronation of Charles V. tom. iii. p. 63. But nogreat
firess ought to be laid on an omiflion in a superficial author,
whlofe treatise, though dignified with the name of hiflory,
contains only such an account of the ceremonial of Charle's

election,

BooX I. No prince in Germany could now apire to a
- - dignity, which Frederick had declined for rea-
r,15 t ons applicable to them all. It remained to make
ietrations a choice between the two great competitors. But
tof Te rte- besides the prejudice in Charles's favour, arising

from his birth, as well as the situation of his
German dominions, he owed not a little to the
abilities of the cardinal de Gurk, and the zeal
of Er. d de la Mark, bishop of Liege, two of
his amoalfadors, who had conduaed their nego-
ciations with more prudence and address than
those entrusted by the French king. The for-
mer, who had long been the minister and favou-
rite of Maximilian, was well acquainted with the
art of managing the Germans; and the latter
having been disappointed of a cardinal's hat by
Francis, employed all the malicious ingenuity
with which the desire of revenge inspires an am-
bitious mind, in thwarting the measures of that
monarch. The Spaniffi party among the Elec-
tors daily gained ground; and even the Pope's
nuncio, being convinced that it was vain to make
any farther opposition, endeavoured to acquire
some merit with the future Emperor, by offering
voluntarily, in the name of his master, a difpen-
fation to hold the Imperial crown in conjunion
with that of Naples .

ON

eletion, as is urually published in Germany on like occa-
lions. Scard. Rer. Germ. Script. v. 2. p. . The testimony
of Lrafmus, lib. 13. epilt. 4. and that of Sleidan, p. 8. are
express. Seckcndorf in his Commentaries Hiftoricus &
Apologeticus de Lutheranifmo, p. z12, has examined this
fact with his usual indutry, and haseflablilhed its truth by
the mors undoubted evidence. To thee tefimonies which
he has colle&ed, I may add the decisive one of cardinal
Caje:an, the popes legate at Frankfort, in his letter July
5th, 1519. Epilires u Princes, &c. recuellies par Rufcelli
traduias par Belforreft. ar. 1572. p.6o.

a Freheri Rer. German. Scriptores, vol iii. 172. cur.
Struvii Argent. 17 7. GianoneHilt. of Naples, a, 498.

ON the twenty-eighth of June, five months BOOK I.

and ten days after the death of Maximilian, this "i
important contest, which had held all Europe '5'9.
in fufpence, was decided. Six of the Eletors They chure
had already declared for the king of Spain; and perr.
the archbishop of Treves, the only firm adhe-
rent to the French interest, having at last joined
his brethren, Charles was by the unanimous
voice of the eletoral college raised to the impe-
rial throne b.

BUT though the electors consented, from

various motives, to promote Charles to that
high station, they discovered at the fame time
great jealousy of his extraordinary power, and They are
endeavoured, with the utmost solicitude, to pro- five of h,
vide against his encroaching on the privileges power, and
of the Germanick body. It had long been the clutiope-
custom to demand of every new Emperor a in it.
confirmation of'thefe privileges, and to require
a promise that he would never violate them in
any inRfance. While princes, who were formi-
dable neither from extent of territory, nor of
genius, possessed the Imperial throne, a general
and verbal engagement to this purpose was
deemed sufficient security. But under an Em-
peror so powerful as Charles, other precautions
seemed necessary. A Capitulation or claim of
rights was formed, in which the privileges and
immunities of the electors, of the princes of the
empire, of the cities, and of every other member
of the Germanick body, are enumerated. This
capitulation was immediately signed by Charles's
ambassadors in the name of their master, and
he himself at his coronation confirmed it in the
most solemn manner. Since that period, the

VOL. II. F Elecors

b Jac. Aug. Thuan. HiRl. fui temporis. Edit. Bulkley,
lib. i. c. 9.

BooK I. Ele&ors have continued to prescribe the fame
'- - conditions to all his successors; and the Capi.
1519 tulation or mutual contra& between the Em-

peror and his subje&s, is confidered in Germany
as a strong barrier against the progress of the
Imperial power, and as the great charter of their
liberties to which they often appeal c.

e.r *a- THE important intelligence of his election
t caes. was conveyed in nine days from Frankfort to

Barcelona, where Charles was till detained by
the obstinacy of the Catalonian Cortes, which
had not hitherto brought to an issue any of the
affairs which came before it. He received the
account with the joy natural to a young and
aspiring mind, on an accellion of power and
dignity which railed him so far above the other
princes of Europe. Then it was that those vast
profpe&s which allured him during his whole ad-
ministration began to open, and from this sera
we may date the formation, and are able to trace
the gradual progress of a grand system of enter-
prizing ambition, which renders the history of
his reign so worthy of attention.

Its efrea A TRIVIAL circumstance first discovered the
poa him effects of this great elevation upon the mind

of Charles In all the publick writs which he
issucd as king of Spain, he assumed the title of
Maijev, and required it from his subjects as a
mark of their refpet. Before that time, all the
monarchs of Europe were satisfied with the ap-
pellation of Higbnefs, or Grace; but the vanity
of rher courts soon led them to imitate the ex-
ample of the Spanish. - The epithet of Majesty

is

c Pfeffel Abrege de 1'Hit. de Droit Publique d'Alle-

magne, 59.-. Liwnei Capitulat. Impcr. Epiltres des
Princes par Rufcelli, p. 60.

/ J

is no longer a mark of pre-eminence. The most ROOK 1.
inconsiderable monarchs in Europe enjoy it, and ---
the arrogance of the greater potentates has in- '5'9.
vented no higher denomination d.

THE Spaniards were far from viewing the The Spani.

promotion of their king to the Imperial throne airds difs-
with the fame fatisfaaion which he himself felt. this vent.
To be deprived of the presence of their fove-
reign, and to be fubje&ed to the government
of a viceroy and his council, a species of admi-
niftration often oppressive, and always disagree-
able, were the immediate and necessary confe-
quences of this new dignity. To fee the blood
of their countrymen Ihed in quarrels wherein
the nation had no concern; to behold its trea-
fures wafted in supporting the splendour of a
foreign title; to be plunged in the chaos of
Italian and German politics, were effe&s of this
event almost as unavoidable. From all these
considerations, they concluded, that nothing
could have happened more pernicious to the
Spanish nation; and the fortitude and publick
spirit of their ancestors, who, in the Cortes of
Castile, prohibited Alphonzo the Wife from
leaving the kingdom, in order to receive the
Imperial crown, were often mentioned with the
highest praise, and pronounced to be extremely
worthy of imitation at this junture e.

BUT Charles, without regarding the senti-

ments or murmurs of his Spanili subje&s,
accepted of the Imperial dignity which the
count Palatine, at the head of a solemn embafly,
offered him in the name of the electors; and November.

F declared

d Minianz Contin. Mar. p. 13. Ferreras, viii. 475.

Memoires Hist. de la Houflaie, tom. i. p. 53, &c.
* Sandoval, i. p. 3. Miniana, Contin. p. 14.

BooK I. declared his intention of setting out soon for
'
J Germany, in order to take poffeflion of it
'59 Thiswas the more necessary, because, according

to the forms of the German conffiutnion, he
could not, before the ceremony of a publick co-
ronation, exercise any act of jurifdition or au-
thority f.

Therd; - THEIR certain knowledge of this resolution
^,te1t i- augmented so much the disgust of the Spaniards,

that a fullen and refra&ory spirit prevailed
among persons of all ranks. The Pope having
granted the king the tenths of all eccleiaftical
benefices in Castile to aflift him in carrying on
war with greater vigour against the Turks, a
convocation of the clergy unanimously refused
to levy that fum, upon pretence that it ought
never to be exaced but at those times when
Christendom was acually invaded by the Infi-
dels; and though Leo, in order to fuppott his
authority, laid the kingdom under an interdi&,
so little regard was paid to a censure which was
universally deemed unjust, that Charles himself
applied to have it taken off. Thus the Spanish
clergy, besides their merit in opposing the ufir-
pations of the Pope, and disregarding the influ-
ence of the crown, gained the exemption which
they had claimed .

A iafu.rec- THE commotions which arose in the kingdom
.e vi. of Valencia, annexed to the crown of Aragon,

were more formidable, and produced more dan-
gerous and lasting effets. A seditious monk
having by his sermons excited the citizens of
Valencia, the capital city, to take arms, and to
punish certain criminals in a tumultuary man-
ner, the people, pleased with this exercise of

power,

f Sabinus. P. Barre, viii. o85. P. Martyr,
Ep 462. Ferreras, viii. 473.

power, and with such a discovery of their own Boo I.
importance, not only refused to lay down their '
arms, but formed themselves into troops and '5'9
companies that they might be regularly trained
to martial exercises. To obtain ome security
againit the oppreflion of the grandees was the
motive of this association, and proved a powerful
bond of union; for as the ariftocratical privi-
leges and independence were more complete in
Valencia than in any other of the Spanish king-
doms, the nobles, being scarcely accountable for
their condu& to any superior, treated the people
not only as vassals but as slaves. They were
alarmed, however, at the progress of this unex-
pe&ed infurretion, as it might encourage the
people to attempt ihaking off the yoke alto-
gether; but as they could not repress them
without taking arms, it became necessary to
have recourse to the Emperor, and to desire his
permission to attack them. At the fame time ssio.
the people made choice of deputies to represent t progser".
their grievances, and to implore the prote&ion
of their sovereign. Happily for the latter, they
arrived at court when Charles was exasperated
to an high degree against the nobility. As he
was eager to visit Germany, where his preence
became every day more necessary, and as his
Flemish courtiers were still more impatient to
return into their native country, that they might
carry thither the spoils which they had amassed
in Cattile, it was impossible for him to hold the
Cortes of Valencia in person. He had for that
realbn empowered the Cardinal Adrian to repre-
sent him in that assembly, and in his name to
receive their oath of allegiance, to confirm their
privileges with the usual folemnities, and to
demand of them a free gift. But the Valencian
nobles, who confidered this measure as an in-

dignity

Boos I. dignity to their country, which was no less enti-
'- tled, than his other kingdoms, to the honour
I 20' of their sovereign's pretence, declared that by

the fundamental laws of the constitution they
could neither acknowledge as king a person who
was absent, nor grant him any subsidy, and
to this declaration they adhered with an haughty
and inflexible obstinacy. Charles, piqued with
their behaviour, decided in favour of the people,
and rashly authorized them to continue in arms.
Their deputies returned in triumph, and were
received by their fellow-citizens as the deliverers
of their country. The insolence of the multi-
tude increasing with their success, they expelled
all the nobles out of the city, committed the go-
vernment to magifrates of their own ele&tion,
and entered into an aflociation diftinguilhed by
the name of Germanada or Brotherhood, which
proved the source not only of the wildest dif-
orders, but of the mot fatal calamities in that
kingdom h.

Te C,..t MEANWHILE, the kingdom of Castile was
fs c,.sile agitated with no less violence. No sooner was
summoned

.t^Ir. in the Emperor's intention to leave Spain made

known, than several cities of the first rank re-
solved to remonstrate against it, and to crave
redress once more of those grievances which they
had formerly laid before him. Charles artfully
avoided admitting their deputies to audience;
and as he saw from this circumstance, how diffi-
cult it would be at this junture to refirain the
mutinous spirit of the greater cities, he fum-
moned the Cortes of Castile to meet at Com-
poftella, a town in Galicia. His only reason for
calling that assembly, was the hope of obtaining
another donative; for as his treasury had been

exhausted
h P. Martyr, Ep. 6j5. Ferreras, viii. 476, 485.

exhausted in the fame proportion that the riches BOOK I.
of his ministers increased, he could not, without '-'
some additional aid, appear in Germany with '520'
splendour suited to the Imperial dignity. To
appoint a meeting of the Cortes in o remote a
province, and to demand a new subsidy before
the time for paying the former was expired,
were innovations of a most dangerous tendency;
and among people not only jealous of their liber-
ties, but accustomed to supply the wants of
their sovereigns with a very frugal hand, excited
an universal alarm. The magistrates of Toledo
remonstrated against both these measures in a
very high tone; the inhabitants of Valladolid,
who expected that the Cortes should have been
held in that city, were so enraged that they took
arms in a tumultuary manner; and if Charles
with his foreign counsellors had not fortunately
made their escape during a violent tempest, they
would have massacred all the Flemings, and have
prevented him from continuing his journey to-
wards Compoftella.

EVERY city through which they passed, peti- The pro-

tioned against holding a Cortes in Galicia, a 'edinsof
point with regard to which Charles was insex- bly.
ible. But though the utmof influence had been
exerted by the ministers, in order to procure a
choice of representatives favourable to their de-
signs, such was the temper of the nation, that,
at the opening of the assembly, there appeared April .
among many of the members unusual symptoms
of ill-humour, which threatened a fierce oppo-
fition to all the measures of the court. No
representatives were sent by Toledo; for the lot,
according to which, by ancient custom, the
ele&ion was determined in that city, having
fallen upon two persons, devoted to the Flemish
ministers, their fellow-citizens refused to grant

them

Boox I. them a commiflion in the usual form, and in

"' their stead made choice of two deputies, whom
1520. they empowered to repair to Compoftella, and

to protest against the lawfulness of the Cortes

The diff- assembled there. The representatives of Sala-
fcauon of
the Calt°i- manca refused to take the ulual oath of fidelity,
ns increif- unless Charles consented to change the place

of meeting. Those of Toro, Madrid, Cor-
dova, and several other places, declared the de-
mand of another donative to be unprecedented,
unconstitutional, and unnecessary. All the arts,
however, which influence popular afiemblies,
bribes, promises, threats, and even force, were
employed in order to gain members. The no-
bles, soothed by the refpeatful aiduity with
which Chievres and the other Flemings paid
court to them, or instigated by a mean jealousy
of that spirit of independence which they saw
riling among the commons, openly favoured
the pretensions of the court, or at the utmost
did not oppose them; and at last, in contempt
not only of the sentiments of the nation, but
of the ancient forms of the confhttution, a ma-
jority voted to grant the donative for which the
Emperor had applied i. Together with this
grant, the Cortes laid before Charles a reprefen-
tation of those grievances whereof his people
craved redress; but he, having obtained from
them all that he could expec, paid no attention
to this ill-timed petition, which it was no longer
dangerous to disregard k.

Ch:rles ap- As nothing now retarded his embarkation, he
^doinr-,g disclosed his intention with regard to the regency
h, abioece. of Castile during his absence, which he had

hitherto kept secret, and nominated cardinal

Adrian

P. Martyr, Ep 663. Sandoval, p. 32, &c. k San-
doval, p. 84.

Adrian to that office. The viceroyalty of Ara- Boo I.
gon he conferred on Don John de Lanuza;, v-
that of Valencia on Don Diego de -Mendoza 1520'
Conde de Melito. The choice of the two latter
was universally acceptable; but the advance-
ment of Adrian, though the only Fleming who
had preserved any reputation among the Spa-
niards, animated the Castilians with new hatred
against foreigners; and even the nobles, who
had so tamely suffered other inroads upon the
constitution, felt the indignity offered to their
own order by his promotion, and remonstrated
against it as illegal. But Charles's desire of
visiting Germany, as well as the impatience of
his ministers to leave Spain, were now so much
increased, that without regarding the murmurs
of the Castilians, or even taking time to provide
any remedy against an infurre&ion in Toledo,
which at that time threatened, and afterwards
produced most formidable effecs, he failed from and embarks
Corogna on the twenty-fecond of May; and by n' theLow
setting out so abruptly in quest of a new crown,
he endangered a more important one of which he
was already in pofleffion.

i P. Martyr, Ep. 67o. Sandov. 86.

THE

# THE HISTORY OF THE REIGN OF THE EMPEROR CHARLES V. BOOK II.

THE
HISTORY

OF THE
R E I G N

OF THE
EMPEROR CHARLES V.

BOOK n.

Boot I. n u

ANY concurring circumstances not only

- --I* called Charles's thoughts towards the as-
Cb fairs of Germany, but rendered his presence in
psec in that country necessary. The Eletors grew im-
.,,,. patient of so long an interregnum; his heredi-

tary dominions were disturbed by intestine com-
motions; and the new opinions concerning re-
ligion made such rapid progress, as required the
most serious consideration. But above all, the
motions of the French king drew his attention,
and convinced him that it was neceflary to take
measures for his own defence, with no less ipeed
than vigour.

Ric am WHEN Charles and Francis entered the lifts
=ezip as candidates for the Imperial dignity, they con-
betw~ du&ed their rivalfhip with many professions of
Fcld regard for each other, and with repeated decla-

rations that they would not susser any tincture

of

of enmity to mingle itself with this honourable Booi II.
emulation. "We both court the fame mistress," '--
said Francis, with his usual vivacity, " each 520.
ought to urge his suit with all the address of
which he is master; the most fortunate will pre-
vail, and the other must reft contented ." But
though two young and high-fpirited Princes,
and each of them animated with the hope
of success, might be capable of forming such.
a generous resolution, it was soon found that
they promised upon a moderation too refined
and disinterested for human nature. The pre-
ference given to Charles in the fight of all Eu-
rope, mortified Francis to the highest degree,
and inspired him with all the passions natural to
disappointed ambition. To this was owing the
personal jealousy and rivalfhip which fubfited
between the two monarchs during their whole
reign; and the rancour of these, augmented by
a real opposition of interest, which gave rife to
many unavoidable causes of discord, involved
them in almost perpetual hostilitics. Charles
had paid no regard to the principal article in
the treaty of Noyon, by refusing oftener than
once to do justice to John d'Albret, the ex-
cluded monarch of Navarre, whom Francis was
bound in honour, and prompted by interest, to
restore to.his throne, The French king had pre-
tensions to the crown of Naples, of which Ser-
dinand had deprived his predecessor by a most
unjustifiable breach of faith. The Emperor
might reclaim the dutchy of Milan as a fief of
the empire, which Francis had seized, and still
kept in pofiffion, without having received in-
veftiture. Charles confidered the dutchy of Bur-
gundy as the patrimonial domain of his ancestors,
wrested from them by the unjust policy ot Louis

XI.
a Guic. lib. 13. p. 159.

Booc II. XI. and observed with the greatest jealousy the

s~trict connections which Francis had formed with
i;2)' the duke of Gueldres, the hereditary enemy of

his family.

Their dli- WHEN the sources of discord were so many
,li"'lo and various, peace could be of no long con-
ttec,m- tinuance, even between princes the molt ex-
ohn^'ile empt from ambition or emulation. But as the

thock between two such mighty antagonists
could not fail of being extremely violent, they
both discovered no small solicitude about its
consequences, and took time not only to col-
le& and to ponder their own strength, and to
comp-re it with that of their adversary, but to
secure the friendlhip or assistance of the other
European powers.

Tqy ne-o- THE ope had equal reason to dread the two
t^pop. rivals, and saw thac he who prevailed, would

become absolute ma.ter in Italy. If it had been
in his power to engae them in hostilities, with-
out rendering orba.dy the theatre of war, no-
thing would have been more agreeable to him
than to fee them wafle each other's strength in
endless quarrels. But this was impoflible. Leo
foreaw, that, on the first rupture between the
two monarchs, the armies of France and Spain
would take the field in the Milanefle and while
the fce.e of their operations was so near, and
the subjed for which they contended so interett-
ir.g to him, he could not long remain neuter.
He was obliged, therefore, to adapt his plan of
conduct to his plitical situation. He courted
and soothed the Emperor and king of France
with equ::l indultry and addrels. Though
warmly uolicited by each of them to espouse his
cause, he affumnd all the appearances of entire
impartiality, and attcniptcd to conceal his real

fcntimients

sentiments under that profound dffimulation ROOK 1t.
which seems to have been affected by mot of '-~
the Italian politicians in that age. I520

THE views and interest of the Venetians were with the

not different from thole of the Pope; nor were Venettln.
they less solicitous to prevent Italy from becom-
ing the feat of war, and their own republic from
being involved in the quarrel. But through
all Leo's artifices, and notwithstanding his high
pretensions to a perfec neutrality, it was visible
that he leaned towards the Emperor, from whom
he had both more to fear and more to hope than
from Francis; and it was equally manifest, that
if it became necessary to take a fide, the Vene-
tians would, from motives of the fame nature,
declare for the king of France. No confider-
able assistance, however, was to be expected
from the Italian states, who were jealous to an
extreme degree of the Transalpine powers, and
careful to preserve the balance between them,
unless when they were educed to violate this
favourite maxim of their policy, by the certain
profpet of ome great advantage to themselves.

BUT the chief attention both of Charles and w;th Hnwy

of Francis, was employed in order to gain the VmI.
king of England, from whom each of them ex-
peced afliftance more effetual, and afforded
with less 'political caution. Henry VIII. had
ascended the throne of that kingdom in the year
one thousand five hundred and nine, with such
circumltances of Advantage, as promised a reign
of diftinguilhed felicity and splendour. The The great
union in his person of the two contending titles of IPw- of

- . l * I .- thlt mo.

York and Lancaster; the alacrity and emulat on nrrch.
with which both factions obeyed his commands,
not only enabled him to exert a degree of vigouf
and authority in his domestic government which

none

Boo II. none of his predecessors could have safely as-
' "-m'fumed; but permitted him to take a hare in the

'iz' affairs of the continent, from which the atten-

tion of the English had long been diverted by
their unhappy divisions. The immense treasures
which his father had amassed, rendered him the
most wealthy prince in Europe. The peace
which had subsisted under the cautious admini-
ftration of that monarch, was of sufficient length
to recruit the nation after the desolation of the
civil wars, but not so long as to enervate its fpi-
rit; and the English, ashamed of having ren-
dered their own country so long a scene of dif-
cord and bloodihed, were eager to display their
valour in some foreign war, and to revive the me-
mory of the vitories gained by their ancestors.
Hi.s chi- Henry's own temper perfectly suited the state of

his kingdom, and the disposition of his fubjets.
Ambitious, a&ive, enterprizing and accomplished
in all the martial exercises which in that age
formed a chief part in the education of persons
of noble birth, and inspired them with an early
love of war, he longed to engage in a&ion,
and to signalize the beginning of his reign by
some remarkable exploit. An opportunity oon
presented itself; and the vitory at Guinegate,
together with the successful sieges of Teroiienne
and Tournay, though of little utility to England,
refleced great lustre on its monarch, and con-
firmed the idea which foreign princes entertained
of his power and importance. So many con-
curring causes, added to the happy situation of
his own dominions, which secured them from so-
reign invasion; and to the fortunate circum-
stance of his being in possession of Calais, which
served not only as a key to France, but opened
an easy pafiage into the Netherlands, rendered
the King of England the natural guardian of the
liberties of Europe, and the arbiter between the

Emperor

Emperor and French monarch. Henry him-BootK i.
self was sensible of this singular advantage, and --
convinced, that, in order to preserve the balance ts
even, it was his office to prevent either of the
rivals from acquiring such superiority of power
as might be fatal to the other, or formidable to
the reft of Christendom. But he was destitute
of the penetration, and still more of the temper
which such a delicate funcion required. Influ-
enced by caprice, by vanity, by resentment, by
affecion, he was incapable of forming any regu-
lar and extensive system of policy, or of adhering
to it with steadiness. His measures seldom re-
fulted from attention to the general welfare, or
from a deliberate regard to his own interest, but
were dictated by pafions which rendered him
blind to both, and prevented his gaining that as-
cendant in the affairs of Europe, or from reap-
ing such advantages to himself, as a prince of
greater art, though with inferior talents, might
have easily secured.

ALL the impolitick steps in Henry's admini- And of his

fration must not, however, be imputed to de- i^
fe&s in his own charater; many of them were Wolfey.
owing to the violent passions and insatiable am-
bition of his prime minister and favourite cardi-
nal Wolfey. This man, from one of the lowest
ranks in life, had risen to an height of power
and dignity, to which no English fubje& ever
arrived, and governed the haughty, prefump-
tuous, and untratable spirit of Henry with
absolute authority. Great talents, and of very
different kinds, fitted him for the'two opposite
stations of minister, and of favourite. His pro-
found judgment, his unwearied industry, his
thorough acquaintance with the state of the
kingdom, his extensive knowledge of the views
and interests of foreign courts, qualified him for

that

BooK II. that uncontrouled diretion of affairs with which
~'- ' he was intruded. The elegance of his manners,
'520. the gaiety of his conversation, his insinuating

address, his love of magnificence, and his pro-
ficiency in those parts of literature of which
Henry was fond, gained him the affection and
confidence of the young monarch. Wolfey was
far from employing this vast and almost royal
power to promote either the true interest of the
nation, or the real grandeur of his master. Ra-
pacious at the fame time, and profuse, he was
insatiable in desiring wealth. Of boundless am-
bition, he aspired after new honours with an
eagerness unabated by his former success; and
being rendered presumptuous by his uncommon
elevation, as well as by the ascendant which he
had gained over a prince, who scarcely brooked
advice from any other person, he discovered in
his whole demeanour the most overbearing haugh-
tiness and pride. To these passions he himself
sacrificed every consideration; and whoever en-
deavoured to obtain his favour, or that of his
master, found it necessary to sooth and to gratify
them.

The cet As all the states of Europe fought Henry's
fey btFW'- riendlhip at that time, all courted his minister
ci. with incredible attention and obsequiousness, and

strove by presents, by promises, or by flattery
to work upon his avarice, his ambition, or his
pride b. Francis had, in the year one thousand
five hundred and eighteen, employed Bonnivet,
admiral of France, one of his most accomplished
and artful courtiers, to gain the haughty prelate.
He himself bestowed on him every mark of re-
fpe& and confidence. He consulted him with

regard
I Fiddes's Life of Wolfey, 66.Rymer's FEdera, xiii. 718.

regard to his most important affairs, and re-BooK I.
ceived his responses with implicit deference. By--
thce arts, together with the grant of a large 1520'
pension, Francis secured the Cardinal, who per-
fuaded his master to surrender Tournay to
France, to conclude a treaty of marriage be-
tween his daughter the princess Mary and the
Dauphin, and to consent to a personal interview
with the French king . From that time the
most familiar intercourse subsisted between the
two courts; Francis, sensible of the great value
of Wolsey's friendship, laboured to secure the
continuance of it by every possible expression of
regard, bellowing on him in all his letters the
honourable appellation of Father, Tutor, and
Governor.

CHARLES observed the progress of this union And by

with the utmost jealousy and concern. His near chrle".
affinity to the king of England, gave him some
title to his friendship; and soon after his accef-
sion to the throne of Castile, he had attempted to
ingratiate himself with Wolfey, by fettling on
him a pension of three thousand livres. His
chief solicitude at present was to prevent the in-
tended interview with Francis, the effects of which
upon two young princes, whole hearts were no
less susceptible of friendship than their manners
were capable of inspiring it, he extremely
dreaded. But after many delays occasioned by
difficulties about the ceremonial, and by the anxi-
ous precautions of both courts for the safety of
their refpe&ive sovereigns, the time and place
of meeting were at last fixed. Mffengers had
been sent to different courts, inviting all comers,
who were gentlemen, to enter the lifts at tilt and
tournament, against the two monarchs and their

VOL. II. G knights.
c Herbert's Hi.. of Hen.VIII. 30. Rymer, xiii. 624.

i

Boor Il. knights. Both Francis and Henry loved the
*-i t splendour of these spectacles too well, and were
3520' too much delighted with the graceful figure

which they made on such occasions, to forego
the pkafure or glory which they expeced from
such a singular and brilliant assembly. Nor was
the Cardinal less fond of displaying his magni-
ficence in the presence of two courts, and of dif-
covering to the two nations the extent of his
influence over both their monarchs. Charles,
finding it impossible to prevent the interview,
endeavoured to disappoint its effets, and to
pre-occupy the favour of the English monarch,
and his minister, by an a of complaisance till

crhodl - more flattering and more uncommon. Having
Miy i'h. failed from Corunna, as has already been related,

he steered his course directly towards England,
and relying wholly on Henry's generosity for his
own safety, landed at Dover. This unexpected
visit furprized the nation. Wolfey, however,
was well acquainted with the Emperor's inten-
tion. A negociation, unknown to the historians
of that age, had been carried on between him
and the court of Spain; this visit had been con-
certed; and Charles granted the Cardinal, whom
he calls his most dearfriend, an additional pen-
sion of seven thousand ducats d. Henry, who
was then at Canterbury, in his way to France,
immediately dispatched Wolfey to Dover, in
order to welcome the Emperor; and being
highly pleased with an event so soothing to his
vanity, hastened to receive, with suitable refpec,
a guest who had placed in him such unbounded

inficslts confidence. Charles, to whom time was pre-
ify '^bIiot COUs, staid only four days in England: But
with tbe during that short space, he had the address not
king nd o
WSIcy- only

d Rymer, xiii. 714.

only to give Henry favourable impreflions of BDoo IL
his charactcr and intentions, but to detach Wol- '~o'
fey entirely from the interest of the French king. 2
All the grandeur, wealth, and power, which the
Cardinal pofflffed, did not satisfy his ambitious
mind, while there was one ftep higher to which
a:I ecclesiastic could ascend. The papal dignity
had for ome time been the obje& of his withes,
and Francis, as the most effectual method of
securing his friendship, had promised to favour
his pretensions, on the first vacancy, with all
his intereit. But as the emperor's influence in
the college of cardinals was greatly superior to
the French king's, Wolfey grasped eagerly at
an offer which that artful prince had made him
of exerting it vigorously in his behalf; and al-
lured by this profpet, which under the pontifi-
cate of Leo, till in the prime of his life, was a
very distant one, he entered with warmth into
all the Emperor's schemes. No treaty, how-
ever, was concluded t that time between the
two monarchs; but Henry, in return for the
honour which Charles had done him, promised
to visit him in some place of the Low Coun-
tries, immediately after taking leave of the
French King.

His interview with that prince was in an June7th.

open plain between Guifnes and Ardres, where trvween
the two kings and their attendants, displayed Henry and
their magnificence with such emulation, and Fran'""
profuse expence, as procured it the name of the
Field of the Cloth of Gold. Feats of chivalry,
parties of gallantry, together with such exercises
and pastimes as were in that age reckoned manly
or elegant, rather than serious business, occupied
both courts during eighteen days that they con-

G 2 tinued

Boor II. tinued together e. Whatever impression the en

% ' gaging manners of Francis, or the liberal and
1520. unlufpicious confidence with which he treated

Henry, made on the mind of that monarch was
soon effaced by Wolsey's artifices, or by an in-
ju1y o. terview he had with the Emperor at Gravelines;

which was conduced by Charles with less pomp
than that near Guifnes, but with greater atten-
tion to his political interest.

Henry. THIS afiduity with which the two greatest
i ofwn monarchs in Europe paid court to Henry, ap-
ttc. peared to him a plain acknowledgment that he

held the balance in his hands, and convinced
him of the justness of the motto which he had
chosen, " That whoever he favoured would
prevail." In this opinion he was confirmed by
an offer which Charles made of submitting any
difference that might arise between him and
Francis to his sole arbitration. Nothing could
have the appearance of greater candour and
moderation, than the choice of a judge who was

reckoned

c The French and Englilh hifoians dercribe the pomp

of this interview, and the various fpeaacles, with great
minuteness. One circumstance mentioned by the marechal
de Fleuranges. who was present, and which appears fingu-
lar in the present age, is commonly omitted. " After the
tournament," fays he, ". the French and Englilh wrefllers
made their appearance, and wrefiled in presence of the
Kings, and the ladies; and as there were many Rout wrest-
lers there, it afforded excellent paflime; but as the King
of France had neglected to bring any wrestlers out of Bre-
tagne, the Englilh gained the prize.-After this, the
Kings of France and England retired to a tent, where they
drank together, and the King of England seizing the King
of France by the collar, said, " MJ brother, mulf wreflk
-tib-7ths," and endeavoured once or twice to trip up his
heels; but the King of France, who is a dextrous wrefiler,
twiled him round, and threw him on the earth with pro-
digious violence. The King of England wanted to renew
the combat, but was prevented." Memoires de Fleuranges,
12o. Paris, 753. p. 329.

reckoned the common friend of both. But as Boo IL
the emperor had now attached Wolfey entirely -
to his interest, no proposal could be more infi- '520.
dious, nor, as appeared by the sequel, more fa-
tal to the French king .

CHARLES, notwithtanding his partial fond- Coronaion

ness for the Netherlands, the place of his nati- fh Eo -
vity, made no long stay there; and after re-
ceiving the homage and congratulations of his
countrymen, hastened to Aix-la-Chapelle, the
place appointed by the golden bull for the coro-
nation of the Emperor, There, in presence ofoaober 13.
an assembly more numerous and splendid than
had appeared on any former occasion, the crown
of Charlemagne was placed on his head, with
all the pompous solemnity which the Germans
affe& in their publick ceremonies, and which
they deem essential to the dignity of their
Empire ',

ALMOST at the fame time, Solyman the Mag- Solymsnthe

nificent, one of the most accomplished, enter- Mfgendfi
prizing, and victorious of the Turkih princes, Ottoman
a constant and formidable rival to the Emperor, throne.
ascended the Ottoman throne. It was the pecu.
liar glory of that period to produce the most
illustrious monarchs, who have at any one time
appeared' in Europe. Leo, Charles, Francis,
Henry and Solyman were each of them possesed
of talents which would have rendered any age
wherein they happened to flourish, conspicuous,
But such a onftellation of great princes ihed
uncommon lustre on the sixteenth century. In
every contest, great power as well as great abili-
ties were set in opposition the efforts of valour

and

. f Herbert, 37. g Hartman. Mauri Relatio Coronar,
Car.V.ap. Goldaf, Polit. Imperial. Franc. 1614. fol. p 264.

BooK IT. and condu& on one fide, counterbalanced by
-~""' aq equal exertion of the fame qualities on the
1520. other, not only occasioned such a variety of

events as renders the history of that period inte-
reflin,, but served to check the exorbitant pro-
grefs of any of thole princes, and to prevent their
attaining uch pre-eminence in power as w.ould
have been fatal to the liberty and happiness of
mankind.

D:ct ci:Id THE firfi act of the Emperor's administration
wo s. was to aptoint a diet of the Empire to be held

at Worms on the sixth of January, one thouand
five hundred and twenty-one. In his circular
letters to the different princes, he informed them,
that he had called this afembly in order to con-
cert with them the most proper measures for
checking the progress of those new and d angerous
opinions, which threatened to disturb the peace
of Germany, and to overturn the religion of
their anceft6rs.

Rite of the CHARLES had in view the opinions which had
tgRefo- been propagated by Luther and his disciples

since the year one thousand five hundred and
Seventeen. As these led to that happy re-
formation in religion which rescued one part of
Europe from the papal yoke, mitigated its ri-
gour in the other, and produced a revolution in
the sentiments of mankind, the greatest as well
as the molf beneficial that has happened since the
publication of Christianity, not only the events
which at firfl gave birth to such opinions, but
the causes which rendered their progress so rapid
and successful, deserve to be confidered with mi-
nute attention.

To overturn a system of religious belief,
founded on ancient and deep-rooted prejudices,

supported

supported by power, and defended with no ess Poor 11.
art than induftrv; to establish in its room doc.'""'-
trines of the most contrary genius and tendency; 152s9
and to accomplish all this, not by external vio-
lence or the force of arms, are operations which
historians the leaf prone to credulity and fuppr
ftition, mutt ascribe to that Divine Providerce
which, with infinite ease, can bring about events
which to human sagacity appear impofible, The
interposition of Heaven in favour of the Chrigiap
religion at its first publication, was manifeftd1
by miracles and prophecies wrought and uttered
in confirmation of it: And though none of the
reformers possessed, or pretended to posess,
these fupernatura! gifts, yet that wonderful pre-
paration of circumstances which disposed the
minds of men for receiving their doctrines, that
singular combination of caufeswhich secured their
success, and enabled men, destitute of power
and of policy, to triumph over those who em-
ployed both against them, may be confidered
as no light proof that the fame hand which
planted the Christian religion, protected the re-
formed faith, and reared it, from beginnings ex-
tremely feeble, to an amazing degree of strength
and maturity.

IT was from causes, feeminglv frtuitous, From in-

considerable

and from a source very inconfidrable, that ll bgiani
the mighty effets of the Reformation flowed,
Leo X. when raised to the papll throne, found
the revenues of the church exhaoted by the vast
projects of his two ambitious predepcffors, Alec-
ander VI. and Julius II, His own temper,
naturally liberal and eterprizing, rendered him
incapable of that evere and patient econmy
which the situation of his finances required. On
the contrary, his chemes for aggrandizing the
family of edici, his love of Tpendour, his

taste

Boor 1I.tafte for pleasure, and his magnificence in re-
''v 'warding men of genius, involved him daily in

52 new expences; in order to provide a fund for

which, he tried every device, that the fertile
invention of priests had fallen upon, to drain the

A le of credulous multitude. Among others, he had
publi, rrecourfe to a sale of Indulgences. According o
LcT the doctrine of the Romilh church, all the good

works of the Saints, over and above those which
were necessary towards their own justification,
arc deposited, together with the infinite merits
of Jesus Christ, in one inexhaustible treasury.
The keys of this were committed to St. Peter
and to his successors the Popes, who may open
it at pleasure, and by transferring a portion of
this superabundant merit to any particular per-
son, for a fum of money, may convey to him
either the pardon of his own fins, or a release
for any one in whom he is interested, from the
pains of purgatory. Such indulgences were first
invented in the eleventh century by Urban II.
as a recompence for those who went in person
upon the meritorious enterprize of conquering
the Holy Land. They were afterwards granted
to those who hired a soldier for that purpose; and
in process of time were bellowed on such as gave
money for accomplilhing any pious work en-
joined by the pope'. Julius II. had bellowed
Indulgences on all who contributed towards
building the church of St. Peter at Rome; and
as Leo was carrying on that magnificent and ex-
pensive fabrick, his grant was founded on the
fame pretence '.

so ooaia- THE right of promulgating of these Indul-
s~ *G gences in Germany, together with a lhare in the
sxtIc. i-ecsprofits

History of the Council of Trent, by F. Paul, p. 4.
i Palaric. Hil. Coac. Trident. p. 4.

profits arising from the sale of them, was granted Book II.
to Albert, eletor of Metz and archbishop of - '
Magdeburg, who, as his chief agent for retail- S
ing them in Saxony, employed Tetzel, a Domi-
nican friar, of licentious morals, but of an
ative spirit, and remarkable for his noisy and
popular eloquence. He, assisted by the monks
of his order, executed the commilfion with
great zeal and fu-cefs, but with little discretion
or decency; and though by magnifying excef-
fively the benefit of their Indulgences , and

by

k As the form of these indulgences, and the benefits

which they were supposed to convey, a.e unknown in pro-
teflant countries, and little understood, at present, in fe-
veral places where the Roman catholic religion is eftablilh-
ed, 1 have, for the information of my readers, translated
the form of absolution used by Tetzel. May our Lord
Jesus Christ have mercy upon thee, and absolve thee y the
meiits of his most holy pallion. And I, by his authority,
that of his blessed apostils Peter and Paul, and of the molt
holy Pope, granted and committed to me in there parts, do
absolve thee. firRf from all ecclefiafical censures in whate-
ver manner they have been incurred, and then f:om all thy
fns, tranfgrefflons and excesses, how enormous soever they
may be, even from such as are reserved for the cognizance
of the holy fee, and as far as the keys of the holy church
extend, I remit to you all puniflainnt which you deserve in
Purgatory on their account, and I reitore you to the holy
facrainents of the church, to the unity of the faithful and
to that innocence and purity which you pofefi~ at aptifm,
so that when you die the gates of punifhmeat Ihall be hut,
and the'gates of the paradise of delight hall be opened;
and if you shall not die at present, this grace shall remain
in full force ivhen you are at the point of death. In the
r.ame of theFather, and of the Son, and of the Holy
Ghost."' Seckend. Comment. lib. i. p. 14.

The terms in which Tetzel and his associates defc.ibed

the benefits of Indulgences, and the necessity of purchasing
them, ar so extravagant, that they appear to be almolt in-
credible. If any man (said they) purchases letters of in-
dulgence, his foul may reft ecure with refpea to its sava.
tion. The fouls confined in purgatory, forwhofe redemp-
lion ndulgences are purchased, as loon as the oney tinkles

** ~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~is

BooK I. by disposing of them at a very low price, they
1-y carried on for some time an extensive and lucra-
1S20. tive traffick among the credulous multitude, the

extravagance of their assertions, as well as the
irregularities in their conduct, came at last to
give general offence. The princes and nobles
were irritated at feeing their vassals drained of
so much wealth, in order to replenish the trea-
fury of a profuse pontiff. Men of piety regretted
the delusion of the people, who being taught
to rely for the pardon of their fins on the In-
dulgences which they purchased, did not think
it incumbent on them either to abound in faith,
or to prafife holiness. Even the most unthink-
ing were shocked at the scandalous behaviour
of Tetzel and his associates, who often fquan-
dered in drunkenness, gaming, and low debau-
chery, those fums which were piously beflowed
in hopes of obtaining eternal happiness; and all
began to wish that some check were given

to

in the chest, ifantly escape from that place of tornent,
and afccnd into heaven. That the efficacy of Indnlgences
was so great, that the mofl heinous fins, even if one *boud
violate (which was impofible) the Mother of. Gd, would
be reiitted and expiated by them, and the person be freed
both from pupiliment and guilt. That this was the up-
fpeakatle gift of God, in order, to reconcile ned to him-
fef. That the cross ereaed by the preacherspfJIndugen-
ces, was a efficacious as the crofi of Chril itself. ,o !
the heavens are open; if you enter not now, when will you
enter ? For twelve-pence you may redeem the fop of your
father out of purgatory; and are -you so ungrateful, that
you will not rescue your parent from torment ? If you had
but one coat, you ought to itrip yourielf infiautly, and fell it,
in order to purchase such benefits, &c. These, nd many
such extravagant expressions, are feleted out of Luther's
works by Chemnitius in his Examen Goncilii Tridentini
apud Herm. Vonder. Hardt. HiLl. Liter. Reform. pars iv.
p. 6. The fame author has publihed several of Tetzel's
Discourses, which prove that there exprellions were nei-
ther ingular nor exaggerated. Ibid. p. 14.

to this commerce, no less detrimental to society BooK .11
than deltrutive to religion. -."

15zo.

SucH was the favourable jun&ure, and so i ar-

difpolcd were the minds of his countrymen to l',", COs
lilten to his discourses, when Martin Luther firlt h ia h'-
began to call in question the efficacy of Indul- t
gences, and to declaim against the vicious lives
and falie doctrines of the persons employed in
promulgating them. He was a native of Eilleben
in Saxony, and though born of poor parents,
had received a learned education, during the
progress of whih he gave many indications of
uncommon vigour and acuteness of genius. As
his mind was naturally susceptible of serious
impressions, and tin&tured with somewhat of
that religious melancholy which delights in the
solitude and devotion of a monastic life, he
retired into a convent of Augustinian friars, and
without suffering the intreaties of his parents to
divert him from what he thought his duty to
God, he aflumed the habit of that order. There
he acquired great reputation, not only for piety,
but for his love of knowledge, and unwearied
application to fRudy. He had been taught the
fcholaltic philosophy and theology which were
then in vogue by very able masters, and wanted
not penetration to comprehend all the niceties
and diftintions with which they abound; but
his understanding, naturally found, and superior
to every thing frivolous, oon became dilfauted
with these subtile and uninftrutive sciences,
and fought for some more solid foundation of
knowledge and of piety in the holy scriptures.
Having found a copy of the Bible, which lay
negleced in the library of his monastery, he
abandoned all other pursuits, and devoted him-
self to the study of it, with such eagerness and
assiduity, as ailonifhed the monks, who were

little

lBoot IT. little accuRomed to derive their theological
L-V-., notions from that source. The great progress
'S5z° which he made in this uncommon course of

study, augmented so much the fame both of his
fandity and of his learning, that Frederick,
Elector of Saxony, having founded an university
at Wittemberg on the Elbe, the place of his
residence, Iuther was chosen first to teach phi-
lofophy, and afterwards theology there; and
discharged both offices in such a manner, that
he was deemed the chief ornament of that
society.

Ueo~ofc WHILE Luther was at the height of his repu-
cS t i tation and authority, Tetzel began to publish

Indulgences in the neighbourhood of Wittem-
berg, and to ascribe to them the fame imaginary
virtues, which had, in other places, imposed on
the credulity of the people. As Saxony was
not more enlightened than the other provinces
of Germany. Tetzel met with prodigious fuc-
cess there. It was with the utmost concern,
that Luther beheld the artifices of those who
fold, and the simplicity of those who bought
Indulgences. The opinions of Thomas Aquinas
and the other fchoolmen, on which the doctrine
of Indulgences was founded, had already loft
much of their authority with him; and the
Scriptures, which he began to confider as the
great standard of theological truth, afforded no
countenance to a practice, equally subversive
of faith and of morals. His warm and impe-
tuous temper did not susser him long to con-
ceal such important discoveries, or to continue
a silent fpetator of the delusion of his country-
men. From the pulpit in the great church of
Wittemberg, he inveighed bitterly against the
irregularities and vices of the monks who pub-

lilheQ

lifhed Indulgences; he ventured to examine the Booc II.
docrines which they taught, and pointed out to'----
the people the danger of relying for salvation '520"
upon any other means than those appointed by
God in his word. The boldness and novelty of
these opinions drew great attention, and being
recommended by the authority of ILuther's per-
fonal character, and delivered with a popular
and persuasive eloquence, they made a deep im-
pression on his hearers. Encouraged by the
favourable reception of his doctrines among the
people, he wrote to Albert, elector of Mentz
and archbishop of Magdeburg, to whose jurif-
dicion that part of Saxony was subjec, and
remonstrated warmly against the false opinions
.as well as wicked lives of thecpreachers of Indul-
gences; but he found that prelate too deeply
interested in their success to correct their abuses.
His next attempt was to gain the suffrage of
men of learning. For this purpose, he pub- Hepublifhe

,.., , . ,-0

, [* *

. ' *

. . his tlhefes

lifhed ninety-five theres, containing his senti-,, hi;,
ments with regard to Indulgences. These hethem.
proposed, not as points fully established, or of
undoubted certainty, but as fubjets of inquiry
and disputation; he appointed a day, on which
the learned were invited to impugn them either
in person, or by writing; to the whole he sub-
joined solemn protestations of his high refpe&
for the apoftolick fee, and of his implicit sub-
mission to its authority. No opponent appeared
at the time prefixed; the theses 1pread over
Germany with astonishing rapidity; they were
read with the greatest eagerness; and all ad-
mired the boldness of the man who had ventured
not only to call in question the plenitude of papal
power, but to attack the Dominicans, armed
with all the terrors of inquisitorial authority. '.

THE

1 Lutheri Opera Jena, 1612. vol. i. prefat. 3. p. 2. 66.

Hist. of Counc. of a rent by F. Paul, p. 4. Seckend. Coin.
Apol. p. 16.

.G;. I!. THE Friars of St. Auguffine, Luther's own
L-- J order, though addicted with no less obftquiouf-
Su,-.rs dnefs than the other monastic fraternities to the
i" n', .c papal fee, gave no check to the publication of

'' these uncommon opinions. Luther had, by his

piety and learning, acquired extraordinary au-
thority among his brethren; he professed the
higheit regard for the authority of the Pope;
hs professions were at that time sincere; and as
a lccret enmity, excited by interest or emula-
tion, fibfitts among all the monaftick orders in
the Romilh church, the Augutlinians were
highly pleased with his invectives against the
Dominicans, and hoped to fee them exposed to
the hatred and scorn of the people. Nor was
his lovercign the Elecor of Saxony, ths wisest
prince at that time in Germany, dissatisfied with
this cbftruction which Luther threw in the way
of the publication of Indulgences. He Jfcretly
enco,:rgtd the attempt, and flattered himfeif
that this difute among the ecclesiastics them-
frivcs, might give some check to the exactions
of the court of Rome, which the secular princes
had long, though without success, been endea-
vouring to oppole.

.-.. Tn MAN; zealous champions immediately arose
,:u,.a to da fend opinions on vhih the wealth and

power or the church were founded, against
I uther's attacks. In opposition to his theies,
Tetzcl publifned ccuvter-theies at Francfort on
the Oder; Eccius, a celebrated divine of Aug-
frurg, endeavoured to refute his notions; and
Prierias, a Dominican friar, matter of the sacred
palace and Inquifior-eeneral, wrote against him
with all the virulence of a fcholaitic dilputant.
Eut the manner in which they conduaed the
controversy, d.d little service to their cause.

Luther

Luther attempted to combat Indulgences by BooK 1I.
arguments founded in reason, or derived from '
scripture; they produced nothing in support of ';zo
them but the sentiments of fchoolmen, the con-
clufions of the canon law, and the decrees of
Popes m. The decision of judges so partial and
interested, did not satisfy the people, who began
to call in question the authority even of these
venerable guides, when they found them stand-
ing in direct opposition to the di&ates of reason,
and the determination of the divine law . *

MEAN-

m F Paul, p. 6. Seckend. p. 40. Palavic. p. 8.
n Seckend. p. 30.
* Guicciardini has aferted two things with regard to

the firlt promulgation of Indulgences; . That Leo be-
stowcd a gift of the profits arising from the sale of Indul-
gences in Saxony, and the adjacent provinces of Germany,
upon his fiter Magdalen, the wife of Francefcetto Cibo,
Guic. lib. 13. 68. 2. That Arcemboldo, a Genefe ec-
clefiaftic, who had been bred a merchant, and lill retained
all the arts of that profession, was appointed by her to col-
le& the money which should b raised. F. Paul has fol-
lowed him in both these particulars, and adds, that the
Augustinians in Saxony had been immemorially employed
in preaching Indulgences; but that Arcemboldo and his
deputies, hoping to gain more by committing this trull to
the Dominicans, had made their bargain with Tetzel, and
that Luther was prompted at firfI to oppose Tetzel, and his
afrociates, by a desire of taking revenge for this injury of-
sered to his order. F. Paul, p. 5. Almo't all the hilo-
rians since their time, popish as well as proteflant, have,
without examination, admitted these affrrtions to be tri
upon their authority. But notwithlfanding the corcoirrir
teflimony of two authors so eminent both for exacncis
and veracity, we may observe,

I. That Felix Contolori, who searched the pnntiical

archives of purpose, could not find this pretended grart in
any of those regillers where it mut necessarily have ben
recorded. Palav. p. 5.-z That the profits arising fiom
Indulgences in Saxony and the adjacent countries, had been
granted not to Magdalen, but to Albert archbishop of
Mentz, who had the right of nominating those who pub-
lilhed them. Seek. p. iz. Luth. Oper. . praef. p. i.
Palav p. 6-3. That Alcemboldo never had concern in the

publication

BooK 'I. MEANWHILE, these novelties in L uther's doc-
'-- m rines which intererted all Germany, excited
Th rtoi lie attention and no alarm in the court of

Rt"- Rome. Leo, fond of elegant and refined plea-

Iaded furcs, intent upon great schemes of policy, a
Luthbr. stranger to theological controversies, and apt to

despise them, regarded with the utmost indif-
ference the operations of an obscure Friar, who,
in the heart of Germany, carried on a fcholaftick
disputation in a barbarous style. Little did he
apprehend, or Luther himlelf dream, that the
ffects of this quarrel would be so fatal to the
papal fee. Leo imputed the whole to monaftick

enmity

peblication of Indulgences in Saxony; his diftri& was
5 landers and the Upper and Loner Rhine. Seek. p. 4.
1alav. p. 6.-4. That Luther and his adherents never
c.enticn this grant of Leo's to his ifler, though a circum-
fance of bich they could hardly have been ignorant, and
uhich they would have been careful not to fupprefs.-i.
1'Te publcation of Indulgences in Germany, was not ufu-
z!! crc. ritt:.d to the Auguliinians. The promulgation
of them a: three different periods under Julius 11. was
Franted to the Franciscans; the Dominicans had been em-
rpove., in the fame cffice a hort time before the present
tei id l'alv. p. 46.-5. The Fromulgation of these in-
ci!ngnccs. which sirs excited Luther's indignation, was
er.:ral!ed to the archbiblop of Mentz in conjunlion with
the guerdian of the Franciscans; hut the latter having de-
ctined accepting of that trult, the sole right became veiled
in t: e archb;ibop. 'alav. 6. Seek. 16, 17.-7. Luther
W's ,o i stliated b. his superiors among the Auauflinians
tv attack tl;e Dominicans their rivals, or to depreciate In-
dr'-'ences bwcaulc they were promulgated by them; his
c pniition to their opinions and vices proceeded from more
I.udab!e motives -eck. p. 15. z3. I.utheri Opera .
F- 64 6 S. A diplt-ma of Indulgences is publilhed by
iirr. \cndcr !ardt, irom which it appears, that the
came of he guardian of the Franciscans is retained to-
geri.cr wi:h that of ;he arcbb;lhop, although the former
ciJ not act. '1 he limits of the country to which their com-
-.if:c-os extended, iz. tile dioeefcs of Mentz, Magdeburg,
Ha1'berfiadlt, 2nd the territories As the marquis of lranden-
tur, b, re n.cntiored in that diploma. lift. Lterria
P.r:o;a..:. pars . p. 14.

enmity and emulation, and seemed inclined not BooK 11.
to interpose in the contest, but to allow the --'
Augustinians and Dominicans to wrangle about '50'
the matter with their usual animosity.

THE solicitations, however, of Luther's ad-Thepro-

verfaries, exasperated to an high degree by the thef' opiL
boldness and severity with which he animad-on-
verted on their writings, together with the fur-
prizing progress which his opinions made in
different parts of Germany, routed at last the
attention of the court of Rome, and obliged
Leo to take measures for the security of the
church againif an attack that now appeared too
serious to be despised. For this end, he fum-He isum.
moned Luther to appear at Rome, within sixty moned to

of th

ch amb* /* l i t appea at

days, before the auditor of the chamber, and RPoe.
the fame Prierias who had written against him, Jy 158.
whom he empowered to examine his doctrines,
and to decide concerning them. He wrote, at
the fame time, to the eletor of Saxony, be-
feeching him not to protet a man whose here-
tical and profane tenets were so hocking to
pious ears; and enjoined the Provincial of the
Augustinians to check by his authority the rash-
ness of an arrogant monk, which brought dif-
grace upon the order of St. Augustine, and gave
offence and disturbance to the whole church.

FROM the strain of there letters, as well as The Pope
from the nomination of a judge so prejudiced empowers

· . · :

* a o Isis

L /- i legte

and partial as Prierias, Luther easily saw what totry hir
sentence he might expect at Rome. He dif- inGera-y.
covered, for that reason, the unmoft solicitude,
to have his cause tried in Germany, and before
a less fufpeted tribunal. The professors in the
university of Wittemberg, anxious for the fafecy
of a man who did so much honour to their
society, wrote to the Pope, and after employing

VOL. II. H several

BooK . several pretexts to excuse Luther from appear-
' '- ing at Rome, intreated Leo to commit the exa-

520o. mination of his doctrines to some persons of

learning and authority in Germany. The Elec-
tor requested the fame thing of the Pope's legate
at the diet of Augsburg; and as Luther him-
self, who, at that time, was so far from having
any intention to disclaim the papal authority,
that he did not even entertain the smallest sus-
picion concerning its divine original, had written
to Leo a most submissive letter, promising an
unreserved compliance with his will, the Pope
gratified them so far as to empower his legate
in Germany, cardinal Cajetan, a Dominican,
eminent for scholastic learning, and passionately
devoted to the Roman fee, to hear and determine
the caue.
Lmh-er p. LUTHER, though he had good reason to decline

b tre a judge chosen among his avowed adversaries, did

not hesitate about appearing before Cajetan,
and having obtained the Emperor's fafe-con-
duEt, immediately repaired to Augsburg. The
Cardinal received him with decent refpet, and
endeavoured at first to gain upon him by gentle
treatment: But thinking it beneath the dignity
of his station to enter into any formal dispute
with a person of such inferior rank, he required
him, by virtue of the apofolick powers with
which he was clothed, to retraEk the errors which
he had uttered with regard to Indulgences, and
the nature of faith; and to abstain, for the
future, from the publication of new and dan-
gerous opinions Luther, fully persuaded of
the truth of his own tenets, and confirmed in
the belief of them by the approbation which
they had met with among persons conspicuous
both for their learning and piety, was furprized
at this abrupt mention of a recantation, before

any

any endeavours were used to convince him that BOOK I.
he was mistaken. He had flattered himself --'¥
that in a conference concerning the points in 1520.
dispute, with a prelate of such distinguished
abilities, he would be able to remove many of
thole imputations with which the ignorance or
malice of his antagonists had loaded him; but
the high tone of authority that the Cardinal
assumed, extinguished at once all hopes of this
kind, and cut off every profpe& of advantage
from the interview. His native intrepidity ofHisintpid
mind, however, did not desert him. He de- behaviour
dared, with the utmost firmness, that he could
not, with a safe conscience, renounce opinions
which he believed to be true; nor should any
consideration ever induce him to do what would
be so base in itself, and so offensive to God.
At the fame time, he continued to express no
less reverence than formerly for the authority
of the apoftolick fee°; he signified his willing-
ness to submit the whole controversy to certain
universities which he named, and promised
neither to write nor to preach concerning Indul-
gences for the future, provided his adversaries
were likewise enjoined to be silent with refpe&
to them P. All these offers Cajetan disregarded
or reje&ed, and still insisted peremptorily on a
simple recantation, threatening him with eccle-
fiaftical censures, and forbidding him to appear
again in his pretence, unless he resolved in.
ftantly to comply with what he had required.
This haughty and violent manner of proceed-
ing, as well as other circumstances, gave Lu-
ther's friends such strong reasons to fufpe&, that
even the Imperial fafe-conduc would not be
able to prote&t him from the legate's power and
resentment, that they prevailed on him to with-

H z draw
· Luth. Oper. vol. i. p. 164. P Ibid. p. 169.

BooK 11. draw fecrety from Augsburg, and to return to
' - --his own country. But before his departure,

*20. according to a form of which there had been
Hir, rrl. some examples, he prepared a solemn appeal,
oaebrr 1 from the Pope, ill informed at that time concern-

ing his cause, to the Pope, when he should re-
ceive more full information with refpet to it q.

He i rup- CAJETAN, enraged at Luther's abrupt retreat,
phar bor and at the publication of his appeal, wrote to
·*saxcr. the Eletor of Saxony, complaining of both;

and requiring him as he regarded the peace
of the church, or the authority of its head,
either to fend that seditious monk a prisoner to
Rome, or to banihi him out of his territories.
It was not from theological considerations that
Frederick had hitherto countenanced Luther;
he seems to have been much a stranger to con-
troverfies of that kind, and t have been little
intereited in them. His protefion flowed al-
most entirely, as hath been already observed,
from political motives, and was afforded with
great secrecy and caution. He had neither heard
any of Luther's discourses, nor read any of his
books; and though all Germany resounded with
his fame, he had never once admitted him into
his pretence r. But upon this demand which the
cardinal made, it became necessary to throw
off somewhat of his former reserve. He had
been at great expence, and had bestowed much
attention on founding a new university, an obje&
of considerable importance to every German
prince; and forefceing how fatal a blow the
removal of Luther would be to its reputation ,
he, under various pretexts, and with many pro-
sessions of esteem for the cardinal, as well as
of reverence for the Pope, not only declined

complying

q Seid. Hil. of Reform. p. 7. Seckend. p. 45. Luth.

Oper. i. 163. r Seckend. p. 7. Sid. Hilt. p. 1z.
s Seckend. p. 5.

complying with either of his requests, but BooK II.
openly discovered great concern for Luther's'-v'
safety '. 15So.

THE inflexible rigour with which Cajetan in- Mctive of

sifted on a simple recantation, gave great offence ndu" '
to Luther's followers in that age, and hath since
been censured as imprudent, by several Popilh
writers. But it was impossible for the legate to
at another part. The judges before whom
Luther had been required to appear at Rome,
were so eager to display their zeal against his
errors, that, without waiting for the expiration
of the sixty days allowed him in the citation,
they had already condemned him as an here-
tick . Leo had, in several of his brieves and
letters, stigmatized him as a child of iniquity,
and a man given up to a reprobate sense. No-
thing less, therefore, than a recantation could
save the honour of the church, whose maxim it
is, never to abandon the smallest point that it
has established, and which is even precluded, by
its pretensions to infallibility, from having it in
its power to do so.

LUTHER'S situation, meanwhile, was such as Lthe'.

would have filled any other person with the most ~i
disquieting apprehensions. He could not ex-
pe& that a prince so prudent and cautious as
Frederick, would, on his account, et at defiance
the thunders of the church, and brave the papal
power, which had cruihed some of the most
powerful of the German Emperors. He knew
what veneration was paid, at that time, to eccle-
fiaftical decisions; what terror ecclesiastical cen-
fures carried along with them, and how easily

there

t Sleid. Hit. p. io. Luth. Oper. i. 172. u Lth.
Oper. i. 161.

Boos I1. these might intimidate and lhake a prince, who
'-v-was rather his protetor from policy, than his
Is20' disciple from convicion. If he Ihould be ob-

liged to quit Saxony, he had no prolpe& of any
other asylum, and must Rand exposed to what-
ever punishment the rage or bigotry of his
enemies could inflit. Though sensible of his
danger, he discovered no symptoms of timidity
or remissness, but continued to vindicate his
own conduct and opinions, and to inveigh against
those of his adversaries with more vehemence
than ever . .

He ,rpl BUT as every ftep taken by the court of
o^er" Rome, particularly the irregular sentence by

which he had been so precipitately declared a
heretick, convinced Luther that Leo would oon
proceed to the most violent measures against
him, he had recourse to the only expedient in
his power, in order to prevent the effec of the
papal censures. He appealed to a general coun-
cil, which he affirmed to be the representative
of the catholic church, and superior in power
to the Pope, who being a fallible man, might
err, as St. Peter, the moR perfec of his prede-
ceffors, had erred .

A new bull IT soon appeared, that Luther had not formed
I'dugerf rash conje&ures concerning the intentions of the

Romish church. A bull, of a date prior to his
appeal, was issued by the Pope, in which he
magnifies the virtue and efficacy of Indulgences,
in terms as extravagant as any of his predecef-
fors had ventured to use in the darkest ages;
and without applying such palliatives, or men-
tioning such concessions, as the junture seemed
to call for, he required all Christians to assent
to what he delivered as the doctrine of the

Catholic
x Seckend.p. 59. Y Sleid. Hifi. z1. Luth.Oper. i. 179.

Catholic church, and fubje&ed those who should BooK II.
hold or teach any contrary opinion to the hea- -V
vieft ecclesiastical censures. I

AMONO Luther's followers, this bull, which

they confidered as an unjustifiable effort of the
Pope in order to preserve that rich branch of his
revenue, which arose from Indulgences, pro-
duced little effec. But, among the reft of his
countrymen, such a clear decision of the fove-
reign pontiff against him, and enforced by such
dreadful penalties, must have been attended with
consequences very fatal to his cause; if these
had not been prevented in a great measure by
the death of the Emperor Maximilian, whom ,'s deth
both his principles and his interest prompted to ofadvantage
support the authority of the holy fee. In con- o Luther.
sequence of this event, the vicariat of that part i's9.
of Germany which is governed by the Saxon
laws, devolved to the Eletor of Saxony; and
under the ihelter of his friendly administration,
Luther not only enjoyed tranquillity, but his
opinions were suffered, during the inter-regnum
which preceded Charles's election, to take root
in different places, and to grow up to some de-
gree of strength and firmness. At the fame
time, as the election of an Emperor was a point
more interesting to Leo than a theological con-
troverfy, which he did not understand, and of
which he could not foresee the consequences, he
was so extremely solicitous not to irritate a Prince
of such considerable influence in the electoral
college as Frederick, that he discovered a great
unwillingness to pronounce the sentence of ex-
communication against Luther, which his adver-
saries continually demanded with the most dla
morons importunity,

To

BooK II. To there political views of the Pope, as well

-.-v..as to his natural aversion from evere measures,

snfio was owing the suspension of any further pro-
of poceed-ceedings against Luther for eighteen months.
Luther. Perpetual negociations, however, in order to

bring the matter to some amicable issue, were
carried on during that space. The manner in
which there were conducted having given Luther
many opportunities of observing the corruption
of the court of Rome; its obtinacy in adher-
ing to established errors; and its indifference
about truth, howeverclearly proposed, orfirongly

Hebeginsto proved, he began to utter some doubts with re-
t-'t n qd- gard to the divine original of the papal authority.
pal iath- A public disputation was held upon this impor-

tan question at Leiplick, between Luther and
Eccius, one of his most learned and formidable
antagonists i but it was as fruitless and indecisive
as such fcholaftick combats usually prove. Both
parties boasted of having obtained the vi&ory;
both were confirmed in their own opinions; and
no progreis was made towards deciding the point
in controversy .

Reformti- NOR did this spirit of mutiny against the doc-
,S -trines and usurpations of the Romilh church

break out in Saxony alone; an attack no less
fierce, and occalioned by the fame causes, was
made upon them about this time in Switzer-
land. The Franciscans being entrusted with the
promulgation of Indulgences in that country,
executed their commiflion with the fame indifcre-
tion and rapaciousness, which had rendered the
Dominicans so odious in Germany. They pro-
ceeded, nevertheless, with uninterrupted success
till they arrived at Zurich. There Zuinglius,
a man not inferior to Luther himfielf in zeal

and
z Luth. Oper. i. 99.

and intrepidity, ventured to oppose them; and BooK it.
being animated with a republican boldness, and'- "
free from those restraints which fubje&ion to the 1520.
will of a prince imposed on the German refor-
mer, he advanced with more daring and rapid
steps to overturn the whole fabric of the efta-
blilhed religion '. The appearance of such a
vigorous auxiliary, and the progress which he
made, was, at first, matter of great joy to Lu-
ther. On the other hand, the decrees of the uni-
verfities of Cologne and Louvain, which pro-
nounced his opinions to be erroneous, afforded
great cause of triumph to his adversaries.

BUT the undaunted spirit of Luther acquired Luthta'

fresh vigour from every instance of opposition; g'er
and pushing on his inquiries and attacks from
one dotrine to another, he began to hake the
firmest foundations on which the wealth or
power of the church were eftablilhed. Leo
came at last to be convinced, that all hopes of
reclaiming him by forbearance were vain; feve-
ral prelates of great wisdom exclaimed no less
than Luther's personal adversaries against the
Pope's unprecedented lenity in permitting an
incorrigible heretic, who during three years had
been endeavouring to subvert every thing fa-
cred and venerable, still to remain within the
bosom of the church; the dignity of the papal
fee rendered the most vigorous proceedings ne-
ceffary; the new Emperor, it was hoped, would
support its authority; nor did it seem probable
that the Eletor of Saxony would so far forget
his usual caution, as to set himself in opposition
to their united power. The college of Cardi-
nals was often assembled, in order to prepare the
sentence with due deliberation, and the ablet

canonists
s Sleid.Hit. zz. Seckend. 59.

Boor II.canonifts were consulted how it might be ex-
"'~^ pressed with unexceptionable formality. At last,
Bul5o2. ex on the fifteenth of June, one thousand five hun-
cormmni- dred and twenty, the bull, so fatal to the church
l~ 2- of Rome, was issu'ed. Forty-one propositions,
tgan him. extracted out of Luther's works, are therein con-

demned as heretical, scandalous, and offensive
to pious ears; all persons are forbidden to read
his writings, upon pain of excommunication;
such as had any of them in their custody, are
commanded to commit them to the flames; he
himself, if he did not, within sixty days, pub-
lickly rezant his errors, and burn his books, is
pronounced an obstinate heretic; is excommuni-
cated, and delivered unto Satan for the deftruc-
tion of his fleih; and all secular princes are re-
quired, under pain of incurring the fame censure,
to seize his peribn, that he might be punilhed as
his crimes deserved b.

The e.Sta THE publication of this bull in Germany, ex.
CtC~is cited various passions in different places. Lu-

ther's adversaries exulted, as if his party and
opinions had been crulhed at once by such a de-
cifive blow. His followers, whose reverence for
the papal authority daily diminilhed, read Leo's
anathemas with more indignation than terror.
In some cities, the people violently obftruted
the promulgation of the bull; in others, the
persons who attempted to publifl it were in-
fulted, and the bull itself torn in pieces, and
rodden under foot c.

ad upon THIS sentence, which he had for some time ex-
juthc peted, did not disconcert or intimidate Luther.

After renewing his appeal to the general coun-

cil,

b Palavic. 27. Luth. Oper. i. 423. c Serkend.
p. 116.

cil, he publithed remarks upon the bull of ex-Bi, II.
communication; and being now prluaded that --
Leo had been guilty both of impiety and injuf- Is0O
tice in his proceedings against him, he boldly
declared the Pope to be that man of fii, or
Anti-christ, whose appearance is foretold in the
New Testament; he declaimed againit his ty-
ranny and usurpations with greater violence than
ever; he exhorted all Christian princes to hake
of such an ignominious yoke; and boasted of
his own happiness in being marked out as the
pbjec of ecclesiastical indignation, because he
had ventured to assert the liberty of mankind.
Nor did he onfine his exprellions of contempt
for the papal power to words alone; Leo having,
in execution of the bull, appointed Luther's
books to be burnt at Rome, he, by way of reta-
liation, assembled all the professors and students
in the university of Wittemberg, and with great
pomp, in presence of a va(t multitude of fpeta-
tors, cast the volumes of the canon law, toge-
ther with the bull of excommunication, lito the
flames; and his example was imitated in cvral
cities-of Germany. The manner in which he
justified this a&ion, was still more offensive than
the aion itself. Having colleced from the ca-
non law some of the most extravagant propofi:ions
with regard to the plenitude and omnipotence
of the Pope's power, as well as the fubordina-
tion of all secular jurifdition to his authority,
he published these with a commentary, pointing
out the impiety of fuLh tenets, and their evident
tendency to subvert all civil government d.

SueH was the progress which Luther had tteof the

made, and such the Itate of his party, when tion whe
Charles arrived in Germany. No secular prince Charles ar.

had ved in
had

L GrOany.
d Luth. Oper. iL 316.

BooK I. had hitherto embraced Luther's opinions; no

change in the eftablilhed forms of worlhip had
been introduced; and no encroachments had
been made upon the pofleffions or jurifdi&ion of
the clergy; neither party had yet proceeded to
action; and the controversy, though conducted
with great heat and passion on both fides, was still
carried on with its proper weapons, with theses,
disputations, and replies. A deep impression,
however, was made upon the minds of the people;
their reverence for ancient institutions and doc-
trines was shaken; and the materials were al-
ready scattered which kindled into the combuf-
tion that oon spread over all Germany. Stu-
dents crowded from every province of the Empire
to Wittemberg; and under Luther himself Me-
lan&hon, Carloitadius, and other masters, then
reckoned eminent, imbibed opinions, which, on
their return, they propagated among their coun-
trymen, who listened to them with that fond at-
tention, which truth, when accompanied with
novelty, naturally commands .

R-&a;oo DURING the course of these tranfa&ions, the
~n of court of Rome, though under the direction of
thetonf one of its ablest Pontiffs, neither formed its

schemes with that profound sagacity, nor exe-
cuted them with that steady perseverance, which
had long rendered it the most perfec model of
political wisdom to the reft of Europe. When
Luther began to declaim against Indulgences,
two different methods of treating him lay before
the Pope; by adopting one of which the attempt,
it is probable, might have been crushed, and by
the other it might have been rendered innocent.
If Luther's first departure from the do&trines of
the church had initantly drawn upon him the

weight
e Seckend. 59.

weight of its censures, the dread of these might Bool II.
have restrained the Ele&or of Saxony from pro- - -'
te&ing him, might have deterred the people from 150o.
listening to his discourses, or even might have
overawed Luther himself; and his name, like
that of many good men before his time, would
now have been known to the world only for his
honest but ill-timed effort to corret the cor-
ruptiobs of the Romish church. On the other
hand, if the Pope had early testified some dif-
pleasure with the vices and excefles of the friars
who had been employed in publishing Indul-
gences; if he had forbidden the mentioning of
controverted points in discourses addressed to the
people; if he had enjoined the disputants on
both fides to be silent; if he had been careful
not to rifque the credit of the church by defin-
ing articles which had hitherto been left unde-
termined, Luther would, probably, have ftopt
fiort at his first discoveries: He would not have
been forced in felf-defence to venture upon new
ground, and the whole controversy might poffi-
bly have died away insensibly; or being confined
entirely to the schools, might have been carried
on with as little detriment to the peace and unity
of the Romish church, as that which the Fran-
cifcans maintain with the Dominicans, concern-
ing the immaculate conception, or that between
the Jansenists and Jesuits concerning the ope-
rations of grace. But Leo, by flucuating be-
tween there opposite systems, and by embracing
them alternately, defeated the effects of both.
By an improper exertion of authority, Luther
was exasperated, but not restrained. By a mif-
taken exercise of lenity, time was given for his
opinions to spread, but no progress made to-
wards reconciling him to the church; and even
the sentence of excommunication, which at ano-
ther junAure might have been decisive, was de-

layed

Bo I. layed so long, that it became at last scarcely an

-~ objec of terror.

,a4 ur.o SuCH a series of errors in the measures of a
'Lu~ee. court, seldom chargeable with mistaking its own

true interest, is not more astonishing than the
wisdom which appeared in Luther's condu&.
Though a perfet stranger to the maxims of
human prudence, and incapable, from the im-
petuofity of his temper, of observing them, he
was led naturally by the method in which hc
made his discoveries, to carry on his operations
in a manner which contributed more to their fuc-
cess, than if every flep he took had been pre-
fcribed by the molt artful policy. At the time
when he let himself to oppose Tetzel, he was
far from intending that reformation which he
afterwards effcted; and would have trembled
with horror at the thoughts of what at last
he gloried in accomplishing. The knowledge
of truth was not poured into his mind, all at
once, by any special revelation; he acquired it
by industry and meditation, and his progress, of
conlequence, was gradual. The dotrines of
Popery are so clofeiy conne-ted, that the expos-
ing of one error conduced him naturally to the
derction of others; and all the parts of that
artificial fabrick were so linked together, that the
pulling down of one loosened the foundation
of the reft, and rendered it more easy to over-
turn them. In confuting the extravagant tenets
concerning Indulgences, he was obliged to in-
quire into the true caule of our justification and
acceptance with God. The knowledge of that,
dilcovered to him by degrees the inutility of
pilgrimages and penances; the vanity of rely-
ing on the intercession Ls faints; the impiety of
worihipping them; the abuses of auricular con-
felion; and the imaginary exifience of purga-

tory.

tory. The detection of so many errors, led him BooK I.
of course to confider the character of the clergy' '
who taught them; and their exorbitant wealth, 5Z2C.
the severe injuncion of celibacy, together with
the intolerable rigour of monaftick vows, ap-
peared tohim the great sources of their corruption.
From thence, it was but one ftep to call in quef-
tion the divine original of the papal power,
which authorized and supported such a system
of errors. As the unavoidable result of the
whole, he disclaimed the infallibility of the Pope,
the decisions of fchoolmen, or any other human
authority, and appealed to the word of God as
the only standard of theological truth. To this
gradual progress Luther owed his success. His
hearers were not hocked at first by any propo-
fition too repugnant to their ancient prejudices,
or too remote from established opinions. They
were condu&ed insensibly from one doctrine to
another. Their faith and conviaion were able
to keep pace with his discoveries. To the fame
cause was owing the inattention, and even indif-
ference, with which Leo viewed Luther's firIt
proceedings. A dire& or violent attack upon
the authority of the church, would at once have
drawn upon Luther the whole weight of its ven-
geance; but as this was far from his thoughts,
as he continued long to profess great respect for
the Pope, and made repeated offers of fubmif-
sion to his decisions, there seemed to be no
reason for apprehending that he would prove
the author of any desperate revolt; and he was
suffered to -proceed ftep by fecp, in undermin-
ing the constitution of the church, until the
remedy applied at last came too late to produce
any effe&.

BUT whatever advantages Luther's cause de-
rived either from the mistakes of his adversaries,

or

Booz 11. or from his own good conduct, the sudden pro-
''"' grefi and firm establishment of his dotrines,
A, 2 must not be ascribed to these alone. The fame

^i e corruptions in the church of Rome which he

o=ibrd condemned, had been attacked long before his
*, 0; appearance. The fame opinions which he now
,i=c propagated, had been published in different

places, and were supported by the fame argu-
ments. Waldus in the twelfth century, Wick-
liss in the fourteenth, and Huss in the fifteenth,
had inveighed against the errors of Popery with
great boldness, and confuted them with more
ingenuity and learning than could have been
e~peaed in those illiterate ages in which they
flourilhed. But all there premature attempts
towards a reformation proved abortive. Such
feeble lights, incapable of dispelling the dark-
ness which then covered the church, were oon
extinguilhed; and though the dotrines of these
pious men produced some effe&s, and left some
traces in the countries where they taught, they
were neither extensive nor considerable. Many
powerful causes contributed to facilitate Lu-
ther's progress, which either did not exist, or
did not operate with full force in their days;
and at the critical and mature jun&ure when
he appeared, circumstances of every kind con-
curred in rendering each ftep that he took fuc-
ceisful.

Tr be THE long and scandalous schism which di-
,^:e , vided the church, during the latter part of the

.tac- fourteenth, and the beginning of the fifteenth
°J- centuries, had a great effect in diminishing the

veneration with which the world had been ac-
customed to view the papal dignity. Two or
three contending Pontiffs roaming about Europe
at a time; fawning on the Princes whom they

wanted

wanted to gain; squeezing the countries which BOOK II.
acknowledged their authority; excommunicat--
ing their rivals, and cursing those who adhered 1520.
to them, discredited their pretensions to infal-
libility, and exposed both their persons and their
office to contempt. The laity, to whom all
parties appealed, came to learn that some right
of private judgment belonged to them, and ac-
quired the exercise of it so far as to chue,
among these infallible guides, whom they would
please to follow. The proceedings of the coun-
cils of Constance and Basil, spread this dif-
refpet for the Romish fee still wider, and by
their bold exertion of authority in deposing and
ele&ing Popes, taught the world that there was
in the church a jurifdition superior even to the
papal power, which they had long believed to be
supreme.

THE wound given on that occasion to theThepontifi.
papal authority was scarcely healed up, when ces of

Alexander

the pontificates of Alexander VI. and Julius II. vi. ai of
both able princes, but detestable ecclefiafticks, J""uius !
raised new scandal in Christendom. The pro-
fligate morals of the former in private life; the
fraud, the injustice and cruelty of his publick
administration, place him on a level with those
tyrants, whose deeds are the greatest reproach
to human. nature. The latter, though a stranger
to the odious passions which prompted his pre-
deceffor to commit so many unnatural crimes,
was under the dominion of a restless and ungo-
vernable ambition, which scorned all confidera-
tions of gratitude, of decency, or of justice,
when they obftruted the execution of his
schemes. It was hardly poflible, to be firmly
persuaded that the infallible knowledge of a
religion, whose chief precepts are purity and
humility, was deposited in the breasts of the

VOL. II. I impious

Boo 11. impious Alexander, or the overbearing Julius.
'-/ The opinion of those who exalted the authority
152C' of a council above that of the Pope, spread

wonderfully under their pontificates: And as
the Emperor and French Kings, who were alter-
nately engaged in hostilities with those a&ive Pon-
tiffs, permitted and even encouraged their sub-
jeds to expole their vices with all the violence of
invective, and all the petulance of ridicule,
men's ears being accustomed to these, were not
ihocked with the bold or ludicrous discourses of
Luther and his followers concerning the papal
dignity.
The imr~o NOR were such excesses confined to the head

'crf of the church alone. Many of the dignified

clergy, secular as well as regular, being the
younger sons of noble families, who had assumed
the ecclesiastical character for no other reason
but that they found in the church stations of
great dignity and affluence, were accustomed
totally to neglec the duties of their office, and
indulged themselves without reserve in all the
vices to which great wealth and idleness natu-
rally give birth. Though the inferior clergy
were prevented by their poverty from imitating
the expensive luxury of their superiors, yet gross
ignorance and low debauchery rendered them
as contemptible as the other were odious f. The

severe

f The corrupt fate of the church prior to the Reforma-

tion, is ackno ledged by an author, who was both abun-
d nt'y able to judge concerning this matter, and who was
not overforward to confers it. " For ome years (fays
Bellarmine) before the Lutheran and Calviniflick hereies
were publilhed, there was not (as contemporary authors
tcllify) any everity in ecclefialtical judicatories, any dif-
cipline ith regard to morals, any knowledge of sacred
literature, any reverence for divine things, there was not
almoR any religion remaining." Bellarmin. Concio. xxviii.

Oper.

severe and unnatural law of celibacy, to which Boor rl.
both were equally subject, occasioned such irre- "'
gularities, that in several parts of Europe the 's0'
concubinage of priests was not only permitted,
but enjoined. The employing of a remedy so
contrary to the genius of the Christian religion,
is the strongest proof that the crimes it was
intended to prevent were both numerous and
flagrant. Long before the sixteenth century,
many authors of great name and authority give
such descriptions of the dissolute morals of the
clergy, as seem almost incredible in the prelent
age g. The voluptuous lives of ecclefiafticks

I 2 occasioned

Oper. tom. vi. col. 296. edit Colon. 1617. pud Gerdefii
Hill. Evan. Renovati, vol. i. p 25.

g Centum Gravamina Nationif. German. in Fafciculo

Rer. Expetend. & Fugiendarum, per Ortuinum Gratium,
vol. i. 361. See innumerable paflages to the fame pur-
pose in the appendix, or second volume, publilhed by Edw.
Brown. See also Herm.Vonder Hardt, Hilt. Lit. Reform.
pars iii. and the vai collections of Walchius in his four
volumes of Monumenta medii aevi. Gotting. 17{7.

The authors I have quoted enumerate the vices of the

clergy. When they ventured upon aions manifelly cri-
minal, we may conclude that they would be less scrupulous
with refpet to the decorum of behaviour. Accordingly
their neglec of the decent conduc suitable to their pro-
session, seems to have given great offence. In order to il-
lustrate this, I Ihall transcribe one passage, because it is
taken not from any author whose professed purpose it was
to describe the improper conduc ot the clergy; and who,
from prejudice or artifice, may be supposed to aggravate
the charge againll them. The Eimperor harles iV. in a
letter to the archbilhop of Mentz, A D. 1359, exhorting
him to reform the disorders of the clergy, thus expresses
himself: " De Chrifti patrimonio, ludos, halliludia & tor-
neamenta exercent; habitum militarem cum practextis au-
reis & argenteis gellant. & calceos militares; comam &
barbam nutriunt, & nihil quod ad vitam & ordinem eccle-
fiaRlicum fpeAat, ollendunt. Militaribus fe duntaxat &
fecularibus aibus, vita & moribus, in fu falutis difpen-
dium, & generale populi fcandalum, imifcent." Codex
Diplcmaticus Anecdotorum, per Val. Ferd. Gudenum,
4to. vol. iii. p. 438.

BOOK II. occasioned great scandal, not only because their

-''"' manners were inconsistent with their sacred cha-
'I20 rater; but the laity being accustomed to fee fe-

veral of them raised from the lowest ifations to
the greatest affluence, did not hew the fame in-
dulgence to their excesses, as to those of persons
poffcffed of hereditary wealth or grandeur; and
viewing their condition with more envy, they
censured their crimes with greater severity. No-
thing, therefore, could be more acceptable to
Luther's hearers, than the violence with which
he exclaimed against the immoralities of church-
men, and every person in his audience could,
from his own observation, confirm the truth of
his invectives.

The facility THE scandal of these crimes was greatly in-
eei ,,h created by the facility with which such as com-
liieswtmre mitted them, obtained pardon. In all the Eu-
p.rdoned. ropean kingdoms, the impotence of the civil

magistrate, under forms of government ex-
tremely irregular and turbulent, made it necef-
fary to relax the rigour of justice, and upon
payment of a certain fine or composition pre-
fcribed by law, judges were accustomed to remit
farther punishment, even of the most atrocious
crimes. The court of Rome, always attentive
to the means of augmenting its revenues, imi-
tated this pra&ice, and by a preposterous ac-
commodation of it to religious concerns, granted
its pardons to such transgressors as gave a fum
of money in order to purchase them. As the
idea of a composition for crimes was then fami-
liar, this firange traffick was so far from hock-
ing mankind, that it soon became general; and
in order to prevent any imposition in carrying
it on, the officers of the Roman chancery pub-
lilhed a book, containing the precise fum to be

exated

exa&ed for the pardon of every particular fin. Boo II.
A deacon guilty of murder was absolved for
twenty crowns. A bishop or abbot might affaC- '15Z
finate for three hundred livres. Anyecclefiaftick
might violate his vows of chastity, even with
the most aggravating circumstances, for the
third part of that fum. Even such shocking
crimes, as occur seldom in human life, and per-
haps exist only in the impure imagination of a
casuist, were taxed at a very moderate rate.
When a more regular and perse& mode of dif-
pensing justice came to be introduced into civil
courts, the pracice of paying a composition for
crimes went gradually into disuse; and mankind
having acquired more accurate notions concern-
ing religion and morality, the conditions on
which the court of Rome bestowed its pardons
appeared impious, and were confidered as one
great source of ecclesiastical corruption h.

THIS degeneracy of manners among the The exorbi-

clergy might have been tolerated perhaps, with t^fat ealth
greater indulgence, if their exorbitant riches and church,
power had not enabled them, at the fame time,
to oppress all other orders of men. It is the
genius of superstition, fond of whatever is pom-
pous or grand, to let no bounds to its liberality
towards persons whom it esteems sacred, and to
think its expressions of regard defective unless
it hath raised them to the heighth of wealth
and authority. Hence flowed the extensive re-
venues and jurisdiction possesed by the church
in every country of Europe, and which were
become intolerable to the laity from whose un-
discerning bounty they were at first derived.

THE

h Fafcicul. Rer. Expet. & Fug. i. 355. J. G. Schelhor-

nii Amenit. Literar. Francof. 1725, vol. ii. 369. Diftion.
de Bayle, Artic. Banck & T.uppius. Taxa Cancellar. Ro-
mana, Edit. Francof. 165. paflim.

Booc I1. THE burden, however, of ecclesiastical op-

v*- ^prellion had fallen with such peculiar weight on
,i the Germans, as rendered them, though natu-
iGc:r~ny rally exempt from levity, and tenacious of their

ancient customs, more inclinable than any people
in Europe to liften to those who called on them
to assert their liberty. During the long contests
between the Popes and Emperors concerning
the right of investiture, and the wars which
these occasioned, most of the considerable Ger-
man ecclefiafticks joined the papal fa&ion; and
while engaged in rebellion against the head of
the.Empire, they seized the Imperial revenues,
and usurped the Imperial jurifdi&ion within
their own dioceses. Upon the re-establishment
of tranquillity, they still retained these ufurpa-
tions, as if by the length of an unjust possession
they had acquired a legal right to them. The
Emperors, too feeble to wrest them out of their
hands, were obliged to grant the clergy fiefs of
those vast territories, and they enjoyed all the
immunities as well as honours which belonged to
feudal barons. By means of these, many bishops
and abbots in Germany were not only eccle-
fiafticks, but princes, and their character and
manners partook more of the licence, too fre-
quent among the latter, than of the fancity
which became the former i.

-Ferc te THE unsettled state of government in Ger-
tat many, and the frequent wars to which that
F 'i r' country was exposed, contributed in another
o the r-
pr;y manner towards aggrandizing ecclcfiafticks.

'1 he only property, during those times of anar-
chy, which enjoyed security from the oppreflion
of the great, or the ravages of war, was that
which belonged to the church. This was owing,

not
i F. Paul, Hittory of Ecclesias. Benefices, p. o17.

not only to the great reverence for the sacred BooK II.
chara6ter prevalent in those ages, but to a super- -- -
ftitious dread of the sentence of excommuni- '5ZO°
cation, which the clergy were ready to denounce
against all who invaded their possessions. Many
observing this, made a surrender of their lands
to ecclefiafticks, and consenting to hold them in
fee of the church, obtained as its vassals a de-
gree of safety, which without this device they
were unable to procure. By such an increase
of the number of their vassals, the power of
ecclefiafticks received a real and permanent aug-
mentation; and as lands, held in fee by the
limited tenures common in those ages, often re-
turned to the persons on whom the fief depended,
considerable additions were made in this way to
the property of the clergy k.

THE solicitude of the clergy in providing for The vas

the safety of their own persons, was still greater peutnl i
than that which they displayed in securing their ecclesia-
possessions; and their efforts to attain it were tiks
still more successful. As they were consecrated
to the priestly office with much outward folem-
nity; were distinguished from the reft of man-
kind by a peculiar garb and manner of life;
and arrogated to their order many privileges
which do not belong to other Christians, they
naturally became the obje&s of excessive vene-
ration. As a superstitious spirit spread, they
were regarded as beings of a superior species to
the profane laity, whom it would be impious to
try by the fame laws, or to fubje& to the fame
punishments. This exemption from civil jurif-
di&ion, granted at first to ecclefiafticks, as a
mark of refpet, they soon claimed as a point

of

k F. Paul, Hilt. of Eccles. Benef. p. 66. Boulainvilliers,
Etat. de France, tom. i. 169; Lond. 1737.

Booc II. of right. This valuable immunity of the priest-
'-"^ hood is aflerted, not only in the decrees of
s520. Popes and councils, but was confirmed in the

most ample form by many of the greatest Em-
perors . As long as the clerical character re-
mained, the person of an ecclefiaftick was sacred;
and unless he were degraded from his office,
the unhallowed hand of the civil judge durst
not touch him. But as the power of degra-
dation was lodged in the spiritual courts, the
difficulty and expence of obtaining such a fen-
tence, too often secured absolute impunity to
offenders. Many assumed the clerical character
for no other reason, than that it might screen
them from the punishment which their actions
deserved m. The German nobles complained
loudly, that these anointed malefactors, as they
call them ", seldom suffered capitally, even for
the most atrocious crimes; and their indepen-
dence on the civil magistrate is often mentioned
in the remonstrances of the diets, as a privilege
equally pernicious to society, and to the morals
of the clergy.
rTF.ir ea- WHILE the clergy asserted the privileges of

. .cmt' rtheir own order with so much zeal, they made

die of continual encroachments upoa those of the laity.
ót L' All causes relative to matrimony, to testaments,

to ulury, o legitimacy of birth, as well as those
which concerned ecclesiastical revenues, were
thought to be so connected with religion, that
they could be tried only in the spiritual courts.
Not latisfied with this ample jurifiiction, which
extended to one half of the subje&s which give
rife to litigation among men, the clergy, with

wonderful

Goldafti Confl;tir. Impcrial Francof. 1673. vol. ii.

92, 1I7. m Ryrer's Fcedera, vol. xxxiii. 532.
n Centum Gravam. § 31.

wonderful industry, and by a thousand inven-BooK If.
tions, endeavoured to draw all other causes into ' -"
their own courts o. As they had engrossed the '520.
whole learning known in the dark ages, the
spiritual judges were commonly so far superior
in knowledge and abilities to those employed in
the secular courts, that the people at first fa-
voured any stretch that was made to bring their
affairs under the cognizance of a judicature, on
the decisions of which they could rely with
more perse& confidence. Thus the interest of
the church, and the inclination of the people,
concurring to elude the jurifdition of the lay-
magistrate, soon reduced it almost to nothing P.
By means of this, vast power accrued to ecclefi-
afticks, and no inconsiderable addition was made
to their revenue by the fums paid in those ages
to such as administered justice.

THE penalty by which the spiritual courts Tle dred-

enforced their sentences, added great weight and of lp^'itl
terror to their jurifdiAion. The censure of ex- cnfures.
communication was instituted originally for pre-
serving the purity of the church; that obstinate
offenders, whose impious tenets or profane lives
were a reproach to Christianity, might be cut
off from the society of the faithful: This, eccle-
fiafticks did not scruple to convert into an engine
for promoting their own power, and infliced
it on the most frivolous occasions. Whoever
despised any of their decisions, even concerning
civil matters, immediately incurred this dreadful
censure, which not only excluded them from all
the privileges of a Christian, but deprived them
of their rights as men and citizens q; and the

dread

o Giannone His. of Naples, book xix. § 3. P Cen-
tum Gravam. § 9, 56, 64. q Ibid. § 34.

BooK ll. dread of this rendered even the most fierce and
'"" ~ turbulent spirits obsequious to the authority of

,s20. the church.

Thec -e T NOR did the clergy negle& the proper me-
of ccltfiaf-
tick, t fe- thods of preserving the wealth and power which

ue thcr they had acquired with such indultry and ad-

dress. The pofeffions of the church, being
confcrated to God, were declared to be unalien-
able; so that the funds of a society which was
daily gaining, and could never lose, grew to
be immense. In Germany, it was computed
that the ecclefiafticks had got into their hands
more than one half of the national property r.
In other countries, the proportion varied; but
the hfare belonging to the church was every
where prodigious. These vast poffeflions were
not subjet to the burdens imposed on the lands
of the laity. The German clergy were exempted
by law from all taxes ; and if, on any extraor-
d;nary emeigence, ecclefiafticks were pleased to
gr..nt ome aid towards supplying the publick
exigencies, this was confidered as a free gift flow-
ing from their own generosity, which the civil
magifrate had no title to demand, far less to ex-
ad. In consequence of this strange solecism in
government, the laity in Germany had the mor-
tification to find themselves loaded with excessive
impositions, because such as pofleffed the greatest
property were freed from any obligation to sup-
port, or to defend the state.

T'Iecrm:a GRIEVOUS, however, as the exorbitant wealth
,,,<k nfy and numerous privileges of the clerical order
Freigntrs. were to the other members of the Germanick

body,

r Cetum Gravam. § 2. s Ibid. Goldafti Conft.
Iilper. ii. 79. o3. Pfeffel His. dDroit Publ. 350. 374.

body, they would have reckoned it some miti-Boo I.
gation of the evil, if there had been poffefled1-- '
only by ecclefiafticks residing among themselves, i5 :o
who would have been less apt to make an im-
proper use of their riches, or to exercise their
rights with unbecoming rigour. But the bishops
of Rome having early put in a claim, the boldest
that ever human ambition suggested, of being
supreme and infallible heads of the Christian
church; they, by their profound policy and
unwearied perseverance, by their address in avail-
ing themselves of every circumstance which
occurred, by taking advantage of the fuperfti-
tion of some Princes, of the necessities of others,
and of the credulity of the people, at length
established their pretensions, in opposition both
to the interest and common sense of mankind.
Germany was the country which these eccle-
fiaftical sovereigns governed with most absolute
authority. They excommunicated and deposed
some of its most illustrious Emperors, and ex-
cited their fubjecs, their ministers, and even their
children, to take arms againt them. Amidst
these contests, the Popes continually extended
their own immunities, spoiling the secular
Princes gradually of their most valuable prero-
gatives, and the German church felt all the
rigour of that oppression which flows from sub-
je&ion to foreign dominion, and foreign ex-
acions.

THE right of conferring benefices, which theNomin.tea

Popes usurped during that period of confufion,by hePope.
was an acquisition of great importance, and
exalted the ecclesiastical power upon the ruins
of the temporal. The Emperors and other
princes of Germany had long been in pofeffelon
of this right, which served to increase both their
authoricy and their revenue. But by wresting

it

Boor II. it out of their hands, the Popes were enabled

^'"-v "to fill the Empire with their own creatures;
'520 they accustomed a great body of every prince's

fubjets to depend not upon him but upon the
Roman fee; they bellowed upon strangers the
richest benefices in every country, and drained
their wealth to supply the luxury of a foreign
court. Even the patience of the most fuperftiti-
ous ages mutinied under such oppression; and so
loud and frequent were the complaints and mur-
murs of the Germans, that the Popes, afraid of
irritating them too far, consented, contrary to
their usual pra&tice, to abate somewhat of their
pretensions, and to reft satisfied with the right
of nomination to such benefices as happened to
fall vacant during fix months in the year, leav-
ing the disposal of the remainder to the princes
and other legal patrons '.

Te ~di- BUT the court of Rome easily found expedi-
,tSfrients for eluding an agreement which put such
po.-of th restraints on its power. The pracice of refer-
fPiPf"'f ving certain benefices in every country to the

Pope's immediate nomination, which had been
long known, and often complained of, was ex-
tended far beyond its ancient bounds. All the
benefices possesed by Cardinals, or any of the
numerous officers in the Roman court; those
held by persons who happened to die at Rome,
or within forty miles of that city on their journey
to or from it; those which became vacant by
translation, with many others, were included in
the number of reserved benefices; Julius II. and
Leo, stretching the matter to the utmost, often
collated to benefices where the right of referva-
tion had not been declared, on pretence of hav-

ing

t F. Paul, Hit. of Eccles. Benef. zo04. Gold. Conflit.
nIper. i. 408.

ing mentally reserved this privilege to them-BooK Ir.
selves. The right of reservation, however, even - *
with this extension, had certain limits, as it 1s20.
could be exercised only where the benefice was
acually vacant; and therefore, in order to ren-
der the exertion of papal power unbounded,
expetative graces, or mandates nominating a
person to succeed to a benefice upon the sirs
vacancy that ihould happen, were brought into
use. By means of these, Germany was filled
with persons depending on the court of Rome,
from which they received such reversionary
grants, princes were defrauded, in a great de-
gree, of their prerogatives; the rights of lay-pa-
trons were pre-occupied, and rendered almost en-
tirely vain ".

THE manner in which these extraordinary venality of

powers were exercised, rendered them till more teourt of
odious and intolerable. The avarice and ex-
tortion of the court of Rome, were become ex-
ceflive almost to a proverb. The sale of bene-
sices was so notorious, that no pains were taken
to conceal, or to disguise it. Companies of
merchants openly purchased the benefices of
different diftrics in Germany from the Pope's
ministers, and retailed them at an advanced
price x. Pious men beheld with deep regret
these fimoniacal tranfa&ions, so unworthy the
ministers of a Christian church; while politicians
complained of the loss sustained by the ex-
portation of so much wealth in that irreligious
traffick.

THE

u Centum Gravam. § z2. Fafcic. Rer. Expet. &c. 334.

Gold. Cont. Imper. i. 391, 404, 405. F. Paul, Hist. of
Eccl. Benef. 167, 99. x Fafcic. Rer. Expet. i. 359.

Boos Il. THE rums, indeed, which the court of Rome

drew by its stated and legal impositions from all

it drained the countries acknowledging its authority, were
'thero so considerable, that it is not trange that
,,r;th. Princes, as well as their fubjecs, murmured at

the smallest addition made to them by unnecef-
fary or illicit means. Every ecclesiastical person,
upon his admiflion to his benefice, paid annats,
or one year's rent of his living, to the Pope;
and as that tax was exafted with great rigour,
its amount was prodigious. To this must be
added, the frequent demands made by the Popes
of free gifts from the clergy, together with the
extraordinary levies of tenths upon ecclesiastical
benefices, on pretence of expeditions against the
Turks, seldom intended, or carried into exectu-
tion; and from the whole, the vast proportion
of the revenues of the church, which flowed con-
tinually to Rome, may be estimated.

The ,i;te SucH were the dissolute manners, the exor-
effea of ll -
:Icrc .r. .bitant wealth, the vast power and privileges of

the clergy before the Reformation; such the op-
preflive rigour of that dominion which the Popes
had eftablithed over the Christian world; and
such the sentiments concerning them that pre-
vailed in Germany at the beginning of the fix-
teenth century. Nor has this Iketch been copied
from the controversial writers of that age, who,
in the heat of disputation, may be fufpe&ed of
having exaggerated the errors, or of having mif-
represented the condu& of that church which they
laboured to overturn; it is formed upon more au-
thentic evidence, upon the memorials and re-
monstrances of the Imperial diets, coolly enume-
rating the grievances under which the Empire
groaned, in order to obtain the redress of them.
Diffatisfaftion must have risen to a great height
among the people, when these grave assemblies

exprefled

expressed themselves with such acrimony; and if Boor II.
they demanded the abolition of those enormities -
with so much vehemence, the people, we may be '20°'
assured, uttered their sentiments and desires in
bolder and more virulent language.

To men thus prepared for haking off theMenpre-

yoke, Luther addressed himself with certainty of paed'Lu
success. As they had long felt its weight, and ther' opi.
had borne it with impatience, they listened with io'""
joy to the irft proposal for procuring deliver-
ance. Hence proceeded the fond and eager
reception that his doctrines met with, and the
rapidity with which they spread over all the pro-
vinces of Germany. Even the impetuosity and and to tole
fierceness of Luther's spirit, his confidence in fet^hiad.
asserting his own opinions, and the arrogance as
well as contempt wherewith he treated all who
differed from him, which, in ages of greater
moderation and refinement, have been reckoned
defects in the character of that reformer, did not
appear exceRive to his contemporaries, whose
minds were strongly agitated by those interesting
controversies which he carried on, and who had
themselves endured the rigour of papal tyranny,
and seen the corruptions in the church against
which he exclaimed.

NOR were they offended at that gross fcur-

rility with which his polemical writings are
filled, or at the low buffoonery which he ome-
times introduces into his gravest difcourfis. No
dispute was managed in those rude times with-
out a large portion of the former; and the lat-
ter was common, even on the noi: iolemn oc-
cafions, and in treating the must sacred fubjets.
So far were either of these from doing hurt to
his cause, that invective and ridicule had ome
effec, as well as more laudable arguments, in

exposing

Boot n. exposing the errors of popery, and in determining

mankind to abandon them.

1520.

The Bdea BESIDE all these causes of Luther's rapid
,°o pr progrels, arising from the nature of his enter-
ing tbe prize, and the juncture at which he undertook
th R-fo it, he reaped advantage from some foreign and
matin: adventitious circumtances, the beneficial influ-

ence of which none of his forerunners in the fame
course had enjoyed. Among these may be rec-
koned the invention of the art of printing,
about half a century before his time. By this
fortunate difcoverv, the facility of acquiring and
of propagating knowledge was wonderfully in-
creased, and Luther's books, which must other-
wife have made their way slowly and with un-
certainty into distant countries, spread at once
all over Europe. Nor were they read only by
the rich and the learned, who alone had access
to books before that invention; they got into
the hands of the people, who, upon this appeal to
them as judges, ventured to examine and to re-
jet many docrines, which they had formerly
been required to believe, without being taught
to understand them.

An^ r the THE revival of learning at the fame period,
I^^' .was a circumstance extremely friendly to the

Reformation. The study of the ancient Greek
and Roman authors, and the discovery of that
liberal and found knowledge which they contain,
rouzed the human mind from the profound
lethargy in which it had been funk during feve-
ral cenuries. Mankind seem, at that period, to
have recovered the powers of inquiring and of
thinking, faculties of which they had long loft
the use; and fond of the acquisition, they exer-
cifed them with great boldness upon all subje&s.
They were not now afraid of entering an un-

common

common path, or of embracing a new opinion. BooK II.
Novelty appears rather to have been a recom-'-
mendation of a doctrine; and instead of being 1520.
startled when the daring hand of Luther drew
aside, or tore the veil which covered established
errors, the genius of the age applauded and
aided the attempt. Luther, though a stranger
to elegance in taste or composition, zealously
promoted the cultivation of ancient literature;
and sensible of its being necessary in studying
the scriptures, he himself had acquired confi-
derable knowledge both in the Hebrew and
Greek tongues. Melanthon, and some other
of his disciples, were eminent proficients in the
polite arts; and as the fame barbarous monks,
who opposed the introdution of learning into
Germany, set themselves with equal fierceness
against Luther's opinions, and declared the good
reception of the latter to be the effec of the
progress which the former had made, the cause
of learning and of the Reformation came to be
confidered as closely conneced, and, in every
country, had the fame friends and the fame ene-
mies. This enabled the reformers to carry on
the contest at first with great superiority. Eru-
dition, industry, accuracy of sentiment, purity
of composition, even wit and raillery, were wholly
on their fide, and triumphed with ease over illi-
terate mqnks, whose rude arguments, expresscd
in a perplexed and barbarous style, were found
insufficient for the defence of a system, the er-
rors of which, all the art and ingenuity of its
later and more learned advocates have not been
able to palliate.

THAT bold spirit of inquiry, which the revi- Luther aid-

val of learning excited in Europe, was so favour- n byphe
able to the Reformation, that Luther was aided did not wrvi
in his progreis, and mankind were prepared to his uccels.

VOL. II. K embrace

BoK II. embrace his dotrines, by persons who did not
'"- 'wilh success to his undertaking. The greater

s20. part of the in genious men who applied to the

study of ancient literature, towards the clofeof
the fifteenth century, and the beginning of the
sixteenth, though they had no intention, and
perhaps no with, to overturn the eftablifled
system of religion, had discovered the absurdity
of many tenets and practices authorized by the
church, and perceived the futilir of those argu-
ments, by which illiterate monks endeavoured
to defend them. Their contempt of theft advo-
cates for the received errors, led them frequently
to expose the opinions which they supported,
and to ridicule their ignorance with great free-
dom and severity. By this, men were pre-
pared for the more serious attacks made upon
them by Luther, and their reverence both for
the do&rines and persons against whom he in-
veighed, was considerably abated. This was
particularly the cafe in Germany. When the
first attempts were made to revive a taste for
ancient learning in that country, the Ecclefialticks
there, who were still more ignorant than their
brethren on the other fide of the Alps, et them-
selves to oppose its progress with more a&ive
zeal; and the patrons of the new studies, in re-
turn, attacked them with greater violence. In
the writings ofReilchlin, Hutten, and theother
revivers of learning in Germany, the corruptions
of the church of Rome are censured with an
acrimony of style, little inferior to that of Lu-
ther himself y.

P..t;culllr FRoM the fame cause proceeded the frequent
E:-. strictures of Erasmus upon the errors of the

church,

y Gerdefius Hill. Evang. Renov. vol. i p. 141. i57.

Seekend. lib. i. p. 103. Vonder Hardt. Hist. Literar. Re-
form. pars ii.

church, as well as upon the ignorance and vices BooK IL
of the clergy. His reputation and authority --
were so high.in Europe at the beginning of the s521.
.sixteenth century, and his works were read with
such universal admiration, that the effca of thee
deserves to be mentioned as one of the circum-
stances which contributed most considerably to-
wards Luther's success. Erasmus, having been
destined for the church, and trained up in the
knowledge of Ecclesiastical literature, applied
.himself more to theological inquiries than any
of the revivers of learning in that age. His
acute judgment and vast erudition enabled him
to discover many errors, both in the doctrine
and worihip of the Romish church. Some of
there he confuted with great solidity of reason-
.ing, and force of eloquence. Others he treated
.as objets of ridicule, and turned against them
that irresistible torrent of popular and satirical
wit, of which he had the command. There was
,scarcely any opinion or pratice of the:Romifh
church which Luther endeavoured to reform,
but what had been previously animadverted upon
by Erasmus, and had afforded him fubje& either
of censure or of raillery. WhenLuther first be-
.gan his attack upon the church, Erasmus seemed
to applaud his conduct; he courted the friendihip
of several of his disciples and patrons, and con-
demned the behaviour and spirit of his adver-
saries . He concurred openly with him in in-
veighing against the school divines, as the teach-
ers of a system equally unedifying and obscure.
He joined him in endeavouring to turn the at-
tention of men to the study of the holy scrip-
tures, as the only standard of religious truth '.

K 2 VARIOVS

z Seckend. lib. i. p. 40. 96. a Vonder Hardt.

HiRor. Literar. Reform. pars i. Gerdef. Hit. Evang. Re-
nov. i. 147.

BooK II. VARIOUS circumstances, however, prevented
'--Y" Erasmus from holding the fame course with
'z20. Luther. The natural timidity of his temper;

his want of that force of mind which alone can
prompt a man to assume the charater of a re-
former b; his excelfive deference for persons in
high station; his dread of losing the pensions
and other emoluments which their liberality
had conferred upon him; his extreme love of
peace, and hopes of reforming abuses gradually,
and by gentle methods; all concurred in deter-
mining him not only to repress and to moderate
the zeal, with which he had once been animated
against the errors of the church c, but to assume
the character of a mediator between Luther
and his opponents. But though Erasmus soon
began to censure Luther as too daring and im-
petuous, and was at last prevailed upon to
write against him, he must, nevertheless, be
confidered as his forerunner and auxiliary in
this war upon the church. He first scattered
the feeds, which Luther cherihed and brought
to maturity. His raillery and oblique censures
prepared the way for Luther's inve&ives and
more direc attacks. In this light Erasmus ap-
peared to the zealous defenders of the Romilh
church in his own times'.. In this light he
must be confidered by every person conversant
in the history of that period.

IN

b Erafinus himself is candid enough to acknowledge this:

" Luther," fays he, " has given us many a wholerome
doarine, and many a good counsel. I wish he had not
defeated the effe& of them by intolerable faults. But if he
had written every thing in the most unexceptionable man-
ner, I had no inclination to die for the fake of truth.
Every man hath rot the courage requisite to make a mar-
tyr; and I am afraid, that if I were put to the trial, I
lhould imitate St. Peter." Epift. Erafmi in Jortin's Life
of Erafm. vrl. i.. 273.

c Jortin's Life of Erasmus, vol. i. p. 258.
d Vonder HarJt. Hill. Literar. Reform. pars i. p. z.

IN this long enumeration of the circumitances BooK 11.

which combined in favouring the progress of~""~
Luther's opinions, or in weakening the refitance 1520.
of his adversaries, I have avoided entering into
any difcuflion of the theological dotrines of
popery, and have not attempted to shew how
repugnant they are to the spirit of Christianity,
and how destitute of any foundation in reason,
in the word of God, or in the practice of the
primitive church, leaving these topics entirely
to ecclesiastical historians, to whose province
they peculiarly belong. But when we add the
effet of these religious considerations to the
influence of political causes, it is obvious that
the united operation of both on the human
mind, muff have been sudden and irresistible.
Though, to Luther's contemporaries, who were
too near perhaps to the scene, or too deeply
interested in it, to trace causes with accuracy,
or to examine them with coolness, the rapidity
with which his opinions spread, appeared to be
so unaccountable, that some of them imputed
it to a certain uncommon and malignant position
of the stars, which scattered the spirit of gid-
diness and innovation over the world . It is
evident, that the success of the Reformation was
the natural effec of many powerful causes pre-
pared by peculiar providence, and happily con-
spiring to that end. This attempt to investigate
these causes, and to throw light on an event so
singular and important, will not, perhaps, be
deemed an unnecessary digreffion.--I return
from it to the course of the history.

THE Diet at Worms condu&ed its delibera- Proceedings

C h of the diet

tions with that flow formality peculiar to such at wos.
assemblies. Much time was spent in establish- 's5*.

ing
e Jovii Hiftoria, Lut. 553. fol. p. 134.

Boo II. ing some regulations with regard to the internal
'- -' police of the Empire. The jurisdiction of the
'Sz' Imperialchamber was confirmed, and the forms

of its proceeding rendered more fixed and
regular. A council of regency was appointed
to aflif Ferdinand in the government of the
Empire during his brother's absence; which,
from the extent of the Emperor's dominions,
as well as the multiplicity of his affairs, was an
event that might be frequently expected f. The
state of religion was then taken into confide-

The Empe- ration. There were not wanting some plausible
th,, reasons which might have induced Charles to
toLuher. have declared himself the protector of Luther's

cause, or at least to have connived at its pro-
grefs. If he had poffefled no other dominions
but those which belonged to him in Germany,
and no other crown beides the Imperial, he
might have been disposed perhaps to favour a
man, who aferted so boldly the privileges and
immunities for which the Empire had struggled
so long with the Popes. But the vast and dan-
gerous schemes which Francis I. was forming
against Charles, made it necessary for him to
regulate his condut by views more extensive
than those which would have suited a German
prince; and it being of the utmost importance
to secure the Pope's friendship, this determined
him to treat Luther with great severity, as the
most effetual method of soothing Leo into a
concurrence with his measures. His eagernes
to accomplish this, rendered him not unwilling
to gratify the papal legates in Germany, who
insisted that, without any delay or formal deli-
beration, the diet ought to condemn a man
whom the Pope had already excommunicated

as

f Pont. Heater. Rer. Aufir. lib. viii. c. ii. p. 95.
Pfeffel Abreg Chronol. p. 598.

as an incorrigible heretick. Such an abrupt BooK 11.
manner of proceeding, however, being deemed"-'"
unprecedented and unjust by the members of '521t
the diet, they made a point of Luther's appear- He is fur-
ing in person, and declaring whether he adhered ,,r to
or not to those opinions, which had drawn upon
him the censures of the church g. Not only
the Emperor, but all the princes through whose
territories he had to pass, granted him a safe-
condu&t; and Charles wrote to him at the fame March 6.
time, requiring his immediate attendance on the
diet, and renewing his promises of protetion
from any injury or violence h. Luther did not
hesitate one moment about yielding obedience,
and set out for Worms, attended by the herald
who had brought the Emperor's letter and safe-
condu&. While on his journey, many of his
friends, whom the fate of Huss, under funimilar
circumstances, and notwithstanding the fame
security of an Imperial fafe-condut, filled with
solicitude, advised and intreated him not to ruih
wantonly into the midst of danger. But Lu-Hisu

daunted

ther, superior to such terrors, silenced them p'iit.
with this reply, " I am lawfully called," said
he, " to appear in that city, and thither will I
go in the name of the Lord, though as many
devils as there are tiles on the houses, were there
combined against me ."

THE reception which he met at Worms, His reepti-

was such as he might have reckoned a fullWorms.
reward of all his labours, if vanity and the love
of applaufc had been the principles by which
he was influenced. Greater crowds assembled
to behold him, than had appeared at the Em-
peror's public entry; his apartments were daily
filled with princes and peronages of the highest

rank,

g P. Mart. E p. 722. h Luth. Oper. ii. 411,
i Luth. Oper. ii. 412.

Boor II. rank k, and he was treated with all the refpec
^"'^ paid to those who possess the power of directing
152' the understanding and sentiments of other men;

an homage, more sincere, as well as more flat-
tering, than any which preeminence in birth

Theminnror condition can command. At his appearance
pebranc. before the diet, he behaved with great decency,

and with equal firmness. He readily acknow-
ledged an excess of vehemence and acrimony in
his controversial writings, but refused to retra&
his opinions unless he were convinced of their
falsehood; or to consent to their being tried by
any other rule than the word of God. When
neither threats nor intreaties could prevail on
him to depart from this resolution, some of the
ecclefiafticks proposed to imitate the example
of the council of Constance, and by punishing
the author of this pestilent heresy, who was
now in their power, to deliver the church at
once from such an evil. But the members of
the diet refuing to expose the German integrity
to fresh reproach by a second violation of pub-
lick faith; and Charles being no less unwilling
to bring a stain upon the beginning of his admi-
niftration by such an ignominious ation, Lu-

Ar;; :6. ther was permitted to depart in safety . A
r's;act'few days after he left the city, a severe edit

was published in the Emperor's name, and by
authority of the diet, depriving him, as an ob-
ftinate and excommunicated criminal, of all the
privileges which he enjoyed as a fubje& of the
Empire, forbidding any prince to harbour or
protect him, and requiring all to concur in seizing
his person as soon as the term specified in his
fafe-conduc was expired m.

BUT

k Seckend. 156. Lth. Oper. ii.4r4. I F. Paul.

Hist. of Coonc. p. 13. Seckcnd. 160. m Gold.
Conft. Imperial ii 408.

BUT this rigorous decree had no considerable BooK It.

effe&, the execution of it being prevented""-
partly by the multiplicity of occupations which Helisli'ed
the commotions in Spain, together with the ndconcsl-

ed at Wart-

wars in Italy and the Low Countries, createdb urg.
to the Emperor; and partly by a prudent pre-
caution employed by the Ele&or of Saxony,
Luther's faithful patron. As Luther, on his
return from Worms, was passing near Alten-
stein in Thuringia, a number of horsemen in
masks rushed suddenly out of a wood, where
the Ele&or had appointed them to lie in wait
for him, and surrounding his company, carried
him, after difiniffing all his attendants, to Wart-
burg, a firong caitle not far distant. There
the Elecor ordered him to be supplied with
every thing necessary or agreeable; but the place
of his retreat was carefully concealed, until
the fury of the present storm against him began
to abate, upon a change in the political fitua-
tion of Europe. In this solitude, where he re-
mained nine months, and which he frequently
called his Patmos, after the name of that island
to which the apostle John was banifled, he
exerted his usual vigour and industry in defence
of his doctrines, or in confutation of his adver-
saries, publishing several treatises, which revived
the spirit of his followers, astonished to a great
degree, and disheartened at the sudden diiap-
pearance of their leader.

DURING his confinement, his opinions con-Progrersof

tinued to gain ground, acquiring the afcendanthis opinions.
in almost every city of Saxony. At this time,
the Augustinians of Wittemberg, with the ap-
probation of the university, and the connivance
of the Ele&or, ventured upon the first ltep
towards an alteration in the established forms of
public worship, by abolihfing the celebration

of

BOOK I. of private masses, and by giving the cup as well
:..... as the bread to the laity in administering the fa-
1s'5- crament of the Lord's supper.

Decee of WHATEVER consolation the courage and fuc-
t'h P"°er- cess of his disciples, or the progress of his doc-
co=deig trines in his own country, afforded Luther in his

retreat, he there received information of two
events, which considerably damped his joy, as
they seemed to lay insuperable obfacles in the
way of propagating his principles in the two
most powerful kingdoms of Europe. One was,
a solemn decree, condemning his opinions, pub-
lified by the university of Paris, the most
ancient and at that time the most refpetable
of the learned societies in Europe. The other
was, the answer written to his book concerning

e.ryvim. the Babylonifh captivity by Henry VIII. of
,it England. That young monarch,' having been
,,n.- educated under the eye of a suspicious father,

who, in order to prevent his attending to bufi-
ness, kept him occupied in the study of litera-
ture, ill retained a greater 1aw of learning,
and stronger habits of applicatio to it, than
are common among Princes of f active a dif-
position, and such violent passions. Being am-
bitious of acquiring glory of every kind, as well
as zealoulay attached to the Romilh church, and
highly exasperated againit Luther, who had
treated Thomas Aquinas, his favourite author,
with great contempt, Henry did not think it
enough to exert his royal authority in opposing
the opinions of the reformer, but resolved like-
wife to combat them with scholastic weapons.
With this view be pblilhed his treatise on the
Seven Sacraments, which, though forgotten at
present, as books of contuoverfy always are,
when the occasion that produced them is pa,
is noc defttut of pomical ige~uiy d acute-

ness.

ness, ad' was represented by the flattery of his Boos Ii.
courtiers to be a work of such wonderful science '"-
and learning, as exalted him no less above other 'S"'
authors in merit, than he was diftinguihed.
among them by his-rank. The Pope, to whom
it was presented with the greatest formality in
full consistory, spoke of it in such terms, as if
it had been ditated by immediate inspiration .
and as a testimony of the gratitude of the church:
fbr his extraordinary zeal, conferred on him the
title of Defender of the Faith, an appellation
which Henry oon forfeited in the opinion of
those from whom he derived it, and which is
still retained by his successors, though the avowed
enemies of those opinions, by contending for
which he merited that honourable diftinctibn.
Luther, who was not overawed either by the Luther'.
authority of the University, or the dignity of bp',t
the monarch, soon published his animadversions
on both in a Rfyle no less vehement and revere,
than he would have used in confuting his
ieaneft antagonist. This indecent boldness,
instead of hocking his contemporaries, was
confidered by them as a new proof of his un-
daunted spirit. A controversy managed by dif-
putants so illutrious, drew more general atten-
tion; and such was the contagion of the spirit
of innovation, diffused through Europe in that
age, and so powerful the evidence which aecom-
panied the do&rines of the reformers on their
first publication, that, in spite both of the civil
and ecclesiastical powers combined against them,
they daily gained converts both in France and
in England.

How desirous soever the Emperor might be stteof rs.

to put a stop to Luther's progress, he was often . .b.
obliged, during the diet at Worms, to turn his chile. and

thoughts F'C,.

BooK II. thoughts to matters still more interesting, and
v '- which demanded more immediate attention. A
';"' war was ready to break out between him and

Francis in Navarre, in the Low Countries, and
in Italy; and it required either great address to
avert the danger, or timely and wife precautions
to resist it. Every circumstance, at that junc-
ture, inclined Charles to prefer the former mea-
sure. Spain was torn with intestine commo-
tions. In Italy, he had not hitherto secured
the alfiftance of any one ally. In the Low-
Countries, his fubjets trembled at the thoughts
of a rupture with France, the fatal effects of
which on their commerce they had often experi-
enced. From these considerations, as well as
from the solicitude of Chievres, during his whole
administration, to maintain peace between the
two monarchs, proceeded the Emperor's back-
wardnefs to commence hostilities. But Francis
and his ministers did not breathe the fame
pacific spirit. He easily foresaw that concord
could not long subsist, where interest, emula-
tion, and ambition conspired to dissolve it; and
he possessed several advantages which flattered
him with the hopes of surprising his rival, and
of overpowering him before he could put him-
f'lf in a posture of defence. The French
King's dominions, from their compa& situation,
from their fubje&ion to the royal authority, from
the genius of the people, fond of war, and
attached to their sovereign by every tie of duty
and affe&ion, were more capable of a great or
sudden effort, than the larger but disunited ter-
ritories of the Emperor, in one part of which
the people were in arms against his ministers,
and in all his prerogative was more limited than
that of his rival.

THE

THE only princes, in whose power it was to BooK II.

have kept down, or to have extinguished this-~~- '
flame on its first appearance, either negle&ed to He.nSry,.
exert themselves, or were aive in kindling and favours the
spreading it. Henry VIII. though he affe&edEmperor.
to assume the name of mediator, and both par-
ties made frequent appeals to him, had laid
aside the impartiality which suited that character.
Wolfey, by his artifices, had estranged him so
entirely from the French King, that he ecretly
fomented the discord which he ought to have
composed, and waited only for some decent
pretext to join his arms to the Emperor's n.

LEO's endeavours to excite discord between Leo hei-

tases he-

the Emperor and Francis were more avowed, tweenthe
and had greater influence. Not only his duty, rivals.
as the common father of Christendom, but his
interests as an Italian potentate, called upon the
Pope to a as the guardian of the public tran-
quillity, and to avoid any measure that might
overturn the system, which after much blood-
shed, and many negociations, was now efta-
blilhed in Italy. Accordingly Leo, who instant-
ly discerned the propriety of this conduct, had
formed a scheme, upon Charles's promotion to
the Imperial dignity, of rendering himself the
umpire between the rivals, by soothing them
alternately, while he entered into no close con-
federacy with either; and a pontiff less am-
bitious and enterprizing, might have saved Eu-
rope from many calamities by adhering to this
plan. But this high-fpirited prelate, who was
still in the prime of life, longed paflionately to
distinguish his pontificate by some splendid
action. He was impatient to waft away the
infamy of having loft Parma and Placentia, the

acquisition
n Herbert. Fiddes's Life of Wolfey, 258.

Boo nI. acquisition of which refleted so much lufte on

the administration of his predecessor Julius. He
1521. beheld, with the indignation natural to Italians

in that age, the dominion which the Tranfal-
pine, or as they, in imitation of the Roman arro-
gance, denominated them, the barbarous nations,
:had attained in Italy. He flattered himself,
.that after assisting the one monarch to strip the
other of his pofleflions in that country, he
might find means of driving out the vi&or in
his turn, and acquire the glory of restoring
Italy to the ;liberty and happiness which it en-
joyed before;the invasion of Charles VIII. when
every ate was governed by its native princes,
or its own laws, and unacquainted with a so-
reign yoke. Extravagant and chimerical as this
proje&t may seem, it was the tfavourite objet
of almost every Italian eminent for genius or
.enterprize during great part ofrthe ;sixteenth
century. They vainly hoped, thatby'fuperior
ifill in the artifices and refinements of negocia-
tion, they Ihould be able to baffe theefforts
of nations, ruder indeed than themselves, but
much more powerful and warlike. So alluring
was the profpet of this to Leo, that notwith-
.sanding the gentleness of his disposition, and
'his foadnefs'for the pleasures of a refined and
luxurious ease, ?be hastened to disturb the peace
of Europe, and to.plunge himself in a daner-
ous war, with an impetuosity fcareely inferior
-to that of the!turbulent and martial Julius'.

,IT was in Leo's power, however, to. chue
which of the monarchs he would take forthis
confederate agaift .the other. Both of them
courted his friendship; he wavered for fnme
time between them, and at sirs coacluded.an
,allianceswith Francis. The obje&t of this treaty

was
" Guic. lib. xir. p. 173.

was the conquest of Naples, which the confede- Boot 1f.
rates agreed to divide between them. The Pope,'---'
it is probable, flattered himself, that the brisk '521.
and aive spirit of Francis, seconded by the
fame qualities in his fubjets, would get the start
of the flow and wary councils of the Emperor,
and that they might over-run with ease this de-
tached portion of his dominions, ill provided
for defence, and always the prey of every in-
vader. But whether the French King, by dif-
covering too openly his suspicions of Leo's fin-
cerity, disappointed these hopes; whether the
treaty was only an artifice of the Pope's, to cover
the more serious negociations which he was car-
rying on with Charles; whether he was en-
ticed by the profpe& of reaping greater advan-
tages from an union with that prince; or whe-
ther he was oothed by the zeal which Charles
had manifested for the honour of the church in
condemning Luther; certain it is, that he soon Conclude a
deserted his new ally, and made overtures of `.'h
friendhip, though with great secrecy, to the
Emperor P. Don John Manuel, the fame man
who had been the favourite of Philip, and whefe
address had disconcerted all Ferdinand's schemes,
having been delivered, upon the death of that
-monarch, from the prison to which he had been
confined, was now the Imperial ambafTador at
Rome, and fully capable of improving this fa-
vourable disposition in the Pope to his master's
advantage q. To him the condu& of this nego-
ciation was entirely committed; and being care-
fully concealed from Chieres, whose aversion
from a war with France would have prompted
him to retard or defeat it, an alliance between
the Pope and Emperor was quickly con- May 8

,5~ cluded

p Guic. lib; xiv. p. 75. Mem. deBcllay, Par. 1573. P. 24.
q Jovii Vita Leonis, lib. iv. p. 89

BooK IF. cluded r. The chief articles in this treaty, which

- proved the foundation of Charles's grandeur in
3521. Italy, were, that the Pope and Emperor flould

join their forces to expel the French out of the
Milanese, the possession of which ihould be
granted to Francis Sforza, a son of Ludovico
the Moor, who had resided at Trent since the
time his brother Maximilian had been difpof-
ficfed of his dominions by the French King;
that Parma and Placentia should be restored to
the church; that the Emperor hould assist the
Pope in conquering Ferrara; that the annual
tribute paid by the kingdom of Naples to the
Holy See ihould be increased; that the Emperor
flould take the family of Medici under his pro-
tecion; that he should grant to the Cardinal of
that name a pension of ten thousand ducats upon
the archbifhoprick of Toledo; and fettle lands
in the kingdom of Naples to the fame value
upon Alexander the natural son of Lorenzo de
Medici.

Dot of THE transacting an affair of such moment
te Empe- without his participation, appeared to Chievres
i -s so decisive a proof of his having loft the afcen-
a-ter. dant which he had hitherto maintained over the

mind of his pupil, that his chagrin on this ac-
count, added to the melancholy with which he
was overwhelmed on taking a view of the many
and unavoidable calamities attending a war
against France, is said to have hortened his
days'. But though this, perhaps, may be only
the conjecture of historians, fond of attributing
every thing that befals illustrious personages to
extraordinary causes, and of ascribing even their

diseases

r Guic. 1.xiv. 18I. Mem.deBellay, p.24. Du Mont.

Corps Diplor. tom. iv. suppl. p. 96. Belcarii Comr
ment. de reb. Gallic. 483.

diseases and death to the effe& of political pafli- Book I!.
ons, which are more apt to disturb the enjoyment --
than to abridge the period of life, it is certain 'j.''
that his death at. this critical juncure extin-
guifhed all hopes of avoiding a rupture with
France '. This event, too, delivered Charles
from a minister, to whose authority he had been
accufiomed from his infancy to submit with such
implicit deference, as checked and depressed his
genius, and retained him in a state of pupillage,
unbecoming his years as well as his rank; but this
refiraint being removed, the native powers of
his mind were permitted to unfold themselves,
and he began to display such great talents, both
in council and in execution, as exceeded the
hopes of his contemporaries U, and command the
admiration of posterity.

WHILi the Pope and Emperor were pre-Cormmence-

paring, in consequence of their secret alliance, ti,"lti,,^
to attack Milan, hostilities commenced in ano-Navrc.e
ther quarter. The children of John d'Albret,
King of Navarre, having often demanded the
restitution of their hereditary dominions, in terms
of the treaty of Noyon, and Charles having as
often eluded their requests upon very frivolous
pretexts, Francis thought himself authorized by
that treaty to assist the exiled family. Tho
junture appeared extremely favourable for such
an enterprize. Charles was at a distance from
that part of his dominions; the troops usually
stationed there, had been called away to quell
the commotions in Spain; the Spanish male-
contents warmly solicited him to invade Na-
varre x, in which a considerable facion was ready
to declare for the descendants of their ancient
monarchs. But in order to avoid, as much as-

VOL. II. L possible,

t P. Heuter. Rer. Aulriac. lib. viii. c. . p. 197.
a P. Mart. Ep. 735. x P. Mar. Ep. 721.

Boot I. possible, giving offence to the Emperor, or
L''-3 King of England, Francis directed forces to be
121. levied, and the war to be carried on, not in his

own name, but in that of Henry d'Albret. The
condut of these troops was committed to An-
drew de Foix, de l'Efparre, a young nobleman,
whom his near alliance to the unfortunate king
whose battles he was to fight, and what was still
more powerful, the interest of his sifter, madame
de Chateaubriand, Francis's favourite mistress,
recommended to that important trust, for which

Prre f he had neither talents nor experience. But as
te French. there was no army in the field to oppose him,

he became master, in a few days, of the whole
kingdom of Navarre, without meeting with any
obftru&ion but from the citadel of Pampeluna.
The additional works to this fortress, begun by
Ximenes, were still unfinihed; nor would its
flight resistance have deserved notice, if Ignatio
Loyola, a Bifcayan gentleman, had not been
dangerously wounded in its defence. During
the progress of a lingering cure, Loyola hap-
pened to have no other amusement than what
he found in reading the lives of the faints:
The effet of this on his mind, naturally enthu-
fiaftic, but ambitious and daring, was to inspire
him with such a desire of emulating the glory of
there fabulous worthies of the Romish church,
as led him into the wildest and most extravagant
adventures, which terminated at last in infitut-
ing the society of Jesuits, the most political and
best regulated of all the monaftick orders, and
from which mankind have derived more advan-
tages, and received greater hurt, than from any
other of these religious fraternities.
Trshy eter IF, upon the reduction of Pampeluna, L'Es-

cc parre had been satisfied with taking proper pre-

cautions

cautions for securing his conquest, the kingdom BooK 11.
of Navarre might still have remained annexed----
to the crown of France, in reality, as well as in '5Z'
title. But, pulhed on by youthful ardour, and
encouraged by Francis, who was too apt to be
dazzled with success, he ventured to pass the
confines of Navarre, and to lay siege to Lo-
grogno, a small town in Castile. This rouzed
the Castilians, who had hitherto beheld the rapid
progress of his arms with great unconcern, and
the diflenfions in that kingdom being almost
composed, both parties exerted themselves with
emulation in defence of their country; the one,
that it might efface the memory of past mifcon-
du& by its present zeal; the other, that it might
add to the merit of having subdued the Empe-
ror's rebellious subjects, that of repulsing his
foreign enemies. The sudden advance of their
troops, together with the gallant defence made
by the inhabitants of Logrogno, obliged the
French general to abandon his rash enterprize.
The Spanish army, which increased every day,
harassing him during his retreat, he, instead of
taking shelter under the cannon of Pampeluna,
or waiting the arrival of ome troops which were
marching to join him, attacked the Spaniards, They are
though far superior to him in number, with great . drivea
impetuosity, but with so little conduc, that his out of Na-
forces were totally routed, he himfeif, togethervarr
with his principal officers, was taken prisoner,
and Spain recovered poffefflon of Navarre in fill
shorter time than the French had spent in the
conquest of it Y.

WHILE Francis endeavoured to justify his Honil:tie

invasion of Navarre, by carrying it on in theb gLo
name of Henry D'Albret, he had recourse to an countries.

L 2 artifice
y Mem. de Bellay, p. 21 P. Mar. Ep. 726.

Boo II. artifice much of the fame kind, in attacking ano-
'-- ther part of the Emperor's territories. Robert

j121. de la Mark lord of the small but independent

territory of Bouillon, situated on the frontiers
of Luxembourg and Champagne, having aban-
doned Charles's service on account of an en-
croachment which the Aulick council had made
on his jurifdidtion, and having thrown himself
upon France for protection, was easily persuaded,
in the heat of his resentment, to fend a herald to
Worms, and to declare war againf the Emperor
in form. Such extravagant insolence in a petty
prince furprized Charles, and appeared to him
a certain proof of his having received promises
of powerful support from the French king.
The jufnefs of this conclusion oon became
evident. Robert entered Luxembourg with
troops levied in France, by the King's conni-
vance, though seemingly in contradicion to his
orders, and after ravaging the open country,
laid siege to Vireton. Of this Charles com-
plained loudly, as a direct violation of the peace
subsisting between the two crowns, and fum-
moned Henry VIII. in terms of the treaty con-
cluded at London in the year one thousand five
hundred and eighteen, to turn his arms against
Francis as the first aggressor. Francis pretended
that he was not answerable for Robert's condut,
whose army fought under his own standards, and
in his own quarrel; and affirmed, that, contrary
to an express prohibition, he had reduced some
subje&s of France into his service; but Henry
paid so little regard to this evasion, that the
French King, rather than irritate a prince whom
he till hoped to gain, commanded de la Mark
to disband his troops z.

THE

: eim. de 3tif;y, p. :, &c. Mem. de Flcuranges,
P 33; &c

THE Emperor, mean while, was assembling BooK II.

an army to chastise Robert's insolence. Twenty ''
thousand men, under the count of Nassau, in- '521
vaded his little territories, and in a few days
became matiers of every place in them but Sedan.
After making him feel so sensibly the weight of
his master's indignation, Nassau advanced to-
wards the frontiers of France; and Charles know-
ing that he might presume so far on Henry's
partiality in his favour, as not to be over-awed
by the fame fears which had restrained Francis,
ordered his general to besiege Moufon. The
cowardice of the garrison having obliged the go-
vernor to surrender almost without reffitance,
Nassau invested Mezieres, a place at that time siege of
of no considerable strength, but so advantage- bythe I
oufly situated, that by getting poffiefion of it, periiitts
the Imperial army might have penetrated into
the heart of Champagne, in which there was
hardly any other town capable of obftru&ing its
progress. Happily for France, its monarch,
sensible of the importance of this fortress, and
of the danger to which it was exposed, com-
mitted the defence of it to the chevalier Bayard,
dilfinguifhed among his contemporaries by the
appellation of The Knight witbout fear, and with-
wt reproach . This man, whose prowess in com-
ba, whose puncilious honour and formal gal-
lantry, bear a nearer resemblance, than any thing
recorded in history, to the characer ascribed to
the heroes of chivalry, poffefled all the talents
which form a great general. These he had
many occasions of exerting in the defence of
Mezieres; partly by his valour, partly by his
conduct, he protracted the siege to a great length,
and in the end obliged the Imperialists to raise

it,
a Oeuvres de Brantome, tom. vi. 1 14.

Boo II. it, with infamy and loss b. Francis, at the head
' 'of a numerous army, soon retook Moufon, and
rifd. entering the Low Countries, made several con-

quests of small importance. In the neighbour-
hood of Valenciennes, through an excess of cau-
tion, an error with which he cannot be often
charged, he loft an opportunity of cutting off
the whole Imperial army '; and what was still
of more consequence, he disgusted the constable
Bourbon, by giving the command of the van to
the duke D'Alen:on, though this post of ho-
nour belonged to Bourbon, as a prerogative of
his office.

A:ft. DURING these operations in the field, a con-
cAn,,u, t- grefs was held at Calais under the mediation of
&dr te me- Henry VIII. in order to bring all differences to
E'rgu, 'an amicable issue; and if the intentions of the

mediator had corresponded in any degree to his
professions, it could hardly have failed of pro-
ducing ome good effe&. Henry committed the
sole management of the negociation, with unli-
mited powers, to Wolfey; and this choice alone
was sufficient to have rendered it abortive. That
prelate, bent on attaining the papal crown, the
great objet of his ambition, and ready to facri-
fice every thing in order to gain the Emperor's
interest, was so little able to conceal his par-
tiality, that, if Francis had not been well ac-
quainted with his haughty and vinditive tem-
per, he would have declined his mediation.
Much time was spent in inquiring who had be-
gun hostilities, which Wolfey affected to repre-
er.t as the principal point; and by throwing the,
blame of that on Francis, he hoped to justify,
by the treaty of London, any alliance into which

his

b Mem. de Bellay, p. 25, &c. c p. Mart. Ep.
747. Mem. de Bellay, 35.

his master should enter with Charles. The con- BooK Ir.
ditions on which hostilities might be terminated, --
came next to be confidered; but with regard ,;5,lt,,
to these, the Emperor's prbpofals were such as effa.
discovered either that he was utterly averse to
peace, or that he knew Wolfey would approve
of whatever terms should be offered in his name.
He demanded the restitution of the dutchy of
Burgundy, a province, the possession of which
would have given him access into the heart of
the kingdom; and required a discharge of the
homage due to the crown of France for the
counties of Slanders and Artois, which none of
his ancestors had ever refused, and which he
had bound himself by the treaty of Noyon to
renew. These terms, to which an high-fpirited
prince would scarcely have listened, after the
disasters of the most unfortunate war, Francis
reje&ed with great disdain; and Charles shew-
ing no inclination to comply with the more
equal and moderate propositions of the French
monarch, that he hould restore Navarre to its
lawful prince, and withdraw his troops from the
siege of Tournay, the congress broke up without
any other effe, than that which attends unfuc-
cefsful negociations, the exasperating of the par-
ties, whom it was intended to reconcile .

DURING the continuance of the congress, League

Wolfey, on pretence that the Emperor himfelfa gn ,b-
would be more willing to make reasonable con- tween the
cessions than his ministers, made an excursion EndpHerr
to Bruges, to meet that monarch. He was
received by Charles, who knew his vanity, with
as much refpe& and magnificence as if he had
been king of England. But instead of advan-
cing the treaty of peace by this interview,

Wolfey,
d P. Mart. Ep. 739. Herbert.

BooK I. Wolfey, in his master's name, concluded a

league with the Emperor against Francis; in
5i2. which it was stipulated, that Charles lhould in-

vade France on the fide of Spain, and Henry
irn Picardy, each with an army of forty thousand
men; and that, in order to strengthen their union,
Charles should espouse the Princess Mary,
Henry's only child, and the apparent heir of his
dominions . Henry produced no better rea-
sons for this measure, equally unjust and impo-
litick, than the article in the treaty of London,
by which he pretended that he was bound to
take arms againfi the French King as the first
aggressor; and the injury hich he alleged
Francis had done him, in permitting the duke
of Albany, the head of a faction in Scotland
which opposed his interest, to return into that
kingdom. He was influenced, however, by
other considerations. The advantages which
accrued to his fubjecs from maintaining an
exat neutrality, or the honour that resulted to
himself from aing as the arbiter between the
contending princes, appeared to his youthful
imagination so inconsiderable, when compared
with the glory which Charles and Francis reaped
from leading armies or conquering provinces,
that he determined to remain no longer in a
slate of ina&ivity. Having once taken this re-
solution, his inducements to prefer an alliance
with Charles were obvious. He had no claim
upon any part of that Prince's dominions, molt
of which were so situated, that he could not
attack them without great difficulty and dif-
advantage; whereas feeral maritime provinces
of France had been long in the hands of the
Englilb monarchs, whose pretensions, even to
the crown of that kingdom, were not as yet

altogether
e Rymer, Edea. xiii Hrbcrt.

altogether forgotten; and the pofiefion of Ca- Boo .
lais not only gave him easy access into ome of '-~-.
these provinces, but in cafe of any disaster, as- '5"'
forded him a secure retreat. While Charles at-
tacked France upon one frontier, Henry flat-
tered himself that he would find little reliftance
on the other, and that the glory of re-annexing
to the crown of England the ancient inheritance
of its monarchs on the continent, was reserved
for his reign. Wolfey artfully encouraged these
vain hopes, which led his mailer into such mea-
fures as were most subservient to his own secret
schemes and the Englifl, whose hereditary ani-
mofity againfl the French was apt to rekindle on
every occasion, did not disapprove of the martial
spirit of their sovereign.

MEANWHILE the league between the Pope Ho;litie

and Emperor produced great effe&s in Italy,il''.
and rendered Lombardy the chief theatre of
war. There was, at that time, such contrariety
between the charaaer of the French and Ita-
lians, that the latter ubmitted to the govern-
ment of the former with greater impatience,
than they expressed under the dominion of other
foreigners. The phlegm of the Germans and
gravity of the Spaniards, suited their jealous
temper and ceremonious manners better than
the French gaiety, too prone to gallantry, and
too little attentive to decorum. Lewis XII.
however, by the equity and gentenefs of his
administration, and by granting the Milanese
more extensive privileges than those they had
enjoyed under their native princes, had over-
come, in a great measure, their prejudices, and
reconciled them to the French government.
Francis, on' recovering that dutchy, did not
imitate the example of his predecefibr. Though
too generous himelf to opprf his people, his

boundless

BooK II. boundless confidence in his favourites, and his

negligence in examining into the condu& of
,ZS' those whom he entrusted with power, embol-

dened them to venture upon many ats of

The Mili- oppression. The government of Milan was
ad'di,g; committed by him to Odet de Foix, Mare-
Frecch go-chal de Lautrec, another brother of Madame
..rornc. de Chateau-Briand, an officer of great expe-

rience and reputation, but haughty, imperious,
rapacious, and incapable either of listening to
advice, or of bearing contradiction. His info-
lence and exactions totally alienated the assec-
tions of the Milanese from France, drove many
of the considerable citizens into banilhment,
and forced others to retire for their own safety.
Among the las was Jerome Morone, vice-
chancellor of Milan, a man whose genius for
intrigue and enterprize distinguished him in an
age and country, where violent fations, as well
as frequent revolutions, affording great scope
for such talents, produced or called them forth
in great abundance. He repaired to Francis
Sforza, whole brother Maximilian he had be-
trayed; and fufpeting the Pope's intention of
attacking the Milanese, although his treaty with
the Emperor was not yet made publick, he
proposed to Leo, in name of Sforza, a scheme
for furprizing several places in that dutchy by
means of the exiles, who, from hatred to the
French, and from attachment to their former
masers, were ready for any desperate enter-
prize. Leo not only encouraged the attempt,
but advanced a considerable fum towards the
execution of it; and when through unforeseen
accidents it failed of success in every part, he
allowed the exiles, who had assembled in a body,
to retire to Reggio, which belonged at that time
to the church. The Marechal de Foix, who
commanded at Milan in ablence of his brother

Lautrec,

Lautrec, who was then in France, tempted with BooK II.
the hopes of catching at once, as in a nare, all -
the avowed enemies of his master's government 521.4
in that country, ventured to march into the
ecclesiastical territories, and to invet Reggio.
But the vigilance and good condut of Guic-
ciardini the historian, governor of that place,
obliged the French general to abandon the en-
terprize with disgrace f. Leo, on receiving this The Pope
intelligence, with which he was highly pleased, da,'ins
as it furnished him a decent pretext for a rup- Francis
ture with France, immediately assembled the
consistory of Cardinals. After complaining bit-
terly of the hostile intentions of the French
King, and magnifying the Emperor's zeal for
the church, of which he had given a recent proof
by his proceedings against Luther, he declared
that he was constrained in felf-defence, and as
the only expedient for the security of the ecclefi-
aftical state, to join his arms to those of that
prince. For this purpose, he now pretended to
conclude a treaty with Don John Manuel, al-
though it had really been signed some months be-
fore this time; and he publickly excommu-
nicated De Foix, as an impious invader of St.
Peter's patrimony.

LEo had already begun preparations for war wr in the

by taking into pay a considerable body of Milnefe-
Swiss; but the Imperial troops advanced so
slowly from Naples and Germany, that it was
the middle of autumn before the army took the
field under the command of Prosper Colonna,-
the most eminent of the Italian generals, whose
extreme caution, the effea of long experience
in the art of war, were opposed with great pro-
priety to the impetuosity of the French. In

the
f Guic. lib. xiv. 183. Mem. de Bellay, p. 38, &c.

BooK I. the mean time, De Foix dispatched courier
'--' after courier to inform the King of the danger
152,. which was approaching. Francis, whose forces

were either employed in the Low Countries, or
assembling on the frontiers of Spain, and who
did not expet so sudden an attack in that
quarter, ent ambalfadors to his allies the Swiss,
to procure from them the immediate levy of an
additional body of troops; and commanded
Lautrec to repair forthwith to his government.
That general, who was well acquainted with
the great neglect of ceconomy in the adminiftra-
tion of the King's finances, and who knew how
much the troops in the Milanese had already
suffered from the want of their pay, refused to
kt out, unless the fum of three hundred thou-
sand crowns was immediately put into his hands.
But the King, Louise of Savoy, his mother,
and Semblancay, the superintendent of finances,
having promised, even with an oath, that on
his arrival at Milan he hould find remittances
for the fum which he demanded; upon the
faith of this, he departed. Unhappily for
France, Louise, a woman deceitful, vindictive,
rapacious, and capable of sacrificing any thing
to the gratification of her passions, but who had
acquired an absolute ascendant over her son by
her maternal tenderness, her care of his edu-
cation, and her great abilities, was resolved not
to perform this promie. Lautrec having in-
curred her displeasure by his haughtines in
neglecing to pay court to her, and by the free-
dom with which he had talked concerning some
of her adventures in gallantry, fIe, in order to
deprive him of the honour which he might have
ained by a successful defence of the Milanese,
ized the three hundred thousand crowns def-
tid for that service, and detained them for her
own use.

LAUTREC,

LAUTREC, notwithstanding this cruel difap- Boo ll.

pointment, found means to assemble a confi- -
derable army, though far inferior in number to prgrl Of
that of the confederates. He adopted the plan the Impe-
of defence most suitable to his situation, avoid-ri'"ill
ing a pitched battle with the greatest care,
while h;e harafled the enemy continually with
his light troops, beat up their quarters, inter-
cepted their convoys, and covered or relieved
every place which they attempted to attack. By
this prudent condu&, he not only retarded their
progress, but would have soon wearied out the
Pope, who had hitherto defrayed almost the
whole expence of the war, as the Emperor,
whose revenues in Spain were dissipated during
the commotions in that country, and who was
obliged to support a numerous army in the
Netherlands, could not make any considerable
remittances into Italy. But an unforeseen acci-
dent disconcerted all his measures, and occa-
sioned a fatal reverse in the French affairs. A
body of twelve thousand Swiss served in Lau-
trec's army under the banners of the republick,
with which France was in alliance. By a law,
no less political than humane, eftabliihed among
the cantons, their troops were not hired out by
publick authority to both the contending par-
ties in any war. This law, the love of gain
had sometimes eluded, and private persons had
been allowed to enlist in what service they
pleased, though not under the publick banners,
but under those of their officers. The Cardinal
of Sion, who still preserved his interest among
his countrymen, and his enmity to France, hav-
ing prevailed on them to permit a levy of this
kind, twelve thousand Swiss joined the army of
the confederates. The cantons, when they saw
so many of their countrymen marching under hof-

tile

Boor I. tile Rtandards, and ready to destroy each other,
'-"' became so sensible of the infamy to which they

s21' would be exposed, as well as the loss they might

susser, that they dispatched couriers, command-
ing their people to leave both armies, and to
return forthwith into their own country. The
Cardinal of Sion, however, had the address, by
corrupting the mefflngers appointed to carry
this order, to prevent it from being delivered
to the Swiss in the service of the confederates;
but being intimated in due form to those in
the French army, they, fatigued with the length
of the campaign, and murmuring for want of
pay, instantly yielded obedience, in spite of
Lautrec's remonstrances and intreaties.

AFTER the desertion of a body which formed

th. Rfrength of his army, Lautrec durst no
longer face the confederates. He retired to-
wards Milan, encamped on the banks of the
Adda, and placed his chief hopes of safety in
preventing the enemy from palling the river;

Bect an expedient for defending a country so preca-
1l," of rious, that there are few examples of its being

employed with success against any general of
experience or abilities. Accordingly Colonna,
notwithstanding Lautrec's vigilance and a&ivity,
passed the Adda with little loss, and obliged
him to shut himself up within the walls of
Milan, which the confederates were preparing
to besiege when an unknown person, who never
afterwards appeared either to boast of this ser-
vice, or to claim a reward for it, came from the
city and acquainted Morone, that if the army
would advance that night, the Ghibelline or
Imperial fation would put them in poffeflion
of one of the gates. Colonna, though no friend
to rash enterprizes, allowed the marquis de
Pescara to advance with the Spanish infantry,

and

and he himself followed with the reft of his Book II.
troops. About the beginning of night, Pescara '- ~-
arriving at the Roman gate in the suburbs, 121
furprized the soldiers whom he found there;
those posted in the fortifications adjoining to
it, immediately fled, the marquis, seizing the
works which they abandoned, and puihing for-
ward incessantly, though with no less caution
than vigour, became master of the city with
little bloodlhed, and almost without resistance;
the vi&ors being as much astonished as the van-
quifhed at the facility and success of the attempt.
Lautrec retired precipitately towards the Vene-
tian territories with the remains of his shattered
army; the cities of the Milanese, following the
fate of the capital, surrendered to the confede-
rates; Parma and Placentia were united to the
ecclesiastical state, and of all their conquests in
Lombardy, only the town of Cremona, the castle
of Milan, and a few inconsiderable forts remained
in the hands of the French .

LEO received the accounts of this rapid fuc- Death of

celfion of prosperous events with such transports Le x.
of joy, as brought on (if we may believe the
French historians) a flight fever, which being
neglected, occasioned his death on the second
of December, while he was still of a vigorous
age, and at the height of his glory. By this
unexpected accident, the spirit of the confede-
racy was broken, and its operations suspended.
The Cardinals of Sion and Medici left the
army that they might be present in the con-
clave; the Swiss were recalled by their fuperi-
ors; some other mercenaries diibanded for want

of

g Guic. 1. xiv. igo, &c. Mem. de Bellay, 42, &c.

Galencii Capella de reb. gest. pro reftitut. Fran. Sfortio
Comment. ap. Scardium, vol. ii. 180, &c.

Boo I. of pay; and only the Spaniards, and a few Ger-

mans in the Emperor's service, remained to de-
i52' fend the Milanese. But Lautrec, dcftitute both

of men and of money, was unable to improve
this favourable opportunity in the manner which
he would have wished. The vigilance of Mo-
rone, and the good conduc of Colonna, difap-
pointed his feeble attempts on the Milanese.
15,L Guicciardini, by his addreif and valour, repulsed

a bolder and more dangerous attack which he
made on Parma h.

Adan GREAAT discord prevailed in the conclave,
kaedPore which followed upon Len's death, and all

the arts natural to men grown old in in-
trigue, when contending for a prize so valu-
able, were praaifed. Wolsey's name, notwith-
standing all the Emperor's magnificent promises
to favour his pretensions, of which that prelate
did not fail to remind him, was hardly men-
tioned in the conclave. ulio Cardinal de Me-
dici, Leo's nephew, who was more eminent than
any other member of the sacred college for his
abilities, his walth, and his experience in tranf-
aing great affairs, had already secured fifteen
voiccs, a number sufficient, according to the
forms of the conclave, to exclude any other
candidate, though not to carry his own eletion.
Ail the old cardinals combined aainft him,
without being united in favour o any other
perf. While these fadians were endeavour.
ing to gain, to corrupt, or to weary out each
other, Medici and his adherents voted one
morning at the scrutiny, which according to
form was made every day, for Cardinal Adrian
of Utrecht, who at that time governed Spain
in the Emperor's name. This they did merely

to
h Guic. 1. iv. 214.

to protract time. But the adverse party in-BooK IF.
ftantly closing with themi to their ovn amaze- -v
ment and that of all Europe, a stranger to Jtaly, 152s.
unknown to the persons who gave their suffrages
in his favour, and unacquainted with the man-
ners of the people, or the interest of the ilate,
the government of which they conferred upon
him, was unanimouly raited to the papal throne, January 9.
at a juncture so delicate and critical, as would
have demanded all the sagacity and experience
of one of the most able prelates in the sacred
college. The Cardinals themselves; unable to
give a reason for this strange choice, on account
of which, as they marched in proceflion from
the conclave, they were loaded with insults and
curies by the Roman people, ascribed it to an
immediate impulse of the Holy Ghost. It may
be imputed with greater certainty to the influ-
ence of Don John Manuel, the Imperial ambaf-
fador, who by his address and intrigues facilita-
ted the ele&ion of a person devoted to his matier's
service, from gratitude, from interest, and from
inclination '.

BESIDE the influence which Charles acquired Wir enew.

by Adrian's promotion, it threw great lustre on Mifineh.
his administration. To bestow on his preceptor
such a noble recompence, and to place on the
papal throne a creature whom he had raised,
were ats of uncommon magnificence and power.
Francis observed, with the f.nfibility of a rival,
the pre-eminence which he was gaining, and
resolved to exert himself with frelh vigour, in
order to wrest from him his late conquests in
Italy. The Swiss, that they might make some

VOL, II. M reparation

i Herm. Moringi Vita Hadriani ap. Cafp. Burman, in

Analea. de liad. p. 52. Codclae Hadr. Ibid. p.
144, &c

Boot n. reparation to the French King, for having with-

-- drawn their troops from his army so unfeafon-
S2z. ably, as to occasion the loss of the Milanese,

permitted him to levy ten thousand men in the
republick. Together with this reinforcement,
Lautrec received from the King a small fum of
money, which enabled him once more to take
the field, and after seizing by furprize, or force,
several places in the Milanese, to advance within
a few miles of the capital. The confederate
army was in no condition to obftru& his pro-
grefs; for though the inhabitants of Milan, by
the artifices of Morone, and by the popular de-
clamations of a monk whom he employed, were
inflamed with such enthufiaftick zeal against the
French government, that they consented to
raie extraordinary contributions, Colonna must
soon have abandoned the advantageous camp
which he had chosen at Bicocca, and have dil-
miffed his troops for want of pay, if the Swiss in
the French service had not once more extricated
him out of his difficulties.

The Sinh THE insolence or caprice of that people
thb,,,fwere often no less fatal to their friends, than
iccc. their valour and discipline were formidable to

their enemies. Having now served some months
without pay, of which they complained loudly,
a fum destined for their use was sent from France
under a convoy of horse; but Morone, whole
vigilant eye nothing escaped, posted a body of
troops in their way, so that the party which es-
corted the money durst not advance. On receiving
intelligence of this, the Swiss loft all patience,
and officers as well as soldiers crowding around
Lautrec, threatened with one voice instantly to
retire, if he did not either advance the pay
which was due, or promise to lead them next
morning to battle. In vain did Lautrec remon-

ftrate

firate against these demands, representing toBooc I.
them the impossibility of the former, and the"' v
raflinefs of the latter, which must be attended 52
with certain deftruclion, as the enemy occupied
a camp naturally of great strength, and which
by art they had rendered almost inacceflible.
The Swiss, deaf to reason, and persuaded that
aheir valour was capable of surmounting every
obstacle, renewed their demand with greater
fierceness, offering themselves to form the van-
guard, and to begin the attack. Lautreci
unable to overcome their obstinacy, complied
with their request, hoping, perhaps, that some
of those unforeseen accidents, which so often
determine the fate of battles, might crown this
rash enterprize with undeserved success; and
convinced that the effecs of a defeat could not
be more fatal than those which would certainly
follow upon the retreat of a body which com-
posed one half of his army. Next morning the May.
Swiss were early in the field, and marched with
the greatest intrepidity against an enemy deeply
intrenched on every fide, surrounded with artil-
lery, and prepared to receive them. As they
advanced, they sustained a furious cannonade
with great firmness, and without waiting for
their own artillery, rushed impetuously upon the
intrenchments. But after incredible efforts of
valour, which were seconded with great spirit by
the French, having loft their bravest officers and
best soldiers, and finding that they could make
no imprefion on the enemy's works, they founded
a retreat; leaving the field of battle, however,
like men repulsed, but not vanquished, in close
array, and without receiving any molestation
from the enemy.

NEXT day, such as survived set out for their Driven out
own country; and Lautrec, despairing of being fthe Mila-

M 2 able

BooK n. able to make any farther resistance, retired into
'-' France, after throwing garrisons into Cremona,

s52Z. and a few other places; all which, except the

citadel of Cremona, Colonna soon obliged to
surrender.
LofGcn GENOA, however, and its territories, remain-

ing fubje& to France, still gave Francis confi-
derable footing in Italy, and made it easy for
him to execute any scheme for the recovery of
the Milanese. But Colonna, rendered enter-
prizing by continual success, and excited by the
solicitations of the fation of the Adorni, the
hereditary enemies of the Fregofi, who under
the proteetion of France possessed the chief au-
thority in Genoa, determined to attempt the re-
duction of that fate; and accomplished it with
amazing facility. He became master of Genoa
by an accident as unexpeted as that which had
given him possession of Milan; and almot with-
out opposition or bloodshed, the power of the
Adori and the authority of the Emperor were
eftabliihed in Genoa .
HenryVII. SUCH a cruel succession of misfortunes asseted

, gia Firancis with deep concern, which was not a
France. little augmented by the unexpected arrival of

J 19,. an Englilh herald, who, in the name of his

sovereign, declared war in form against France.
This ftep was taken in consequence of the treaty
which Wolfey had concluded with the Emperor
at Bruges, and which had hitherto been kept
secret. Francis, though he had reason to be
furprized with this denunciation, after having
been at such pains to sooth Henry and to gain
his minister, received the herald with great

composure
k Jovii Vita Ferdin. Davali, p. 344. Guic. 1. xiv. 233.

composure and dignity ; and without abandon-BooK II.
ing any of the schemes which he was forming -
against the Emperor, began vigorous prepara- '
tions for refifing this new enemy. His trea-
fury, however, being exhausted by the efforts
which he had already made, as well as by the
fums he expended on his pleasures, he had re-
course to extraordinary expedients for supplying
it. Several new offices were created and exposed
to sale; the royal demesnes were alienated; un-
usual taxes were imposed; and the tomb of St.
Martin was stripped of a rail of massive silver,
with which Louis XI. in one of his fits of devo-
tion, had encircled it. By means of these expe-
dients he was enabled to levy a cdnfiderable army,
and to put the frontier towns in a good posture
of defence.

THE Emperor, meanwhile, was no less foli-charlte

citous to draw as much advantage as poffiblelad'n'
from the accefion of such a powerful ally; and
the prosperous situation of his affairs, at this
time, permitting him to set out for Spain, where
his pretence was extremely necessary, he visited
the court of England in his way to that coun-
try. He proposed by this interview not only
to strengthen the bonds of friendship which
united him with Henry, and to excite him to
puh the war against France with vigour, but
hoped to remove any disgust or resentment that
Wolfey might have conceived on account of the
cruel disappointment which he had met with in
the late conclave. His success exceeded his
most sanguine expecations; and by his artful
address, during a residence of fix weeks in
England, he gained not only the King and the
winifter, but the nation itself. Henry, whose

vanity
t Journal de Louise de Savoic, p. 199.

Boor I. vanity was sensibly flattered by such a visit, as
'-- wwell as by the studied refpea withlwhich the
I522' Emperor treated him on every occasion, entered

warmly into all his schemes. The Cardinal,
foreseeing from Adrian's age and infirmities, a
sudden vacancy in the papal fee, dissembled or
forgot his resentment; and as Charles, besides
augmenting the pensions which he had already
fettled on him, renewed his promise of favour-
ing his pretensions to the papacy, with all his in-
terest, he endeavoured to merit the former, and
to secure the accomplishment of the latter, by
freh services. The nation, iaring in the glory
of its monarch, and pleated with the confidence
which the Emperor placed in the English, by
creating the earl of Surrey his high-admiral, dif-
covered no less inclination to commence hoftili-
ties than Henry himself.

The Englifl IN order to give Charles, before he left Eng-
rsade, land, a proof of this general ardour, Surrey

failed with such forces as were ready, and ra-
vaged the coasts of Normandy. He then made
a dfcent on Bretagne, where he plundered and
burnt Morlaix, and some other places of less
confequenc. After these flight excursions, at-
tended with greater dishonour than damage to
France, he repaired to Calais, and took the com-
mand of the principal army, confifing of sixteen
thousand men; with which, having joined the
Flemilh troops under the count de Buren, he
advanced into Picardy. The army which Fran-
cis had assembled, was far inferior in number

-;ih little to these united bodies. But during the long
success. wars between the two nations, the French had

discovered the proper method or defending their
country against the English. They had been
taught by their misfortunes to avoid a pitched
battle with the utmost care, and to endeavour,

by

by throwing garrisons into every place capable BooK II.
of resistance, by watching all the enemy's mo--
tions, by intercepting their convoys, attacking 1522.
their advanced pots, and harassing them conti-
nually with their numerous cavalry, to ruin them
with the length of the war, or to beat them by
piece-meal. This plan the duke of Vendome,
the French general in Picardy, pursued with no
less prudence than success; and not only pre-
vented Surrey from taking any town of impor-
tance, but obliged him to retire with his army
greatly reduced by fatigue, by want of provifi-
ons, and by the lots which it had sustained in fe-
veral unsuccessful kirmiffies.

THUS ended the second campaign in a war the Solyman.,

most general that hitherto had been kindled in CRhuPt of
Europe; and though Francis, by his mother's
ill-timed resentment, by the disgusting insolence
of his general, and the caprice of the mercenary
troops which he employed, had loft his con-
quests in Italy, yet all the powers combined
against him had not been able to make any im-
preffon on his hereditary dominions; and wher-
ever they either intended or attempted an attack,
he was well prepared to receive them.

WHILE the Christian princes were thus waft-

ing each'other's strength, Solyman the Magni-
ficent entered Hungary with a numerous army,
and investing Belgrade, which was deemed the
chief barrier of that kingdom against the
Turkith arms, oon forced it to surrender. En-
couraged by this success, he turned his vi&o-
rious arms against the island of Rhodes, the
feat, at that time, of the knights of St. John
of Jerusalem. This fnall state he attacked
vith uch a numerous army, as the lords of

Asia

Boor IAfia have been accustomed in every age tq
''-" bring into the field. Two hundred thousand
52z. men, and a fleet of four hundred fail appeared

against a town defended by a garrison confifing
of five thousand soldiers, and fix hundred
knights, under the command of Villiers de
L'isle Adam, the grand master, whose wisdom
and valour rendered him worthy of that flation
at such a dangerous juncture. No sooner did
he begin to fufpec the destination of Solymans
vast armaments, than he dispatched messengers
to all the Christian courts, imploring their aid
againt the common enemy. But though every
prince in that age acknowledged Rhodes to be
the great bulwark of Christendom in the east,
and trusted to the gallantry of its knights as
the best security againt the progress of the
Ottoman arms; though Adrian, with a zeal
which became the head and father of the church,
exhorted the contending powers, to forget their
private quarrels, and by uniting their arms, to
prevent 'the Infidels from destroying a society
which did honour to the Christian name; yet so
violent and implacable was the animosity of
both parties, that, regardless of the danger to
which they exposed all Europe, and unmoved
by the intreaties of the grand master, or the
admoiiitions of the Pope, they suffered Soly-
man to carry on his operations against Rhodes
without disturbance. The grand mafier, after
incredibleefforts of courage, of patience, and
of military condu& during a siege of fix months;
after sustaining many assaults, and disputing
every pdt with amazing obstinacy, was obliged
at las to yield to numbers, and having ob-
tained an honourable capitulation from the
Sultan, who admired and refpefted his virtue,
he furreidered the town, which was reduced to

a heap

a heap of rubbish, and destitute of every re-Boo IL
Iburce m. Charles and Francis, ashamed of hav- *'
ing occasioned such a loss to Christendom by 5z
their ambitious contests, endeavoured to throw
the blame of it on each other, while all Europe,
with greater justice, imputed it equally to both.
The Emperor, by way of reparation, granted
the knights of St. John the small iland of
Malta, in which they fixed their residence, re-
taining, though with less power and splendour,
their ancient spirit, and implacable enmity to
the Infidels.

m Foptaqus de Bello Rodio ap. Scard. Sript. Rer.

German. Vol. ii. p. 88. P. Barre. Hist. d'Allem. tom.
viii. 7.

THE

# THE HISTORY OF THE REIGN OF THE EMPEROR CHARLES V. BOOK III.

THE
HISTORY

OF THE
R E I G N

OF THE
EMPEROR CHARLES V,

BOOK III.

Boot lI. f HARLES, having had the satisfaction
·. ---- t of feeing hostilities begun between France
c 1522. and England, took leave of Henry, and arrived
Ciil w in
Cafti. in Spain on the seventeenth of June. He found

that country just beginning to recover order and
strength after the miseries of a civil war to which
it had been exposed during his absence; an ac-
count of the rife and progress of which, as it was
but little connected with the other events which
happened in Europe, hath been reserved to this
place.
In-rtaion No sooner was it known that the Cortes as-

Toledo. fembled in Galicia had voted the Emperor a

free-gift, without obtaining the redress of any
one grievance, than it excited universal indigna-
may, s52o. tion. The citizens of Toledo, who confidered

themselves, on account of the great privileges
which they enjoyed, as guardians of the liberties
9f the Castilian commons, finding that no re-

garc

gard was paid to the remonstrances of their de- Boot Il.
puties against that unconstitutional grant, took -'-
arms with tumultuary violence, and seizing the 52
gates of the city which were fortified, attacked
the al-cazar, or cartle, which they soon obliged
the governor to surrender. Emboldened by this
success, they deprived of all authority every per-
son whom they ffpe&ed of any attachment to
the court, etablilhed a popular form of govern-
ment, composed of deputies from the several pa-
rifhes in the city, and levied troops in their own
defence. The chief leader of the people in these
insurrections was don John de Padilla, the eldest
son of the commendador of Castile, a young no-
bleman of a generous temper, ofi undaunted cou-
rage, and possessed of the talents as well as of
the ambition which, in times of civil discord,
raise men to power and eminence ".

THE resentment of the citizens of Segovia or segovi,

produced effecs still more fatal. Tordelillas,
one of their representatives in the late Cortes,
had voted for the donative; and being a bold
and haughty man, ventured, upon his return, to
call together his fellow-citizens in the great
church, that he might give them, according to
custom, an account of his conduct in that as-
fembly. But the multitude, unable to bear his
insolence, in attempting to justify what they
thought inexcusable, burst open the gates of the
church with the utmost fury, and leizing the
unhappy Tordefillas, dragged him through the
streets, with a thousand curses and insults, to-
wards the place of public execution, In vain
did the dean and canons come forth in procession
with the holy sacrament, in order to appease their
rage; In vain did the monks of those mona-
Rteries by which they pafled, conjure them on

Sandv. 77.the
' Sandov.- p 77-

iboO I. their knees to spare his life, or at least to allow
'""-'him time to confers, and to receive absolution
352z' of his fins. Without liflening to the di&ates

either of humanity or religion, they cried out,
" That the hangman alone could absolve such
a traitor to his country;" they hurried him
along with greater violence; and perceiving that
he had expired under their hands, they hung
him up with his head downwards on the com.
mon gibbet b. The fame spirit seized the inhabi-
tants of Burgos, Zamora, and several other ci-
ties; and though their representatives, taking
warning from the fate of Tordefillas, had been
so wife as to save themselves by a timely flight,
they were burnt in effigy, their houses razed to
the ground, and their effecs consumed with fire;
and such was the horror which the people had
conceived against them as betrayers of the pub-
lick liberty, that not one in those licentious mul-
titudes would touch any thing, however valua-
ble, which had belonged to them c.

uFrrn of ADRIAN, at that time regent of Spain, had

Adso p- scarcely fixed the feat of his government at Valla-
i', them. dolid, when he was alarmed with an account of
:5s.' these infurre&ions. He immediately assembled

the council to deliberate concerning the proper
method of suppressing them. The counsellors
difiered in opinion; some infiting that it was
necessary to check this audacious spirit in its in-
.fancy by a revere execution of justice; others
advising to treat with lenity a people who had
rome reason to be incensed, and not to drive them
beyond all the bounds of duty by an ill-timed
rigour. The sentiments of the former being
warmly supported by the archbilhop of Granada,
president of the council, a person of great au-

thority,
b P. Mart. Ep. 671. c Sand. 103. P. Mart. Ep. 67j.

thority, but cholerick and impetuous, were ap-BooK 11I.
proved of by Adrian, whose zeal to support his '-'.
master's authority hurried him into a measure, I'52.
to which, from his natural caution and timidity,
he would otherwise have been averse. He com-
manded Ronquillo, one of the King's judges,
to repair instantly to Segovia, which had set the
first example of mutiny, and to proceed against
the delinquents according to law; and left the
people should be so outrageous as to resist his
authority, a considerable body of troops was
appointed to attend him. The Segovians, fore- His troop.
feeing what they might expect from a judge so regurd at
well known for his austere and unforgiving tem-
per, took arms with one consent, and having
mustered twelve thousand men, hut their gates
against him. Ronquillo, enraged at this insult,
denounced them rebels and outlaws; and his
troops seizing all the avenues to the town, hoped
that it would oon be obliged to surrender for
want of provisions. The inhabitants, howe-
ver, defended themselves with vigour, and hav-
ing received a considerable reinforcement from
Toledo, under the command of Padilla, at-
tacked Ronquillo, and forced him to retire,
with the loss of his baggage and military chest d.

UPON this Adrian ordered Antonio de Fonseca, and at Me-

whom.the Emperor had. appointed commander na d'
in chief of the forces in Castile, to assemble an
army, and to besiege Segovia in form. But the
inhabitants of Medina del Campo, where Cardi-
nal Ximenes had established a vast magazine of
military stores, would not susser him to draw
from it a train of battering cannon, or to destroy
their countrymen with those arms which had
been prepared against the enemies of the king-

dom.

d Sandov. z. P. Mart. Ep. 679. Miniana, Contir.
p. 15.

Boo n . dom. Fonseca, who could not execute his orders

' without artillery, determined to seize the maga-

15'Z. zinc by force, and the citizens standing on their
August a. defence, he assaulted the town with great bris-k

ness: But his troops were so warmly received,
that despairing of carrying the place, he set fire
to some of the houses, in hopes that the citizens
would abandon the walls, in order to save their
families and effe&s. Instead of that, the expedient
to which he had recourse served only to increase
their fury, and he was repulsed with great in-
famy, while the flames spreading from street to
street, reduced to ahes almost the whole town,
one of the most considerable at that time in
Spain, and the great mart for the manufa&ures
of Segovia, and several other cities. As the
warehouses were then filled with goods for the
approaching fair, the loss was immense, and was
felt universally. This, added to the impression
which such a cruel acion made on a people long
unaccustomed to the horrors of civil war, en-
raged the Castilians almost to madness. Fonseca
became the objea of general indignation, and
was branded with the name of incendiary, and
enemy to his country. Even the citizens of
Valladolid, whom the pretence of the cardinal
had hitherto restrained, declared that they could
no longer remain inactive fpetators of the susser-
ings of their countrymen. Taking arms with
no less fury than the other cities, they burnt
Fonseca's house to the ground, eleted new ma-
giftrates, raiied soldiers, appointed officers to
command them, and guarded their walls with as
much diligence as if an enemy had been ready
to attack them.

Adrin f- THE Cardinal, though virtuous and difinte-
teops. refted, and capable of governing the kingdom

with honour in times of tranquillity, possessed

neither

neither the courage nor sagacity necessary at fuchBooK ItI-
a dangerous juncture. Finding himself unable - -
to check there outrages committed under his 522'
own eye, he attempted to appease the people,
by protesting that Fonseca had exceeded his
orders, and had by his rash condut offended
him, as much as he had injured them. This
condescension, the effe& of irresolution and ti-
midity, rendered the malecontents bolder and
more insolent; and the Cardinal having soon as-
ter recalled Fonseca, and dismissed his troops,
which he could no longer afford to pay, as the
treasury, drained by the rapaciousness of the
Flemish ministers, had received no supply from
the great cities, which were all in arms, the peo-
ple, were left at full liberty to a without con-
troul, and scarcely any hadow of power re-
mained in his hands.

NOR were the proceedings of the commons The view
the effe&s merely of popular and tumultuary ?n preteo

. .3 ~ *. . /^-

t- - lions of the

rage; they aimed at obtaining redress of their common, r
political grievances, and an eftabliihment ofc0'tile'
publick liberty on a secure basis, objets worthy
of all the zeal which they discovered in con-
tending for them. The feudal government in
Spain was at that time in a state more favour-
able to liberty than in- any other of the great
European kingdoms. This was owing chiefly
to the number of great cities in that country,
a circumstance I have already taken notice of,
and which contributes more than any other to
mitigate the rigour of the feudal institutions, and
to introduce a more liberal and equal form of
government. The inhabitants of every city
formed a great corporation, with valuable immu-
nities and privileges; they were delivered from
a state of subjection and vassalage; they were

admitted

Boo mI. admitted to a considerable ihare in the legifla.
-i- ture; they acquired the arts of industry, with-
IS2z' out which cities cannot subsist; they accumu-

lated wealth, by engaging in commerce; and
being free and independent themselves, were the
guardians of the publick freedom and indepen-
dence. The genius of the internal government
eftablilbed in cities, which even in countries
where defpotick power prevails most, is democra-
tical and republican, rendered the idea of liberty
familiar and dear to them. Their representatives
in the Cortes were accustomed, with equal spirit,
to check the encroachments of the King, and the
oppression of the nobles. They endeavoured to
extend the privileges of their own order; they
laboured to hake off the remaining incumbran-
ces, with which the feudal tyranny had burdened
them; and conscious of being one of the most
considerable orders in the state, were ambitious
of becoming the most powerful.

r. THE present juncture appeared favourable for

ienct by pulhing any new claim. Their overeign was
he oly absent from his dominions; by the ill-condu&c
J*unt of his ministers he had loft the esteem and assec-

tion of his fubjecs; the people exasperated by
many injuries had taken arms, though without
concert, almost by general consent; they were
animated with rage capable of carrying them to
the molt violent extremes; the royal treasury was
exhausted; the kingdom defltitute of troops;
and the government committed to a stranger, of
great virtue indeed, but of abilities unequal to
such a trust. The first care of Padilla, and the
other popular leaders who observed and deter-
mined to improve these circumstances, was to
eftabliih some form of union or association among
the malecontents, that they might at with

greater

greater regularity, and pursue one common end; BOOK I.
and as the different cities had been prompted'-.-'
to take arms by the fame motives, and were 1522.
accustomed to confider themselves as a diftin&
body from the reft of the subje&s, they did not
find this difficult. A general convention was
appointed to be held at Avila. Deputies ap-
peared there in name of almost all the cities en-
titled to have representatives in the Cortes. They
all bound themselves by solemn oath, to live and
die in the service of the King, and in defence of
the privileges of their order; and assuming the
name of the holy 7unta or association, proceeded
to deliberate concerning the state of the nation,
and the proper method of redressing its griev-
ances. The first that naturally presented itself, They dir-
was the nomination of a foreigner to be regent; an's autbho
this they declared with one voice to be a vio- ity.
lation of the fundamental laws of the kingdom,
and resolved to fend a deputation of their mem-
bers to Adrian, requiring him in their name to
lay aside all the ensigns of his office, and to ab-
stain for the future from the exercise of a jurif-
diction which they had pronounced illegal .

WHILE they were preparing to execute this bold Get po.ss-

resolution, Padilla accomplished an enterprize of.0,
the greatest advantage to the cause. After reliev-
ing Segovia, he marched suddenly to Tordefillas, August y9.
the place where the unhappy Queen Joanna
had resided since the death of her husband, and
being favoured by the inhabitants, was admitted
into the town, and became master of her person,
for the security of which Adrian had neglected
to take proper precautions f. Padilla waited
immediately upon the Queen, and accosting her

VOL. II. N with

e p. Mart. Ep. 691. f Vita dell' Imper. Carl V. dall
Als. Ulloa.Ven. 15o9 p. 67. Miniana, Contin. p. 17.

Boo Ill. with that profound respect, which he exated
''-' r from the few persons whom the deigned to ad-
iSZ' mit into her presence, acquainted her at large

with the miserable condition of her Catilian
fubjefts under the government of her son, who
being destitute of experience himself, permitted
his foreign ministers to treat them with such
rigour, as had obliged them to take arms in de-
fence of the liberties of their country. The
Queen, as if The had been awakened out of a
lethargy, expressed great astonishment at what
he said, and told him, that as he had never
heard, till that moment, of the death of her
father, or known the sufferings of her people,
no blame could be imputed to her, but that now
fie would take care to provide a sufficient re-
medy; and in the mean time, added she, let it
be your concern to do what is necessary for the
publick welfare. Padilla, too eager in forming a
conclusion agreeable to his withes, mistook this
lucid interval of reason for a perse& return of that
faculty; and acquainting the Junta with what
had happened, advised them to remove to Tor-
defillas, and to hold their meetings in that place.
This was instantly done; but though Joanna
received very graciously an address of the Junta,
beseeching her to take upon her the government
of the kingdom, and in token of her compli-
ance, admitted all the deputies to kifs her hand;
though she was present at a tournament held on
that occasion, and eemed highly satisfied with
both thee ceremonies, which were conducted
with great magnificence in order to please her,
she soon relapsed into her former melancholy
and sullenness, and could never be brought, by
any arguments or intreaties, to sign any one paper
necessary towards the dispatch of business s.

THE
g Sandov. 164. P. Mart. Ep. 685, 686.

THE Junta concealing as much as poflibleBooK ill.

this last circumstance, carried on all their deli- '-v
berations in her name; and as the Castilians, carSyo2
who idolized the memory of Isabella, retainedgovernment
a wonderful attachment to her daughter, no'
sooner was it known that she had consented to
assume the reins of government, than the people
expressed the most universal and immoderate
joy, and believing her recovery to be compleat,
ascribed it to a miraculous interposition of heaven,
in order to rescue their country from the oppref-
sion of foreigners. The Junta, conscious of the and deprive

i · r Adrian of

reputation and power which they had acquired llpower.
by teeming to a& under the royal authority, were
no longer satisfied with requiring Adrian to resign
the office of regent; they detached Padilla to
Valladolid with a considerable body of troops,
ordering him to seize such members of the coun-
cil as were fill in that city, to conduc them to
Tordefillas, and to bring away the feals of the
kingdom, the publick archives, and treasury
books. Padilla, who was received by the citi-
zens as the deliverer of his country, executed his
commission with great exa&nefs; permitting
Adrian, however, fill to reside in Valladolid,
though only as a private person, and without any
* hadow of power h.

THE Emperor, to whom frequent accounts of The emper-

these tranfations were transmitted while he was o alarmed.
still in Slanders, was sensible of his own impru-
dence and that of his ministers, in having de-
spifed too long the murmurs and remonstrances
of the Castilians. He beheld, with deep con-
cern, a kingdom, the most valuable of any he
possessed, and in which lay the strength and
sinews of his power, just ready to disown his

N 2 authority,
b Sandof. 174. P. Mart. Ep. 79.1

BooK III. authority, and on the point of being plunged in

'"' all the miseries of civil war. But though his
52s" pretence might have averted this calamity, he

could not, at that time, visit Spain without en-
dangering the Imperial crown, and allowing the
French King full leifuie to execute his ambi-

H ni-c- tious schemes. The only point now to be deli-
f t..th berated upon, was whether he should attempt
the mate- to gain the malecontents by indulgence and con-

'' cclions, or prepare dire&ly to suppress them by

force; and he resolved to make trial of the for-
mer, while, at the fame time, if that ihould fail
of success, he prepared for the latter. For this
purpose, he issued circular letters to all the
cities of Castile, exhorting them in most gentle
terms, and with assurances of full pardon, to
lay down their arms; he promised such cities as
had continued faithful, not to exa& from them
the subsidy granted in the late Cortes, and of-
sered the fame favour to such as returned to
their duty; he engaged that no office should be
conferred for the future upon any but native
Cafilians. On the other hand, he wrote to the
nobles, exciting them to appear with vigour in
defence of their own rights, and those of the
crown, againsl the exorbitant claims of the com-
mons; he appointed the high admiral, Don Fa--
drique Enriquez, and the high constable of Caf-
tile, Don Inigo de Velafco, two noblemen of
great abilities as well as influence, regents of the
kingdom in conjuncion with Adrian; and he
gave them full power and inftrutions, if the ob-
ftinacy of the malecontents should render it ne-
ceffary, to vindicate the royal authority by force
of arms '

THESE
i p. :citer. Rer. Auftr. lib. viii. c. 6. p. 88.

THESE concessions, which, at the time of hisBooK I11.

leaving Spain, would have fully satisfied the peo- -r
pie, came now too late to produce any effe&. TheSlJge
The Junta, relying on the unanimity with whith r'n""-

fhtnce of

the nation Submitted to their authority, elated ,lhj',,nt,
with the success which hitherto had accompanied con:erning

their grlev-

all their undertakings, and feeing no military ngre.
force collected to defeat or obftru& their de-
signs, aimed at a more thorough reformation of
political abuses. They had been employed for
some time in preparing a remonfirance, contain-
ing a large enumeration not only of the griev-
ances, of which they craved redress, but of such
new regulations as they thought necessary for
the security of their liberties. This remon-
france, which is divided into many articles re-
lating to all the different members of which the
constitution was compoed, as well as to the
various departments in the adminifiration of
government, furnishes us with more authentick
evidence concerning the intentions of the Junta,
than can be drawn from the teftimonyof the
later Spanish historians, who lived in times when
it became faflionable and even necessary to re-
present the conduct of the malecontents in the
worst light, and as flowing from the worst mo-
tives. After a long preamble concerning the
various calamities under which the nation
groaned, and the errors and corruption in govern-
ment to which these were to be imputed, they
take notice of the exemplary patience wherewith
the people had endured them, until felf-pre-
servation, and the duty which they owed to
their country, had obliged them to assemble, in
order to provide in a legal manner for their own
safety, and that of the constitution: For this
purpose, they demanded that the King would
be pleased to return to his Spanish dominions,

and

Boor in. and reside there, as all their former monarchs

' X ' had done; that he would not marry but with
'2". content of the Cortes; that if he should be ob.

liged at any time to leave the kingdom, it hall
not be lawful to appoint any foreigner to be
regent; that the present nomination of Cardinal
Adrian to that office Ihall inffantly be declared
void that he would not, at his return, bring
along with him any Flemings or other strangers;
that no foreign troops shall, on any pretence
whatever, be introduced into the kingdom;
that none but natives hall be capable of hold-
ing any office or benefice either in church or
state; that no foreigner shall be naturalized;
that free quarters shall not be granted to fol-
diers, nor to the members of the King's house-
hold, for any longer time than fix days, and that
only when the court is in a progress; that all the
taxes shall be reduced to the fame fate they
were in at the death of Queen Isabella; that
all alienations of the royal demesnes or revenues
since that Queen's death shall be resumed; that
all new offices created since that period shall be
abolished; that the subsidy granted by the late
Cortes in Galicia fliall not be exated; that in
all future Cortes each city hall fend one repre-
fentative of the clergy; one of the gentry, and
one of the commons, 'each to be elected by his
own order; that the crown shall not influence
or direc any city with regard to the choice of
its representatives; that no member of the
Cortes shall receive an office or pension from
the King, either for himself or' for any of his
family, under pain of death, and confiscation of
his goods; that each city or community shall
pay a competent salary to its representative for
his maintenance during his attendance on the
Cortes; that the Cortes hall aflemble once in
three years at leaR, whether ummoned by the

King

King or not, and ihall then enquire into theBoor I11.
observation of the articles now agreed upon,
and deliberate concerning publick affairs; that
the rewards which have been given or promised
to any of the members of the Cortes in Galicia,
ihall be revoked; that no gold, silver, or
jewels, hall, upon pain of death, be sent out
of the kingdom; that judges ihall have fixed
salaries assigned them, and hall not receive any
share of the fines and forfeitures of persons
condemned by them; that no grant of the
goods of persons accused fiall be valid, if given
before sentence was pronounced against them;
that all privileges which the nobles have at any
time obtained, to the prejudice of the commons,
{hall be revoked; that the government of cities
or towns shall not be put into the hands of no-
blemen; that the pofleffions of the nobility
shall be fubje& to all publick taxes in the fame
manner as those of the commons; that an en-
quiry be made into the conduct of futh as have
been entrusted with the management of the
royal patrimony since the acceflion of Ferdi-
nand; and if the King do not within thirty
days appoint persons properly qualified for that
service, it hall be lawful for the Cortes to
nominate them; that Indulgences hall not be
preached or dispersed in the kingdom until the
cause of'publifhing them be examined and ap-
proved of by the Cortes; that all the money
arising from the sale of Indulgences, hall be
faithfully employed in carrying on war againt
the Infidels;, that such prelates as do not reside
in their dioceses fix months in the year, hall
forfeit their revenues during the time they are
absent; that the ecclesiastical judges and their
officers hall not exact greater fees than those
which are paid in the secular courts; that the
present archbishop of Toledo being a foreigner,

be

Book III. be compelled to resign that dignity, which shall
- -'- be conferred upon a Castilian; that the King
1S22. flall ratify and hold as good service done to

him and to the kingdom, all the proceedings of
the Junta, and pardon any irregularities which
the cities may have committed from an excess
of zeal in a good cause: That he hall promise
and swear in the most solemn manner to observe
all thee articles, and on no occasion attempt ei-
ther to elude, or to repeal them; and that he
hall never solicit the Pope or any other prelate
to grant him a dispensation or absolution from
this oath and promise k.

The (pirit SUCH were the chief articles presented by
oh ib,'y the Junta to their sovereign. As the feudal in-
breahed. ftitutions in the several kingdoms of Europe

were originally the fame, the genius of those
governments which arose from them bore a
strong resemblance to each other, and the regu-
lations which the Castilians attempted to efta-
blilh on this occasion, differ little from those
which other nations have laboured to procure in
their struggles with their monarchs for liberty.
The grievances complained of, and the reme-
dies proposed by the English commons in their
contests with the princes of the house of Stuart,
particularly resemble those upon which the
Junta now insisted. But the principles of liberty
seem to have been better underRoood at this
period, by the Castilians, than by any other
people in Europe; they had acquired more
liberal ideas with refpe& to their own rights and
privileges; they had formed more bold and ge-
nerous sentiments concerning government; and
discovered an extent of political knowledge to
which the English themselves did not attain until
more than a century afterwards.

IT
k Sandov. zo6. P. Mart. Ep. 686.

IT is not improbable, however, that the fpiritBoot IlI.

of reformation among the Castilians, hitherto '-
unrestrained by authority, and emboldened by 's5a
success, became too impetuous, and prompted
the Junta to propose innovations which, by
alarming the other members of the constitution,
proved fatal to their cause. The nobles, who,
instead of obftruting, had favoured or con-
nived at their proceedings, while they confined
their demands of redress to such grievances as
had been occasioned by the King's want of
experience, and by the imprudence and rapa-
cioufnefs of his foreign ministers, were filled irritt the
with indignation when they began to touch the nobIl
privileges of their order, and plainly saw that
the measures of the commons tended no less to
break the power of the aristocracy, than to li-
mit the prerogatives of the crown. The resent-
ment which they had conceived on account of
Adrian's promotion to the regency, abated con-
fiderably upon the Emperor's raising the con-
fiable and admiral to joint power with him in
that 6ffice; and as their pride and dignity were
less hurt by suffering the prince to possess an ex-
tensive prerogative, than by admitting the high
pretensions of the people, they determined to
give their sovereign the assistance which he had
demanded of them, and began to assemble their
vassals for that purpose.

THE Junta, meanwhile, expected with im-The dep-

patience the Emperor's answer to their remon- tf .
ftrance, which they had appointed some of their not present
number to present. The members entrusted n,',h
with this commission set out immediately for oa. o.
Germany; but having received at different places
certain intelligence from court, that they could
not venture to appear there without endanger-
ing their lives, they ftopt short in their journey,

and

Boo Ill. and acquainted the Junta of the information

c --- which had been given them'. This excited
s522 such violent paflions as transported the whole

party beyond all bounds of prudence, or of
moderation. That a Castilian King should deny
his fubjecs access into his presence, or refue to
liflen to their humble petitions, was represented
as an at of tyranny so unprecedented and in-
tolerable, that nothing now remained but with
arms in their hands to drive away that ravenous
band of foreigners which encompafled the throne,
who after having devoured the wealth of the
kingdom, found it necessary to prevent the cries
of an injured people from reaching the ears of
their overeign. Many insisted warmly on ap-
proving a motion which had formerly been
made, for depriving Charles, during the life

. int pro-of his mother, of the regal titles and authority
:rti.of which had been too rashly conferred upon him
t jta from a false supposition of her total inability for

government. Some proposed to provide a pro-
per person to afift her in the administration of
publick affairs, by marrying the Queen to the
Prince of Calabria, the heir of the Aragonefe
Kings of Naples, who had been detained in
prison since the time that Ferdinand had dif-
pofied his ancestors of their crown. All agreed
that, as the hopes of obtaining redress and fe-
curity merely by presenting their requets to their
sovereign, had kept them too long in a slate
of inaction, and prevented them from taking
advantage of the unanimity with which the na-
tion declared in their favour, it was now necef-
fary to collec their whole force, and to exert
themselves with vigour, in opposing this fatal
combination of the King and nobles against their
liberties m

THEY.
' Sacdor. 1431 m P. Mart. Ep. 688.

THEY soon took the field with twenty thou- Boo III.

sand men. Violent disputes arose concerning v-
the command of this army. Padilla, the dar-Tak.eLh;
ling of the people and soldiers, was the only per- sied.
son whom they thought worthy of this honour.
But Don Pedro de Giron, the eldest son of the
Conde de Uruena, a young nobleman of the
first order, having lately joined the commons out
of private resentment against the Emperor, the
refpet due to his birth, together with a secret
desire of disappointing Padilla, of whose popu-
larity many members of the Junta had become
jealous, procured him the office of general; November
though he Ioon gave them a fatal proof that he 3.
possessed neither the experience, 'the abilities,
nor the steadiness which that important fation
required.

THE regents, meanwhile, appointed Riofeco as The'' r"a

the place of rendezvous for their troops, which, .
though far inferior to those of the commons in
number, excelled them greatly in discipline and
in valour. They had drawn a considerable body
of regular and veteran infantry out of Navarre.
Their cavalry, which formed the chief strength
of their army, confited mostly of gentlemen ac-
customed to the military life, and animated with
the martial spirit peculiar to their order in that
age. The infantry of the Junta was formed en-
tirely of citizens and mechanicks, little acquainted
with the use of arms. The small body of ca-
valry which they had been able to raise, was com-
posed of persons of ignoble birth, and perfe&t
itrangers to the service into which they entered.
The charater of the generals differed no less than
that of their troops. The royalists were com-
manded by the Conde de Haro, the constable's

eldest

Boo IUI. eldest son, an officer of great experience, and of
`--` distinguished abilities.

miroMiece GIaoN marched with his army dire&ly to Rio-
ess ofhe sfeco, and seizing the villages and pafles around
pcert o it, hoped that the royalists would be obliged ei-

ther to surrender for want of provisions, or to
fight with disadvantage before all their troops
were aficnbled. But he had not the abilities,
nor his troops the patience and dilcipline necef-
fary for the execution of such a scheme. The
Conde de Haro found little difficulty in condut-
ing a considerable reinforcement through all his
polts into the town; and Giron despairing of
being able to reduce it, advanced suddenly to
Villa-panda, a place belonging to the Constable,
in which the enemy had their chief magazine of
provisions. By this ill-judged motion, he left
Tordefillas open to the royalists, whom the Conde
Dcsnb. 5 de Haro led thither in the night, with the utmost

secrecy and dispatch; and attacking the town,
in which Giron had left no other garrison than a
regiment of priess raised by the bishop of Za-
mora, he, by break of day, forced his way into
it, after a desperate resistance, became master of
the Queen's person, took prisoners many mem-
bers of the Junta, and recovered the great eal,
with the other ensigns of government.

BY this fatal blow the Junta loft all the repu-

tation and authority which they derived from
seeming to at by the Queen's commands; such
of the nobles as had hitherto been wavering or
undetermined in their choice, now joined the re-
gents with all their forces; and an universal con-
fternation eized the partizans of the commons.
This was much increased by the suspicions they
began to entertain of Giron, whom they loudly

accused

accused of having betrayed Tordefillas to the BooK Ill.
enemy; and though that charge seems to have --'
been destitute of foundation, the success of the 52.
royalists being owing to Giron's ill-condut ra-
ther than to his treachery, he so entirely loft cre-
dit with his party, that he resigned his commis-
sion, and retired to one of his castles n.

SUCH members of the Junta as had escaped e Tln't

the enemy's hands at Tordefillas, fled to Valla- theirrfyem.
dolid; and as it would have required long time
to supply the places of those who were prisoners
by a new elecion, they made choice among them-
selves of a small number of persons, to whom
they committed the supreme direction of affairs.
Their army, which grew stronger every day by
the arrival of troops from different parts of the
kingdom, marched likewise to Valladolid; and
Padilla being appointed commander in chief, the
spirits of the soldiery revived, and the whole
party forgetting the late misfortune, continued
to express the fame ardent zeal for the liberties
of their country, and the fame implacable ani-
mofity against their oppressors.

WHAT they stood most in need of, was money dhir ,es

to pay their troops. A great part of the current rnifing mo-
coin had been carried out of the kingdom by the "y'
Flemings; .the stated taxes levied in times of
peace were inconsiderable; commerce of every
kind being interrupted by the war, the fum
which they yielded decreased daily; and the Junta
were afraid of disgusting the people by burdening
them with new impositions, to which, in that age,
they were little accustomed. But from this dif-

ficulty

n Miscellaneous Trats by Dr. Mich. Gcddes, vol. i.
p. 278.

Boot Ill ficulty they were extricated by Donna Maria Pa-
'-'e' checo, Padilla's wife, a woman of noble birth,

'SZ2* of great abilities, of boundless ambition, and

animated with the most ardent zeal in support of
the cause of the Junta. She, with a boldness
superior to those superstitious fears which often
influence her sex, proposed to seize all the rich
and magnificent ornaments in the cathedral of
Toledo; but left that attion, by its appearance
of impiety, might offend the people, he and her
retinue marched to the church in solemn procef-
sion, in mourning habits, with tears in their eyes,
beating their breasts, and falling on their knees,
implored the pardon of the faints whose shrines
The was about to violate. By this artifice, which
screened her from the imputation of sacrilege,
and persuaded the people that necessity and zeal
for a good cause had constrained her, though
with reluctance, to venture upon this ation, she
procured a considerable supply of money for the
Junta °. The regents, no less at a loss '.ow to
maintain their troops, the revenues of the crown
having either been dissipated by the Flemings,
or seized by the commons, were obliged to take
the Queen's jewels, together with the plate be-
longing to the nobility, and apply them to that
purpose; and when these failed, they obtained
a finall fum, by way of loan, from the King of
Portugal P.

Lottimeti THE nobility discovered great unwillingnes

,hs,- hto proceed to extremities with the Junta. They
bity. were animated with no less hatred than the com-

mons against the Flemings; they approved
much of several articles in the remonstrance;

they

o Sador. p. 308. Dia. de Bayl, Art. Padilla.
P P. MatEp. 78.

they thought the juncture favourable, not only Boo I.
for redressing pat grievances, but for rendering -
the conititution more perfect and secure by new '522.
regulations; they were afraid, that while the two
orders of which the legislature was composed,
wafted each other's strength by mutual hostilities,
the crown would rife to power on the ruin or
weakness of both, and encroach no less on the
independence of the nobles, than on the privi-
leges of the commons. To this disposition were
owing the frequent overtures of peace which the
regents made to the Junta, and the continual ne-
gociations they carried on during the progress of
their military operations. Nor were the terms
which they offered unreasonable; for on condi-
tion that the Junta would pass from a few arti-
cles most subversive of the royal authority, or
inconsistent with the rights of the nobility, they
engaged to procure the Emperor's content to
their other demands, which, if he, through the
influence of evil counsellors, should refute, fe-
veral of the nobles promised to join with them
in order to extort it . Such divisions, however,
prevailed among the members of the Junta, as
prevented their deliberating calmly, or judging
with prudence. Several of the cities which had
entered into the confederacy, were filled with
that mean jealousy and distrust of each other,
which rivallhip in commerce or in grandeur is
apt to inspire; the constable, by his influence
and promises, had prevailed on the inhabitants
of Burgos to abandon the Junta, and other no-
blemen had haken the fidelity of some of the
lesser cities; no person had arisen among the
commons of such superior abilities or elevation
of mind, as to require the diretion of their
affairs. Padilla, their general, was a man of

popular
q P. Mart. Ep. 69;, 713. Geddes'sTraas, i. z61.

Booc II. popular qualities, but diffrufted for that reason
'--' by those of highest rank who adhered to the

5S2. Junta; the conduc of Giron led the people to

view with suspicion every person of noble birth
who joined their party; so that the strongest
marks of irresolution, mutual distrust, ad me-
diocrity of genius, appeared in all their pro-
ceedings at this time. After many consultations
held concerning the terms proposed by the re-
gents, they suffered themselves to be so carried
away by relentment against the nobility, that
rejecing all thoughts of accommodation, they
threatened to trip them of the crown-lands,
which they or their ancestors had usurped, and
to re-annex these to the royal domain. Upon
this prepoRerous scheme, which would at once
have annihilated all the liberties for which they
had been firuggling, by rendering the kings of
Castile absolute and independent on their sub-
jets, they were so intent, that they now ex-
claimed wi:h less vehemence against the exac-
tions of the foreign ministers, than against the
immense power and wealth of the nobles, and
seemed to hope that they might make peace
with Charles, by offering to enrich him with their
spoils.

Elaed ith THE success which Padilla had met with in
,inrtcf- several lmall encounters, and in reducing some
rar- inconsiderable towns, helped to precipitate the

members of the Junta into this measure, filling
them with uch confidence in the valour of their
troops, that they hoped for an easy vitory over
the royalists. Padilla. that his army might not
remain ina&ive; while flushed with good for-
tune, laid siege to Torrelobaton, a place of
greater strength and importance than any that
he had hitherto attacked, and which was de-
fended by a ufficient garrison; and though the

besieged

besieged made a desperate resistance, and the ad- BOOK 11.
miral attempted to relieve them, he took the----
town by storm, and gave it up to be plundered MA52l2,
by his soldiers. If he had marched instantly with ,s.
his vitorious army to Tordefillas, the head-quar-
ters of the royalists, he could hardly have failed
of making an effe&tual imprefllon on their troops,
furprized at the briflcnefs of his operations, and
far from being of sufficient strength to give him
battle. But the fickleness and imprudence of the Imprudence
Junta prevented his taking this tep. Incapa- dua.
ble, like all popular aflociations, either of carry-
ing on war, or of making peace, they listened
again to overtures of accommodation, and even
agreed to a short suspension of arms. This ne-
gociation terminated in nothing; but while it
was carrying on, many of Padilla's soldiers, un-
acquainted with the restraints of discipline, went
off with the booty which they had got at Torre-
lobaton; and others, wearied out by the unusual
length of the campaign, deserted . The confta-
ble too had leisure to assemble his forces at Bur-
gos, and to prepare every thing for marching;
and as soon as the truce expired, he effeted a
jun&ion with the Conde de Haro, in spite of all
Padilla's efforts to prevent it. They advanced
immediately towards Torrelobaton ; and Padilla
finding the number of his troops so diminished
that he durst not risk a battle, attempted to re-
treat to Toro, which if he could have accom-
plilhed, the invasion of Navarre at that junture
by the French, and the necessity which the regents
must have been under of detaching men to that
kingdom, might have saved him from danger.
But Haro, sensible how fatal would be the confe- Th ,ob s
quences of suffering him to escape, marched with rmy of the
such rapidity at the head of his cavalry, that he Il" A'p.:

VOL. II. 0 came

r Sndlov. 336.

Boo I came up with him near Villalar, and without
*-.- waiting for his infantry, advanced to the attack.

52- Padilla's army, fatigued and disheartened by their

precipitant retreat, which they could not diftin-
guilh from a flight, happened at that time to be
palling over a ploughed field, on which such a
violent rain had fallen, that the soldiers funk al-
most to the knees at every flep, and remained
exposed to the fire of ome field-pieces which
ud deft the royalists had brought along with them. All

these ircumftances so disconcerted and itimi-
dated raw soldiers, that without facing the enemy,
or making any resistance, they fled in the utmot
confusion. Padilla exerted himself with extra-
ordinary courage and acivity in order to rally
them, though in vain; fear rendering them deaf
both to his threats and intreaties: Upon
which, finding matters irretrievable, and refolv-
ing not to survive the disgrace of that day, and
the ruin of his party, he ruffed into the thickest
of the enemy; but being wounded and dif-
mounted, he was taken prisoner. His princi-
pal officers flared the fame fate; the common
soldiers were allowed to depart unhurt; the no-
bles being too generous to kill men who threw
down their arms '.

THE resentment of his enemies did not susser

Padilla to linger long in expetation of what
should befal him. Next day he was condemned
to lose his head, though without any regular
trial, the notoriety of the crime being supposed
sufficient to supersede the formality of a legal

process.

Sandov. ;45, &c. P. Mart. Ep. 720. Miniana. Contin.

p. z6. Epitome de la vida y Hechos del Emper. Carlos V.
por D. Joan. Anton. de Vera y Zuniga, 4to. Madr. 16z7.
P. '9.

process. He was led instantly to execution, to- BOOK Ill.
nether with Don John Bravo, and Don Francis '~ '
Maldonada, the former commander of the Sego pdilf'
vians, and the latter of the troops of Salamanca. their gee-
Padilla viewed the approach of death with calm , d'tPt
but undaunted fortitude; and when Bravo, his
fellow-fufferer, expressed some indignation at
hearing himself proclaimed a traitor, he checked
him, by observing, " That yesterday was the
time to have displayed the spirit of gentlemen,
this day to die with the meekness of Christians."
Being permitted to write to his wife and to the
community of Toledo, the place of his nativity,
he addressed the former with a manly and vir-
tuous tenderness, and the latter with the exul-
tation natural to one who confidered himself as
a martyr for the liberties of his country . After

this,

t The firain of the? letters is so eloquent and high-fpi-

rited, that I have tranlated them for the entertainment of
my readers.

The Letter f Don Yohn Padilla to his Wife.

SENORA,

" IF our grief did not afflia me more than my own

death, I hould deem myself perfecly happy. For the end
of life being certain to all men, the Almighty confers a
mark of dillinguilhing favour upon that person, for whom
he appoints a death such as mine, which, though lamented
by many, is nevertheless acceptable unto him. It would
require more time than I now have, to write any thing that
could afford you conlblation. That my enemies will not
grant me, nor do I wish to delay the reception of that
crown which I hope to enjoy. You may bewail your own
loss, but not my death, which, being so honourable, ought
not to be lamented by any. My foul (for nothing else is
left to me) I bequeath to you. You will receive it, as the
thing in this world which you valued moR. I do not write
to my father Pero Lopez, because I dare not; for though
I have flewn myself to be his son in daring to lore my life,
I have not been the heir of his good fortune. I will not
attempt to fay any thing more, that I may not tire the
executioner, who waits for me, and that I may not excite

0 2 a fufi-

Boor Ill. this, he submitted quietly to his fate. Most of
-'---the Spanish historians, accustomed to ideas of

52. government, and of regal power, very different

from those upon which he a&ed, have been so
eager to testify their disapprobation of the cause
in which he was engaged, that they have neglet-
ed, or have been afraid to do justice to his vir-
tues and by blackening his memory, have en-
deavoured to deprive him of that pity, which is
seldom denied to illustrious sufferers.

THE

a suspicion, that, in order to prolong my life, I lengthen
out my lette-. My servant Soffa, an eye-witness, and to
whom I have communicated my moll secret thoughts, will
inform you of what I cannot now write; and thus I reft,
expecting the infirument of your grief, and of my deli-
verance."

His Letter to the City of Toledo.

" To thee, the crown of Spain, gnd light of the whole

world, free from the time of the mighty Goths; to thee,
who by Ihedding the blood of frangers, as well as thy own
blood, hail recovered liberty for thyself, and thy neighbour-
ing cities; thy legitimate son Juan de-Padilla gives infor-
mation, how by the blood of his body, thy ancient victories
are to be refrelhed. If fate hath not permitted my ations
to be placed among your successful and celebrated exploits,
the fault hath been in my ill fortune, not in my good will.
This I rqueft of thee, as of a mother, to accept, since God
1-.th given me nothing more to lose for thy fake, than that
.hich I am now to relinquifi. I am more solicitous about
thy good opinion thin about my own life. The hiftings
of fortune, which never flands dill, are many. But this I
fee with infinite consolation, that I, the lead of thy chil-
dren, fiuffr death for thee; and that thou halt nursed at
thy breais uch as may take vengeance for my wrongs.
iany tongues will relate the manner of my death, of which
I am ill ignorant, though I know it to be near. My end
will tcltily what was my desire My foul I recommend to
thee, as to the patroness us Chrifianity. Of my body I fay
nothing, for it is not mine. I can write nothing more, for
at this very morment I feel the kn:e at my throat with
greater dread of thy displeasure, than apprehension of my
own pain." Saildov. Ilifl. ol. i. p. 478.

THE vitory at Villalar proved as decisive as BOOK Ill.

it was compleat. Valladolid, the most zealous '-
of all the aflociated cities, opened its gates im- Rui,5,f the
mediately to the conquerors, and being treated arry.
with great clemency by the regents, Medina del
Campo, Segovia, and many other towns, followed
its example. This sudden dissolution of a con-
federacy, formed not upon flight disgusts, or
upon trifling motives, into which the whole
body of the people had entered, and which had
been allowed time to acquire some degree of
order and consistence by eftablilhing a regular
plan of government, is the strongest proof of
the inability of its leaders, or of ome secret
discord reigning among its members. Though
part of the army by which they had been sub-
dued, was obliged, a few days after the battle,
to march towards Navarre, in,order to check
the progress of the French in that kingdom, no-
thing could prevail on the dejected commons of
Castile to take arms again, and to embrace such
a favourable opportunity of acquiring those
rights and privileges for which they had ap-
peared so zealous. The city of Toledo alone, P.dill's
animated by Donna Maria Pacheco, Padilla'sw fed.efen
widow, who, inflead of bewailing her huband ret rpiri.
with a womanish sorrow, prepared to revenge his
death, and to prosecute that cause in defence of
which he had suffered, must be excepted. Re-
fpet for her sex, or admiration of her courage
and abilities, as well as sympathy with her mif-
fortunes, and veneration for the memory of her
huband, secured her the fame ascendant over
the people which he had possessed. The pru-
dence and vigour with which she acted, justified
that confidence they placed in her. She wrote
to the French general in Navarre, encouraging
him to invade Castile, by the offer of powerful
assistance. She endeavoured, by her letters and

emissaries,

Boot nl. emissaries, to revive the spirit and hopes of other
'--'cities. She railed soldiers, and exaaced a great

I52Z fum from the clergy belonging to the cathedral,

to defray the expence of keeping them on foot .
She employed every artifice that could interest
or inflame the populace. For this purpose she
ordered crucifixes to be used by her troops in-
Rtead of colours, as if they had been at war
with infidels, and enemies of religion; he
marched through the streets of Toledo with her
son, a young child, clad in deep mourning, feated
on a mule, having a standard carried before
him, representing the manner of his father's exe-
cution x. By all these means he kept the minds
of the people in such perpetual agitation as
prevented their paflions from subsiding, and ren-
dered them insensible of the dangers to which
they were exposed, by anding alone in oppo-
fition to the royal authority. While the army
was employed in Navarre, the Regents were
unable to attempt the reduion of Toledo -by
force; and all their endeavours either to dimi-
nif Donna Maria's credit with the people, or
to gain her by large promises and the folici-
tations of her brother the Marquis de Mondeiar,
proad ieffetual. Upon the expulsion of the
French out of Navarre, part of the army re-
turned into Castile, and invested Toledo. Even
this made no impreiflon on the intrepid and
obinate courage of Donna Maria. She de-
fended the town with vigour, her troops beat
the Royalifs in several sallies, and no progress
was made towards reducing the place, until the
clery, whom she had highly offended by invad-
ing their property, ceased to support her. As
soon as they received information of the death
of William de Croy archbishop of Toledo,

whose
* P. Mart. Ep. 727. : Sandov. 375

whose possession of that fee was their chief griev- BOOK II.
ance, and that the Emperor had named a Cafti- - -
lian to succeed him, they openly turned against s*2Z
her, and periuaded the people that he had ac-
quired such influence over them by the force
of enchantments; that she was aflifted by a fa-
miliar demon, which attended her in the form
of a Negro-maid; and that by its fuggetions
lhe regulated every part of her conduEt . The
credulous multitude, whom their impatience of a
long blockade, and despair of obtaining fuc-
cours either from the cities formerly in confe-
deracy with them, or from the French, rendered
desirous of peace, took arms against her, and
driving her out of the city, surrendered it to
the Royalists. She retired to the citadel, which oaober 6.
fbe defended with amazing fortitude four months
longer; and when reduced to the last extremi-
ties, fle made her escape in disguise, and fled to Feb. o,
Portugal, where he had many relations I. a5s'

Upon her flight, the citadel surrendered. Fatal efiea

Tranquillity was re-established in Castile; and W
this bold attempt of the commons, like all un-
fuccefful infurre&ions, contributed to confirm
and extend the power of the crown, which it
was intended to moderate and abridge. The
Cortes still continued to make a part of the Caf-
tilian constitution, and were summoned to meet
whenever the King stood in need of money;
but instead of adhering to their ancient and cau-
tious form of examining and redressing publick
grievances, before they proceeded to grant any
supply, the more courtly custom of voting a
donative in the first place was introduced; and
the Sovereign having obtained all that he wanted,

never

y P. Mart. Ep. 727. 2 Sandov. 375 P. Mart,
Ep. 754. Ferrer. viii. 563.

Boot nL never allowed them to enter into any inquiry, or
'--' to attempt any reformation injurious to his au-

522-. thority. The privileges which the cities had en-

joyed were gradually circumscribed or abolilh-
ed; their commerce began from this period to
decline; and becoming less wealthy and less po-
pulous, they loft that power and influence which
they had acquired in the Cortes.

The ror- WHILE Castile was exposed to the calamities
Er-t the of civil war, the kingdom of Valencia was torn
in vc".. by intestine commotions till more violent. The

aflbciation which had been formed in the city of
Valencia in the year one thousand five hun-
dred and twenty, and which was diftinguilhed
by the name of the Germanada, continued to
subsist after the Emperor's departure from Spain;
and the members of it, upon pretexts of defend-
ing the coats against the descents of the Corsairs
of Barbary, and under fan&ion of that permif-
sion, which Charles had rahly granted them, re-
fused to lay down their arms. But as the griev-
ances which the Valencians aimed at redressing,
proceeded from the arrogance and exactions of
the nobility, rather than from any unwarrantable
exercise of the royal prerogative, their resent-
ment turned chiefly againif the former. As soon
as they were allowed the use of arms, and be-
came conscious of their own strength, they grew
impatient to take vengeance of their oppressors.
They drove the nobles out of most of the cities,
plundered their houses, wafted their lands, and
assaulted their cafiles. They then proceeded to
elec thirteen persons, one from each company of
tradesmen eftabliihed in Valencia, and committed
the administration of government to them, under
pretext that they would reform the laws, eftablih
one uniform mode of difpenfingjuRfice without

partiality

partiality or regard to the diftin&ion of ranks, BooK ls.
and thus restore men to some degree of their -v
original equality. 1522.

THE nobles were obliged to take arms in self-

defence. Hostilities began, and were carried
on with all the rancour, with which resentment
at oppreflion inspired the one party, and the
idea of insulted dignity animated the other. As
no person of honourable birth or of liberal
education joined the Germanada, the councils
as well as troops of the confederacy were con-
duted by low mechanicks, who acquired the
confidence of an enraged multitude chiefly by
the fierceness of their zeal, and the extravagance
of their proceedings. Among such men, the
laws introduced in civilized nations, in order to
restrain or moderate the violence of war, were
unknown or despised; and they committed the
wildest ats of cruelty and outrage.

THE Emperor occupied with fupprefling the

infurretion in Castile, which more immediately
threatened the subversion of his power and pre-
rogative, was unable to give much attention to
the tumults in Valencia, and left the nobility
of that kingdom to fight their own battles.
His viceroy, the Conde de Melito, had the
supreme command of the forces which the nobles
raised among their vassals. The Germanada
carried on the war during the years one thou-
sand five hundred and twenty and twenty-one,
with a more persevering courage, than could
have been expected from a body so tumultuary,
under the condu& of such leaders. They de-
feated the nobility in several actions, which,
though not considerable, were extremely harp.
They repulsed them in their attempts to reduce
different towns. But the nobles, by their fupe-
rior kill in war, and at the head of troops

more

Booi I,. more accustomed to service, gained the advan-
' 'atage in most of the rencounters. At length,
522. they were joined by a body of Caltilian cavalry,

which the regents dilpatched towards Valencia,
soon after their victory over Padilla at Villalar,
and by their afliftance they acquired such fupe-
riority, that they entirely broke and ruined the
Germanada. The leaders of the party were
put to death, almost without any formality of
legal trial and suffered such cruel punilhments,
as the sense of recent injuries prompted the
nobles to infli&t The government of Valencia
was re-eftablilhed in its ancient form '.
AlpP~ In Aragon, violent symptoms of the fame

'f as spirit of difaffeion and mutiny, which reigned
Ar.ag- in the other kingdoms of Spain, began to ap-

pear; but by the prudent condut of the viceroy,
Don John de Lanufa, they were so far com-
posed, as to prevent their breaking out into any

wmidable open infurre&ion. But in the island of Ma-
i*Mj'. jorca, annexed to the crown of Aragon, the

fame causes which had excited the commotions
in Valencia, produced effetts no les violent,
The people, impatient of the hardlhips which
they endured under the rigid jurifdidion of the
i.,ch 9s nobility, took arms in a tumultuary manner;

' deposed their viceroy; drove him out of the

iiland; and massacred every gentkman who
was so unfortunate as to fall into their hands.
The obstinacy with which the people of Ma-
jorca persisted in their rebellion, was equal
to the rage with which they began it. Many
and vigorous efforts were requisite in order to
reduce them to obedience; and tranquillity

was

Argenfola Anales de Aragon, cap. 7S. o. 99. i.

Sayas Anales de Aragon, cap. .

i , &c. PMart. Ep. lib.

xxxiii. & xxaiv. palirm. Ferrer. Hill. d'Efpagne, iii. $q2.
'64. &c.

was r-effablifhed in every part of Spain be- BocIlil.
fore they could be brought to submit to their '~
fbvereign b. s2.

YWHILE the spirit of difaffetion was so general cur,

among the Spaniards, and so many causes con- w'hlhdP,,,
curred in precipitating them into such violent i noftahe
measures, in order to obtain the rcdrefs of their c""-
grievances, it may appear strange, that the
malecontents in the different kingdoms hould
have carried on their operations without any
mutual concert, or even any intercourfc with
each other. By uniting their councils and
arms, they might have acted both with greater
force, and with more effect. The appearance
of a national confederacy would have rendered
it no less refpetable among the people than
formidable to the crown; and the Emperor,
unable to resist such a combination, mufd have
complied with any terms which the members of
it thought fit to prescribe. Many things, how-
ever, prevented the Spaniards from forming
themselves into one body, and pursuing com-
mon measures. The people of the different
kingdoms in Spain, though they were become
the lubjets of the fame sovereign, retained, in
full force, their national antipathy to each other.
The -renembrance of their ancient rivalfhip and
hostilities was still recent, and the sense of reci-
procal injuries so entire, as to be incompatible
with their acting in confidence and concert.
Each nation chose rather to depend on its own
efforts and to maintain the struggle alone, than
to implore the aid of neighbours, whom they
diftrutted and hated. At the fame time the
forms of government in the several kingdoms

of

b Argenfola Anales de Aragon, c. 113. Ferrer. His.

viii. 542. Sayas Anales de Aragon, cap. 7. X. 1t. 76. 81.
Fcrreras Hil. d'Efpagne, viii. 579, &c. 609.

BooK III. of Spain were so different, and the grievances
*~'~~ of which they complained, as well as the altera-

'5Z" tions and amendments which they attempted to

introduce, so various, that it was not easy to
bring them to unite in any common plan. To
this disunion Charles was indebted for the pre-
servation of his Spanish crowns ; and while each
of the kingdoms followed separate measures, all
of them were obliged at last to conform to the
will of their sovereign.

The Empe- THE arrival of the Emperor in Spain filled
:t rR, - his fubjets who had been in arms against him
nroube- with deep apprehensions, from which he soon

Ira the delivered them by an at of clemency, no less
nlcD- prudent than generous. After a rebellion so
tnc!. general, scarcely twenty persons, among so many

criminals obnoxious to the law, had been
punilhed capitally in Castile. Though strongly
solicited by his council, Charles refused to Ihed
any more blood by the hands of the execu-
o. s. tioner; and published a general pardon, ex-

tending to all crimes committed since the com-
mencement of the infurre&tions, from which
only fourscore were excepted. Even there he
seems to have named, rather with an intention
to intimidate others, than from any inclination
to seize them; for when an officious courtier
offered to inform him where one of the most
considerable among them was concealed, he
avoided it by a good-natured pleasantry; " Go,"
fays he, " I have now no reason to be afraid of
that man, but he has some cause to keep at a
distance from me; and you would be better
employed in telling him that I am here, than in
acquainting me with the place of his retreat ."
By this appearance of magnanimity, as well as

by

c Sandov. 3v7, &c. Vida del. Emper. Carlos por Don
Juan. Anton. de Vcra y Zuniga, p. 30.

by his care to avoid every thing which had Boor III.
disgusted the Castilians during his former refi- V-
dence among them; by his address in assuming 152-
their manners, in speaking their language, and
in complying with all their humours and cuf-
toms, he acquired an ascendant over them which
hardly any of their native monarchs had ever
attained, and brought them to support him in
all his enterprizes with a zeal and valour to
which he owed much of his success and gran-
deur

ABOUT the time that Charles landed in Spain Adr;an rets

Adrian set out for Italy to take possession of hisRome, and
new dignity. But though the Roman peoplehi, ll'e
longed extremely for his arrival, they could there.
not, on his first appearance, conceal their fur-
prize and disappointment. After being accuf-
tomed to the princely magnificence of Julius,
and the elegant splendour of Leo, they beheld
with contempt an old man of an humble deport-
ment, of austere manners, an enemy to pomp,
destitute of taste in the arts, and unadorned with
any of the external accomplishments which the
vulgar expec in those raised to eminent Rtations e.
Nor did his political views and maxims seem
less strange and astonishing to the pontifical
ministers. He acknowledged and bewailed the
corruptions which abounded in the church, as
well as in the court of Rome, and prepared to
reform both; he discovered no intention of
aggrandizing his family; he even scrupled at.
retaining such territories as ome of his pre-,
deceflors had acquired by violence or fraud,
rather than by any legal title, and for that
reason he invested Francesco Maria de Roverc

anew

d Ulloa Vita de Carlo V. p. 8. e Guic. 1. xv. 238.
Jovii Vita Adriani, 117. Bellefor. Epitr. des Print. 84.

Bao 111. anew in the duchy of Urbino, of which Leo
- -' bad stripped him, and surrendered to the duke
'15z' of Ferrara several places wrestcd from him by

the church f. To men little habituated to fee
princes regulate their condu& by the maxims
of morality and the principles of justice, these
actions of the new Pope appeared incontestable
proofs of his weakness or inexperience. Adrian,
who was a perfec stranger to the complex
and intricate system of Italian politicks, and
who could place no confidence in persons whole
subtile refinements in business suited so ill with
his natural simplicity and candour, being often
embarraficd and irrerfoute in his deliberations,
the opinion of his incapacity daily increaed,
until both his person and government became
objecis of ridicule among his subjects .
1^.oite- ADRIAN, though devoted to the Emperor,

forel ece endeavoured to assume the impartiality which
" E"-. became the common father of Christendom, and

laboured to reconcile the contending princes,
that they might unite in a league against Soly-
man, whose conquest of Rhodes rendered him
more formidable than ever to Europe h. But
this was an undertaking far beyond his abilities.
To examine such a variety of pretensions, to
adjust such a number of interfering interests, to
extinguilh the paslions which ambition, emula-
tion, and mutual injuries had kindled, to bring
si many hostile powers to pursue the fame
i:-eme with unanimity and vigour, required
not only uprightnfs of intention, but a great
superiority both of undcrftanding and address.

THE

f Guic lib xv. 2.0. s Jov. Vita Adr 118. P.
Mart. Ep. --.. Rutcelli Lettres de Princ. vol. i. 87. 96.

l £rifr. Eliio itr. p. 86.

THE Italian states were no less desirous of BoO I.

peace than the Pope. The Imperial army under r--
Colonna was still kept on foot; but as the Em- 'i22.
peror's revenues in Spain, in Naples, and in
the Low Countries, were either exhaufled, or
applied to ome other purpose, it depended
entirely for pay and subsistence on the Italians.
A great part of it was quartered in the eccle-
fiaftical state, and monthly contributions were
levied upon the Florentines, the Milanese, the
Genoese, and Lucchefe, by the viceroy of Na-
ples; and though all exclaimed against such
oppreflion, and were impatient to be delivered
from it, the dread of worse consequences from
the rage of the army, or the resentment of the
Emperor, obliged them to submit i.

So much regard, however, was paid to the l3-

Pope's exhortations, and to a bull which he league
issued requiring all Christian princes to content Finftthe
to a truce for three years, that the Imperial, the Ki'g.
French, and English ambassadors at Rome were
empowered to treat of that matter; but while
they wafted their time in fruitless negociations,
their matters continued their preparations for
war. The Venetians, who had hitherto adhered
with great firmness to their alliance with Francis,
being now convinced that his affairs in Italy
were in a desperate situation, entered into a
league against him with the Emperor; to which
Adrian, at the instigation of his countryman June s.
and friend Charles de Lannoy, viceroy of Na-
ples, who persuaded him that the only obstacles
to peace arose from the ambition of the French
King, soon after acceded. The other Italian
states followed their example; and Francis was

lefrt
i Guic. 1. xv. 238.

BooK II. left, without a single ally, to resist the efforts

_- of so many enemies, whole armies threatened,
' 53- and whose territories encompassed, his dominions

on every fide k.

Fr ' THE dread of this powerful confederacy, it
2,,5, iwas thought, would have obliged Francis to

opfialion keep wholly on the defensive, or at least have
to L prevented his entertaining any thoughts of

marching into Italy. But it was the character
of that prince, too apt to become remiss, and
even negligent on ordinary occasions, to rouze
at the approach of danger, and not only to
encounter it with spirit and intrepidity, qualities
which never forlook him, but to provide against
it with diligence and industry. Before his ene-
mies were ready to execute any of their schemes,
Francis had assembled a numerous army. His
authority over his own subjects was far greater
than that which Charles or Henry possessed over
theirs. They depended on their diets, their
cortes, and their parliaments for money, which
was usually granted them in small fums, very
slowly, and with much relutance. The taxes
he could impose were more considerable, and
levied with greater dispatch; so that on this, as
well as on other occasions, his army was in the
field while they were devising ways and means
for raising theirs. Sensible of this advantage,
Francis hoped to disconcert all the Emperor's
schemes by marching in person into the Mila-
nefe; and this bold measure, the more formida-
ble, because unexpeced, could scarcely have

S.ipet.dd failed of producing that effect. The vanguard
. i~,o vof of his army had already reached Lyons, and he
,he ,ontl- himself was hastening after it with the second di-
l'H..- vision of his troops, when the discovery of a
ft.,-$. domeftick

k Guic. 1. xv. 241. 248.

cl:;eftick conspiracy which threatened the ruin BooK l-.
of the kingdom, obliged him to itop hort, and -
to alter his meafilres. 523.

T HE author of this dangerous plot was Charles ls charac-

duke of Bourbon, lord high constable, whose
noble birth, vait fortune, and high office, raised
him to be the molt powerful subjet in France,
as his great talents, equally suited to the field
or the council, and his signal services to the
crown, rendered him the most illustrious and
defeiving. The near resemblance between the
King and him in many of their qualities, both
being fond of war, and ambitious to excel in
manly exercises, as well as their equality in age,
and their proximity of blood, ought naturally
to have secured him a considerable (hare in that
Monarch's favour. But unhappily Louise, the curep of
King's mother, had contrated a violent aver-on.
sion to the house of Bourbon, for no better
reason than because Anne of Bretagne, the
Queen of Lbuis the Twelfth, with whom he
lived in perpetual enmity, discovered a peculiar
attachment to that branch of the royal family;
and (he had taught her son, who was too sus-
ceptible of any impreflion which he gave him,
to view all the constable's acions with a mean
and unbecoming jealousy. His distinguished
merit at the battle of Marignano had not been
sufficiently rewarded; he had been recalled
from the government of Milan upon very frivo-
lous pretences, and had met with a cold recep-
tion, which his prudent conduct in that difficult
itation did not deserve; the payment of his
pensions had been suspended without any good
cause; and during the campaign of one thou-
sand five hundred and twenty-one, the King, as
has already been related, had affronted him in
presence of the whole army, by giving the com-

Vo.. 1'. P mand

BcoK III. mand of the van to the duke of Alencon. The
'- -' constable, at fira, bore these indignities with
1523' greater moderation than could have been ex-

pected from an high-fpirited Prince, conscious
of what was due to his rank, and to his services.
Such a multiplicity of injuries, however, ex-
haufted his patience; and inspiring him with
thoughts of revenge, he retired from court, and
began to hold a ecret correspondence with ome
of the Emperor's minister'.

ABOUT that time the dutchess of Bourbon

happened to de without leaving any children.
Louile, of a disposition no less amorous than
vindictive, and till susceptible of the tender
palions at the age of forty-fix, began to view
the Copflable, a Prince as amiable as he was
accomplished, with other eyes; and notwith-
standing the great disparity of their years, she
formed the scheme of marrying him. Bourbon,
who might have expected every thing to which
an ambitious mind can aspire, from the doting
fondness of a woman who governed her son and
the kingdom, being incapable either of imitating
the Quen in her ludden transition from hatred
to love, or of difrrmbling so meanly as to pre-
tend aflc-ion for one who had persecuted him
so long with unprovoked malice, not only re-
jected the match, but embittered his refusal by
some severe raillery on Louise's person and cha-
tacter. She finding herself not only contemned,
but insulted, her disappointed love turned into
hatred, and since fle could not marry, she re-
fclved to ruin Bout-bon.

FOR tis ptrpofe fle consulted with the chan-

cellor Du k1rat, a man, who, by a base prolti-
tution of great talcnts and of uperior kill in
his profcilon, had ril:n to that high office.

By

By his advice a law-suit was commenced against BooiK lt.
the Conltable, for the whole estate belonging to '
the house of Bourbon. Part of it was claimed 1523.
in the King's name, as having fallen to the
crown; part in that of Louise, as the nearest
heir in blood of the deceased Dutchess. Both
these claims were equally destitute of any foun-
dation in justice; but Louise, by her folicita-
tions and authority, and Du Prat, by employ-
ing all the artifices and chicanery of law, pre-
vailed on the judges to order the estate to be
sequestered. This unjust decision drove the Con- His ecret

e.

. negociitions

itable to despair, and to measures which defpairwitihe
alone could have dictated. He renewed his in-Emperor.
trigues in the Imperial court, and flattering
himself that the injuries which he had suffered
would justify his having recourse to any means
in order to obtain revenge, he offered to transfer
his allegiance from his natural sovereign to the
Emperor, and to assist him in the conquest of
France. Charles, as well as the King of Eng-
land, to whom the secret was communicated ,
expecting prodigious advantages from this revolt,
were ready to receive him with open arms, and
spared neither promises nor allurements which
might help to confirm him in his resolution.
The Emperor offered him in marriage his sifter
Eleanor, the widow of the King of Portugal,
with a vaR portion. He was included as a prin-
cipal in the treaty between Charles and Henry.
The counties of Provence and Dauphine were
to be fettled on him, with the title of King.
The Emperor engaged to enter France by the
Pyrenees, and Henry, supported by the Flem-
ings, to invade Picardy; while twelve thousand
Germans, levied at their common charge, were
to penetrate into Burgundy, and to at in con-

P 2 cert
Rymer's Fc(der. xiii. 794.

Book Il. cert with Bourbon, who undertook to raise fix

*- thousand men among his friends and vassals in
1'SZ3 the heart of the kingdom. The execution of

this deep laid and dangerous plot was suspended,
until the King hould cross the Alps with the
only army capable of defending his dominions;
and as he was far advanced on his march for
that purpose, France stood on the brink of de-
ftrucion m.
:f.ocrd. HAPPILY for that kingdom, a negociation

which had now been carrying on for several
months, though conducted with the most pro-
found secrecy, and communicated only to a
few chosen confidents, could not altogether
escape the observation of the reft of the Con-
stable's numerous retainers, rendered more in-
quifitive by finding that they were distrusted.
Two of these gave the King some intimation of
a mysterious correspondence betwen their master
and the Count de Roeux, a Flemilh nobleman
of great confidence with the Emperor. Francis,
who could not bring himself to fufpe& that the
first prince of the blood would be so base as to
betray the kingdom to its enemies, immediately
repaired to Moulins, where the Constable was
in bed, feigning indisposition, that he might not
be obliged to accompany the King into Italy,
and acquainted him of the intelligence which he
had received. Bourbon, with great solemnity,
and the most imposing affectation of ingenuity
and candour, afierted his own innocence; and
as his health, he said, was now more confirmed,
he promil'ed to join the army within a few days.
Francis, open and candid himself, and too apt
to be deceived by the appearance of those vir-

tues

m Thuani Hil. lib. i. c. ic. Heuter. Rer. Autr. lib.
vi.i C. c1. . 207.

tues in others, gave such credit to what he said, BOOK 11I.
that he refused to arrest him, although advised '--.'
to take that precaution by his wisest counsellors; '523'
and as if the danger had been over, he con-
tinued his march towards Lyons. The Con-september.
stable set out soon after, seemingly with an in-
tention to follow him; but turning suddenly to Flie to
the left he crossed the Rhone, and after infinite tLal-.
fatigues and perils, escaped all the parties which
the King, sensible too late of his credulity, ent
out to intercept him, and reached Italy in
safety n.

FRANCIs took every possible precaution to

prevent the bad effe&s of the irreparable error
which he had committed. He put garrisons
in all the places of trength in the Conlla-
ble's territories. He seized all the gentlemen
whom he could fufpet of being his associates;
and as he had not hitherto discovered the whole
extent of the conspirator's schemes, nor knew
how far the infecion had spread among his fuh-
jeas, he was afraid that his absence might en-
courage them to make ome desperate attempt,
and for that reason relinquiffied his intention of
leading his army in person into Italy.

HE did not, however, abandon his design on French in.

the Milanese; but appointed admiral Bonnivet j,, the
to take the supreme command in his stead, and M e.
to march into that country with an army thirty
thousand strong. Bonnivet did not owe this
preferment to his abilities as a general; for of
all the talents requisite to form a great com-
mander, he possessed only personal courage, the
lowest and the mot common. But he was the
most accomplished gentleman in the French

court,

n Mem. de Bellay, p. 64, &c. Pafquier Recherches de
la France, p. 4it.

Boz Ii. court, of agreeable manners, an insinuating
'-"' address, and a sprightly converation; and Fran-
1523. cis, who lived in great familiarity with his cour-

tiers, was so charmed with thele qualities, that
he honoured him, on all occasions, with the molt
partial and distinguishing marks of his favour.
He was, besides, the implacable enemy of Bour-
bon; and as theKing hardly knew whom to rust
at that juncture, he thought the chief command
could be lodged no where so safely as in his
hands.
T;eirll COLO'NA, who was entrusted with the de-

fence of the Milanese, his own conquest, was in
no condition to refill such a formidable army.
He was destitute of money sufficient to pay his
troops, which were reduced to a small number by
sickness or desertion, and had, for that reason,
been obliged to negle& every precaution necef-
fary for the security of the country. The only
plan which he formed was to defend the passage
of the river Teflino against the French; and as
if he had forgotten how eafily-he himself had
disconcerted a similar scheme formed by Lautrec,
he promised with great confidence on its being
effectual. But in spite of all his caution, it fuc-
ceeded no better with him than with Lautrec.
Bonnivet passid the river without loss, at a ford
which had been neglected, and the Imperialists
retired o Mi!an, preparing to abandon the town
as oon as the French should appear before it.
By an unaccountable negligence, which Guic-
ciard:ni imputes to infatuation °, Bonnivet did
not advance for three or four days, and loft the
opportunity with which his good fortune pre-
fenred him. The citizens recovered from their
consternation; Colonna, still ative at the age
of fourscore, and Morone, whose enmity to France

was
Guic. lib. xv. :54.

was indefatigable, were employed night and day BOOK I.
in repairing the fortifications, in amalting provi- -
sions, in collecting troops from every quarter; '523.
and by the time the French approached, had
put the city in a condition to itand a siege.
Bonnivet, after some fruitlcfs attempts on the
town, which haraflid his own troops more than
the enemy, was obliged, by the inclemency of
the season, to retire into winter quarters.

DURING these transactions Pope Adrian died; Death of

an event so much to the fatisfation of the
Roman people, whose hatred or contempt of
him augmented every day, that the night after
his decease, they adorned the door of his chief
physician's house with garlands, adding this in-
Icription, TO THE DELIVERER OF
HIS COUNTRYP. The Cardinal de Medici
instantly renewed his pretensions to the papal
dignity, and entered the conclave with high ex-
pectations on his own part, and a generalopi-
nion of the people that they would be successful.
But though upported by the Imperial faction,
possessed of great personal interest, and capable
of all the artifices, refinements, and corruption,
which reign in those assemblies, the obstinacy
and intrigues of his rivals protracted the con-
clave to the unusual length of fifty days. The !e'ain of
address and perseverance of the cardinal at lars vr."
surmounted every obstacle. He was raised to Nov. 8.
the head of the church, and assumed the go-
vernment of it by the name of Clement VII.
The choice was universally approved of. High
expectations were conceived of a Pope, whole
great talents, and long experience in business,
leemed to qualify him no less for defending the
Spiritual interests of the church, exposed to. im-

minent-
r Jovii Vit. Adr, 127.

Boox Ui.minent danger by the progress of Luther's opi-
'---nions, than for conducting its political opera-
1s'- tions with the prudence requiiite at such a diffi-

cult junture; and who, betides thele advan-
tages, rendered tie ecclesiastical ate more
re;lpetable, by having in his hands the govern-
ment of f-lorence, together with the wealth of
the family of Medici .

v ."',--l, CARDINAL WOLSEY, nor disheartened by the
',J ,''t. disappointment of his ambitious views at the
i'.rlt- sor:ner elction, had entertained more sanguine

hopes of uJccefs on this occasion. Henry wrote
to the Emperor, reminding him of his engage-
ments to second the pretensions of his minister.
Wolifey beftirred himself with ativity suitable
to the importance of the prize for which he
contended, and instructed his agents at Rome
to spare neither promires nor bribes in order to
gain his end. But Charles had either amused
him with vain hopes which he never intended
to gratify, or he judged it impolitick to oppose
a candidate who had Iuch a prolpe& of succeed-
ing as Medici; or perhaps the cardinals durst
not venture to provoke the people of Rome,
while their indignation againit Adrian's memory
was still fresh, by placing another Ultra-men-
tane in the papal throne. Wolfry, after all his
expe&ations and endeavo-rs, had the morti-
fication to fee a Pope elected, of such an age,
and of so vigorous a constitution, that he could
not comfort himself much with the chance of
surviving him. This second proof fully con-
vinced Wolley of the Emperor's insincerity, and
it excited in him all the resentment which an
haughty mind feels on bing at once difap-
pointed and deceived; and though Clement en-
deavoured to soothe his vindictive nature by

granting
q Guic. 1. xv. z23.

granting him a commission to be legate in Eng- BIooK II.
land during life, with such ample powers as'-- -
veled in him almost the whole papal juriidic- '523'
tion in that kingdom, the injury he had received
entirely dissolved the tie which had united him
to Charles, and from that moment he meditated
revenge. It was necessary, however, to conceal
his intention from his mailer, and to fulpend
the execution of it, until, by a dexterous im-
provement of the incidents which might occur,
he should be able gradually to alienate the King's
affections from the Emperor. For this reaon,
he was so far from exprelling any uneasiness on
account of the repulle which he had met with,
that he abounded on every occasion, private as
well as pubiick, in declarations of his high satis-
fa&ion with Clement's promotion r.

HENRY had, during the campaign, fulfilled Heny's

with great sincerity whatever he was bound toFpret"in
perform by the league against France, though
more slowly than he could have withed. His
thoughtless profusion, and total neglec of cco-
nomy, reduced him often to great straits for
money. The operations of war were now car-
ried on in Europe in a manner very different
from that which had long prevailed. Inltead of
armies fudclenly aflembled, which under diftint
chieftain followed their prince into the field
for a flort space, and fcrved at their own cost,
troops were now levied at great charge, and
received regularly considerable pay. Inltead of
impatience on both fides to bring every quarrel
to the issue of a battle, which commonly de-
cided the fate of open and defenceless countries,
and allowed the barons, together with their vas-
als, to return to their ordinary occupations;

towns
X Fiddes's Life of Wolfry, 294, &c. Herbert.

Boo I. towns were fortified with great art, and defended

- with much obstinacy; war, from a very simple,
'*5z3 became a very intricate science; and campaigns

grew of course to be more tedious, and less
decisive. The xpence which these alterations
in the military system neceff.rily created, ap-
peared intolerable to nations hitherto unaccuf-
tomed to the burden of heavy taxes. Hence
proceeded the frugal, and even parsimonious
spirit of the English parliaments in that age,
which Henry, with all his authority, was seldom
able to overcome. The commons, having re-
fused at this time to grant him the supplies which
he demanded, he had recourse to the ample and
almo.t unlimited prerogative which the Kings
of England then possessed, and by a violent
and unusual exertion of it, raised the money he
sp. n. wanted. This, however, wafted so much time,

that it was late in the season before his army,
under the duke of Suffolk, could take the field.
Being joined by a considerable body of Flemings,
Suffolk marched into Picardy, and Francis, from
his extravagant eagerness to recover the Mila-
nefe, having left that frontier almost unguarded,
he penetrated as far as the banks of the river
Oyfe, within eleven leagues of Paris, filling that
capital with consternation. But the arrival of
some troops detached by the King, who was still
at Lyons; the ative gallantry of the French
officers, who allowed the allies no respite night
or day; the rigour of a most unnatural season,
together with scarcity of provisions, compelled
No~Tbr. Suffolk to retire; and La Tremoiiille, who com-

manded in those parts, had the glory of having,
with an handful of men, checked the progress of
a formidable army, and of driving them with ig-
nominy out of the French territories s.

TH
Herbert. Mem. de Bellay, 73, &c.

THE Emperor's attempts upon Burgundy and BooK Il.

Guienne were not more fortunate, though in
both these provinces Francis was equally ill pre- A^ 2,re
pared to resist them. The conduc and valour of the Ge-
of his generals supplied his want of foresight; Spi»d, .
the Germans who made an irruption into one
of these provinces, and the Spaniards who
attacked the other, were repulsed with great dif-
grace.

THUS ended the year 152., during whichEnd of the

Francis's good fortune and success had been mP'"'
such as gave all Europe an high idea of his
power and resources. He had discovered and
disconcerted a dangerous conspiracy, the author
of which he had driven into exile, almost without
an attendant; he had rendered abortive all the
schemes of the powerful confederacy formed
against him; he had protected his dominions
when attacked on three different fides; and
though his army in the Milanese had not made
such progress as might have been expe&ed from
its superiority to the enemy in number, he had
recovered and still kept possession of one half of
that dutchy.

THE enfuirig year opened with events more 's4.

disastrous to France. Fontarabia was loft by thetieot
the cowardice or treachery of its governor. In PP-
Italy, the allies resolved on an early and vigo- 17.
rous effort in order to dispossess Bonnivet of
that part of the Milanese which lies beyond the
Tefino. Clement, who, under the pontificates
of Leo and Adrian, had discovered an impla-
cable enmity to France, began now to view the
power which the Emperor was daily acquiring
in Italy, with so. much jealousy, that he refused
to accede, as his predecessors had done, to the
league against Francis, and forgetting private

passions

BooK ll. pafions and animoities, laboured with the zeal
'---' which became his charater, to bring about a

'523. reconciliation among the contending parties.
imre-;a!r-But all his endeavours were ineffecual; a nu-
take'to merous army, to which each of the allies fur,
siJd early. nithed their contingent of troops, was assembled

at Milan by the beginning of March. Lannoy,
viceroy of Naples, took the command of it
upon Colonna's death, though the chief direc-
tion of military operations was committed to
Bourbon, and the marquis de Pescara; the
latter the ablcft and molt enterprifingof the
Imperial generals; the former inspired by his
rec-ntment with new aivity and invention, and
acqu.-inred so thoroughly with the charaters
of the French commanders, the genius of their
troops, and the strength as well as weakness of
their armies, as to be of infinite service to the
party which he had joined. But all these ad-
vantages were nearly loft through the Emperor's
inability to raile money sufficient for executing
the various and extensive plans which he had

Retsrdedby formed. When his troops were commanded to
,he ro'p. march, they mutinied against their leaders, de-

manding the pay which was due to them for
some months; and disregarding both the me-
naces and intreaties of their officers, threatened
to pillage the city of Milan, if they did not in-
ltantly receive fatisfa&ion. Out of this difficulty
the generals of the allies were extricated by Mo-
rone, who prevailing on his countrymen, over
whom his influence was prodigious, to advance
the fum that was requisite, the army took the
field '.

The French BO\NIVET was deflitute of troops to oppose
, 'tethih s army, and still more of the talents which
Milandref couldt

t Gic. 1. xv. 267. Capella, 9go.

could render him an equal match for its leaders. BOCK III.
After various movements and encounters, de-' '
fcribed with great accuracy by the contemporary 'S24
historians, a detail of which, at this distance of
time, would be equally uninteresting and un-
inltru&ive, he was forced to abandon the strong
camp in which he had intrenched himself at
Biagraffa. Soon after, partly by his own mif-
condut, partly by the activity of the enemy,
who harassed and ruined his army by continual
skirmishes, while they carefully declined a battle
which he often offered them; and partly by
the caprice of 6000 Swiss, who refused to join
his army, though within a day's march of it; he
was reduced to the necessity of attempting a
retreat into France through the valley of Aoft.
Just as he arrived on the banks of the Seflia,
and began to pass that river, Bourbon and Pes-
cara appeared with the vanguard of the allies,
and attacked his rear with great fury. At the
beginning of the charge, Bonnivet, while exert-
ing himself with much valour, was wounded
so dangerously as obliged him to quit the field;
and the conduct of the rear was committed to
the chevalier Bayard, who, though lb much a
stranger to the arts of a court that he never rose
to the chief command, was always called, in
times of real danger, to the polls of greatest
difficulty and importance. He put himself at
the head of the men at arms, and animating
them by his pretence and example to sustain
the whole shock of the enemy's troops, he
gained time for the reft of his countrymen to
make good their retreat. But in this ferviceDeathof
he received a wound which he immediately per- t chev-,
ceived to be mortal, and being unable to con-andruinof
tinue any longer on horseback, he ordered one h Fre'ch
of his attendants to place him under a tree, with ary
his face towards the enemy; then fixing his

ey es

Boos Il. eyes on the guard of his sword, which he held

'v'°up instead of a cross, he addrefled his prayers
'S*' to God, and in this posture, which became his

chara&er both as a soldier and as a Christian,
he calmly waited the approach of death. Bour-
bon, who led the foremost of the enemy's
troops, found him in this situation, and ex-
pressed regret and pity at the fight. " Pity not
" me," cried the high-fpirited chevalier, " 1 die
· as a man of honour ought, in the discharge
of my duty: They indeed are objects of
" pity, who fight against their King, their

country, and their oath." The marquis de

Pescara, palling oon after, manifested his admi-
ration of Bayard's virtues, as well as his sorrow
for his fate, with the generosity of a gallant
enemy; and finding that he could not be re-
moved with safety from that spot, ordered a tent
to be pitched there, and appointed proper per-
sons to attend him. e died, notwithstanding
their care, as his anceflors for several generati-
ons had done, in the field of battle. Pescara
ordered his body to be embalmed, and sent to
his relations; and such was the refpe& paid to
military merit in that age, that the duke of Sa-
voy commanded it to be received with royal ho-
nours in all the cities of his dominions; in Dau-
phine, Bayard's native country, the people of
all ranks came out in a solemn proceflion to
meet it ".

BONNIVET led back the hattered remains of

his army into France; and in one short cam-
paign, Francis was stripped of all he had pof-
sessed in Italy, and left without one ally in that
country.

WHILE

Bellefor. Epitr. p. 73. Mem. de Bellay, 75. Oeav.
de Brant. tomr. vi. o18, &c. Pafquier Recherches, p. 5z6.

WHILE the war kindled by the emulation of BOOK III.

Charles and Francis spread over 1b many coun-
tries of Europe, Germany enjoyed a profound pro, 1rItof
tranquillity, extremely favourable to the refor- the refr-
mation, which continued to make progress Gt'mny.
daily. During Luther's cnfinement in his
retreat at Wartburg, Carlollauius (r'e of his
disciples, animated with the fame zeal, but pof-
sesscd of less prudence and moderation than his
master, began to propagate wild and dangerous
opinions, chiefly among the lower people. En-
couraged by his exhortations, they rose in fe-
veral villages of Saxony, broke into the churches
with tumultuary violence, and threw down and
destroyed the images with which they were
adorned. These irregular and outrageous pro-
ceedings were so repugnant to all the Ele&or's
cautious maxims, that, if they had not received
a timely check, they could hardly have failed
of alienating from the reformers a prince, no
less jealous of his own authority, than afraid
of giving offence to the Emperor, and other
patrons of the ancient opinions. Luther, fen-
fible of the danger, immediately quitted his re-
treat, without waiting for Frederick's permif-
sion, and returned to Wittemberg. Happily for March 6.
the reformation, the veneration for his person '5t
and authority were still so great, that his appear-
ance alone suppressed that spirit of extravagance
which began to seize his party. Carloftadius
and his fanatical followers, truck dumb by his
rebukes, declared that they heard the voice of
an angel, not of a man x.

BEFORE Luther left his retreat, he had begun Luther

to translate the Bible into the German tongue, the Bble.
an undertaking of no less difficulty than im-

portance,
x Slcid. Hist. Si. Seckend. 9rg.

Boot In. portance, of which he was extremely fond, and
'- for which he was well qualified: He had a

'54" competent knowledge in the original languages;

a thorough acquaintance with the style and senti-
ments of the inspired writers; and though is
compositions in Latin were rude and barbarous,
he was reckoned a great makter of the purity
of his mother tongue, and could express himself
with all the elegance of which it is capable.
By his own afiduous application, together with
the assistance of Melan&hon and several other of
his disciples, he finished part of the New Testa-
ment in the year 1522; and the publication of
it proved more fatal to the church of Rome,
than that of all his own works. It was read
with wonderful avidity and attention by persons
of every rank. They were atonilhed at dif-
covering how contrary the. precepts of the
Author of our religion are, to the inventions of
those priests who pretended to be his vicege-
rents; and having now in their hand the rule
of faith, they thought themselves qualified, by
applying it, to judge of the eftabiifed opinions,
and to pronounce when they were conformable
to the standard, or when they departed from it.
The great advantages arising fiom Luther's
translation of the Bible, encouraged the advo-
cates for reformation, in the other countries of
Europe, to imitate his example, and to publish
versions of the Scriptures in their refpe&ive lan-
guages.
s..-c-.ci- AtOUT this time, Nuremberg, Francfort,

;,lif' H Hamburgh, and several other cities in Germany
P rif of the first rank, openly embraced the reformed
. urch. religion, and by the authority of their magi-

ftratcs abolished the mass, and the other super-

ftitious

flitious rites of Popery Y. The elecor of BooK IlI.
Brandenburgh, the Dukes of Brunswick and -'
Lunenburgh, and prince of Anhalt, became 1524'
avowed patrons of Luther's opinions, and coun-
tenanced the preaching of them among their
subje&s.

THE court of Rome beheld this growving de- Mearre,

fe&ion with great concern; and Adrian's first bE,'dia
care, after his arrival in Italy, had ben to de- i . oer to
liberate with the Cardinals, concerning the po,etof
proper means of putting a stop to it. This the Reior-
Pope was profoundly killed in fcholaftick theo- "aion.
logy, and having been early taken notice of on
that account, he (fill retained such an excellfive
admiration of the science to which he owed his
reputation and success in life, that he confidered
Luther's invectives againt the f:hoolmen, par-
ticularly Thomas Aquinas, as little less than
blasphemy. All the tenets of that dotor ap-
peared to him so clear and irrefragable, that he
supposed every person who called in question
or contradicted them, to be either blinded by
ignorance, or to be ating in opposition to the
conviction of his' own mind: Of course, no
Pope was ever more bigotted or inflexible with
regard to points of doctrine than Adrian; ha
not only maintained them as Leo had done,
because they were ancient, or because it was
dangerous for the church to allow of innova-
tions, but he adhered to them with the zeal of
a theologian, and with the tenaciousness of a
disputant. At the fame time his own manners
being extremely simple, and uninfected with
any of the vices which reigned in the court of
Rome, he was as sensible of its corruptions as
the reformers themselves, and viewed them with

VOL. II. Q no
Y Secke:d. 241. Chytr:i Contin. Krantzii, 203.

Boor IIT. no less indignation. The brief which he ad-
' ' dreffd to the diet of the Empire assembled at
NOV'. I2. Nuremberg, and the inftrudions he gave Che-

regato, the nuncio whom he ent hither, were
framed agreeably to these views. On the one
hand, he condemned Luther's opinions with
more afperiry and rancour of expression than
Leo had ever used; he severely censured the
Princes of Germany for suffering him to spread
his pernicious tenets, by their negle&ing to
execute the edi& of the diet at Worms, and
required them, if Luther did not instantly re-
tra& his errors, to destroy him with fire as a
gangrened and incurable member, in like man-
ner as Dathan and Abiram had been cut off by-
Moses, Ananias and Sapphira by the apostles,
and John Huss and Jerome of Prague by their
ancestors . On the other hand, he, with great
candour, and in the most explicit terms, ac-
knowledged the corruptions of the Roman court
to be the source from which had flowed most of
the evils the church now felt or dreaded; he
promised to exert all his authority towards re-
forming these abuses, with as much dispatch as
the nature and inveteracy of the disorders would
admit; and he requested of them to give him
their advice with regard to the most effe&ual
means of fupprelfing that new heresy which had
sprung up among them .

D;et ofou- THE members of the Diet, after praising the
'rem'^ Pope's pious and laudable intentions, excuied
gcacr!' themselves for not executing the edict of Worms,
th .rss by alleging that the prodigious increase of
remedy. Luther's followers, as well as the aversion to

the court of Rome among their other fubjets

on
Fafkic. Rer. Expet. & Fug;end. 343. a Ibid. p 349.

on account of its innumerable exactions, renBooK Ir.
dered such an attempt not only dangerous, but
ilnpoffible. They affirmed that the grievances 1524.
of Germany, which did not arise from imaginary
injuries, but from impositions no less real than
intolerable, as his Holinels would learn from a
catalogue of them, which they intended to lay
before him, called now for some r.ew and effica-
cious remedy; and in their opinion, the only
remedy adequate to the disease, or which afforded
them any hopes of feeing the church restored to
soundness and vigour, was a General Council.
Such a council, therefore, they advised him,
after obtaining the Emperor's consent, to assem-
ble without delay, in one of the great cities of
Germany, that all who had right to be present
might deliberate with freedom, and propose
their opinions with such boldness, as the dan-
gerous situation of religion at this junture re-
quired b.

THE nuncio, more artful than his master, and Artifices of

better acquainted with the political views and toh enudi
interests of the Roman court, was startled at
the propoftion of a council; and easily foresaw
how dangerous such an assembly might prove
at a time when many openly denied the papal
authority, and the reverence and fubmilfion
yielded to it visibly declined among all. For
that reason he employed his utmost address, in
order to prevail on the members of the Diet to
proceed themselves with greater severity against
the Lutheran heresy, and to relinquish their
proposal concerning a general council to be
held in Germany. They, perceiving the nuncio
to be more solicitous about the interests of the
Roman court, than the tranquillity of the Em-

Q 2 pire,
b Fafcic. Rer. Expet. & Fugiend. p. 346.

BooK I. pirc, or purity of the church, remained in-
'--" flexible, and continued to prepare the catalogue

'52- of their grievances to be presented to the Pope .

The nuncio, that he might not be the bearer of
a remonstrance so disagreeable to his court, left
Nuremberg abruptly, without taking leave of
the Diet d.

The Di. THE secular Princes accordingly, for the
pefent a ecclefiafticks, although they gave no opposition,
dred grir- did not think it decent to join with them, drew

o'e."'up the lift (so famous in the German annals)

of an hundred grievances, which the Empire
imputed to the iniquitous dominion of the papal
fee. This lift contained grievances much of
the fame nature with that prepared under the
reign of Maximilian. It would be tedious to
enumerate each of them; they complained of
the fums exated for dispensations, absolutions,
and indulgences; of the expence arising from
the law-suits carried to Rome; of the innu-
merable abuses occasioned by reservations, com-
mendams, and annates; of the exemption from
civil jurifdition which the clergy had obtained;
of the arts by which they brought all secular
causes under the cognizance of the ecclesiastical
judges of the indecent and profligate lives
which not a few of the clergy led; and of
various other particulars, many of which have
already been mentioned among the circum-
stances which contributed to the favourable
reception, or to the quick progress of Luther's
do&rines. In the end they concluded, that if
the holy fee did not speedily deliver them from
those intolerable burdens, they had determined
to endure them no longer, and would employ

the
c Fatfci. Rer. Expet. & Fu;iend. 349. d Ibid. 376.

the power and authority with whichGod had en- BOOK Ill.
trusted them, in order to procure relief e.

1524.

INSTEAD of such severities against Luther and The receri

his followers as the nuncio had recommended, fth Di,'
the recess or edic of the Diet contained only a 1523.
general injunction to all ranks of men to wait
with patience for the determinations of the
council which was to be assembled, and in the
mean time not to publish any new opinions
contrary to the eftabliihed do&rines of the
church; together with an admonition to all
preachers to abstain from matters of controversy
in their discourses to the people, and to confine
themselves to the plain and inftrutive truths of
religion f.

THE reformers derived great advantage from This diet of

the transactions of this diet, as they afforded gra thbeefi'
them the fullest and most authentick evidenceformation.
that gross corruptions prevailed in the court of
Rome, and that the Empire was loaded by the
clergy with insupportable burdens. With re-
gard to the former, they had now the testimony
of the Pope himself, that their invectives and
accusations were not malicious or ill-founded.
As to the latter, the representatives of the Ger-
manick body, in an assembly where the patrons
of the new opinions were far from being the
most numerous or powerful, had pointed out,
as the chief grievances of the Empire, those
very pra&ices of the Romish church against
which Luther and his disciples were accustomed
to declaim. Accordingly, in all their contro-
verfial writings after this period, they often
appealed to Adrian's declaration, and to the

hundred
e Fafcic. Rer. Expet & Fugiend. 354. f Ibid. 348.

Boo III. hundred grievances, in confirmation of what-

"""ever they advanced concerning the dissolute

manners, or infatidble ambition and rapacioul-
ness of the papal court.

Adri.n'. AT Rome, Adrian's condut was confidered
crduridt as a proof of the most childish simplicity and
Ruoe. imprudence. Men trained up anmidll the arti-

sices and corruptions of the papal court, and
accustomed to judge of actions not by what
was just, but by what was useful, were afto-
nifhed at a Pontiff, who, departing from the
wife maxims of his predecessors, acknowledged
disorders which he ought to have concealed;
and forgetting his own dignity, asked advice of
those, to whom he was entitled to prcfcribe. By
such an excess of impolitick incerity, they were
afraid that, instead of reclaiming, he would
render the enemies of the church more pre-
sumptuous, and inflead of extinguishing heresy,
would weaken the foundations of the papal
power, or flop the chief fotrces from which
wealth flowed into the church . For this reason
thev iduftrioufy opposed all his schemes of
ret .r::;.tion, and by throwing objeAions and
difficulties in his way, endeavoured to retard or
to defeat the execution of them. Adrian, ama-
zed on the one hand, at the obstinacy of the
Lutherans, dilgufted on the other, with the
manners and maxims of the Italians, and finding
himself unable to correct either the one or the
other, often lamented his own situation, and
often looked back with pleasure on that period
of his life when he was only dean of Louvain, a
more humble but happier station, in which little
was expected from him, and there was nothing
to fruftratc his good intentions h.

CLEMENT

g F. Pau!, His. of Counc. p. 8. Palavic. Hil. 58.
e Jovii Vit. Adr. p 118.

CLEMENT VII. his successor, excelled AdrianBoor lit.

as much in the arts of government, as he was -
inferior to him in purity of life, or uprightness ci'n24.:
of intention. He was animated not only with at.ure a-
the aversion which all Popes naturally bear to her, andhi,
a council, but having gained his own election rc:dof t
by means very uncanonical, he was afraid of an ocil
assembly that might fubje& it to a scrutiny
which it could not stand. He determined,
therefore, by every possible means to elude the
demands of the Germans, both with refpe to
the calling of a council, and reforming abuses
in the papal court, which the rashness and in-
capacity of his predecessor had brought upon
him. For this purpose he made choice of car.
dinal Campeggio, an artful man, often entrusted
by the Popes with negotiations of importance,
as his nuncio to the diet of the Empire assem-
bled again at Nuremberg,

CAMPEGGIO, without taking any notice of Febiury.

The negoci-

what had passed in the last meeting, exhorted tions ofhi
the diet in a long discourse, to execute the edict nuncio in 4
of Worms with vigour, as the only effectual ,t.,N,
means of fupprefling Luther's doctrines. The -c
diet, in return, desired to know the Pope's in-
tentions concerning the council, and the redress
of the hundred grievances. The former, the
nuncio endeavoured to elude by general and
unmeaning declarations of the Pope's resolution
to pursue such measures as would be for the
greatest good of the church. With regard to
the latter, as the catalogue of grievances did
pot reach Rome till after Adrian's death, and
of consequence had not been regularly laid
before the present Pope, Campeggio took ad-
vantage of this circumstance to decline making
any definitive answer to them in Clement's

name;

Boot IlI name; though, at the fame time, he observed

--'"-'that their catalogue of grievances contained
'5z2' many particulars extremely indecent and un-

dutiful, and that the publishing it by their own
authority was highly difrefpe&ful to the Roman
fee. In the end, he renewed his demand of
their proceeding with vigour against Luther

,ttte&d and his adherents. But though an aribaffador
f,,^tcI' from the Emperor, who was at that time very

fol citous to gain the Pope, warmly seconded
the nuncio, with many professions of his matter's
zeal for the honour and dignity of the papal fee,
Ap-ii s. the recess of the diet was conceived in terms of

almost the fame import with the former, without
enjoining any additional severity against Luther
and his party'.

BEFORE he left Germany, Campeggio, in

order to amuse and soothe the people, published
cSrtain articles for the amendment of some difor-
ders and abuses which prevailed among the infe-
rior clergy; but this partial reformation, which
fell so far ihort of the expectations of the Luther-
ans, and of the demands of the diet, gave no fa-
tisfa&ion, and produced little effect. The nun-
cio, with a cautious hand, tenderly lopped a
few branches the Germans aimed a deeper blow,
and by friking at the root wilied to exterminate
the evil .

i Scckend. z86. Slcid. Hit. 66. k Seckend. 292.

THE

# THE HISTORY OF THE REIGN OF THE EMPEROR CHARLES V. BOOK IV.

T H E

OF THE
R E I G N

OF THE
EMPEROR CHARLES V.

BOOK IV.

H E expulsion of the French, both out of Boo IV.

T the Milanese, and the republick of Genoa, --v
was confidered by the Italians as the conclusion 524
of the war between Charles and Francis; and as the Italia
they began immediately to be apprehensive of' Itate'with
the Emperor, when they saw no power remain- charles ad
ing in Italy capable either to controul or oppose S""i'.
him, they longed ardently for the re-eltablilh-
ment of peace. Having procured the reftora-
tion of Sforza to his paternal dominions, which
had been their chief motive for entering into
confederacy with Charles, they plainly discovered
their intention to contribute no longer towards
increasing the Emperor's superiority over his
rival, which was already the obje& of their jea-
lousy. The Pope especially, whose natural
timidity increased his suspicions of Charles's de-
signs, endeavoured by his remonstrances to in-

spire

Boic IV. spire him with moderation, and incline him to
'-~' peace.

A 5 24.

C..'. re- Bt'T the Emperor, intoxicated with success,
.^rt' c- and urged on by his own ambition, no less than

by Bcurbon's desire of revenge, contemned Cle-
ment's admonitions, and declared his resolution
of ordering his army to pass the Alps, and to
invade Provence, a part of his rival's dominions,
where, as he leaf dreaded an attack, he was leaf
prepared to resist it. His most experienced
ministers dissuaded him from undertaking such
an enterprize with a feeble army, and an ex-
haufted treasury: But he relied so much on
having obtained the concurrence of the King of
England, and on' the hopes which Bourbon,
with the confidence and credulity natural to
exiles, entertained of being joined by a nume-
rous body of his partisans as soon as the Impe-
rial troops should enter France, that he persisted
ob:linateiy in the measure. Henry undertook
to furnish an hundred thousand ducats towards
defraying the expence of the expedition during
the firll month, and had it in his choice either
to continue the payment of that fum monthly,
or to invade Picardy before the end of July with
a powerful army. The Emperor engaged to
attack Gnienne at the fame time with a con-
fiderable body of men; and if their enterprizes
proved fuiccefsful, they'agreed, that Bourbon,
besides the territories which he had loft, should
he put in poflflelon of Provence, with the title
of King, and hfould do homage to Henry as
the lawful King of France, for his new domi-
nions. Of all the parts of this extensive but
extravagant projet, the invasion of Provence
was the only one which was executed. For al-
though Bourbon, wikh a scrupulous delicacy,

altogether

altogether unexpeced afrer the part which heBooc IV.
had ated, positively refused to acknowledge '"'
Henry's title to the crown of France, and thereby *s"
absolved him from any obligation to promote
the enterprize, Charles's eagerness to carry his
own plan into execution did not in any degree
abate. The army he employed for that purpose
amounted only to eighteen thousand men; the
supreme command of which was given to the
Marquis de Pescara, with instructions to pay the
greatest deference to Bourbon's advice in all his
operations. Pescara paired the Alps without The tl,-
opposition, and entering Provence, laid siege o i~...
Marseilles. Bourbon had advised him rather to Azura *'
march towards Lyons, in the neighbourhood of
which city his territories were situated, and where
of course his influence was most extensive: But
the Emperor was so desirous to get poffeflion of
a port, which would, at all times, secure him
easy access into France, that by his authority he
over-ruled the Constable's opinion, and directed
Pescara to make the redu&tion of Marleilles his
chief object .

FRANCIS, who foresaw, but was npable topraate

prevent this attempt, took the most proper pre-~',,.' 'M
cautions to defeat it. He laid waste the adja-
cent country, in order to render it more difficult
for the enemy to subsist their army; he razed
the suburbs of the city, strengthened its fortifica.
tions, and threw into it a numerous garrison
under the command of brave and experienced
officers. To these, nine thousand of the citi-
zens, whom their dread of the Spanish yoke in-
spired with contempt of danger, joined them-
selves; by their united courage and induitry,
all the efforts of Pescara's military Ikill, and of

Bourbon's
a Glic. 1. xv. 273, &C. Mem. de Bellay, p. So.

Bec IV. Bourbon's activity and revenge, were rendered
'"-' abortive. Francis, meanwhile, had leisure to
'54 afnembie a powerful army under the walls of

Avignon, and no sooner began to advance to-
wards Marseilles, than the Imperial troops, ex-
haufted by the fatigues of a siege which had

Lmciles lasted forty days, weakened by diseases, and al-
ti...t. most destitute of provisions, retired with- preci-
-:.'S- pitation towards Italy °.

IF, during these operations of the army in

Provence, either Charles or Henry had attacked
France in the manner which they had projected,
that kingdom must have been exposed to the
most imminent danger. But on this, as well as
on many other occasions, the Emperor found
that the extent of his revenues was not adequate
to the greatntfs of his power, or the ardour of
his ambition, and the want of money obliged
him, though with much reluftance, to circum-
scribe his plan, and to leave part of it unexe-
cuted. Henry, disgusted at Bourbon's refuting
to recognize his right to the crown of France;
alarmed at the motions of the Scots, whom the
Solicitations of the French King had persuaded to
march towards the borders of England; and
no longer incited by his minister, who was be-
come extremely cool with regard to all the Em-
peror's interests, took no measures to support an
enterprize, of which, as of all new undertakings,
he had been at first excessively fond c.

racn C- IF the King of France had been satisfied with
lued with

Ct, ~Cf. having delivered his subje&s from this formi-

dable invasion, if he had thought it enough to
lhew all Europe the facility with which the in-

ternal

b Guic. . xw. 277. Ulloa Vita dell Carlo V. P. 93
c Fiddes's Life of Wolfey. Append. N°. 70, 71, 72.

ternal strength of his dominions enabled him to noor Iv.
resist the impreflion of a foreign enemy, even
when seconded by the abilities and powerful es- 1524
forts of a rebellious fubje&, the campaign, not-
withstanding the loss of the Milanese, would have
been far from ending ingloriously. But Francis,
animated with courage more becoming a soldier
than a general; pushed on by ambition, enter-
prizing rather than considerate; and too apt to
be elated with success; was fond of every under-
taking that seemed bold and adventurous. Such
an undertaking the situation of his affairs, at
that junture, naturally presented to his view. Resolve to
He had under his command one of the moflt inv th
powerful and best appointed armies France had Milaner.
ever brought into the field, which he could not
think of disbanding without having employed
it in any service. The Imperial troops had been
obliged to retire, almost ruined by hard duty,
and disheartened with ill success; the Milanese
had been left altogether without defence; it was
not impossible to reach that country before Pes-
cara, with his Ihattered forces, could arrive there;
or if fear hould add speed to their retreat, they
were in no condition to make head against his
freh and numerous troops; and Milan wou!d
now, as in former instances, submit without
resistance to a bold invader. These confidera-
tions, which were not destitute of plausibility,
appeared to his sanguine temper to be of the
utmost weight. In vain did his wisest minilters
and generals represent to him the danger of
taking the field at a season so far advanced, with
an army composed chiefly of Swiss and Germans,
to whole caprices he would be subject in all his
operations, and on whose fidelity his safety must
absolutely depend. In vain did Louise of Savoy
advance by hatly journies towards Provence,

that

Boos IV. that she might exert all her authority in diffuad-
'-' ing her son from such a rash enterprize. Francis
'5=' disregarded the remonstrances of his subje&s; and

that he might save himself the pain of an interview
with his mother, whose councils he had deter-
mined to reje&, he began his march before her ar-

pnBa hi« rival; appointing her, however, by way of atone-
m._, ment for that neglet& to be regent of the king-
La~C dom during his absence. Bonnivet by his per-

fualions, contributed not a little to confirm
Francis in this resolution. That favourite, who
strongly resembled his master in all the defective
parts of his charater, was led, by his natural im-
petuofity, warmly to approve of such an enter-
prize; and being prompted besides by his im-
patience to revisit a Milanese lady, of whom he
had been deeply enamoured during his late expe-
dition, he is said, by his flattering descriptions of
her beauty and accomplilhments, to have inspired
Francis, who was extremely susceptible of such
passions, with an equal desire of feeing her d.
o~aI THE French paied the Alps at Mount Cenis;

i^t '- and as their success depended on dispatch, they

advanced with the greatest diligence. Pescara,
who had been obliged to take a longer and more
difficult rout by Monaco and Final, was oon
informed of their intention; and being sensible
that nothing but the presence of his troops could
iave the Milanese, marched with such rapidity,
that he reached Alva on the fame day that the
French army arrived at Varcelli. Francis, in-
nfrued by Bonnivet's error in the former cam-
paign, advanced direcly towards Milan, where
the unexpeaed approach of an enemy so power-
ful, occasioned such consternation and disorder,
that although Pdcara entered the city with some

of
o Oeuv. de Brant. torn. vi. zS

of his bell troops, he found that the defence of Boec V.
it could not be undertaken with any probability'--
of success; and having thrown a garrison into the 'S4
citadel, retired through one gate, while the
French were admitted at another c

THESE briflk motions of the French Monarch Emtnbrr-

disconcerted all the schemes of defence which l'r," ,i
the Imperialists had formed. Never, indeed, alitl.
did generals attempt to oppose a formidable in-
vafion under such circumstances of disadvantage.
Though Charles poiffefed dominions more ex-
tensive than any other Prince in Europe, and
had, at this time, no other army but that whnich
was employed in Lombardy, which did not
amount to sixteen thousand men, his prerogative
in all his different dates was so limited, and his
fubjecs, without whose consent he could raise no
taxes, discovered such unwillingness to burden
themselves with new or extraordinary impositions,
that even this small body of troops was in want
of pay, of ammunition, of provisions, and of
clothing. In such a fiuation, it required all
the wildom of Lannoy, the intrepidity es Pes-
cara, and the implacable resentment of Bourbon,
to preserve them from finking under despair,
and to inspire them with refolu.ion to attempt,
or sagacity to discover, what was essential to
their safety. To the efforts of their genius, and
the activity of their zeal, the Emperor was more
indebted for the preservation of his Italian do-
minions than to his own power. Lannoy, by
mortgaging the revenues of Naples, procured
some money, which was immediately applied to-
wards providing the army with whatever ws
moit neceffaryt. Pcfcara, beloved and almolt

adored

e Mem. de EllPv, p. 8!. Gic. 1. xv. 78. f Gui.:.
1. xv. z2o.

Booc IV. adored by the Spanifl troops, exhorted them to
-~ few the world, by their engaging to serve the
5Y4' Emperor, in that dangerous exigency, without

making any immediate demand ot pay, that they
were animated with sentiments of honour very
different from those of mercenary soldiers; to
which proposition, that gallant body of men,
with an unexampled generosity, gave their con-
sent . Bourbon having raised a considerable
fum, by pawning his jewels, et out for Germany,
where his influence was great, that by his pre-
fence he might haften the levying of troops for
the Imperial service h.
rFMis.be- FRANCIS, by a fatal error, allowed the Em-

Tu"Ci'-. peror's generals time to derive advantage from

all theec operations. Instead of pursuing the
enemy, who retired to Lodi on the Adda, an
untenable post, which Pescara had resolved to
abandon on his approach, he, in compliance,
with the opinion of Bonnivet, though contrary
oab ias. to that of his other generals, laid siege to Pavia

on the Tefino; a town, indeed, of great impor-
tance, the pofleffion of which would have opened
to him all the fertile country lying on the banks
of that river. But the fortifications of the place
wvere itrong; it was dangerous to undertake a
difficult siege, at so late a season; and the Im-
perial generals, ifnfible of its consequence, had
thrown into the town a garrison composed of fix
thousand veterans, under the command of An-
tonio de Leyva, an officer of high rank; of
great experience; of a patient, but enterprizing
courage; fertile in rebources; ambitious of dif-

tinguifhing

g Jorii Vit. Davli, lib. v. p. 36. Sandov. vol. i.

s6i. Uiloa Vita dell Carlo \.p.. 94, &c. Vita d;l
F.mpr. Calos V. per Vera y Zuriga, p. 36. h ;eem
r.e c- .-:v., n 83.

tinguifhing himself; and capable, for that rea- Booz IV.
on, as well as from his having been long ac-
customed both to obey and to command, of sus- 1 Sa4
fering or performing any thing in order to pro-
cure success.

FRANCIS prosecuted the siege with obstinacy Hisvigorou

equal to the rashness with which he had under-c fotrt
taken it. During three months, every thing
known to the engineers of that age, or that
could be effe&ed by the valour of his troops,
was attempted in order to reduce the place;
while Lannoy and Pescara, unable to obftru&
his operations, were obliged to remain in such
an ignominious state of inaction, that a Pafqui-
nade was published at Rome, offering a reward
to any person who could find the Imperial-army,
loft in the month of O&tober in the mountains
between France and Lombardy, and which had
not been heard of since that time '.

LEYVA, well acquainted with the difficulties The town

under which his countrymen laboured, and the U^d d-
impossibility of their facing, in the field, such
a powerful army as formed the siege of Pavia,
placed his only hopes of safety in his ownvigilance
and valour. The efforts of both were extraor-
dinary, and in proportion to the importance of
the place, with the defence of which he was en-
trusted. He interrupted the approaches of the
French by frequent and furious rallies. Behind
the breaches made by their artillery, he ereted
new works, which appeared to be scarcely in-
ferior in strength to the original fortifications.
He repulsed the besiegers in all their assaults;
and by his own example, brought not only the
garrison, but the inhabitants, to bear the most

VOL. II. R intolerable

i andov. i. 608.

boor, i. igsoldraibe sati~' and to encdonter ti

'- - a mtdi'g- 1tkiotit nurmuring. The "-ur 1h
15Z4. ico
seajii i-onssited M1th if endeavohirs in -

iirdiri the gt & thi lE*nch. Ftandc
atempting to become master of th t*h, by'
iyerting the course of the Tefino, which is its
icaleoxsce on oe Od, i fddeii ihundAtibh d the

dcir c~ift~i, iniie t~ij, -~h~tlb-sir or sslin~

*ej~ksa'nd f:'~It ~iray tUihe ridtds which his
t~rat 4xenck

P~u1o e ~ OTWiTHSTANi*G the sló*i tPi~Eid 0r at~~i

trO-~d;·t~i~cg ~ ad the h~ch ljy'- a" UiM'
'-·"I* bi his oalant Mlssi Ae, it hn doubt but

..... .. I- 1ód ,.it C óbled to fior

*J d

srpe, id~ cwnkfi,ód thi

Frenc s ta 4óo~ ibl y, bcatie ii-

pauent to Udirnkge huii1&ft rir his co.-
tions with the mEper, &$* W deigns he
~as citrcmel~ y~alouq and to 5ner into terms

07 iidsbipaviti rincit. A ment timid

~icdauious cla;per i (end h'in diwclipabie ll

fcil~o*-i~i the bdl pTw aiiI Lo hM dorii*h,
Id dilivea$i thy tsiCm the rhedr 'bth the
iiipsik, lit remturd to & Irrie ob*ldt anA
rr& ibl tUWeme of ei ' the 6er o'
lone tdc barane and t irain that 6f thó
&hi. trr this rMi, he did raót dihnbie his
tdasfsi6n it dini-g te 1Fieich king m'ove&
~M;an, as e hoped tht t Se-aa a uch
:n~e~dig r wou~d bie smie chck u~ the EM-
peor' aib~t~i, w~hich z~jó ~Zo~:r ia Ica1y (Yas
piow ablie to cntroul. Re 1kb~uiied hard to
bin~g abouit a pace that w~uld fdc~t~1tr$kncis+
ioiFe~Fion ofs new conquest~ ; add is Charle,
wrhoas aays Yfleiible in the rosecutio &

his
k Guic. 1. y. aSo. lloa Vita da'Caro V. p. g5.

his schemes, rejected the proposition with disdain, BDboK V.
and with bitter exclamations against the Pope,'--
by whose persuasions, while Cardinal de Me- :Sa'
dici he had been induced to invade the Mila-
nefe, Clement immediately concluded a treaty
of neutrality with the King of France, in which
the republick of Florence was included

FRANCIS having, by this tranfaion, deprived Francis in

the Emperor of his two most powerful allies,,ld,"N
and at the fame time having secured a palfage
for his own troops through their territris,
formed a scheme of attacking the kingdom of
Naples, hoping either to over-run that country,
which was left altogether without defence, or
that at least such an unexpected ivafion would
oblige the viceroy to ral part of the Imperial
army out of the Milanee. For this purpoe he
ordered fix thousand men to march under the
command of John Stuart duke of Albany. But
Peeara, foreseeing that the effct of this diversion
would depend entirely upon the operations f
the armies in the MilaOefe, persuaded 1*annoy to
disregard Albany's motions m, and to bend his
whole force against the King himself$ o that
Francis not only weakened his army very ualie
fonably by this great detahmenet, but incurred
the xeproalc of engaging too rashly in chimeri-
cal and estravagant projects.

BY this time the garrison of Pavia was re- Effor of

duced to extremity; their ammunition and pro. "Boc *,on.
vifios began to fail; the Germans, of whom
it was chiefly composed, having received no
pay for seven months , threatened to deliver
the town into the enemy's hands, and could
hardly be-refcrained from mutiny by all Leyva's

R 2 address

I Guic. 1. xv. 82. 85. m Guic. 1. xv. 285. n Go!l.
Polit. Imnperial. 87 .

Boos IV. address and authority. The Imperial generals,

who were no strangers to his situation, saw the
ps5. necessity of marching without loss of time to

his relief. This they had now in their power:
Twelve thousand Germans, whom the zeal and
aivity of Bourbon taught to move with un-
usual rapidity, had entered Lombardy under
his command, and rendered the Imperial army
nearly equal to that of the French, greatly
diminished by the absence of the body under
Albany, as well as by the fatigues of the siege,
and the rigour of the season. But the more
their troops increased in number, the more fen-
sibly did they feel the distress arising from want
of money. Far from having funds for paying
a powerful army, they had scarcely what was
sufficient for defraying the charges of condu&-
ing their artillery, and of carrying their ammu-
nition and provisions. The abilities of the gene-
rals, however, supplied every defe&. By their
own example, as well as by magnificent promises
in name of the Emperor, they prevailed on the
troops of all the different nations which com-
posed their army, to take the field without pay;
they engaged to lead them direcly towards the
enemy; and flattered them with the certain prof-
pee of victory, which would at once enrich them
with such royal spoils as would be an ample re-
ward for all their services. The soldiers sensible
that, by quitting the army, they would forfeit
the vast arrears due to them, and eager to get
possession of the promised treasures, demanded a
battle with all the impatience.of adventurers who
fight only for plunder °.

THE

o Eryci Peuteani Hist. Cifalpina ap. Gravii Thef. An-
tiquit. tal. iii. p. 1 1 . t1 9g.

THE Imperial generals, without suffering the Boor IV.

ardour of their troops to cool, advanced im- ''
mediately towards the French camp. On the Theymrch
first intelligence of their approach, Francis called to.tt*ck the
a council of war, to deliberate what course he Febnury 3.
ought to take. All his officers of greatest ex-
perience were unanimous in advising him to
retire, and to decline a battle with an enemy
who courted it from despair. The leaders of
the Imperialists, they observed, would either
be obliged in a few weeks to dilband an army,
which they were unable to pay, and which they
kept together only by the hope of pillage, or
the soldiers enraged at the non-performance of
the promises to which they had trusted, would
rife in some furious mutiny which would allow
them to think of nothing but their own safety:
That, meanwhile, he might encamp in some
strong post, and waiting in safety the arrival
of fresh troops from France and Switzerland,
might, before the end of spring, take poflfslion
of all the Milanese, without danger or blood-
hed. But in opposition to them, Bonnivet,
whose destiny it was to give counsels fatal to
France during the whole campaign, represented
the ignominy that it would refle& on their fove-
reign, if he ihould abandon a siege which he
had prosecuted so long, or turn his back before
an enemy to whom he was still superior in num-
ber; and insisted on the necefity of fighting
the Imperialists rather than relinquish an under-
taking, on the success of which the King's fu-
ture fame depended. Unfortunately, Francis's
notions of honour were delicate to an excess that
bordered on what was romantick. Having of-
ten said that he would take Pavia, or peri in
the attempt, he thought himself bound not to
depart from that resolution; and rather than ex.
pose himself to the slightest imputation, he chore

to

Boo, IV. to forego all the advantages which were the cer-

' 'tain consequences of a retreat, and determined
5 to wait for the Imperialists before the walls of

Pavia P.

CB,,cef TAH Imperial generals found the French b
P"' flrongly entrenched, that notwithstanding the

powerful motives which urged them on, they
hesitated long before they ventured to attack
them; but at last the necessities of the besieged,
and the murmurs of their own soldiers, obliged
Stab 14 them to put every thing to hazard. Never did

armies engage with greater ardour, or with an
higher opinion of the importance of the battle
which they were going to fight; never were
troops more frongly animated with emulation,
national antipathy, mutual reentment, and all
the palfions which inspire obfinate bravery.
On the one hand, a gallant young Monarch,
fconded by a generous nobility, and followed
by fubjets to whose natural impetuosity, indig-
nation at the opposition which they had encoun-
terd, added new force, contended for vi&ory
and honour. On the ether fide, troops more
completely disciplined, and conducted by gene-
rls of greater abilities, fought from neceflity,
with courage heightened by despair. The m-

rialifts, however, were unable t to he

firt efforts of the French valour, and their
firmest battalions began to give way. But he
fortune of the day was quieky change. The
Swiss in the service of France, unmindful ®f
the reputation of their countr for fidelity and
martial glory, abandoned their poet in a cw.
ardly manner. Leyva, with his garrison, faliied
but and attacked the rear of the French, during
the heat of the a&ion, with such fury as threw

11dl- -

x. zgxit
Galec. 1. xv. 291.

it into conffipgn; , p, ?frcara falling op ther BoIr IV.
cavalry, withthe Impirli hors aroi o '7o '
he had prudently interrmled a conlderabe
number of Spanih foot, armed with te' heav
muskets then in use, broke this formidable
body by an unufuol neth,4 of qtacc, agpinf
which they Were wholly unRrfolded. The rot The French
became universal; a refHianle ceased iq - jrmyrouted
most every part, b' wvhecrc the ping yvas ji per-
fCn, who foukt nqw, not for fafpe or yiEtry,
iut ffr fafewt. hough woupqd, irn fersl
placsc and trhrqw from his hor e, which yas
Lilled under him, Francis defended hufelf on
toot w.h an heroick courage. Mbny tsf s
hraveft pafers gathering ro.p.d him, anq en-
deavourg to save; T'isifC a the epenc of
their owq, fFll at hi' feet. .Among tbee wys
Bonnjvet, the apthr of this great icalamnty,
who alone died unlamented. TheKing e-
haufted with fatigue, and scarcely. capable of
faryher reftawce, as left almost alone, exppfed
to :he fury of forne Spanifi fodies, 'frngers
to his rnc, and enraged at his obiacy. At
that moment care up Pomperant, A French
genleian, y40 had entered together wi h

ouribn ipp ,9 Fe EmperQr's service, aid plncig

hilmflf by thee ofe f thk moniarch giipft
iwhQoi be iad rebelle4, a$feds in proteng
him frirpp thle .iolence f he folders; at te
siame ie schipg him to firredr I9 Botr-
botn, hp was Rot fa i$fta9. minnenp as

gtpe dnger as wh ,kid noYp rrouoe Francs,

aO i ufp wohsd trai a$roied uc n

m catiFr

if triumph to his traitorous iubjet; and calling Francie tak-
for Lannoy, who happened likewise to be nearn p'ioner
at hand, gave up his sword tJo him; .which he,
kneeling tb kifs the King's hand, received with
profound refpe&, ad tajking is op6n sword

a
' tj Ffrom

Book IV. from his fide, presented it to him, faying, That
'"-' it did not become so great a Monarch to remain

'2S' disarmed in the presence of one of the Emperor's

fubjeds .

TEN thousand men fell on this day, one of

the most fatal France had ever seen. Among
these were many noblemen of the highest dif
tintion, who chose rather to perili than to turn
their backs with dilhonour. Not a few were
taken prisoners, of whom the most illustrious
was Henry D'Albret, the unfortunate king of
Navarre. A finall body of the rear guard made
its escape under the command of the duke
Alenon; the feeble garrison of Milan, on the
first news of the defeat, retired without being
pursued, by another road; and in two weeks
after the battle, not a Frenchman remained in
Italy.

LANNOY, though he treated Francis with all

the outward marks of honour due to his rank
and charater, guarded him with the utmost
attention. He was solicitous, not only to pre.
vent any possibility of his escaping, but afraid
that his own troops might seize his person, and
detain it as the best ecurity for the payment
of their arrears. In order to provide againit
both these dangers, he conduced Francis, the
day after the battle, to the strong castle of
Pizzichitone near Cremona, committing him to
the custody of Don Ferdinand Alarcon, general
of the Spaniih infantry, an officer of great bra-
very, and of ftri& honour, but remarkable for

that

q Guic. 1. xv. 292. Ocuv. de Brant. vi. 355. Mem.

deBellay, p. 90. Sandov. His. i. 638, &c. P. Mait.
Ep. 805. 810. Rnfceli Lettcre de rincipi, ii. p. 70.
Uloa tadell Carlo V. p. 98.

that severe and scrupulous vigilance which such Boon IV.
a trust required.

FRANCIS, who formed a judgment of the

Emperor's dispositions by his own, was ex-
tremely desirous that Charles should be in-
formed of his situation, fondly hoping that,
from his generosity or sympathy, he (hould
obtain speedy relief. The Imperial generals
were no less impatient to give their sovereign
an early account of the decisive vitory which
they had gained, and to receive his inftru&ions
with regard to their future condu&. As the
most certain and expeditious method of con-
veying intelligence to Spain, at that season of
the year, was by land, Francis gave the Com-
mendador Pennalofa, who was charged with
Lannoy's dispatches, a paflport to travel through
France.

CHARLES received the account of this signal re 'f

and unexpe&ed success that had crowned his 'c~s.
arms, with a moderation, which, if it had been Mc - .0.
real, would have done him more honour than
the greatest vi&ory. Without uttering one
word expressive of exultation, or of intemperate
joy, he retired immediately into his chapel, and
having spent an hour in offering up his thanks-
givings to heaven, returned to the presence-
chamber, which by that time was filled with
grandees and foreign ambassadors, assembled in
order to congratulate him. He accepted of
their compliments with a modest deportment;
he lamented the misfortune of the captive King,
as a striking example of the fad reverse of
fortune, to which the most powerful Monarchs
are subjet& he sorbad any public rejoicings, as
indecent in a war carried on among Christians,
reserving them until he Ihould obtain a victory

equally

Boo IV. equally illustrious over the Infidels; and seemed

'-~ to take pleasure in the advantage which he had
'tSz gained, only as it would prove the occasion of

reltoring peace to Christendom r.
The CHARLES, however, had already begun to

,' form schemes in his own mind, which little

f uited such external appearances. Ambition,
not generosity, was the ruling pafion in his
mind; and the vicory at Pavia opened such
new and unbounded profpets of gratifying it,
as allured him with irresistible force: But it
being no easy matter to execute the vast designs
which he meditated, he thought it necessary,
while proper measures were taking for that pur-
pole, to affe& the greatest moderation, hoping
undr that veil to conceal his real intentions from
the other Princes of Europe.

Th. .,- MEANWHILE France was filled with conifer-
r : .. nation. The King himself had early tranf-
Fi.ne. mitted an account of the rout at Pavia, in a

letter to his mother, delivered by ennalofa,
which contained only these words, " Madam, all
is loft, except our honour." The officers who
made their escape, when they arrived from Italy,
brought such a melancholy detail of particulars
as made all ranks of men lenfibly feel the great-
ness and extent of the calamity. France, with-
out its sovereign, without money in her treasury,
without an army, without generals to command
it, and encompassed on all fides by a victorious
and a&ive enemy, stemed to be on the very

The r- brink of deftrution. But on that occasion the
~ Of',h, great abilities of Louise the regent aived the
egent. kingdom, which the violence of her pafflons had

more than once exposed to the greate danger.

Instead
r Saadv. Hill. i. 6 i. Ullca Vita dell Carlo V. p. i o.

Inftcad of giving herself up to such lamenta- Booz IV.
tioms as were natural to a woman so remarkable
for her maternal tenderness, he discovered all Il2S'
the foresight, and exerted all the acivity, of a
consummate politician. She ambled the no-
bles at Lions, and animated them by her ex-
ample, no less than by her words, with such zeal
in defence of their country, as its present fitua-
tion required. She collced the remains of the
army which had served in Italy, ranobmed the
prisoners, paid their arrears, and put them in a
condition to take the field. She levied new
troops, provided for the security of the fron-
tiers, and raised fums sufficient for defraying
these extraordinary expences. Her chief care,
however, was to appease the resentment, or to
gain the friendhip of the King of England;
and from that quarter, the first ray of comfort
broke in upon the French affairs.

TfiOUGH Henry, in entering into alliances Erea of

with Charles or Francis, seldom followed anyt P'h"i o
regular or concerted plan of policy, but was HenayV1.
infuenced chiefly by the caprice of temporary
paflions, such occurrences often happened as
recalled his attention towards that equal balance
of power which it was necessary to keep be-
tween the two contending potentates, the pre-
ervation of which he always boasted to be his
peculiar office. He hadexpe&ed that his union
with the Emperor might afford him an oppor-
tunity of recovering some part of those territories
in France which had belonged to his ancestors;
and for the fake of such an acquisition he did
tsot scruple to give his afliftance towards railing
Charles to a considerable pre-eminence above
Francis. He had never dreamt, however, of
any event o decisive and so fatal as the victory
at Pavia, which seemed not only to have broken,

but -

BooK IV. but to have annihilated the power of one of

-^ "the rivals; so that the profpet of the sudden
'525' and entire revolution which this would Qccafion

in the political fyflem, filled him with the most
disquieting apprehensions. He saw all Europe
in danger of being over-run by an ambitious
prince, to whose power there now remained no
counterpoise; and though he himself might at
firit be admitted, in quality of an ally, to some
1hare in the spoils of the captive monarch, it
was easy to discern that with regard to the man-
ner of making the partition, as well as his
security for keeping pofleffion of what lhould
be allotted him, he must absolutely depend upon
the will of a confederate, to whose forces his
own bore no proportion. He was sensible that
if Charles were permitted to add any confider-
able part of France to the vast dominions of
which he was already master, his neighbourhood
would be much more formidable to England
than that of the ancient French Kings; while,
at the fame time, the proper balance on the
continent, to which England owed both its
safety and importance, would be entirely loft.
Concern for the situation of the unhappy mo-
narch co-operated with those political confider-
ations; his gallant behaviour in the battle of
Pavia had excited an high degree of admiration,
which never fails of augmenting sympathy; and
Henry, naturally susceptible of generous senti-
ments, was fond of appearing as the deliverer
of a vanquished enemy from a fate of captivity.
The passions of the Englilh minister -seconded
the inclinations of the Monarch. Wolfey, who
had not forgotten the disappointment of his
hopes in two successive conclaves, which he im-
puted chiefly to the Emperor, thought this a
proper opportunity of taking revenge; and
Louise, courting the friendlhip of England with

such

such flattering submissions as were no less agree. BooK IV.
able to the King than to the Cardinal, Henry --a
gave her secret assurances that he would not 1515'
lend his aid towards oppressing France, in its
present helpless state, and obliged her to pro-
mise that he would not consent to dismember
the kingdom, even in order to procure her son's
liberty'.

BUT as Henry's connections with the Emper-

or made it necessary to a in such a manner
as to save appearances, he ordered publick re-
joicings to be made in his dominions for the
success of the Imperial arms; and as if he had
been eager to seize the present opportunity of
ruining the French monarchy he sent ambafla-
dors to Madrid, to congratulate with Charles
upon his vitory; to put him in mind, that he,
as his ally, engaged in one common cause, was
entitled to partake in the fruits of it; and to
require that, in compliance with the terms of
their confederacy, he would invade Guienne
with a powerful army, in order to give him pof-
session of that province. At the fame time, he
offered to fend the princess TMry into Spain or
the Low Countries, that he might be educated
under the Emperor's direcion, until the conclu-
sion of the marriage agreed on between them;
and in return for that mark of his confidence,
he insisted that Francis hould be delivered to
him, in consequence of that article in the treaty
of Bruges, whereby each of the contracing
parties was bound to surrender all usurpers to
him whose rights they had invaded. It was
impoflible that Henry could expect that the
Emperor would liften to there extravagant de-
mands, which it was neither his interest, nor in

his
s MU..de Bellay, 9. Guic. 1. vi. 318. Herbert.

Bgoox . his power to grant They appear ewid~hl to
'~"h' hve been made with o other intetiof them
£535. to furnish him with a derent P, for eftet-

ing into such engagements with Frasce as the
juinaue rquired %.

on the ius- It was among the Italian ftia&, hbMei~ that
IapW"li the vi&ory at Pavia occasioned the greatest id~trh

and terror. That balance of power on which
they i~1ied for their fectity, and am iEh it had
Been the eoAdlhiit obje& of l tos i r n Iihi
and rtfihiient~ to mainttiin1 *a tt ed hi
a ,h~ohtnt. They were *x~aEd by thei* fithi.-
tien to Ml the Krfi ^ssis f the tWcóiAdt~ild
athlity *hd Chais had ttq~ire TY
obst~ ssiWY fympto~ of M ~i~dd %Mt
hbiti In dtht young pi ce ad W-ei 'nfibbe
tht,, as Emperr, orgii oF Ni, he cot~d
either form dahgeus pi \ipon each óf
tlir tetories, or inva&e thei ith grett
advai ae. They iberaIcd, the&+fbró~ *ikt
inach icrunde conceriing the d**~m Of aishi~

ai i form as i~iigt obsltii& Dis rigrtl& t,

But their 0 ufltiens, tisiid~d w1 ittle
nihon, sad e*sited *ih le4 'uout had

t

es ~mmCl~enit, iaftad of parlblhg dte h~.
fares ~ hicb he had coested *lth th Ven~t4
fa ~i~ the i~brtof Itml, #I*t Ihi-
dabd bjLa~Loss dthuat~ or ocrd~i~ii * by his

APrX 3.
1 iIsi1, tllt he etót1e a kpa~ tbtaty,

bbdhg hiilf" t advahe t ahe Thib
in r~iw for certain etookw~ which he wa
to eceive. The iioeey was Miitantly jiald;
Charles af~erItds fuhid to e i 5te treaty,;
and the Pope remained erpo1id at o~c to itt-
famy and to idicule; to the 1?iiltr, becaue

be

t Herbert, p..6s. n Goic. L IVi. 300. Rur-

celi Letecre 'et ?rnc. i. 74. 76, 4kc. Tiuaai si. lib.
1. . AA.

he had deserted the public cause for his private BooK IV.
interest; to the latter, because he had been a ---
loser by that unworthy ation x. 'S2.

How dishonourable soever the artifice might Mutiny in

be which was employed in order to defraud the h, ym'"'i
Pope of this fum, it came very seasonably into
the viceroy's hands, and put it in his power to
extricate himself out of an imminent danger.
Soon after the defeat of the French army, the
German troops, which had defended Pavia with
such meritorious courage and perseverance,
growing insolent upon the fame that they had
acquired, and impatient of relying any longer
on fruitless promises with which they had been
so often amused, rendered themselves matiers of
the town, with a resolution to keep polleflion
of it as a security for the payment of their ar-
rears; and the ret of the army discovered a
much stronger inclination to aflift, than to punish
the mutineers. By dividing among them the
money exa&ed from the Pope, Lannoy quieted
the tumultuous Germans; but though this satis-
fled their present demands, he had so little pro-
fpe& of being able to pay them or his other
forces regularly for the future, and was under
such continual apprehensions of their seizing the
person of the captive King, that, not long after,
he was obliged to dismiss all the Germans and
Italians in the Imperial service y. Thus, from
a circunftance that now appears very singular,
but arising naturally from the constitution of
most European governments in the sixteenth
century, while Charles was fufpe&ed by all his
neighbours of aiming at universal monarchy,

and

x Guic. lib.xvi. 305. Mauroceni Hiftor. Venet. ap,

Ilorichi dell cofe Venez, V. 131. 36. y Guic.
1. xvi. p. 302.

BoK IV. and while he was really forming. vast projets

u of this kind, his revenues were so limited, that
Z5 he could not keep on foot his vi&orious army,

though it did not exceed twenty-four thousand
men.

Tew nm- DURING these transactions, Charles, whose

"' i'epretenfions to moderation and disinterestedness
nt, s .ihb were loon forgotten, deliberated, with the utmost
.'~'^rs solicitude, how he might derive the greatest ad-
i. .aor- vantages from the misfortune of his adversary.

Some of his counsellors advised him to treat
Francis with the magnanimity that became a
vitorious prince, and intfead of taking advan-
tage of his ituation to impose rigorous con-
ditions, to dismiss him on such equal terms, as
would bind him for ever to his interest by the
ties of gratitude and affecion, more forcible as
well ia more permanent than any which could
be formed by extorted oaths and involuntary
flipulations. Such an exertion of generosity is
not, perhaps, to be expeted in the condut of
political affairs, and it was far too refined for
that Prince to whom it was proposed. The
more obvious, but less splendid, scheme of en-
deavouring to make the utmost of Francis's ca-
lamity, had a greater number in the council to
recommend it, and suited better with the Em-
peror's genius. But though Charles adopted
this plan, he did not execute it in a proper
manner. Instead of making one great effort to
penetrate into France with all the forces of Spain
and the Low-Countries; instead of crufling the
Italian ates before they recovered from the
consternation which the success of his arms had
occasioned, he had recourse to the artifices of
intrigue and negociation. This proceeded partly
from nceflity, partly from the natural difpo-
fition of his mind. The situation of his

finances,

finances, at that time, rendered it extremely dif- BooK IV.
ficult to carry on any extraordinary armament;'-v*
and he himself having never appeared at the head '152S
of his armies, the command of which he had
hitherto committed to his generals, was averse
to bold and martial counsels, and trusted more
to the arts with which he was acquainted. He
laid, besides, too much stress upon the vicory of
Pavia, as if by that event the strength of France
had been annihilated, its resources exhausted, and
the kingdom itself, no less than the person of its
Monarch, had been fubje&ed to his power,

FULL of this opinion, he determined to set tehe r;go-

highest price upon Francis's freedom ; and having he proporr
ordered the Count de Roeux to visit the captiveto Franci.
King in his name, he instructed him to propose
the following articles, as the conditions on which
he would grant him his liberty: That he should
restore Burgundy to the Emperor, from whose
ancestors it had been unjustly wrested; that he
should surrender Provence and Dauphine, that
they might be ere&ed into an independent king-
dom for the Constable Bourbon ; that he hould
make full fatisfa&ion to the King of England
for all his claims, and finally renounce the pre-
tensions of France to Naples, Milan, or any
other territory in Italy. When Francis, who had
hitherto flattered himself that he should be
treated by the Emperor with the generosity be-
coming one great Prince towards another, heard
these rigorous conditions, he was so transported
with indignation, that draving his dagger hafti-
ly, he cried out, " 'Twere better that a King
Ihould die thus." Alarcon, alarmed at his ve-
hemence, laid hold on his hand; but though he
soon recovered greater composure, he still declar-
ed, in the most solemn manner, that he would

VOL. II. S rather

BooK IV. rther remain a prisoner during life, than purchal
' '5 liberty by such ignominious cocefions .

F~Cis c THIS mortifying discovery of the Emperor's
t so'. intentions, greatly augmented Francis's chagrin

and impatience under his confinemnt, and muit
have driven him to abiolute depair, if he had
not laid hold of the only thing which could still
administer any comfort to him. He persuaded
himself that the conditions which Reux had
proposed, did not flow originally from Charles
himself, but were dicated by the rigorouspolicy
of his Spaniih council, and that therefore he
might hope, in one personal interview with him,
to do more towards hastening his own deliver-
ance, than could be effected by long negocia-
tions pafling through the subordinate hands of
his ministers. Relying on this supposition, which
proceeded from too favourable an opinion of
the Emperor's character, he offered to visit him
in Spain, and was willing to be carried thither
as a fpetacle to that haughty nation. Lannoy
employed all his address to confirm him in these
Sentiments; and concerted with him in secret
the manner of executing this resolution. Francis
was so eager on a scheme which seemed to open
some profpe& of liberty, that he furnished the
gallies necefary for the voyage, Charles being
at that time unable to set any fleet to ea. The
viceroy, without communicating his intentions
either to Bourbon or Pescara, conducted his pri-
soner towards Genoa, under pretence of tranf-
porting him by sea to Naples ; though soon after
they set fail he ordered the pilots to steer di-
rectly for Spain; but the wind happening to
carry them near the French coast, the unfortu-
nate Monarch had a full profpe&t of his own

dominions,
: Mem. de Bcllay, 94. Ferreras, Hist. ix. 43.

dominions, towards which he cast many a for-BooK IV.
rowful and desiring look. They landed, how- -v-'
ever, in a few days at Barcelona; and oon after I55
Francis was lodged, by the Emperor's command,
in the Alcazar of Madrid, under the care of the Auguaf n4.
vigilant Alarcon, who guarded him with as much
circumfpetion as ever .

A FEW days after Francis's arrival at Ma-Henry vnr.

drid, and when he began to be sensible of his re.ty wth
having relied without foundation on the Empe- Franc, i
ror's generosity, Henry VIII. concluded a treaty procure his
with the Regent of France, which afforded him releae
some hope of liberty from another quarter.
Henry's extravagant demands had been received
at Madrid with that neglect which they deserved,
and which he probably expeted. Charles, in-
toxicated with prosperity, no longer courted him
in that refpecful and fubmiflive manner which
pleased his haughty temper. Wolfey, no less
haughty than his matier, was highly irritated at
the Emperor's discontinuing his wonted caresses
and professions of friendhip to himself. These
flight offences, added to the weighty confide-
rations formerly mentioned, induced Henry to
enter into a defensive alliance with Louise, in
which all the differences between him and her
son were adjusted; at the fame time he engaged
that he would employ his belt offices in order to
procure the deliverance of his new ally from a
state of captivity b.

WHILE the open defection of fuzh a powerful Moro n,

confederate affeced Charles with deep concern, rl.nr to
a secret conspiracy was carrying on in Italy, o"r.eur
which threatened him with consequences still ror's pcwr
more fatal. The restless and intriguing genius' i".'.

S 2 of

a Mem. de Bellay, 95. P. Mart. Ep. ult. Guic. l:b.
xvi. 323. b Herbert. Fiddes's Life of Wolfey, 337.

Boo IV. of Morone, chancellor of Milan, gave rife to
r-^-' this. His revenge had been amply gratified by
3ss5' the expullion of the French out of Italy, and

his vanity no less oothed by the re-establish-
ment of Sforza, to whose interest he had at-
tached himself, in the dutchy of Milan. The
delays, however, and evasions of the Imperial
court in granting Sforza the investiture of his
new-acquired territories, had long alarmed Mo-
rone; 'thef were repeated so often, and with
such apparent artifice, as became a full proof to
his suspicious mind that the Emperor intended
to strip his mailer of that rich country which he
had conquered in his name. Though Charles,
in order to quiet the Pope and Venetians, no
less jealous of his designs than Morone, gave
Sforza, at last. the investiture which had been
so long defred; the charter was clogged with
so many reservations, and fubjeted him to such
grievous burdens, as rendered the duke of Milan
a dependant on the Emperor, rather than a vas-
fal of the Empire, and afforded him hardly any
other security for his possessions, than the good
pleasure of an ambitious superior. Such an ac-
cession of power as would have accrued from
the addition of the Milanese to the kingdom of
Naples, was confidered by Morone as fatal to
the liberties of Italy, no less than to his own
power and importance. Full of this idea, he
began to revolve in his mind the possibility of

gItaly from the yoke of foreigners, the

darling scheme, as has been already observed,
of the Italian politicians in that age, and which it
was the great object of their ambition to accom-
plifh. If to the glory of having been the chief
instrument in driving the French out of Milan,
he could add that of delivering Naples from the
dominion of the Spaniards, he thought that no-
thing would be wanting to complete his fame.

His

His fertile genius soon suggested to him a project Booa IV.
for that purpose; a difficult, indeed, and daring '-v
one, but, for that very reason, more agreeable to 'S2S.
his bold and enterprizing temper.

BOURBON and Pescara were equally enraged Hit nh

at Lannoy's carrying the French King into Spain Perctr.
without their knowledge. The former, being
afraid that the two Monarchs might, in his ab-
fence, conclude some treaty in which his interets
would be entirely sacrificed, hastened to Madrid,
in order to guard against that danger. The
latter, on whom the command of the army now
devolved, was obliged to remain in Italy; but,
in every company, he gave vent to his indigna-
tion against the viceroy, in expressions full of
rancour and contempt; he accused him, in a let-
ter to the Emperor, of cowardice in the time of
danger, and of insolence after a victory, towards
the obtaining of which he had contributed no-
thing either by his valour or his condu&; nor
did he abstain from bitter complaints against
the Emperor himself, who had not discovered,
as he imagined, a sufficient sense of his merit,
nor bestowed any adequate reward on his ser-
vices. It was on this disgust of Pescara, that
Morone founded his whole system. He knew
the boundless ambition of his nature, the vast
extent of'his abilities in peace as well as war,
and the intrepidity of his mind, capable alike of
undertaking and of executing the most defpe-
rate designs. The cantonment of the Spanish
troops on the frontier of the Milanese, gave oc-
cafion to many interviews between him and Mo-
rone, in which the latter took care frequently
to turn the conversation to the tranfa&ions ub-
sequent to the battle of Pavia, a fubje& upon
which the marquis always entered willingly, and
with paflon; and Morone obfcrving his resent-

ment

Boos IV. ment to be uniformly violent, artfully pointed
%'v'-J out and aggravated every circumstance that

SzSt could increase its fury. He painted, in the

frongeft colours, the Emperor's want of dif-
cernment, as well as of gratitude, in preferring
Lannoy to him, and in allowing that prefump-
tuous Fleming to dispose of the captive King,
without consulting the man to wholf bravery
and wisdom Charles was indebted for the glory
of having him in his power. Having warmed
him by such discourses, he then began to infinu-
ate, that now was the time to be avenged for
thde inf0lts, and to acquire immortal renown as
the deliverer of his country from the oppref-
sion of strangers; that the states of Italy, weary
of the ignominious and intolerable dominion of
barbarians, were at las ready to combine in
order to vindicate their own independence; that
their eyes were fixed on him, as the only leader
whose genius and good fortune could ensure the
happy success of that noble enterprize; that the
attempt was no less pra&icable than glorious, it
being in his power so to disperse the Spanith in-
fantry, the only body of the Emperor's troops
in Italy, through the villages of the Milanese,
that, in one night, they might be destroyed by
the people, who, having suffered much from
their exacions and insolence, would gladly un-
dertake this lervice that he might then, with-
out opposition, take pofellion of the throne of
Naples, the station destined for him, and a re-
ward not unworthy the restorer of liberty to
Italy; that the Pope, of whom that kingdom
held, and whose predecessors had disposed of it
on many former occasions, would willingly grant
him the right of investiture; that the Venetians,
the Florentines, the duke of Milan, to whom he
had communicated the scheme, together with the
French, would be the guarantees of his right;

that

that the Neapolitans would naturally prefer theBoor IV.
government of one of their countrymen, whom ' - -
they loved and admired, to that odious domi- '52S'
nion of strangers, to which they had been so
long fubje&ed; and that the Emperor, aftoniihed
at a blow so unexpeted, would find that he had
neither troops nor money to refit such a power-
ful confederacy c.

PESCARA, amazed at the boldness and extent Betryed

and taken

of the scheme, lifened attentively to Morone, prione by
but with the countenance of a man loft in pro- Pescara.
found and anxious thought. On the one hand,
the infamy of betraying his sovereign, under
whom he bore such high command, deterred
him from the attempt; on the other, the pro-
fpe of obtaining a crown allured him to ven-
ture upon it. After continuing a hort space
in fufpence, the least commendable motives, as
is usual after such deliberations, prevailed, and
ambition .triumphed over honour. In order,
however, to throw a colour of decency on his
condut, he insisted that ome learned casuists
should give their opinion, " Whether it was
lawful for a fubje& to take arms against his im-
mediate sovereign, in obedience to the Lord
Paramount of whom the kingdom itself was
held ?" Such a resolution of the cafe, as he ex-
peted, was soon obtained from the divines and
civilians both of Rome and Milan; the nego-
ciation went forward; and measures seemed to
be taking with great spirit for the speedy execu-
tion of the design.

DURING

c Guic. 1. xvi. 325. Jovii Vita Davali, p. 417. Oeuv.

de Brantome, iv. 171. Rufcelli Lettre de Princ. ii. 91.
Thuani Hill. lib. i. c. II. P. Heater. Rer. Auftr. lib. ix.
c. 3. p. 207.

BSol IV. DURING this interval, Pescara, either hocked

---' at the treachery of the ation that he was going
5szit to commit, ordefpairing of its success, began to

entertain thoughts of abandoning the engage.
ments which he had come under. The indifpo-
fition of Sforza, who happened at that time to
be taken ill of a distemper which was thought
mortal, confirmed this resolution, and deter-
mined him to make known the whole conspiracy
to the Emperor; deeming it more prudent to
expet the dutchy of Milan from him, as the
reward of this discovery, than to aim at a king-
dom, to be purchased by a series of crimes,
This resolution, however, proved the source of
ations hardly less criminal and ignominious.
The Emperor, who had already received full
information concerning the conspiracy from
other hands, eemed to be highly pleaed with
Pescara's fidelity, and commanded him to con-
tinue his intrigues for some time with the Pope
and Sforza, both that he might discover their
intentions more fully, and be able to convic
them of the crime with greater certainty. Pes-
cara, conscious of guilt, as well as sensible how
suspicious his long silence mufl have appeared
at Madrid, durst not decline that dishonourable
office, and, to his eternal disgrace, was obliged
to at the meanefi of all parts, that of seducing
with a purpose to betray. Confidering the abi-
lities of the persons with whom he had to deal,
the part was scarcely less difficult than bale;
but he ated it with such address, as to deceive
even the penetrating eye of Moron, who, rely-
ing with full confidence on his sincerity, visited
him at Novara, in order to put the last hand to
their machinations. Pescara received him in
an apartment where Antonio de Leyva was
laced behind the tapestry, that he might over-
ear and bear witness to their conversation: as

Morons

Morone was about to take leave, that officer Book IV
suddenly appeared, and, to his aftonifhment,-'v-
arrested him prisoner in the Emperor's name. 'S2
He was conduced to the castle of Pavia; and
Pescara, who had so lately been his accomplice,
had now the assurance to interrogate him as his
judge. At the fame time, the Emperor de-
clared Sforfa to have forfeited all right to the
dutchy of Milan, by his engaging in a con-
fpiracy against the sovereign of whom he held;
Pescara, by his command, seized on every place
in the Milanese, except the castles of Cremona
and Milan, which, the unfortunate duke attempt-
ing to defend, were closely blockaded by the Im-
perial troops d,

BUT though this unsuccessful conspiracy, in-The rgo-

fead of stripping the Emperor of what he al- 't-
ready pofleffed in Italy, contributed to extend Fra'ncs i
his dominions in that country, it lhewed him the '"'
necessity of coming to some agreement with the
French King, unless he would draw on himself
a confederacy of all Europe, which the progress
of his arms, and his ambition, now as undisguised
as it was boundless, filled with general alarm.
He had not hitherto treated Francis with the
generosity which that monarch expected, and
hardly with the decency due to his station. In-
stead of displaying the sentiments becoming a
great Prince, he seems to have acted with the
mercenary art of a corsair, who, by the rigorous
usage of his prisoners, endeavours to draw from
them an high price for their ransom. The cap-
tive King was confined in an old castle, under a
keeper, whose formal austerity of manners ren-
dered his vigilance fill more disgustful. He was

allowed

d Gic. 1. xvi. 329. JoviiHif. 3jg. Capella, lib. v.
p. 200.

Boon IV. allowed no exercise but that of riding on a mule,
'-" surrounded with armed guards on horseback.

s525. Charles, on pretence of its being necessary to

attend the Cortes af~ombled in Toledo, had
gone to reside in that city, and fuflered several
weeks to elapse without visiting Francis, though
he flicitcd an interview with the most prefling

rniteers and submissive importunity. So many indig-
"i lif- nities made a deep impreflion on an high spirited

Prince; he began to lose all relish for his usual
amusements; his natural gaiety of temper for-
sook him; and after languishing for some time,
he was seized with a dangerous fever, during
the violence of which he complained constantly
of the unexpeted and unprincely rigour with
which he had been treated, often exclaiming,
that now the Emperor would have the satis-
fadion of his dying a prisoner in his hands,
without having once deigned to fee his face.
The physicians, at last, despaired of his life, and
informed the Emperor that they saw no hope of
his recovery, unless he were gratified with regard
to that point on which he seemed to be so strongly
bent. Charles, solicitous to preserve a life,
with which all his profpets of farther advantage
from the victory of Pavia must have terminated,
immediately consulted his ministers concerning
the course to be taken. In vain did the chan-
cellor Gattinara, the most able among them,
represent to him the indecency of his visiting
Francis, if he did not intend to et him at
liberty immediately upon equal terms; in vain
did he point our the infamy to which he would
be exposed, if motives of avarice or ambition
hfould prevail on him to give the captive Mo-
narch this mark of attention and sympathy, for
which humanity and generosity had pleaded so
long without effe&. The Emperor, lets de-
licate, or lets solicitous about reputation than

his

his minister, set out for Madrid to visit his pri- Boor IV.
soner. The interview was hort; Francis being -v--
too weak to bear a long conversation. Charlessepts'.
accosted him in terms full of affection and re-Te Empe-

mr visits

fpet, and gave him such promises of speedy him."
deliverance and princely treatment, as would
have refleced the greatest honour upon him, if
they had flowed from another source. Francis
grasped at them with the eagerness natural in
his situation; and cheered with this gleam of
hope, began to revive from that moment, re-
covering rapidly his wonted health .

HE had soon the mortification to find, that The connl-

his confidence in the Emperor was not better ',,iveB bt
founded than formerly. Charles returned in-Mdrid.
ftantly to Toledo; all negociations were carried
on by his minifters;'and Francis was kept in
as ftrit custody as ever. A new indignity, and
that very galling, was added to all those he
had already suffered. Bourbon arriving in
Spain about this time, Charles, who had so
long refused to visit the king, received his re-
belious ubje& with the most studied refpet.
He met him without the gates of Toledo, em- No. ,5.
braced him with the greatest affe&tion, and plac-
ing him on his left hand, conduted him to
his apartment. These marks of honour to him,
were so many insults to the unfortunate Mo-
narch; which he felt in a very sensible manner.
It afforded him some consolation, however, to
observe, that the sentiments of the Spaniards,
differed widely from those of the sovereign.
That generous people detested Bourbon's crime.
Notwithstanding his great talents and impor.
tant services, they hunned all intercourse with
him, to such a degree, that Charles having de-

fired
c Guic. 1. xvi. 339. Sandov. Hilt. i. 665.

BoK IV. fired the marquis de Villena to permit Bour-
'--' bon to reflde in his palace while the court re-
'z2S- mained in Toledo, he politely replied, " That

he could not refuse gratifying the Emperor in
that request " but added with a Castilian dig-
nity of mind, " that he must not be furprized
if the moment the conflable departed, he hould
burn to the ground a house, which, having been
polluted by the preence of a traitor, became
an unfit habitation for a man of honour f."

A.rainted CHARLES himself, nevertheles, seemed to
,Srep - have it much at heart to reward Bourbon's ser-
i,""m vices in a signal manner. But as he insisted, in
ha' the sirs place, on the accomplishment of the

Emperor's promise in giving him in marriage
his filler Eleanora, Queen dowager of Por-
ugal, the honour of which alliance had been
one of his chief inducements to rebel against
his lawful sovereign; as Francis, in order to
prevent such a dangerous union, had offered,
before he left Italy, to marry that Princess;
and as Eleanora herlelf discovered an inclination
rather to match with a powerful Monarch, than
with his exiled fubje&; all these interfering
circumstances created great embarrafmient to
Charles, and left him hardly any hope of extri-
DraB. cating himself with decency. But the death

of Pcara, who, at the age of thirty-fix, left
behind him the reputation of being one of the
greatrft generals and ablet politicians of that
century, happened opportunely at this jun&ure
for his relief. By that event, the command of
the army in Italy became vacant, and Charles,
always fertile in resources, persuaded Bourbon,
who was in no condition to dispute his will, to
accept the office of general in chief there, to-

gether
f Guic. 1. xvi 335.

nether with a grant of the dutchy of Milan Bool v.
forfeited by Sforza, and in return for these to -.-
relinquish all hopes of marrying the Queen of 152s5
Portugal g.

THE chief obstacle that flood in the way ofNegociati.

Francis's liberty was the Emperor's continuing ^
to insist so peremptorily on the restitution of Bur- Fi'rcis
gundy, as a preliminary to that event. Francis "t"
often declared that he would never consent to
dismember his slate; and that even if he
should so far forget the duties of a Monarch as
to come to such a resolution, the fundamental
laws of the kingdom would prevent its taking
eftet. On his part he was willing to make an
absolute cession to the Emperor of all his preten-
sions in Italy and the Low-Countries; he pro-
mifed to restore Bourbon all his lands which
had been confiscated; he renewed his proposal
of marrying the Emperor's sifter, the Queen
dowager of Portugal; and engaged to pay a
great fum by way of ransom for his own person.
But all mutual esteem and confidence between
the two monarchs were now entirely loft; there
appeared on the one hand, a rapacious ambition
labouring to avail itself of every favourable cir-
cumftance; on the other, suspicion and resent-
ment, standing perpetually on their guard; so
that the prospect of bringing their negociations
to an iflie,. seemed to be far distant. The
dutchess of Alencon, the French King's ifter,
whom Charles permitted to visit her brother in
his confinement, employed all her address, in
order to procure his liberty on more reasonable
terms. Henry of England interposed his good Frands ;
offices to the fame purpose; but both with so'-
little success, that Francis in despair took fud-refie hb

denly crown
g Sandov. Hist. i. 676. Oeuv. de Brant. iv. 249

Booz IV.denly the resolution of resigning his crown with
' a"all its rights and prerogatives to his son the

s525' Dauphin, determining rather to end his days in

prison, than to purchase his freedom by con-
cessions unworthy of a King. The deed for
this purpose he signed with legal formality at
Madrid, empowenng his sifter to carry it into
France, that it might be registered in all the
parliaments of the kingdom; and at the fame
time intimating his intention to the Emperor,
he desired him to name the place of his confine-
ment, and to assign him a proper number of
attendants during the remainder of his days h.
C THIS resolution of the French King had

great efiet; Charles began to be sensible, that
by pulhing rigour to excess, he might defeat
his own measures, and instead of the vast ad-
vantages which he hoped to draw from ransom-
ing a powerful monarch, he might at last find
in his hands a Prince without dominions or
revenues. About the fame time, one of the
King of Navarre's domestics happened by an
extraordinary exertion of fidelity, courage, and
address, to procure his master an opportunity
of escaping from the prison in which he had
been confined ever since the battle of Pavia.
This convinced the Emperor, that the most
vigilant attention of his officers might be eluded
by the ingenuity or boldness of Francis, or his
attendants, and one unlucky hour might de-
prive him of all the advantages which he had
been so solicitous to obtain. By these confi-
derations, he was induced to abate somewhat
of his former demands. On the other hand,
Francis's impatience under confinement daily

increased;

h This paper is publiflied in Memoires iliftoriques, &c.
par M. 'Abbe Raynal, tom. ii. p. 51.

increaed; and having received certain intel-BooK IV.
ligence of a powerful league forming against his v-'
rival in Italy, he grew more compliant with 1525S
regard to concefions, trusting, that, if he could
once obtain his liberty, he would oon be in a
condition to refurne whatever he had yielded.

As these were the views and sentiments of;,6-

the two Monarchs, the treaty which procured Mdid.
Francis his liberty was signed at Madrid on the
fourteenth of January, one thousand five hun-
dred and twenty-fix. The article with regard
to Burgundy, which had hitherto created the
greatest difficulty, was compromised, Francis
engaging to restore that dutchy with all its de-
pendencies in full sovereignty to the Emperor;
and Charles consenting that this restitution hould
not be made until the King was set at liberty:
in order to secure the performance of this, as
well as the other conditions in the treaty, Francis
agreed that at the fame initant he himself was
released, he would deliver as hostages to the
Emperor, his eldest son the Dauphin, his second
son the duke of Orleans, or in lieu of the latter,
twelve of his principal nobility, to be named by
Charles. The other articles swelled to a great
number, and though not of such importance,
were extremely rigorous. Among there the
most remarkable were, that Francis hould re-
nounce all his pretensions in Italy; that he
should disclaim any title which he had to the
sovereignty of Slanders and Artois; that within
fix weeks after his release, he hould restore to
Bourbon and his adherents, all their goods,
moveable and immoveable, and make them full
reparation for the damages which they had sus-
tained by the confiscation of them; that he
mshould use his interest with Henry d'A!bret to
relinquish his pretensions to the crown of Na-

varre,

Boos IV. varre, and flould not for the future assist him
'- ' in any attempt to recover it; that there should
5s26' be established between the Emperor and Francis

a league of perpetual friendship and confe-
deracy, with a promise of mutual assistance in
every cafe of necessity. That in corroboration
of this union, Francis should marry the Em-
peror's sifter, the Queen Dowager of Portugal;
that Francis mhould cause all the articles of this
treaty to be ratified by the States, and registered
in the parliaments of his kingdom; that upon
the Emperor's receiving this ratification, the
hostages ould be set at liberty; but in their
place, theduke of Angouleme, the King's third
ibn, flould be delivered to Charles, that in
order to manifest, as well as to strengthen the
amity between the two Monarchs, he might be
educated at the Imperial court; and that if
Francis did not, within the time limited, fulfil
the ifipulations in the treaty, he mhould promise,
upon his honour and oath, to return into Spain,
and to surrender himself again a prisoner to the
Emperor .

fienmcbt, By this treaty, Charles flattered himself that
hrs nit he had not only effecually humbled his rival,
toitL but that he had taken such precautions as would

forever prevent his re-attaining any formidable
degree of power. The opinion, which the wisest
politicians formed concerning it, was very dif-
ferent; they could not persuade themselves that
Francis, after obtaining his liberty, would exe-
cute articles against which he had fruggled so
long, and to which, even amidst the horrors
of captivity, he had confenfi with such reluc-
tance. Ambition and resentment, they knew,

would

; Recoil des Trait. tom. ii. 12. Ulloa Vita dell Carlo
V. . 102, &C .

would conspire in prompting him to violate the BooK Iv;
hard conditions to which he had been con- -
strained to submit; nor would arguments and S&.
casuistry be wanting to represent that which was
so manifeltly advantageous, to be neceflary and
just. If one part of Francis's condut had been
known, at that time, this opinion might have
been founded, not in conjecture, but in cer-
tainty. A few hours before he signed the treaty, Franci
he aembled such of his counsellors as were then "t'cntl Pgi
at Madrid, and having exated from them a the validity
solemn oath of secrecy, he made a long enu- f it
meration in their presence of the dishonourable
arts, as well as unprincely rigour, which the
emperor had employed in order to ensnare or
intimidate him. For that reason, he took a
formal protest in the hands of notaries, that his
consent to the treaty hould be confidered as an
involuntary deed, and be deemed null and
void k. By this disingenuous artifice, for which
even the treatment that he had met with was
no apology, Francis endeavoured to satisfy his
honouj and conscience in signing the treaty, and
to provide at the fame time a pretext on which
to break it.

GREAT, meanwhile, were the outward demon-

ftrations of love and confidence between the
two Monarchs; they appeared often together
in public; they frequently had long conferences
in private; they travelled in the fame litter, and
joined in the fame amusements. But amidst
these signs of peace and friendship, the Emperor
still harboured fufr'ion in his mind. Though
the ceremonies of tie marriage between Francis
and the Queen of Portugal were performed
soon after the conclusion of the treaty, Charles
would not permit him to consummate it until

VOL. II. T the

k Rcueil des Trait. tom. ii. p. to7.

Boor IV. the return of the ratification from France. Even
'- ' then Francis was not allowed to be at full

6. liberty; his guards were fill continued; though

caresld as a brother-in-law, he was still watched
like a prisoner and it was obvious to attentive
observers, that an union, in the very beginning
of which there might be dicerned such fymp-
toms of jealousy and diftrut, could not be
cordial, or of long continuance'.
Frneu ABOVT a month after the signing of the

treaty, the Regent's ratification of it was brought
from France and that wife Princess, prefer-
ring, on this occasion, the publick good to do-
meftick afetion, informed her son, that, infead
of the twelve noblemen named in the treaty,
Ihe had ent the duke of Orleans along with
his brother the Dauphin to the frontier, as the
kingdom could susser nothing by the absence
of a child, but must be left almost incapable of
defence, if deprived of its ablest fatdmen, and
mot experienced generals, whom Charles had
.,an'r artfully included in his nomination. At last

Francis took leave of the Emperor, whose sus-
picion of the King's sincerity increasing, as the
time of putting it to the proof approached, he
endeavoured to bind them still falter by exating
new promises, which, after those he had already
made, the French monarch was not flow to
grant. He et out from Madrid, a place which
the remembrance of many afflicing circum-
stances rendered peculiarly odious to him, with
the joy natural on such an occasion, and began
the long-wilhed for journey towards his own
dominions. He was escorted by a body of
horse under the command of Alarcon, who, as
the King drew near the frontiers of France,

guarded
Guic. 1. xvi. 353.

guarded him with more scrupulous exa&nefs BOOK iV.
than ever. When he arrived at the river An- -
daye, which separates the two kingdoms, au- '

i5

tree appeared on the opposite bank with a
guard of horse equal in number to AlarcQn's.
An empty bark was moored in the middle of
the stream; the attendants drew up in order on
the opposite banks; at the fame instant, Lannoy
with eight gentlemen put off from the Spanish,
and Lautrec with the fame number from the
French fide of the river; the former had the
King in his boat; the latter, the Dauphin and
duke of Orleans; they met in the empty vessel;
the exchange was made in a moment; Francis,
after a hort embrace to his children, leaped
into Lautrec's boat, and reached the French
shore. He mounted that infsant a Turkish
horse, waved his hand over his head, and with
a joyful voice crying aloud several times, " I
am yet a King," galloped full speed to St John
de Luz, and from thence to Bayonne. This
event, no ess impatiently desired by the French
nation than by their Monarch, happened on the
eighteenth of March, a year and twenty-two
days after the fatal battle of Pavia m.

SaoN after the Emperor had taken leave ofThe ampe-

ror'i mar-

Francis, and permitted him to begin his journey rige with
towards his own dominions, he set ut for Itb"ll of
Seville, in order to solemnize his marriage with Portugal.
Isabella, the daughter of Emanuel, the late
King of Portugal, and the fiter of John II.
who had succeeded him in the throne of that
kingdom. Isabella was a princess of uncom-
mon beauty and accomplishments, and as the
Cortes both in Castile and Aragon had warmly
solicited their sovereign to marry, the choice of

T a wis;
r Sandov. ift. i. 735. Quic. 1. xvi. 355.

Booi IV.a wife so nearly allied to the royal blood of

-" ' both kingdoms, was extremely acceptable to his
1526. fubjecs. The Portuguese, fond of this new

connecion with the first Monarch in Chriffen-
dom, granted him an extraordinary dowry with
Isabella, amounting to nine hundred thousand
crowns, a fum, which, from the situation of
his affairs at that juncture, was of no small con-
March i. sequence to the Emperor. The marriage was

celebrated with that splendour and gaiety, which
became a great and youthful Prince. Charles
lived with Isabella in perfect harmony, and
treated her on all occasions with much diftinc-
tion and regard ".

Ass;, of DURING thece transactions, Charles could
Gneny. hardly give any attention to the affairs of Ger-

many, though it was torn in pieces by commo-
tions, which threatened the most dangerous con-
sequences. By the feudal institutions, which
fill subsisted almost unimpaired in the Empire,
the property of lands was veRied in the Princes,

Grievance and free-barons. Their valfals held of them by
~,fts. the ftriteft and most limited tenures; while

the great body of the people was kept in a
state but little removed from absolute servitude.
In some places of Germany, people of the lowest
class were so entirely in the power of their
masters, as to be subjet to personal and do-
meftick slavery, the most rigorous form of that
wretched state. In other provinces, particularly
in Bohemia and Lusatia, the peasants were
bound to remain on the lands to which they
belonged, and making part of the etate, were
transferred like any other property from one

hand

· Ulloa Vita di Carlo V. p. 1o6. Belcarius Corn. Rer.

Gallic. p. 565. Spalatinus ap. Struv. Corp. Hilt. Germ.
ii so .

hand to another. Even in Suabia, and the BooK IV.
countries on the banks of the Rhine, where their '- -
condition was most tolerable, the peasants not 56
only paid the full rent of their farms to the
landlord; but if they chose either to change the
place of their abode, or to follow a new pro-
session, they were obliged to purchase this pri-
vilege at a certain price. Beside this, all.grants
of lands to peasants expired at their death,
without descending to their posterity. Upon
that event, the landlord had a right to the bes
of their cattle, as well as of their furniture;
and their heirs, in order to obtain a renewal of
the grant, were obliged to pay large fums by
way of fine. These exa&ions, though grievous,
were born with patience, because they were cuf-
tomary and ancient : But when the progress of
elegance and luxury, as well as the changes in-
troduced into the art of war, came to.increafe
the expence of government, and made it necef-
fary for princes to levy occasional or stated
taxes on their fubjees, such impositions being
new, appeared intolerable; and in Germany,
these duties being laid chiefly upon beer, wine,
and other neceflaries of life, affected the com-
mon people in the most sensible manner. The
addition of such a load to their former burdens,
drove them to despair. It was to the valour
inspired by. resentment against impositions of
this kind, that the Swiss owed the acquisition of
their liberty in the fourteenth century. The
fame cause had excited the peasants in several
other provinces of Germany to rebel-againft
their superiors towards the end of the fifteenth
and beginning of the sixteenth centuries; and
though these infurrefions were not attended
with like success, they could not, however, be
quelled without much difficulty and bloodshed °.

BY
o Scckend. lib. ii. p. z. 6.

Boot V. BY these checks, the spirit of the peasants

ó"~'~ was overawed tather than subdued; and their

T,,r . ~a. grievances multiplying continually, they ran to
'aionl arms, this year, with the most frantic rage.

Their frft appearance was near Ulm in Suabia.
The peasants in the adjacent country flcked to
their standard with the ardour and impatience
natural to men, who having groaned long under
oppreffllto beheld at last some piofpe& of de-
live;ance; and the contagion spreading frni
proihnce to province, reached amoft eery part
of Germany. Wherever they came, they plun-
deed the monasteries; wafted the lands of their
fupetiors; razed their castles, and tnaflacred
without mercy all perfoils of noble birth wfro
were so unhappy as to fall into their hands '.
Having intimidated their prefors, as they
imagilnd, by the violence of these proceedngs,
they begwn to confider what would be themff
propet and effe&ual method of securing t~tn-
tebvs for the future from their tyrannical et-
actions. 'With this view, they drew up &ant
publilhed a memorial, conining all their de-
mantds, and declared, that while arms were in
their hands, they would either pnerfadeo oblige
the nobles to give them full fisfaaio t with
regard to these. The chief articles were, that
they might have liberty to chufe their eawn pas-
tors tat they might be freed from e, pay-
ment of all tythes extept those iof cdr; that
they might no longer be confidered as the das
or bondmen of their fuperi'ars; thar the liberty
of hunting and filhing might be common that
the great forests might not be regarded as pri-
vate prperty, but be open sot the fi:-of all;
that they might be delivered from the unusual

burden

P Petr. Crinitus de B.lo Rnflicado, ap. Preler. Sctipt.
ker. Germ. Argent. 1717. vol. iii. p. 243.

burden of taxes under which they laboured BooK IV
that the administration of justice might be ren-
dered less rigorous and more impartial; that 'z6.
the encroachments of the nobles upon meadows
and commons might be restrained q.

MANY of thee demands were extremely rea- Qnelled.

fonable; and being urged by such formidable
numbers, might have met with ome redress.
But those vast unwieldy bodies, assembled in
different places, had neither union, nor conduct,
nor vigour. Being led by persons of the lowes
rank, without skill in war, or knowledge of
what was neceary for accomplishing their de-
signs; all their exploits were distinguished only
by a brutal and unmeaning fury. To oppose
this, the princes and nobles of Suabia and the
Lower Rhine raised their vaflfals, and attack-
ing some of the mutineers with open force, and
others by furprize, cut to pieces or dispersed
all who infested those provinces; so that the
peasants, after ruining the open country, and
losing upwards of twenty thousand of their as-
fociates in the field, were obliged to return to
their habitations with less hope than ever of
relief from their grievances r.

THESE commotions happened at first in pro- Their in

vinces of Germany where Luther's opinions had Thuringia.
made little progress; and being excited wholly
by political caules, had no connetion with the
disputed points in religion. But the frenzy
reaching at lat those countries in which the Re-
formation was eftablifed, derived new strength
from circumstances peculiar to them, and role

to

q leid. Hil. p go. r Seckend. lib. ii. p. Io. Petr.

Gnodalius de Rufticanorom Tumultu in Germania, ap.
Scatd. Script. vol. ii. p. 131, &c.

BooK V. to a still greater pitch of extravagance. The
*.-- -1 Reformation, wherever it was received, increased

's26. that bold and innovating spirit to which it owed

its birth. Men who had the courage to over-
turn a system supported by every thing which
can command refpec or reverence, were not to
be overawed by any authority, how great or
venerable soever. After having been accuf-
tomed to confider themselves as judges of the
mofl important dodrines in religion, to examine
these freely, and to reject, without scruple, what
appeared to them erroneous, it was natural for
them to turn the fame daring and inquilitive
eye towards government, and to think of recti-
fying whatever disorders or imperfecions were
discovered there. As religious abuses had been
reformed in several places without the permif-
sion of the magistrate, it was an easy transition
to attempt the redress of political grievances in
the fame manner.
Mie fr- No sooner, then, did the spirit of revolt break

out in Thuringia, a province subje&t to the
Eletor of Saxony, the inhabitants of which
were mostly converts to Lutheranifm, than it
assumed a new and more dangerous form. Tho-
mas Muncer, one of Luther's disciples, having
established himself in that country, had acquired
a wonderful ascendant over the minds of the
people. He propagated among them the wildest
and mos enthufiaftick notions, but such as tended
manifestly to inspire them with boldness, and
lead them to sedition. Luther, he told them,
had done more hurt than service to religion.

Taeirsan- He had, indeed, rescued the church from the
"i rfiprt yoke of Popery, but his doctrines encouraged,

and his !ieu let an example of the utmost licen-
tioufnefs of manners. In order to avoid vice,

fays

fays he, men must pra&ise perpetual mortifi-BooK Iv.
cation. They must put on a grave countenance,' ~'
speak little, wear a plain garb, and be serious 's2'6
in their whole deportment. Such as prepare
their hearts in this manner, may expet that the
Supreme Being will direc all their steps, and
by some visible sign discover his will to them;
if that illumination be at any time with-held,
we may expostulate with the Almighty, who,
deals with us so harshly, and remind him of his
promises. This expostulation and ager will
be highly acceptable to God, and will at last
prevail on him to guide us with the fame uner-
ring hand which condu&ed the patriarchs of
old. Let us beware, however, of offending him
by our arrogance; but as all men are equal in
his eye, let them return to that condition of
equality in which he formed them, and having
all things in common, let them live together
like brethren, without any marks of fubordina-
tion or pre-eminence I."

EXTRAVAGANT as these tenets were, they

pattered so many paflions in the human heart,
as to make a deep impression. To aim at no-
thing more than the abridging the power of the
nobility, was now confidered as a trifling and
partial reformation, not worth the contending
for; it was proposed to level every diftin&ion
among mankind, and by abolishing property, to
reduce them to their natural state of equality,
in which all Ihould receive their subsistence from
one common stock. Muncer assured them, that
the design was approved of by heaven, and that
the Almighty had in a dream ascertained him
of its success. The peasants set about the exe-
cution of it, not only with the rage which ani-

mated
Secked. lib. ii. p. 13. Skid. Hist. p. 83.

,o IV. mated those of their order in other parts of Ger.

many, but with the ardour which enthusiasm in-
'5 spires. They deposed the magistrates in all the

cities of which they were mailers; seized the
lands of the nobles, and obliged such of them
as they got into their hands, to put on the dress
commonly worn by peasants, and instead of their
former titles, to be satisfied with the appellation
given to people in the lowest clas of life. VaRf
numbers engaged in this wild undertaking but
Muncer, their leader and their prophet, was
destitute of the abilities necessary for condu&ing
it He had all the extravagance, but not the
courage, which enthufiafs usually possess. It
was with difficulty he could be persuaded to take
the field; and though he soon drew together
eight thoutand men, he suffered himself to be
furrouinded by a body of cavalry under the com-
mand of the Eletor of Saxony, the Landgrave
of lefle, and Duke of Brunswick. There
Princes, unwilling to shed the blood of their de-
luded subje&s, sent a young nobleman to their
camp, with the offer of a general pardon, if
they would immediately lay down their arms,
and deliver up the authors of the sedition.
Mfuncer, alarmed at this, began to harangue his
followers with his usual vehemence, exhorting
them not to trust these deceitful promnifs of
their oppreffrs, nor to desert the cause of God,
ad of hriffian liberty.
r~.u BuT the sense of present danger making a

deeper imprcflon on the peasants than his eto-
qunc, confusion and terror were visible in eve-
ry face, when a rainbow, which was the em-
bk~ that the mutineers had painted on their
coours. happening to appear in the clouds,
Muncer, with admirable presence of mind, laid
hold of that icidena, and suddenly raising his

eyes

eyes and hands towards heaven, " Behold," Boos IV.
cried he, with an elevated voice, " the sign'
"which God has given. There is the pledge ,56.
" of your safety, and a token that the wicked
" hall be destroyed." The fanatical multitude
set up instantly a great hout, as if victory had
been certain; and passing in a moment from
one extreme to another, massacred the unfor-
tunate nobleman who had come with the offer
of pardon, and demanded to be led towards the
enemy. The Princes, enraged at this hocking
violation of the laws of war, advanced with no
less impeuofity, and began the attack; but the May is.
behaviour of the peasants in the combat was not
such as might have been expeced either from
their ferocity or confidence of success; an un-
disciplined rabble was no equal match for well-
trained troops; above five thousand were slain
in the field, almost without making resistance;
the reft fled, and among the foremost Muncer
their general. He was taken next day; and be-
ing condemned to such punishments as his crimes
had deserved, he suffered them with a poor and
dastardly spirit. His death put an end to the
ihfurretions of the peasants which had filled
Germany with such terror '; but the enthufiaftick
notions which he had scattered were not extir-
pated, and produced, not long after, effecs more
memorable, as well as more extravagant.

DURING there commotions, Luther aed Lutir'

with exemplary prudence and moderation; like ,,prt
a common parent, flicitous about the welfaie o~ .
of both parties, without sparing the faults or
errors of either. On the one hand, he adrefied
a monitory discourse to the nobles, exhorting

them

t Sleid. HiR. p. 84. Seckend. lib. ii. p. ia. Godalius
Tumult. RuRica. 155.

Boor IV. them to treat their dependants with greater

-"` humanity and indulgence. On the other, he
1526. severely censured the editious spirit of thepea-

sants, advising them not to murmur at hardhips
inseparable from their condition, nor to seek for
redrels by any but legal means ".

His ma, LUTHER'S famous marriage with Catharine
ige. a Boria, a nun of a noble family, who, having

thrown off the veil, had fled from the cloister,
happened this year, and was far from meeting
with the fame approbation. Even his most de-
voted followers thought this flep indecent, at a
time when his country was involved in so many
calamities; while his enemies never mentioned
it with any softer appellation than that of in-
ceftuous or profane. Luther himself was fen-
fible of the imprefflion which it had made to his
disadvantage; but being satisfied with his own
conduct, he bore the censure of his friends,-and
the reproaches of his adversaries, with his usual
fortitude .

THIS year the Reformation loft its first pro-

tetor, Frederick, Elecor of Saxony; but the
blow was the less sensibly felt, as he was fuc-
May 5. ceeded by his brother John, a more avowed and

zealous, though less able patron of Luther and
his doctrines.

PA:m ANOTIER event happened about the fame
*~' e time, which, as it occasioned a considerable
T-cnck change in the itate of Germany, must be traced
"er' back to its source. While the frenzy of the

Crusades possessed all Europe during the twelfth
and thirteenth centuries, f.ecral orders of reli-
gious knighthood were founded in defence of

the
u Skid. His. p. 87 x Seckend. lib. ii. p. 15.

the Christian faith against Heathens and In-Boo, IV.
fidels. Among there the Teutonick order in '-v""
Germany was one of the molt illustrious, the 1526
knights of which distinguished themselves greatly
in all the wild enterprizes carried on in the
Holy Land. Being driven at last from their
settlements in the east, they were obliged to
return to their native country. Their zeal and
valour were too impetuous to remain long
inactive. They invaded, on very fight pre-
tences, the province of Prussia, the inhabitants
of which were frill idolaters; and having com-
pleated the conquest of it about the middle of
the thirteenth century, held it many years as a
fief depending on the crown of Poland. Fierce
contests arose, during this period, between the
Grand Masters of the order, and the Kings of
Poland; the former fruggling for indepen-
dence, while the latter aflerted their right of
sovereignty with great firmness. Albert, a
Prince of the house of Brandenburgh, who was
eleted Grand Mailer in the year one thousand
five hundred and eleven, engaging keenly in
this quarrel, maintained a long war with Sigif-
mund, King of Poland; but having become
an early convert to Luther's doctrines, this gra-
dually lessened his zeal for the interests of his
fraternity; so that he took the opportunity of
the confusions in the Empire, and the absence
of the Emperor, to conclude a treaty with
Sigismund, greatly to his private emolument.
By it, that part of Prussia which belonged to
the Teutonick order was erected into a ecular
and hereditary dutchy, and the investiture of it
granted to Albert, who, in return, bound him-
self to do homage for it to the Kings of Poland
as their vassal. Immediately after this, he made
public profellion of the reformed religion, and

married

Boos IV. married a princess of Denmark. The Teutaicd
--^- knights exclaimed so loudly against the treachery
''6' of their grand malter, that he was put under

the ban of the Empire; but he fill kept pof-
session of the province which he had usurpcd,
and tranfnitted it to his poecrity. In proccfa
of time this rich inheritance fell to the eleoral
branch of the family, all dependence on the
crown of Poland was liaken off, and the Mar-
graves of Brandenburgh, having assumed the
tide of Kings of Prussia, have not only risen to
an equality with the sirs Princes in Germany,
but take their rank among the great Monarchs
of Europe .

7Fl ma- UPON the return of the French King to his
i dd tbe dominions, the eyes of all the powers in Europe
r upo.o were fixed upon him, that, by observing his first
. .b^S. motions, they might form a judgment concern.

ing his subsequent condu. They were not
held long in fuipence. Francis, as soon as he
arrived at Bayonne, wrote to the King of Eng-
land, thanking him for his zealous and assec-
tionate intcrpolition in his favour, to which he
acknowledgd that he owed the recovery of his
liberty. Next day the Emperor's ambafladors
demanded audience, and, in their maiter's name,
required him to ifue such orders as were necef-
fary for carrying the treaty of Madrid into
immediate and full execution. He coldly an-
fwered, that though for his own part he deter-
mined religiously to perform all that he had
promied, the treaty contained so .many articles
relative not to himself alone, but asseting the
intercets of the French monarchy, that he could

not

X Sleid. Hil.9. p 98. Abregi de 'hilL de Proit
Puba. p. 605, &c.

not take any farther ftep without consulting theBoox IV-
States of his kingdom; and that some time
would be necessary in order to reconcile their
minds to the hard conditions which he had
consented to ratify '. This reply was confidered
as no obscure discovery of his being resolved
to elude the treaty; and the compliment paid
to Henry, appeared a very proper ftep towards
securing the assistance of that Monarch in the
war with the Emperor, to which such a refo-
lution would certainly give rife. These circum-
stances, added to the explicit declarations which
Francis made in secret to the ambassadors from
several of the Italian powers, fully satisfied
them that their conjetures with regard to his
condut had been just, and that infead of in-
tending to execute an unreasonable treaty, he
was eager to seize the first opportunity of re-
venging those injuries which had compelled him
to feign an approbation of it. Even the doubts,
and fears, and scruples, which used, on other
occasions, to hold Clement in a fiate of uncer-
tainty, were dissipated by Francis's eeming im-
patience to break through all his engagements
with the Emperor. The situation, indeed, of
affairs in Italy at that time, did not allow the
Pope to hesitate long. Sforza was ill besieged
by the Imperialifs in the cattle of Milan. That
feeble Prince, deprived now of Morone's advice,
and unprovided with every thing necessary for
defence, found means to inform Clement and
the Venetians, that he must soon surrender, if
they did not come to his relief. The Imperial
troops, as they had received no pay since the
battle of Pavia, lived at discretion in the Mi-
lanefe, levying such exorbitant contributions in

that
2 Mem. de Bellay, p. 97.

Boor IV. that dutchy, as amounted, if we may rely on
'-r -' Guicciardini's calculation, to no less a um than

526. five thousand ducats a day ; nor was it to be

doubted, but that the soldiers, as soon as the
castle should submit, would chufe to leave a
ruined country which hardly afforded them sub-
fiftence, that they might take pofleffion of more
comfortable quarters in the fertile and un-
touched territories of the Pope and Venetians.
The afliftance of the French King was the only
thing which could either save Sforza, or enable
them to protect their own dominions from the
insults of the Imperial troops.

A kleue FOR there reasons, the Pope, the Venetians,
agan the and duke of Milan, were equally impatient to
Emieor. come to an agreement with Francis, who, on

his part, was no less desirous of acquiring such
a considerable acceflion, both of flrength and
reputation, as such a confederacy would bring
along with it. The chief objets of this alli-
ance, which was concluded at Cognac on the
twenty-fecond of May, though kept secret for
some time, were, to oblige the Emperor to set
at liberty the French King's sons, upon pay-
ment of a reasonable ransom; and to re-eftablilh
Sforza in the quiet pofefelion of the Milanese.
If Charles should refute either of these, the
contracing parties bound themselves to bring
into the field an army of thirty-five thousand
men, with which, after driving the Spaniards
out of the Milanese, they would attack the
kingdom of Naples. The King of England
was declared prote&or of this league, which
they dignified with the name of Hoey, because
the Pope was at the head of it; and in order
to allure Henry more effetually, a principality

in
* Guic. 1. xvii. 360..

in the kingdom of Naples, of thirty thousand Boo IV.
ducats yearly revenue, was to be fettled on him s6
and lands to the value of ten thousand ducats o 5
Wolfey his favourite b.

No sooner was this league concluded thao TheV P

Clement, by the plenitude of his papal power, ,r'nci
absolved Francis from the oath which he had from hi

oath to ob-

taken to observe the treaty of Madrid c. This serve the
right, how pernicious soever in its effe&si and t"J't°f
deftruive of that integrity which is the bails
of all tranfa&ions among men, was the natural
consequence of the powers which the Popes
arrogated, as the infallible vicegerents of Christ
upon earth. But as, in virtue of this pretended
prerogative, they had often dispensed with
obligations which were held sacred, the interest
of some men, and the credulity of others, led
them to imagine, that the decisions of a fove-
reign pontiff authorized or justified ations which
would, otherwise, have been criminal and im-
pious.

MEANWHILE the discovery of Francis's in-TheEmpe.

tention to elude the treaty of Madrid, filled tbe ,*"d
Emperor with a variety of disquieting thoughts.
He had treated an unfortunate Prince with the
most ungenerous rigour; he had displayed an
insatiable ambition in all his negociations with
his prisoner: He knew what censures the former
had drawn upon him, and what apprehensions
the latter had excited in every court of Europe
nor had he reaped, from the measures which he
pursued, any of those advantages which poli.
ticians are apt to confider as an excuse for the

VOL. II. U mif

b Heater. Rer. Aultr. lib. ix. c. 3. p. 217. Recueil

des Trait. ii. 24. c Goldaft. Polit. Imperial.
p co:. Pallav. Hist. p. o.

*^

Boo IV. most criminal condu&, and a compensation for
'---' the severest reproaches. Francis was now out

526. of his hands; and not one. of all the mighty

consequences which he had expe&ed from the
treaty that set him at liberty, was likely to take
place. His rashness in relying so far on his
own judgment as to trust to the sincerity of the
French King, in opposition to the sentiments of
his wisest ministers, was now apparent; and he
easily conjetured, that the fame confederacy,
the dread of which had induced him to set
Francis at liberty, would now be formed against
him, with that gallant and incensed Monarch
at its head. Self-condemnation and ihame, on
account of what was past, with anxious appre-
henfions concerning what might happen, were
the necessary result of these refle&ions on his
own conduct and situation. Charles, however,
was naturally firm and inflexible in all his mea-
fures. To have receded suddenly from any
article in the treaty of Madrid, would have been
a plain confession of imprudence, and a palpable
symptom of fear; he determined, therefore,
that it was most suitable to his dignity, to insist,
whatever might be the consequences, on the
ftrie execution of the treaty, and particularly
not to accept of any thing which might be
offered as an equivalent for the restitution of
Burgundy d.

Reqi;re IN consequence of this resolution, he ap-
Frnc to pointed Lannoy and Alarcon to repair, as his
ahtbehd ambassadors, to the court of France, and for-
"ipt" i mally to summon the King either to execute the

treaty with the sincerity that became him, or to
return, according to his oath, a prisoner to
Madrid. Inflead of giving them an immediate

answer,
d Guic. 1. xvii. 366.

answer, Francis admitted the deputies of theBaoKJV.
states of Burgundy to an audience in their pre- '
fence. They humbly represented to him, that '526.
he had exceeded the powers veiled in a King of
France, when he consented to alienate their
country from the crown, the domains of which
he was bound by his coronation-oath to preserve
entire and unimpaired. Francis, in return,
thanked them for their attachment to his crown,
and intreated them, though very faintly, to
remember the obligations which he lay under
to fulfil his engagements with the Emperor.
The deputies assuming an higher tone, declared
that they would not obey commands which they
confidered as illegal; and if he mhould abandon
them to the enemies of France, they had re-
solved to defend themselves to the best of their
power, with a firm purpose rather to perish than
submit to a foreign dominion. Upon which, Hs anwer.
Francis turning towards the Imperial ambaffa-
dors, reprefented'to them the impoflibility.of
performing what he had undertaken, and offered,
in lieu of Burgundy, to pay the Emperor two
millions of crowns. The Viceroy and Alarcon,
who easily perceived that the scene to which
they had been witnesses, was concerted between
the King and his fubjets, in order to impose
upon them, signified to him their master's fixed
resolution nbt to depart, in the smallest point,
from the terms of the treaty, and withdrew c.
Before they left the kingdom, they had the
mortification to hear the holy league against the
Emperor publilhed with great solemnity. June i.

CHARLES no sooner received an account of TheEmpe-
this confederacy, than he exclaimed, in the mot r^'T"pr"

U 2 publick war.

e Belcar. Comment. de Reb. Gal. 573. Mem. de Bel
lay, 97.

BooE 1V. publick mannr, and in the harlheft terms, again

-- Francis, as a Prince void of faith, and of h.

nour. He complained no lei of Clemen,
whom he solicited in vain to abandon his new
allies; he accused him of ingratitude; he taod
him with an ambition unbecoming his cha-
rater; he threatened him not only with all the
vengeance which the power of an Emperor can
inflit, but, by appealing to a general council
called up before him all the terrors arising from
the authority of those aflembles so frmidable
to the papal fee. It was nceffary, however,
to oppose something else than reproaches and
threats to the powerful combination formed
against him; and the Emperor, prompted by so
many passions, did not fail to exert himself with
unusual vigour, in order to fend supplies not
only of men, but of money, which was till more
needed, into Italy.

FeUe ope- ON the other hand, the efforts of the confede
_-aoti of
th"e oo- rates bore no proportion to that animosity again*
dcateL the Emperor with which they seemed to enter

into the holy league. Francis, it was thought,
would haveinfufed spirit andvigourinto the whole
body. He had his loft honour to repair, many inju.
ries to revenge, and the fation among the Princes
of Europe from which he had fallen to recover.
From all these powerful incitements, added to
the natural impetuosity of his temper, a war
mre fierce and bloody than any that he had
hitherto made upon his rival, was expec&ed.
But Francis had gone through such a scene of
distress; and the impression it had made was
still Co frelh in his memory, that he was become
diffident of himself, distrustful of fortune, and
desirous of tranquillity. To procure the release
of his sons, and to avoid the restitution of Bur-

gundy,

gondy, by paying some rea abe quivalent,Box IV-
were his chief objes and for the fake of thee, x~6
he would willingly have sacrificed Sfomra and the
liberties of Italy to the Emperor. He flattered
himself that the dread of the confederacy which
he had formed would of kfclf induce Charti
to liften to what was equitable; and was afraid
of employing any considerable force for the re.
lief of the Milanese, left his allies, whom he
had often found to be more attentive to their
ow~ interest, than puxtual in fulfilling their
engagements, hotid abandon him a soon as the
rmperialifts were driven out of that country, and
'deprive his negociations with the Emperor f
xhat weight which they derived from his being
at the head of a powerful league. In the mean
time the cale of Milan was pressed more clofily
than ever, and forza was now reduced to the
haft etremity. The Pope and Venetians, trust.
ing to Francis's concurence, commanded their
troops to take the field, in order to relieve him ,
and an army, more than ffficient for that
Service, was. soon formed. The Milanese, pas
fionatly attached to their unfortunate duke,
and no less exasperated againr the Imperialists,
who had opprled them so crmelly, were ready
to aid the confederates in all their enterprizes.
But the duke d'Urbino, their general, naturally
flow and ndecifive, and refrained, besides, by
his anciem enmity to the family of Medici,
from taking any ftep that might aggrandize or
add reputation to the Pope , los some oppor-
tunities; and refuifd to improve others, of
attacking the Iniperialifts, and aifing the siege.
Thee ddelays gave Bourbon time to bring up a
reinfrcment of fredh troops, and a fiapp of
money, He immediately took the command of ll, 54;

the
f Guic.. kVii. 3.

Book rV. the army, and pulied on the siege with such
'-- vigour, as quickly obliged Sforza to surrender,

'526 who retiring to Lodi, which the confederates had

furprized, left Bourbon in full pofleffion of the
reft of the dutchy, the investiture of which the
Emperor had promised to grant him .

Di.quietde THE Italians began now to perceive the game
of the :- which Francis had played, and to be sensible

that, notwithstanding all their address, and re-
finements in negociation, which they boasted of
as talents peculiarly their own, they had for
once been over-reached in those very arts by a
tramntane Prince. He had hitherto thrown al-
most the whole burden of the war upon them,
taking advantage of their efforts, in order to
enforce the proposals which he often renewed
at the court of Madrid for obtaining the liberty
of his sons. The Pope and Venetians expoftu-
lated and complainedh; but as they were not
able to rouze Francis from his inafivity, their
own zeal and vigour gradually abated; and
Clement, having already gone farther than his
timidity usually permitted him, began to accuse
himself of rashness, and to relapse into his na-
tural (tate of doubt and uncertainty.

Mefrnreof ALL the Emperor's motions depending on
the Imrc- himself alone, were more brisk and better con-

certed. The narrowness of his revenues, in-
deed, did not allow him to make any sudden or
great effort in the field ; but he abundantly sup-
plied that defect by his intrigues and negocia-
tions. The family of Colonna, the most power-
ful of all the Roman barons, had adhered uni-
formly to the Ghibeline or Imperial fa&ion, dur-

ing

t Goic. . xvii. 1. 376, &c. h Rufcclli Lettere
de Priccipi, ii. 157, &c.. 59, 6o-166.

ing those fierce contentions between the Popes BooK IV.
and Emperors, which, for everal ages, filled --
Italy and Germany with discord and bloodshed.
Though the causes which at first gave birth to
these destructive facions existed no longer, and
the rage with which they had been animated
was in a great measure spent, the Colonnas still
retained their attachment to the Imperial interest,
and, by placing themselves under the protecion
of the Emperors, secured the quiet possession of
their own territories and privileges. The Car-
dinal Pompeo Colonna, a man of a turbulent
and ambitious temper, at that time the head of
the family, had long been Clement's rival, to
whose influence in the last conclave he imputed
the disappointment of all his schemes for at-
taining the papal dignity, of which, from his
known connection with the Emperor, he thought
himself secure. This was too great an injury
to an aspiring mind ever to be forgiven ; and
though he had dissembled his resentment so far
as to vote for Clement at his election, and to ac-
cept of great offices in his court, he waited with
the utmost impatience for an opportunity of
being revenged. Don Hugo di Moncada, the
Imperial ambassador at Rome, who was no
firanger to there sentiments, easily persuaded
him, that now was the time, while all the papal
troops were employed in Lombardy, to attempt
something which would at once avenge his own
wrongs, and be of essential service to the Em-
peror his patron. The Pope, however, whose
timidity rendered him quick-fighted, was so at-
tentive to their operations, and began to be
alarmed so early, that he might have drawn to-
gether troops sufficient to have disconcerted all
Colonna's measures. But Moncada amused him
so artfully with negociations, promises, and false

intelligence,

BooK IV. intelligence, that he lulled asleep all his fofpi-

"'IV cions, and prevented his taking any of the pre-
tSz6' cautions necessary for his safety; and to the

eternal disgrace of a prince pofeffed of great
power, as well as renowned for political wisdom,

gt9 Colonna, at the head of three thousand men,

nu be seized one of the gates of his capital, while he,
Maftr of imagining himself to be in perfect security, was

altogether unprepared for refiiting such a feeble
enemy. The inhabitants of Rome permitted
Colonna's troops, from whom they apprelhnded
no injury, to advance without opposition: the
Pope's guards were dispersed in a moment; and
Clement himself, terrified at the danger, ahanmtd
of his own credulity, and deserted by almost
every person, fled with precipitation into the
castle of St. Angelo, which was immediately in-
vested. The palace of the Vatican, the church
of St. Peter, and the houses of the Pope's mini-
fters and servants, were plundered in the most
licentious manner; the reft of the city was left
unmolested. Clement, destitute of every- thing
neceflary either for fubfiftance or defence: was

Ac~omm soon obliged to demand a capitulation; and
dte - Moncada, being admitted into the castle, pre-
',pe .ad fcribed to him, with all the haughtiness of -a
ECpr. conqueror, conditions which it was not in his

power to rejet. The chief of thee was, That
Clement lhould not only grant a full pardon to
the Colonnas, but receive them into favour, and
immediately withdraw all the troops in his pay
from the army of the confederates in Lom-
bardy i.

THE Colonnas, who talked of nothing less
than of deposing Clement, and of placing Pom-

peo,

i Joii Vita Pomp. Colon. Gaic. I. xvii. 407. Ruf-
cclli Lettre d Principi, i. p. 0o. ,

peo, their kinsman, in the vacant chair of St. Boot IV.
Peter, exclaimed loudly against a treaty which '^"
left them at the mercy of a Pontiff juRly in- i6.
cenfed against them. But Moncada, attentive
only to his master's interest, paid little regard to
their complaints, and, by this fortunate mei-
sure, broke entirely the power of the confe-
derates.

WHILE the army of the confederates suffered The Impe-

such a considerable diminution, the Imperialists renfrored.
received two great reinforcements; one from
Spain, under the command of Lannoy and Alar-
con, which amounted to fix thousand men; the
other was raised in the Empire by George
Frondrperg, a German nobleman, who having
served in Italy with great reputation, had ac-
quired such influence and popularity, that mul-
titudes of his countrymen, fond on every occa-
sion of engaging in military enterprizes, and im-
patient at that juncure to escape from the op-
pression of their superiors in religious as well as
civil matters, crowded to his standard; so that
without any other gratuity than the payment
of a crown to each man, fourteen thousand
enlisted in his service. To there the Archduke
Ferdinand added two thousand horse, levied in
the Autrian dominions. But although the
'Emperor had raised troops, he could not remit
the fums necessary for their support. His or-
'dinary revenues were exhausted; the credit of
princes, during the infancy of commerce, was
not extensive and the Cortes of Castile, though
every art had been tried to gain them, and some
innovations had been made in the constitution,
in order to secure their concurrence, peremp-
torily refused to grant Charles any extraordi-

nary

B-cL IV. nary supply k; so that the more his army in-
'- - creased in number, the more were his generals

.Szt

The Em- embarrafled and distressed. Bourbon, in par-
pto'.f- ticular, was involved in such difficulties, that
,_n^d he flood in need of all his address and courage

in order to extricate himself. Vast fums were
due to the Spanish troops already in the Milan-
el., when 1' rondlperg arrived with sixteen thou-
find hungry Germans, destitute of every thing.
Both made their demands with equal fierceness;
the former ciaiming their arrears, and the lat-
ter, the pay which had been promised them on
their entering Lombardy. Bourbon was alto-
get er incapable of giving fatisfation to either.
In this situation he was constrained to commit
aces of violence extremely hocking to his own
nature, which was generous and humane. He
seizcd the principal citizens of Milan, and by
threats, and even by torture, forced from them
a considerable fum: he rifled the churches of
all their plate and ornaments. The inadequate
supply which there afforded, hediftributed among
the soldiers, with so many soothing expreflions
of his sympathy and affie&ion, that though it
fell far short of the fums due to them, it ap-
peased their present murmurs '.

Bob.,n AMONrG other expedients for raising money,
frl. Mo,o Bourbon granted his life and liberty to Morone,
albey. who having been kept in prison since his in-

trigue with Pescara, had been condemned to die
by the Spanish judges empowered to try him.
For this remission he paid twenty thousand du-
cats; and such were his singular talents, and the
wonderful ascendant which he always acquired
over the minds of those to whom he had accees,

that

k Sandov. i. 814. ' Ripamond. Hifi. Mcdiol.
lib. iz. p. 717.

that in a few days, from being Bourbon's pri- Boos IV.
loner, he became his prime confident, with whom
he consulted in all affairs of importance. To s526
his insinuations muff be imputed the suspicions
which Bourbon began to entertain, that the Em-
peror had never intended to grant him the in-
veftiture of Milan, but had appointed Leyva,
and the other Spanifi generals, rather to be
spies on his condu&, than to co-operate heartily
towards the execution of his schemes. To him
likewise, as he still retained, at the age of four-
score, all the enterprizing spirit of youth, may
be attributed the bold and unexpected measure
on which Bourbon soon after ventured m.

SUCH, indeed, were the exigencies of the Im- Hi deibe.

perial troops in the Milanese, that it became in- r,"a t"h
difpenfably necessary to take some immediatehis motio".
ftep for their relief. The arrears of the soldiers
increased daily; the Emperor made no remit-
tances to his generals and the utmost rigour
of military extortion could draw nothing more
from a country entirely drained and ruined. In
this situation there was no choice left, but either -
to disband the army, or to march for subsistence
into the enemy's country. The territories of
the Venetians lay nearest at hand; but they,
with their usual foresight and prudence, had
taken such precautions as secured them from
any insult. Nothing, therefore, remained but to
invade the dominions of the church, or of the
Florentines; and Clement had of late a&ed such
a part, as merited the severest vengeance from
the Emperor. No sooner did his troops return
to Rome after the infurre&ion of the Colonnas,
than, without paying any regard to the treaty
with Moncada, he degraded the Cardinal Co-

lonna,
m Guic. 1. xvii. 419.

Bod IV. lonna, excommunicated the reft of the fifat,
'"~- seized their places of fregth, and wafted their

'56s land with all the cruelty which the smart of a

recent injury naturally excites. After this, he
turned his arms against Naples; and as his ope-
rations were seconded by the French set, he
made some progress towards the conqoet of chit
kingdom; the Viceroy being no less deflitutt
than the other Imperial generals of the money
requisite for a vigorous defence .

s12-. THESE proceedings of the Pope justified, in
ch',. to appearance, the mcalurcs which Bourbon's fitut-
pre'S ter- tion rendered neceffty; and heie abt ebo ee-

i cuting them under such disadvantages, as furnilh

the trongeft proof both of he dcfpair to which
he was reduced, and of the mgeamfs of his xbi-
lities, which were able to surmount so many ob-
ftacles. Having committed te government of
Milan to Leyva, whom he was not unwidling
to leave behind, he began his march in the depth
JaInry 3C. of winter, at the head of cwetey.five d~ofand

men, compoied of nriono differing from each
other in language and manners without moncv,
without magaeines, without arnilery, without
carriaes; in Otort, withont any of thofi thing
which are necffiary to the smallet parry, and
which fcm elfential to the ekitbence ad mo-
tions of a great arrfy. His rom lay through
a country cut by rivr and mountains, in which
the roads were altoft impra&icable as ah ad-
dition to his diffitulie, the enemy's mrmy, fa-
perior to his own in number, r at hand m
WRtwh ait his motions, ad to improve very
advantage. But his trops, impatent of heir
present hardlips, and awed by the hopes of

a Jovii Vita Pomp. Colon. Gic. 1. xviii. 424.

immense booty, without confidcring how illBooK IV.
provided they were for a march, followed him '""
with great cheerfulness. His first scheme was s527.
to have made himself matker of Placentia,
and to have gratified his soldiers with the
plunder of that city; but the vigilance of
the confederate generals rendered the design
abortive; nor had he better ficcefs in his pro-
jec for the redution of Bologna, which was
seasonably supplied with as many troops as fe-
cured it from the insults of an army which had
neither artillery nor ammunition. Having failed
in both these attempts to become maier of some
great city, he was under a necessity of ad-
vancing. But he had now been two months in
the field; his troops had suffered every calamity
that a long march, together with the uncom-
mon rigour of the season, could bring upon
men destitute of all necessary accommodations
in an enemy's country; the magnificent pro-
mises to which they trusted, had proved alto-
gether vain; they saw no profpe& of relief;
their patience, tried to the utmost, failed at last,
and they broke out into open mutiny. Some Mutiny of
officers, who ralhly attempted to restrain them, hi troop.
fell victims to their fury; Bourbon himself, not
daring to appear during the first transports of
their rage, was obliged to fly secretly from his
quarters . But this sudden ebullition of wrath
began at last to subside; when Bourbon, who
pofeffed in a wonderful degree the art of govern-
ing the minds of soldiers, renewed his promises
with more confidence than formerly, and assured
them, that they would be soon accomplished.
He endeavoured to render their hardships more
tolerable, by partaking of them himself; he
fared no better than the meanest centinel; he

marched
o Guic. 1. xviii. 434. Jovii Vit. Colon. 1i.

BooK IV. marched along with them on foot; he joined
^'- ' them in inging their camp-ballads, in which,
'527' with high praises of his valour, they mingled

many frokes of military raillery on his poverty;
and wherever they came, he allowed them, as a
foretaste of what he had promised, to plunder
the adjacent villages at discretion. Encouraged
by all these footbing arts, they entirely forgot
their sufferings and complaints, and followed
him with the fame implicit confidence as for-
merly P.

Tbe po'.e- BOUR BON, meanwhile, carefully concealed
inrefoI.ioo his intentions. Rome and Florence, not know-
and impr- w
dad~' ing on which the blow would fall, were held

in the most disquieting state of fufpence. Cle-
ment, equally solicitous for the safety of both,
flu&uated in more than his usual uncertainty;
and while the rapid approach of danger called
for prompt and decisive measures, he spent the
time in deliberations which came to no iflue,
or in taking resolutions, which, next day, his
restless mind, more sagacious in discerning than
in obviating difficulties, overturned, without
being able to fix on what should be substituted
in their place. At one time he determined to
unite himself more clofcly than ever with his
allies, and to push on the war with vigour; at
another, he inclined to bring all differences to
a final accommodation by a treaty with Lannoy,
who knowing his passion for negociation, soli-
cited him incessantly with proposals for that

Mauh 15. purpose. His timidity at length prevailed, and
C',I"', led him to conclude an agreement with Lan-
the viceroyno, of which the following were the chief
o N.t.'& articles: That a suspension of arms should take

place between the Pontifical and Imperial troops

for
P Ocuv;.s de Brant. vol iv. p. 246, &c.

for eight months; That Clement (hould ad-Booc IV.
vance sixty thousand crowns towards satisfying
the demands of the Imperial army; That the 1527
Colonnas hould be absolved from censure, and
their former dignities and poflrefions be restored
to them; That the viceroy should come to
Rome, and prevent Bourbon from approaching
nearer to that city, or to Florence q. On this
hasty treaty, which deprived him of all hopes
of assistance from his allies, without affording
him any solid foundation of security, Clement
relied so firmly, that, like a man extricated at
once out of all difficulties, he was at perfec
cafe, and in the fulness of his confidence dif-
banded all his troops, except as many as were
sufficient to guard his own person. This ama-
zing confidence of Clement's, who on every
other occasion was fearful and suspicious to
excess, appeared so unaccountable to Guicciar-
dini, who being at that time the pontifical com-
miffary-general and resident in the confederate
army, had great opportunity as well as great
abilities for observing how chimerical all his
hopes were, that he imputes the Pope's condut,
at this juncture, wholly to infatuation, which
those who are doomed to ruin cannot avoid r.

LANNOY, it would seem, intended to have whichBour-

executed the treaty with great sincerity; and :rds.
having detached Clement from the confederacy,
wished to turn Bourbon's arms against the Vene-
tians, who, of all the powers at war with the
Emperor, had exerted the greatest vigour.
With this view he dispatched a courier to Bour-
bon, informing him of the suspension of arms,
which, in the name of their common master, he
had concluded with the Pope. Bourbon had

other
q Guic. 1. xviii 436. r Guic. lib. xviii. 446.

Boo IV. ocher schemes; and he had prosecuted them

now too far to think of retreating. To have
51sz7 mentioned a retreat to his soldiers, would have

been dangerous; his command was independent
on Lannoy; he was fond of mortifying a man
whom he had many reasons to hate : for the
realns, without paying the leat regard to the
message, he continued to ravage the ecclefiatial
territories, and to advance towards Floresn.
Upon this, all Clement's terror and aie/y
returning with new force, he had receurfe to
Lannoy, and intreated and conjured him to put
a top to Bourbon's progref. Lannoy accord.
ingly et out for his camp, but durif not. ap.
proach it; Bourbon's soldiers having got notce
of the truce, raged and threatened, demanding
the accomplhment of the promises to which
they had truted; their general himself could
hardly restrain them; every person in Rome per-
ceived that nothing remained but to prepare for
refiting a ftonm which it was now impofible to
difpe. Clement alone, relying on some ambi-
guous and deceitful profefions which Bourbon
made of his inclination towards peace, funk
back into his former security .

Ad~rnct BOURBON, on his part, was far from being
°~ free from olicitude. All his attempts on any

place of importance had hitherto mifcaried;
and Florence, towards which he had been ap-
proaching for ome time, was, by the arrival of
the duke d'Urbino's army, put in a condition
to set his power at defiance. As it now became
necefry to change his rout, and to take in-
uantly some new resolution, he fixed without
hesitation on one no les daring in itself, than
it was impious according to the opinion of that

age.
* Guic. 1. xvii. 437, &c. Mem. de Bellay. p. moo.

age. This was to assault and plunder Rome. Boot IV.
Many reasons, however, prompted himt to it. '-v-
He was fond of thwarting Lannoy, who had '527
undertaken for the safety of that city ; he ima-
gined that the Emperor would be highly pleased
to fee Clement, the chief author of the league
againt him, humbled; he flattered himself,
that by gratifying the rapacity of his soldiers
with such immense booty, he would attach them
for ever to his interest; or (which is still more
probable than any of these) he hoped that by
means of the power and fame, which he would-*
acquire from the conquest of the first city in
Christendom, that he might lay the foundation
of an independent power; and that after ihaking
off all connecion with the Emperor, he might
take poffellion of Naples, or of some of the ta-
lian fates in his own name '.

WHATEVER his motives were, he executed The Pnp's

his resolution with a rapidity equal to the bold- P0rc," '
ness with which he had formed it. His soldiers,
now that they had their prey in full view, com-
plained neither of fatigue, nor famine, nor
want of pay. No sooner did they begin to
move from Tuscany towards Rome, than the
Pope, sensible at las how fallacious the hopes
had been on which he reposed, started from his
security. But. no time now remained, even for
a bold and decisive Pontiff, to have taken
proper measures, or to have formed any effec-
tual plan of defence. Under Clement's feeble
condut, all was consternation, disorder, and
irresolution. He colleced, however, such of
his disbanded soldiers as still remained in the
city; he armed the artificers of Rome, and the
footmen and train-bearers of the Cardinals;

VOL. II. X he
t Brant. iv. Z71. vi. 89. Belcaii Comment. 594.

BOoms i.bc repaired the breaches in the walls; he begun
'"'"-to eret new works, e acommunicated Bour-
's53' bon and an his t rops, branding the Germans

with the name of Luthera, ad the Spaniards
with that of Moors *. Trfting o th ief-
fefual military prpaaons, or to his fpiritu
arms, which were fill more despised by rapaci-
ous soldies, he ecms to have laid aside his na-
rural timidity, and, contrary to the advice of all
his cneos, determined to wait the approach
of an enemy whom he might easily have avoided,
by a imely retmea

Alt o0 BOUIozBQ, who saw the nceflity of dispatch,
RM sow that his intentions were known, advanced

with filch speed, that he gained several marches
on the duke d'Urbino's army, and encamped
in the plains of Rome on the evening of the
fifth of May. From thence he hewed his fol-
dier the palaces and churches of that city, into
which, as the capital of the Christian common-
wealth, the riches of all Europe had flowed
during many centuries, without having been
once violated by any hostile hand; and com-
manding them to rrl themselves that night,
as a preparation for the assault next day, pro-
mifed them, in reward of their toils and valour,
the possession of all the treasures accumulated
there.

EARLY in the morning, Bourbon, who had

determined to diftinguiih that day either by his
death or the fuccefe of his enterprize, appeared
at the head of his troops, clad in complete
armour, above which he wore a vest of white
tilTuc, that he might be more conspicuous both

to
a Scckend. lib. ii. 68.

to his friends and to his enemies; and as all oolIV.
depended on one bold impreflion, he led them ' -'
intantly to scale the walls. Three diftinf bo- '
dies, one of Germaihs, another of Spaniards,
and the last of Italians, the three different
nations of whom the army was composed, were
appointed to this service; a separate attack was
afigned to each;' and the whole army advanced
to upport them as occasion lhould require. A
thick mif concealed their approach until they
reached almost the brink of the ditch which
surrounded the suburbs: having.planted their
ladder in a moment, each brigade rushed on
to the aflault with an impetuosity heightened
by national emulation. They were received at
first with fortitude equal to their own; the
Swiss in the Pope's guards, and the veteran fol-
diers who had been aflembled, fought with a
courage becoming men to whom the defence
of the noblest city in the world was entrused.
Bourbon's troops, notwithstanding all their
valour, gained no ground, and even began to
give way; when their leader, perceiving that urbon
on this critical moment the fate of the day de-
pended, threw himself from his horse, pressed
to the front, snatched a scaling ladder from a
soldier, planted it against the wall, and began
to mount it, encouraging his men, with his voice
and hand, to follow him. But at that very
instant, a musket bullet from the ramparts
pierced his groin with a wound, which he im-
mediately felt to be mortal; but he retained so
much preence of mind as to desire those who
were near him to cover his body with a cloak,
that his death might not dishearten his troops;
and soon after he expired with a courage worthy
of a better cause, and which would have enti-
tled him to the highest praise, if he had thus

X 2 fallen

Boo IV.fallen in dfence of his country, not at the head
-v of its enemies .

QThc7 THIS fatal event could not be concealed fom

the army; the soldiers soon miled their gne-
ral, whom they were accutomed to fee in every
time of danger; but inftiad of being dilhart-
ened by their los, it animated them with new
valour the name of Bourbon rciunded along
the line accompanied with the cry of ed
and r ge. The veterans who defended the
walls, were toon overpowered by numbers;
the untrained body of city recruits fled at the
fight of danger, and the enemy, with irresistible
violnce, ruhed into the town.

DUI wo the combat, Clement was employed

at the altar of St. Peter's in offering up to
Heaven unavailing prayers for vitory. No
sooner was he inormed that his troops began to
give way, than he fled with precipitation; and
with an infatuation till more amazing than any
thing already mentioned, instead of making his
ekape by the oppofitc gate where there was no
enemy to oppose it, he Ihut himself up, together
with thirteen cardinals, the foreign ambafiadors,
and many prfons of diftin&ion, in the castle of
St. Angelo, which, from his late misfortune, he
might have known to be an insecure retreat.
In his way from the Vatican to that fortress, he
saw his troops flying before an enemy who pur-
sued without giving quarter; he heard the cries
and lamentations of the Roman citizens, and
beheld the beginning of those calamities which

his

x MN. de Bellay, ol. Guic. 1. xiii. p. 445, &c;
Ocua. de Brant. i. 27, &c.

his own credulity and ill-condut had broughtBoot IV.
upon his fubjefts . '-.*

s5«7.

IT is impossible to describe, or even to imna- Podred.

gine, the misery and horror of that scene which
followed. Whatever a city taken by storm can
dread from military rage unrestrained by difci-
pline; whatever excefres the ferocity of the
Germans, the avarice of the Spaniards, or the
licentiousness of the Italians could commit4
there the wretched inhabitants were' obliged to
susser. Churches, palaces, and the houses of
private persons, were plundered without dif--
tinction. No age, or charatr, or' sex, was
exempt from Injury. Cardinals, nobles, priefli,
matrons, virgins, were all the prey 'of soldiers,
and at the mercy of men deaf to the voice of
humanity. Nor did thcfe outrages cease, as is
usual in towns which are arned by assault,
when the first fury of the form was over the
Imperialists kept pofleffion of Rome several
months; and during all that time the insolence
and brutality of the soldiers hardly abated.
Their booty in ready money alone amounted to
a million of ducats; what they railed by ran-
foms and exacions far exceeded that fum.
Rome, though taken several different times by
the northern nations, who over-ran the Empire
in the fifth and sixth centuries, was never
treated with 'o much cruelty by the barbarous
and heathen Huns, Vandals, or Goths, as now
by the bigotted subje&s of a catholick Mo-
narch 2.

AFTER

Y Jov. Vit Colon. 165. s Jov. Vit. Colon. 166.
Guic. 1. xviii. 44o, &c. Comment. de capta urbe Roma
ap. Scardium, ii. 23o. Ulloa Vita dell. Carlo V. p. o1
&c. Gianonne Hit. of Nap. B. xxxi. c. 3. p. 57.

BoOs IV. AFTER Blurbon's death, the command of
*'"''the Imperial army devolved on Philibert de
Te~pC, Chalons prince of Orange, who, with difficulty,
b-tf~i a'rprevaled on as many of his soldiers to defft
s;t. from the pillage, as were necefary to invest th

caltle of St Angelo. Clement was immediatly
sensible of his error in having retired into that
ill-provided and untenable fort. But as the
Imperialis, scorning discipline, and intent only
on plunder, puhed the siege with little vigour,
he did not despair of holding out, until the dutke
d'Jrbino ihould come to his relief, That ge-
neral advanced at the head of an aray com-
ppked of Vepeians, Florentines, and Swiss in
the pay of France, of sufficient strength to
have delivered Cmcnt from the present danger.
But d'Urbino, preferring the indulgence of his
hatred against the family of Medici to the glory
of delivering the capital of Christendom, and
the head of the church, pronounced the enter-
prize to e too hazardous; ad, from an ex-
quifite reinement in revenge, having marched
forward so far, that his army being seen from
the ramparts of St. Angelo, Battered the Pope
with the profpet of certain relief, he imme-

sor,~ diatly retired'. Clement, deprived of every
hqmnf i rsource, and reduced to such extremity of fa-

mine as to feed op alffles-flb, was obliged to
capitulate on such conditions as the conquerors
were pl d to prescribe. He agreed to pay
four hundred thousand ducats to the army; to
surrender to the Emperor all the places of
ftrcngth belonging to the church; and, besides
giving hostages, to remain a prisoner himlelf
until the chief articles were performed. He
was committed to the care of Alarcon, who,
by his severe vigilance in guarding Francis, had

given
Guic. 1. xiii. 450. b Joy. Vit. Colon. 167.

given full proof of his being qualified for thatBooK IV.
office; and thus, by a singular accident, the '"
fame man had the custody of the two most illus- '5t'
trious personages who had been made prisoners
in Europe during several ages.

THE account of this extraordinary and un-The Erp-

expeted event was no less furprizing than agree- 'torb,,
able to the Emperor. ut in order to concealjunare..
his joy from his fubjecs, who were filled with
horror at the success and crimes of their coun-
trymen, and to leflin the indignation of the reft
of Europe, he declared that Rome had been
aflaulted without any order from him. He
wrote to all the princes with whom he was in
alliance, disclaiming his having had any know-
ledge of Bourbon's intentionc. He put him-
self and court into mourning; commanded 'the
reoicings which had been ordered for the birth
of his son Philip to be (topped; and employing
an artifice no lefi hypocritical than gross, he
appointed prayers and processions throughout
all Spain for the recovery of the Pope's lierty,
which by an order to his generals he could have
immediately granted him .

THE, good fortune of the house of Auftrasolyrn;nn.

was no less onfpicuous in another part of Eu- des Hn"-
rope. Solyman having invaded Hungary with g r7
an army three hundred thousand strong, Lewis
II. King of that country, and of Bohemia, a
weak and unexperienced prince, advanced ridhly
to meet him with a body of men which did not
amount to thirty thousand. With an impru-
dence ffill more unpardonable, he'gave the
command of these troops to Paul Tomirri, 'a

'Franicifcan

c Rufcelli Lettre di Principi, ii. 234. d Sleid. lo.
Sandov. i. az. Mauroc. Hit. Vcneta. lib. iii. 220.

Boor 1V. Francican monk, archbilhop of Golocza This
'%1` awkward general, in the dref of his order, girt
1537- with its cord, marched at the head of the

troops; and hurried on by his own prefump
tion, as well as by the impetuofiy of nobles
who defpied danger, but were impatient of

AgR a. long service, he fought the fatal batle of Mo-
Ds'6s hacz, in which the King, the flower of the
her Ha- Hungarian nobility, and upwards of twenty
o i thouland men fell the viims of his folly and
thra . ill-condu& Solyman, after his vicory, sized

and kept paolfion of several towns of greatcft
ftrgen in the fouhemn provinces of Hungary,
and over-running the ret of the country, car-
ried near two hundred thouind persons into
captivity. As Lewis was the las male of the
royal family of Jagellon, the Archduke Ferdi-
nand claimed both his crowns. This claim was
founded on a double title; the one derived.
from the ancient pretensions of the house of
Austria to both kingdoms; the other from the
right of his wife, the only sifter of the deceased
Monarch The feudal inffitutions however sub-
sifted both in Hungary and Bohemia in such
vigour, and the nobles pofieffed such extensive
power, that the crowns were fill eleEive, and
Ferdinand's rights, if they had not been power-
fully fupportd, would have met with little

FSa regard. But his own personal merit' the re-
.;nd esped due to the brother of the greatest Monarch

in Chriendom; the neceflity of chafing a
prince able to afford his subje&s some additional
protection against the Turkilh arms, which, as
they had recently felt their power, they greatly
dreaded; together with the intrigues of his
fiftcr, who had been married to the late King;
overcame the prejudices which the Hungarians
had conceived against the Archduke as a so-

reigner;

reigner and though a considerable party voted Booz IV.
for the Vaywode of Tranfilvania, at length -
secured Ferdinad the throne of that Kingdom. 's'7'
The states of Bohemia imitated the eample of
their neighbour kingdom; but in order to as-
certain and secure their own privileges, they
obliged Ferdinand, before his coronation, to
fubfcribc a deed which they term a Rewrfe,
declaring that he held that crown not by any
previous right, but by their gratuitous and vo-
luntary letion. By such a vast accion of ter-
ritories, the hereditary polflion of which they
secured in proces of time to their family, the
princes of the house of Aufria attained that
pre-eminence in power which hath rendered them
so formidable to the reft of Germany .

THE difcnions between the Pope and Em-Pr'es r

peror proved extremely favourable to the pro-i
grefs of Lutheranifim. Charles, exasperated by
Clement's conduc, and fully employed in op-
posing the league which he had formed against
him, had little inclination and less leisure to
take any measures for suppressing the new opi-
nions in Germany. In a diet of the Empire, June .s
held at Spires, the state of religion came to be st6'
confidered, and all that the Emperor required
of the princes was, that they would wait pati,
ently, and. without encouraging innovations,
for the meeting of a general council which he
had demanded of the Pope. They, in return,
acknowledged' the convocation of a council to
be the proper and regular ftep towards reform-
ing abuses in the church; but contended, that
a national council held in Germany would be

more

c Steph. Broderick Procancelarii Hungar. Clades in

campo Mohacz ap. Scardium, ii 218. P. Barre Hist. d'Al-
lemagne, tom. viii. part i. p. 198.

Boo IV. more efietual for that purpose than what he
--h bad proposed To his advice, concerning the
'5'7. discouragement of innovations, they paid so

little regard, that even during the meeting of
the diet at Spires, the divines who attended the
Elctor of Saxony and Landgrave of Hesse-
Caffcl thither, preached publickly, and admi-
nitered the sacraments according to the rites
of the Reformed church . TheEmperor's own
example emboldened the Germans to treat the
Papal authority with little reverence. During
the heat of his resentment against Clement, he
had publilhed a long reply to an angry bievc
which the Pope had intended as an apology for
his own condu& In this manifeRto, the 'Em-
peror, after having enumerated many instances
of that Pontiffs ingratitude, deceit, and ambi-
tion, all which he painted in the strongest and
most aggravated colours, appealed from him to
a genralcounciL At the. hme time, he wrote
to the college of Cardinals, complaining of
Clement's partiality and injufticc; and requirng
them, if he refuted or delayed to call a council,
to manifet their concern for the peace of the
Christian Church, so hamefully negleed by
its chief pastor, by summoning that aflembly in
their own names. This manifesto, little infe-
rior in virulence to the invectives of Luther him-
self, was dispersed over Germany with great in-
duftry, and being eagerly read by perons of
every rank, did much more than counterbalance
the effeit of all Charles's declarations against the
new opinions.

f Sleid. 103. e Goldaf, Polit. Imper. p. 984.

THE

# THE HISTORY OF THE REIGN OF THE EMPEROR CHARLES V. BOOK V.

THE
HISTORY

OF THE
R E I G N

OF TE
EMPEROR CHARLES V.

BOO.K V.

S.HE account of the cruel manner in BooK V.
1 which the Pope ,had been treated, filled <--
all Europe with aftonif~nent or horror. To s1, 7.
fee a Christian Emperor, who, by poffeiingdigntion
that dignity, ought to have been the protecor h% e
and advocate of the holy fee, lay violent hands Empror.
on him who represented Christ on earth, and
detain his sacred person in a rigorous captivity,
was confidered as an impiety that merited the
severest vengeance, and which called for the
immediate interposition of every dutiful son of
the church. Francis and Henry, alarmed at the
progress of the Imperial arms in Italy, had,
even before the taking of Rome, entered into a
closer alliance; and, in order to give some.
check to the Emperor's ambition, had agreed
to make a vigorous diversion in the Low-
Countries. The force of every motive which
had influenced them at that time, was now in-

creased;

BooK V. creafd; and to thee were added, the desire of

- rescuing the Pope out of the Emperor's hands,
'527- a meaure no less political, than it appeared-to

be pious. This, however, rendered it iiecelFry
to abandon their designs on the Low-Countries,
and to make Italy the feat of war, as it was by
vigorous operations in that country, they might
promise most certainty upon delivering Rome,
and secting Clement at liberty. Francis iceing
now ienfible, that, in his system with regard to
the affairs of Italy, the spirit of refinement had
carried him too far; and that, by an exces of
remiTffefs, he had allowed Charles to attain ad-
vantages which he might eaiy have pre~td
was eager to make reparation for an error of
which he was not often guilty, by an aivity
more suitable to his temper. Henry thought
his inerpofition necefary in order to hinder
the Emperor from becoming master of all Italy,
and acquiring by that means such superiority of
power, as would enable him, for the future, to
diatue without controul to e other princes of
Europe. Wolfey, whom Francis ihd taken
care to secure by flattery and prents, the cer-
tain methods of gaining his favour, hegleed
nothing hat could incense his master agaif the
Emperor. Besides all these publick conlfdepa-
tions, Henry was influenced by one of a more
private nature; having begun about this time to
form his great scheme of divorcing Catherine of
Aragon, towards the execution of which he
knew that the fandion of papal authority would
be neccfiry, he was desirous to acquire as much
ment as poflible with Clement, by appearing to
be the chief inltrument of his deliverance.

Cfa.r, TnH negociation, between princes thus dif-
j"=y,'. poed, was not tedious. Wolfey himlelf con-

duaed it, on the part of his sovereign, with

unbounded

unbounded powers. Francis treated with him Boor V.
in person at Amiens, where the Cardinal ap-'-
peard, and was received with royal magnifi- 15s27
cence. A marriage between the duke of Or-
leans and the princess Mary was agreed to as
the basis of the confederacy; it was resolved
that Italy mhould be the theatre of war; the
strength of the army which should take the field,
as well as the contingent of troops or of money
which each prince hould furnilh, were fettled;
and if the Emperor did not accept of the pro-
pofals they whi they

were jointly to make him, they

bound themselves immediately to declare war,
and to begin hoRilities. Henry, who took every Augut ,s.
resolution with impetuolty, entered To eagerly
into this new alliance, that in order to give
Francis the strongest proof of his friendihip and
refpet, he formally renounced the ancient.claim
of the English Monarchs to the crown of
France, which had long been the pride and ruin
of the nation as a full compensation for which,
he accepted a pension of fifty thousand crowns,
to be paid annually to himself and his fuccef-
fors .

THE Pope, being unable to fulfil the con- TheFIoroe

ditions of his capitulation, still remained a t
prisoner under the severe custody of Alarcon. fredum-
The Florentines no sooner heard of what had
happened at Rome, than they ran to arms in a
tumultuous manner; expelled the Cardinal di
Cortona, who governed their city in the Pope's
name; defaced the arms of the Medici; broke
in pieces the Ratues of Leo and Clement; and
declaring themselves a free state, re-eftabliihed
their ancient popular government. The Vene-
tians,- taking advantage of the calamity of their

ally
* Herbert, 83, &c. Rym. Fd. 1+. o$.

Boo V. ally the Pope, seized Ravnna, and other plaes
~~ -belonging to the church, under pretext ofkcp
527' ing them in depofite. The dukes of Urbino

and Ferrara laid hold likewise on part of the
spoils of the unfortunate Pontiff, whom they
coidrcd as irretrievably ruined b.

Tie p.. LAmNOv, on the other hand, laboured to de-
.'~. rive some solid benefit from that unforefcen

event, which gave such splendour and superiority
to his maes arms. For this purpoof he
marched to Rome, together with Moncada, and
the marquis del Guafto, at the head of all the
roops which they could assemble in the king-
dom of Naples. The arrival of this reinforce-
ment brought new calamities on the unhappy
citizens of Rome; for the soldiers envying the
wealth of their companions, imitated their
licence, and with the utmost rapacity gathered
the glenings, which had escaped the avarice of
the Spaniards and Germans. There was not
now an army in Italy capable of making head
against the Imperialif; and nothing more was
requisite to reduce Bologna, and the other towns
in the ecclfiaftical tat, than to have appeared
before them. But the soldiers having been so
long accustomed, under Bourbon, to an entire
relaxation of dicipline, and having tafted the
sweets of living at discretion in a great city,
almost without the concroul of a superior, were
become so impatient of military subordination,
and so averse to service, that they refused to
lave Rome, unless all their arrears were paid;
a condition which they knew to be impossible.
At the fame time they declared, that they
would not obey any other person than the prince
of Orange, whom the army had chosen general.
Lannoy, finding that it was no longer lfe for

- him
b Guic. 1. s8. 453.

him to remain among licentious troops, who BooK V.
despised his dignity, and hated his person, re- :
turned to Naples; oon after the marquis del '527'
Guafto and Moncada thought it prudent to
quit Rome for the fame reason. The prince of
Orange, a general only in name, and by the
most precarious of all tenures, the good-will of
soldiers whom success and licence had rendered
capricious, was obliged to pay more attention
to their humours, than they did to his commands.
Thus the Emperor, instead of reaping ahy of
the advantages which he might have expected
from the reduction of Rome, had the mortifi-
cation to fee the most formidable body of troops
that he had ever brought into the field, conti-
nue in a state of inactivity from which it was im-
possible to rouze them c.

THIS gave the King of France and the Vene- The Frenda

tians leisure to form new schemes, and to enter "'"yil
into new engagements for delivering the Pope, 1 i.ly.
and preserving the liberties of Italy. The
new restored republick of Florence very inr-
prudently joined with them; and Lautrec, of
whose abilities the Italians entertained a much
more favourable opinion than his own master,
was, in order to gratify them, appointed gene-
raliffimo of the league. It was with the utmost
reluctance he undertook that office, being un-
willing to expose himself a second time to the
difficulties and disgraces which the negligence
of the King, or the malice of his favourites,
might bring upon him. The best troops in
France marched under his command; and the
King of England, though he had not yet de-
clared war agamft the Emperor, advanced a
considerable fum towards carrying on the expe-

dition.
c Gic. 1. 18. 44.

voo V. diton. Lautec's fir operations were prudent,
-- ' vigorous, and fuccfifuL By the afiftanc of

.'2 Andrew Doria, the abkft f officer of that age,
ZuL bhe renderd himself maler of Genoa, and re-

eftablibhed in that republick the fation of the
Fregodi, together with the dominion of France.
He obliged Alexandria to surrender after a short
siege, and reduced all the country on that fide
of the Teino. He took Pavia, which had so
long reitd the arms of his sovereign, by affult,
and plundered it with that cruelty which the
memory of the fatal difater that had befallen
the French nation before its walls naturally in-
spired. All the Milanede, which, Antonio de
Leyva defanded with a small body of trops,
kept together, and supported by his own addrelf
and industry, muf have soon submitted to his
power, if he had continued to bend the force
of his arms aaini that country. But Lautrec
durst not complete a conquef which would
have been so honourable to hmelf, and of such
advantage to the league Francis knew his
confederaes to be more desirous of circumfcrib,
ing the Imperial power in Italy, than of acquir-
ing new territories for him, and was afraid that
if Sforza were once re-e~ablilhed in Milan, they
would ifcond but coldly the attack which he
intended to make on the kingdom of Naples.
For this realbn he inftruted Lautrec not to pufl
his operations with too much vigour in Lom-
bardy; and happily the importunities of the
Pope, and the solicitations of the Florentines,
the one for relief, and the otheforor protetion,
were so urgent as afforded him a decent pretext
to march forward without yielding to the intrea-
tics of the Venetians and Sforza, who infifed on
his laying siege to Milan d.

WHILE

d Guic. . xviii. 461. BeUay, 107, &c. Mauroc.
Hil. Vcnet. lib. iii. 238.

WHILE Lautrec advanced slowly towards BooxV.

Rome, the Emperor had time to deliberate con-
cerning the disposal of the Pope's person, who Th.eSme.
still remained a prisoner in the castle of St. An;. rot ets the
gelo; Notwithtanding the specious veil of fy.
religion with which he usually endeavoured to
cover his aions, Charles, in many instances,
appears to have been but little under the in-
fluence of religious considerations, and had fre-
quently, on this occaflon, expressed an inclina-
tion to transport the Pope into Spain, that he
might indulge his ambition with the fpetacle of
the two nm6ft ilufrious personages in Europe
fucceffivdy prisoners in his court. But the fear
of giving new offence to all Christendom, and
of fillig his own fubjets with horror, obliged
him to forego that fatisfa&ion . The progrefi
of the confederates made it now necessary either
to set the Pope at liberty, or to remove him to
some place of confinement more secure than the
castle of St. Angelo. Many considerations in-
duced him to prefer the former, particularly his
want of the money requisite as well for recruiting
his army, as for paying off the vast arrears due
to it. In order to obtain this, he' had assembled
the Cortes of Castile at Valladolid about the Feb. t1.
beginning of the year, and having laid before
them the state of his affairs, and represented the
necessity of making great preparations to resist
the enemies, whom envy at the success which
had crowned his arms would unite againt him,
he demanded a large supply in the noft pressing
terms; but the Cortes, as the nation was already
exhausted by extraordinary donatives, refused
to load it with any new burden, and, in spite of
all his endeavours to gain or to intimidate the

VOL. II. Y Ameabers,

c Guic 1. 1. 457.

BooK V. members, persisted in this resolution . No re-
'- ' source, therefore, remained but the extorting

527' from Clement, by way of ransom, a fum sus-

ficient for discharging what was due to his
troops, without which it was vain to mention
to hem their leaving Rome.

NOR was the Pope inacive on his part, or

his intrigues unsuccessful, towards hafteningfuch
a treaty. By flattery, and the appearance of
unbounded confidence, he disarmed the resent-
ment of cardinal Colonna, and wrought upon
his vanity, which made him desirous of shew.
ing the world, that as his power had at first
depressed the Pope, it could now raise him to
his former dignity. By favours and promises
he gained MoronS, who, by one of those whim-
ical revolutions which occur so often in his life,
and which so strongly display his character, had
now recovered his credit and authority with
the Imperialists. The address and influence of
two such men easily removed all the obstacles
which retarded an accommodation, and brought
the treaty for Clement's liberty to a conclusion,
upon conditions hard indeed, but not more in-
tolerable than a prince in his situation had reason
to expect. He was obliged to advance, in ready
money, an hundred thousand crowns for the use
of the army; to pay the fame fum at the distance
of a fortnight; and at the end of three months,
an hundred and fifty thousand more. He en-
gaged not to take part in the war against Charles,
either in Lombardy or in Naples; he granted
him a cruzado, and the tenth of ecclesiastical
revenues in Spain; and he not only gave host-
ages, but put the Emperor in poffefiion of
fcveral towns, as a ecurity for the performance

moiety
f Sandov. i. p. 814.

of these articles g. Having raised the first BooK V.
moiety by a sale of ecclesiastical dignities and'""
benefices, and other expedients equally unca- '527.
nonical, a day was fixed for delivering him Decen. 6.
from imprisonment. But Clement, impatient
to be free, after a tedious confinement of fix
months, as well as full of the suspicion and dif-
trust natural to the unfortunate, was so much
afraid that the Imperialists might still throw in
obstacles to put off his deliverance, that he dif-
guised himself the preceding night in the habit
of a merchant, and Alarcon having remitted
somewhat of his vigilance upon the conclufiori
of the treaty, he made his escape undiscovered.
He arrived before next morning at Orvieco, with-
out any attendance but a single officer; and
from thence wrote a letter of thanks to Lautrec,
as the chief instrument of procuring him li-
berty h.

Overtures of

DURING these tranfa&ions, the ambaadors'phemp',rr

of France and England repaired to Spain, in md Henry.
consequence of the treaty which Wolfey had
concluded with the French King. The Empe-
ror, unwilling to draw on himself the united
forces of the two Monarchs, discovered an in-
clination to relax somewhat the rigour of the
treaty of Madrid, to which, hitherto, he had
adhered inflexibly. He offered to accept of the
two millions of crowns which Francis had pro-
posed to pay as an equivalent for the dutchy of
Burgundy, and to set his sons at liberty, on con-
dition that he would recal his army out of Italy,
and restore Genoa, together with the other con-
quests which he had made in that country.
With regard to Sforza, he insisted that his fate

Y z should

Gic. 1. I8. 467. &c. h Guic. 1. 18. 467,

&c. Jov. Vit. Colon. 169. Mauroc. His. Venet. lib.
ill. 22.

BoOK V. bhould be determined by the judges appointed

.--- to inquire into his crimes. Thefc propofitis
'Sa7 being made o Henry, he transmittd them t

his ally the French King, whom it more nearly
concerned to examine, and to anwer tcm;
and if Francis had been sincerely flicitous either
to conclude peace, or preserve confiftcy in his
own condu&, be ought instantly to have closed
with overtures which differed but little from the
opofitions which he himself had formerly
made' . But his views were now much changed
his alliance with Henry, Lautrec's progrf in
Italy, and the superiority of his army ther
above that of the Emperor, hardly left him
oom to doubt of the success of his entrprize
again Naples. Full of those sanguine hopes
he was at no lofi to find pretexts for eeing
or evading what the Emperor had propoed.
Under the appearance of sympathy with Sforza,
for whole interests he had not hitherto disco-
vered much folicitde, he again demanded the
full and unconditional receftablihment of that
unfortunate prince in his dominions. Under
colour of its being imprudent to rely on the
Emperor's fincrity, he infitled that his sons

ould be set at liberty before the French troops
left Italy, or surrendered Genoa. The unrea-
bnablenelf of these demands, as well as the
reproachful insinuation with which they were
accompanied, irritated Charles to such a degree,
that he could hardly liften to them with pa-
tience; and repenting of his moderation, which
had made so little imprelion on his enemies,
declared that he would not depart in the fmalkft
article from the conditions which he had now
offered. Upon this the French and English

ambassadors,
i Recoeil de Traitez, 2. 249.

ambassadors, (for Henry had been drawn unac- Boor V.
countably to concur with Francis in thee"'-
frange propositions) demanded and obtained '1s7.
their audience of leave .

NEXT day, two heralds, who had accompa- Isls.

nied the ambafidors of purpose, though theyJ"inuary^
had hitherto concealed their charaer, having'
assumed the ensigns of their office, appeared in
the Emperor's court, and being admitted into
his preence, they, in the name of their refpeive They de
masters, and with all the folemnities ouftomaryno~Tdwar
on such occasions, denounced war against him. Eper.'
Charles received both with a dignity suitable to
his own rank; but spoke to each in a tone adapt-
ed to the sentiments which he entertained of
their sovereigns. He accepted the defiance of
the Englilh monarch with a firmness tempered
by some degree of decency and relpet. His
reply to the French King abounded with that
acrimony of expreiflon, which personal rivallhip,
exasperated by the memory of many injuries
inficted as well as suffered, naturally fuggeffs.
He desired the French herald to acquaint his
sovereign, that he would henceforth confider
him not only as a base violator of publick faith,
but as a dtranger to the honour and integrity be-
coming a gentleman. Francis, too high-fpirited
to bear such .an imputation, had recourse to an
uncommon expedient in order to vindicate his
charater. He instantly sent back the herald ranci
with a cartel of defiance, in which he gave the theEmro
Emperor the lie in form, challenged him to to inle
single combat, requiring him to name the time combt.
and place of the encounter, and the weapons
with which he chose to fight. Charles, as he

was
k Rym. 14. 200oo. Herbert, 85. Guic. 1. $1. 471.

BooK V. was not inferior to his rival in spirit or bravery,
`-`- readily accepted the challenge; but after several

5ia' meflages concerning the arrangement of all the

circumtances relative to the combat, accom-
panied with mutual reproaches, bordering on
the mos indecent'fcurrility, 'all thoughts of this
duel, more becoming the heroes of romance
than the two greatest Monarchs of their'age,
were entirely laid aside '.
The cfFuA THE example of two personages so illustrious

'

,hi* drew such general attention, and carried with it

the oftn so much authority, that it had considerable in-
of ddi. Quence i introducing an important change in

manners all over Europe. Duels; as has already
been observed, had long been permitted by the
laws of all the European nations, and forming
a part of their jurisprudence, were authorized
by the magistrate on many occasions, as the most
proper method of terminating questions with
regard to property, or of deciding in thoe
which refpeced crimes. But ingle combats
being confidered as solemn appeals to the omni-
science and justice of the Supreme Being, they
were allowed only in publick causes, according
to the prescription of law, and carried on. in a
judicial form. Men accustomed to this manner
of decision in courts of justice, were naturally
led to apply it to perfoial and private quarrels.
Duels, which at first could be appointed by the
civil judge alone, were fought without the in-
terpofition of his authority, and in cafes to
which the laws did not extend. Thetranfatioi
between Charles and Francis strongly counte-
nanced this practice. Upon every affront, or

injury

I Recueil des Traitez, z. Mem. de Bellay, 103, &c,
Sandov. Hilt. i. 837;

njury which seemed to touch his honour, a gen- BooK V.
tieman thought himself intitled to draw his '
sword, and to call on his adversary to make re- '527
paration. Such an opinion, introduced among
men of fierce courage, of high spirit, and of
rude manners, when offence was often given,
and revenge was always prompt, produced most
fatal consequences. Much of the belf blood in
Christendom was shed; many useful lives were
sacrificed and, at some periods, war itself hath
hardly been more deftruCive than there contests
of honour. So powerful, however, is the do-
minion of fashion, that neither the terror of
penal laws, nor reverence for religion, have been
able entirely to abolish a practice unknown
among the ancients, and not justifiable by any
principle of reason; though at the fame time it
mull be admitted, that, to this absurd custom,
we must ascribe, in some degree, the extraordinary
gentleness and complaisance of modern manners,
and that refpeAful attention of one man to an-
other, which, at present, render the social inter-
courses of life far more agreeable and decent
than among the mofa civilized nations of anti-
quity.

WHILE the two Monarchs eemed so eager to Rereat of

terminate their quarrel by a personal combat, trali'f from
Lautrec continued his operations, which pro- Rome
mifed to be more decisive. His army, which br'"ur
was now increased to thirty-five thousand men,
advanced by great marches towards Naples.
The terror of their approach, as well as the
remonstrances and the intreaties of the prince
of Orange, prevailed at last on the Imperial
troops, though with difficulty, to quit Rome,
of which they had kept poffeflion during ten

months.

Bo v. aaomths. But of that ouring army which

had entered the city, scarcely one half remaine
*^' the rft, cut off by the plague or wated by di

ases, the cffets of their inafivity, intepe.
rnce, and debauchery, fell viims to their ow
crimes . Lautrec made the grateftfO eio
attack them in their retreat towards the Neapo;
litan -territories, which would have finited d
war at one blow. But the prudence of their
leaders disappointed all his measures, and con-
du&d them, with little loi, to Naples.' The
people of that kingdom extremely impatient
to lhake off the Spanifi yoke, received the
French with open arms, wherever they appeared
to take poffion; and Gaeta and Naples ex-
cepted, hardly any place of importance remained
Frrhbe- in the hands of the Imperialists. The prefer-

Nt- vation of the former was owing to the ftrngth

of its fortifictions, that of the latter to th
preence of the Imperial-army. Lautrec, how-
ever, fat down before Naples; but finding it
vain to think of reducing a city by force whiie
defended by so many troops, he was obliged to
employ the flower, but les dangerous method
of blockade; and having taken measures which
'appeared to him effetual, he confidently affir-
ed his master, that famine would soon compel
the befeged to capitulate. There hopes were
frongly confirmed by the defeat of a vigorous
attempt made by the enemy in order to recover
the command of the Lea. Thegallies of An.
drew Doria, under the command of his nephew
Philippino, guarded the mouth of the harbour.
Moncada, who had fucceded Lannoy in the
vice-royalty, rigged out a number of gallies
fperior to Doria's, manned them with a chosen

Bx4od7
" Guic. I. xviii. 478.

body of Spanish veterans, and going on board BooK V.
himself, together with the marquis del Guafto, '
attacked Philippino before the arrival of the Ve- '52
netian and French fleets. But he, by his fupe-
perior kill in naval.operations, easily triumphed
over the valour and number of the Spaniards.
The viceroy was killed, most of his fleet de-
stroyed, and Guafto, with many officers of
diftintion, being taken prisoners, were put on
board the captive gallies, and sent by Philippino,
as trophies of his vitory, to his uncle °.

NOTWITHSTANDING this flattering profpe& Ct"m-

of success, many circumstances concurred to fru- wchre-
trate Lautrec's expecations. Clement, though trd the
he always acknowledged his being indebted to es'
Francis for the recovery of his liberty, and often
complained of the cruel treatment which he had
met with from the Emperor, was not influenced
at this juncture by principles of gratitude,, nor,
which is more extraordinary, was he swayed by
the desire of revenge. His past misfortunes
rendered him more cautious than ever; and his
recolletion of the errors which he had commit-
ted, increased the natural irresolution of his
mind. While he amused Francis with promises,
he secretly negociated with Charles; and being
solicitous, above all things, to re-eftabliih his
family in Florence with their ancient authority,
which he could not expec from Francis, who
had entered into ftri& alliance with the new
republick, he leaned rather to the fide of his
enemy than to that of his benefa&or, and gave
Lautrec no afliftance towards carrying on his
operations. The Venetians, viewing with jea.
lousy the progress of the French arms, were
intent only upon recovering such maritime

;" .. ....~. towns
aoic. !.xix. 87. P. Heater. lib. x. c. 2. p. 231.

Boor V. towns in the Neapolitan dominions as were to

v'*~ ' be poffefred by their republick, while they were
152S. altogether careless about the redu&ion of

Naples, on which the uccefs of the common
cause depended . The King of England, in-
stead of being able, as had been projected, to
embarrass the Emperor by attacking his terri-
tories in the Low-Countries, found his subjects
so averse to an unnecessary war, which would
have ruined the trade of the nation, that in order
to silence their clamours, and put a stop to the
infurre&ions ready to break out among them,
he was compelled to conclude a truce for eight
months with the governes of the Netherlands P.
Francis himself, with the fame unpardonable
inattention of which he had formerly been
guilty, and for which he had suffered so revere-
ly, negle&ed to make proper remittances to
Lautrec tor the support of his army q.

R;voof THESE unexpe&ed events retarded the pro.
Dtrwn gres of the French, discouraging both the
Franc, general and his troops; but the revolt of An-

drew Doria proved a fatal blow to all their
measures. That gallant officer, the citizen of a
republick, and trained up from his infancy in the
fea-fervice, retained the spirit of independence
natural to the former, together with the plain
liberal manners peculiar to the latter. A per-
se&t tranger to the arts of fubmilfion or flattery
necefiary in courts, but conscious at the fame
time of his own merit and importance, he al-
ways offered his advice with freedom, arid often
preferred his complaints and remonstrances with
boldness. The French ministers, unaccuftonled

to

o Gic. I. xix. 49. P Herbert, 9o. Rymcr, 14. zsS.
q Guic. I. zviii. 478.

to such liberties, determined to ruin a man who BooK V.
treated them with so little deference; and _'V
though Francis himself had a just sense of 158s.
Doria's services, as well as an high esteem for
his charater, the courtiers, by continually re-
presenting him as a man haughty, intratable,
and more solicitous to aggrandize himself than
to promote the interest of France, gradually
undermined the foundations of his credit, and
filled the King's mind with suspicion and dif-
trust. From thence proceeded several affronts
and indignities put upon Doria. His appoint-
ments were not regularly paid; his advice, even
in naval affairs, was often lighted; an attempt
was made to seize the prisoners taken by his
nephew in the fea-fight off Naples; all which
he bore with abundance of ill-humour. But
an injury offered to his country, transported him
beyond all bounds of patience. The French
began to fortify Savona, to clear its harbour,
and, removing thither some branches of trade
carried on at Genoa, plainly shewed that they
intended to render that town, long the object
of jealousy and hatred to the Genoese, their
rival in wealth and commerce. Doria, animated
with a patriotic zeal for the honour and interest
of his country, remonfirated againit this in the
Jigheft tone, not without threats, if the measure
were not instantly abandoned. This bold action,
aggravated by the malice of the courtiers, and
placed in the most odious light, irritated Francis
to such a degree, that he commanded Barbe-
sieux, whom he appointed admiral of the Levant,
to fail directly to Genoa with the French fleet,
to arrest Doria, and to seize his gallies. This
rath order, the execution of which could have
been secured only by the most profound secrecy,

was

Boo V. was concealed w.th so little care, that Doriaga
~ ' timely intelligence of it, and retired with al

5sa' his gallits to a place of safety. Guafto, his

prisoner, who had long observed and fomented
his growing discontcnt, and had often allured
him by magnificent promises to enter ino the
Emperor's icrvice, laid hold on this favourable
opportunity. While his indignation and resent
ment were at their height, he prevailed on him
to dilpatch one of his officers to the Imperial
court with his overtures and demands. The
negociation was not long; Charles, fully fcn-
fible of the importance of such an acquisition,
granted him whatever terms he required. Doria
sent back his commifion, together with the
collar of St. Michael, to Francis, and hoisting
the Imperial colours, failed with all his gallies
towards Naples, not to block up the harbour
of that unhappy city, as he had formerly en-
aged, but to bring them protection and deli-
vcrance.

wrrtcd His arrival opened the communication with
tf'°.nf the a, and restored plenty in Naples, which
·nny besei was now reduced to the last extremity; and the
LPh" E' French, having loft their superiority at sea, were

sion reduced to great traits for want of provi-
sions. The prince of Orange, who succeeded
the viceroy in the command of the Imperial
army, hewed himself by his prudent condut
worthy of that honour which his good fortune
and the death of his generals had twice acquired
him. Beloved by the troops, who remembering
the prosperity which they had enjoyed under his
command, served him with the utmost alacrity,
he let flip no opportunity of harrafling the enemy,
and by continual alarms or fllies, fatigued and

weakened

weakened them r. As an addition to all there Boox V.
misfortunes, the diseases common in that coun--
try during the sultry months, began to break '58'
out among the French troops. The prisoners
communicated to them the pestilence which the
Imperial army had brought to Naples from
Rome, and it raged with such violence, that
few, either officers or soldiers, escaped the in-
fetion. Of the whole army, not four thousand
men, a number hardly sufficient to defend the
camp, were capable of doing duty '; and being
now besieged in their turn, they suffered all the
rhiferies from which the Imperialists were de-
livered. Lautrec, after struggling long with
so many disappointments and calamities, which
preyed on his mind at the fame time that the
pestilence wafted his body, died, lamenting the Aug. I5.
negligence of his sovereign, and the infidelity
of his allies, to which o many brave men had
fallen victims . By his death, and the indifpo-
fition of the other generals, the command de-
volved on the marquis de Saluces, an officer
altogether unequal to such a trust. He, with R;ire the
troops no less dispirited than reduced, retreated 'e'
in disorder to Averfa; which town being in-
vested by the prince of Orange, Saluces was
under the necessity of consenting, that he him-
self should remain a prifoncr of war, that his
troops hould. lay down their arms and colours,
give up their baggage, and march under a
guard to the frontiers of France, By this igno-
minious capitulation, the wretched remains of
the French army were saved; and the Emperor,
by his own perfeverence and the good conduct

of

r Jovii Hilt. lib. xxxvi. p. 31, &c. Sigonii Vita Doria,
p. 1139. Bellay, 14, &c. *Bellay, 117, &c.

P. Heater. Reram Auftr. lib. x. c. 2. 231.

BooK V. of his generals, acquired once more the fuperi-
'- ' ority in Italy '.
1528.

THE loft of Genoa followed immediately up-

GCm reo- on the ruin of the army in Naples. To deliver
e'rn it - his country from the dominion of foreigners was

Doria's highest ambition, and had been his
principal inducement to quit the service of
France, and enter into that of the emperor. A
most favourable opportunity for executing this
honourable enterprize now presented itself. The
city of Genoa, affli&ed by the pestilence, was
almost deserted by its inhabitants; the French
garrison being neither regularly paid nor re-
cruited, was reduced to an inconsiderable num-
ber; Doria's emissaries found that such of the
citizens as remained, being weary alike of the
French and Imperial yoke, the rigour of which
they had alternately felt, were ready to welcome
him as their deliverer, and to second all his
measures. Things wearing this promising aspec,
he failed towards the coast of Genoa; on his
approach the French gallies retired; a small
body of men which he landed, furprized one of
the gates of Genoa in the night-time; Trivulci,
the French governor, with his feeble garrison,
sept. shut himself up in the citadel, and Doria took

polfeffion of the town without bloodhed or
resistance. Want of provision, quickly obliged
Trivulci to capitulate; the people, eager to
abolilh such an odious monument of their ser-
vitude, ran together with a tumultuous violence,
and levelled the citadel with the ground.

Dfnteft- IT was now in Doria's power to have rendered
eeu: himself the sovereign of his country, which he

had so happily delivered from oppression. The
fame of his former actions, the success of his

present
Iellay, X 17, &c. Jovii Hilt. lib. xxv, xxvi.

present attempt, the attachment of his friends, BooK V.
the gratitude of his countrymen, together with -,
the support of the emperor, all conlpired to '
facilitate his attaining the supreme authority,
and invited him to lay hold of it. But with a
magnanimity of which there are few examples,
he sacrificed all thoughts of aggrandizing him-
self to the virtuous fatisfation of eftablifling
liberty in his country, the highest objec at
which ambition can aim. Having assembled the
whole body of the people in the court before his
palace, he assured them, that the happiness of
feeing them once more in possession of freedom,
was to him a full reward for all his services;
that, more delighted with the name of citizen
than of Sovereign, he claimed no pre-eminence
or power above his equals; but remitted en-
tirely to them the right of fettling what form of
government they would now chule to be efta-
blilhed among them. The people listened to
him with rears of admiration, and of joy.
Twelve persons were elected to new-model the
constitution of the republick. The influence of
Doria's virtue and example communicated itself
to his countrymen; the factions which had long
torn and ruined the state, seemed to be forgot-
ten; prudent precautions were taken to prevent
their reviving; and the fame form of govern-
ment which had subsisted with little variation
since that time in Genoa, was established with
universal applause. Doria lived to a great
age, beloved, refpeted, and honoured by his
countrymen; and adhering uniformly to his
professions of moderation, without arrogating
any thing unbecoming a private citizen, he pre-
served a great ascendant over the councils or the
republick, which owed its being to his generosity.
The authority which he pofeffed was more flat-
tering, as well as more fatisfatory, than that

derived

BooK V. derived from sovereignty; a dominion founded
'-`. in love and in gratitude; and upheld by venera
's. tion for hisvirtues, not by the dread of his power.

His memory is fill reverenced by the Genefe;
and he is diftinguihed in their publick monu.
ments, and celebrated in the works of their hip
torians, by the most honourable of all appellations
THE FATHER OF HIS COUNTRY, AND
THE RESTORER OF ITS LIBERTY'.

,S19. FRANCIS, in order to recover the reputatio
°eM-ir'- of his arms, discredited by so many loses, made

new efforts in the Milanese. But the Count of
St. Pol, a rash and unexperienced officer, to
whom he gave the command, was no match for
Antonio de Leyva, the ablest of the Imperial
generals. He, by his superior ikill in war,
checked, with a handfulof men, the brik but
ill concerted motions of the French; and though
so infirm himself that he was carried constantly
in a litter, he furpafled them, when occailon re-
quired, no less in ativity than in prudence. By
an unexpeted march he furprized, defeated,
and took the Count of St Pol, ruining the
French army in the Milanese as entirely as the
prince of Orange had ruined that which besieged
Naples .

Nqwcta- AMIDST thee vigorous operations in the field,
.r bet.~ each party discovered an impatient desire of

"'1i. peace; and continual negociations were carried

on for that purpose. The French King dif-
couraged, and almotl exhausted by so many
unsuccessful enterprizes, was reduced now to
think of obtaining the release of his sons by con-
cefflons, not by the terror of his arms. The

Pope

Guic. 1. xix. p. 498. Sigonii Vita Doriz, p. 1146.

Jovil Hil. lib. xxvi. p. 36, &c. y Guic. 1. xix. o20. P.
He:er. Rer.AAfr. lib. x. c. 3. p. 233. Mem. de Bellay, a .

Pope hoped to recover by a treaty whatever he BooK V.
had loft in the war. The Emperor, notwith----
standing the advantages which he had gained, 1529.
had many reasons to make him wihl for an ac-
commodation. Solyman, having over-run Hun-
gary, was ready to break in upon the Austrian
territories with the whole force of the East.
The Reformation gaining ground daily in Ger-
many, the princes who favoured it had entered
into a confederacy, which Charles thought dan-
gerous to the tranquillity of the Empire. The
Spaniards murmured at a war the weight of
which refted chiefly on them. The variety and
extent of the Emperor's operations far exceeded
what his revenues could support; his success
hitherto had been owing chiefly to his own good
fortune, and to the abilities of his generals;
nor could he flatter himself that they, with
troops destitute of every thing necessary, would
always triumph over enemies still in a condition
to renew their attacks. All parties, however,
were at equal pains to conceal, or to diffem-
ble their real sentiments. The Emperor, that
his inability to carry on the war might not be
fufpe&ed, insisted on high terms in the tone
of a conqueror. The Pope, solicitous not to
lose his present allies, before he came to any
agreement with Charles, continued to make a
thousand protestations of fidelity to the former,
while he privately negociated with the latter.
Francis, afraid that his confederates might pre-
vent him by treating for themselves with the
Emperor, had recourse to many diihonourable
artifices in order to turn their attention from the
measures which he was taking to adjust all diffe-
rences with his rival.

IN this situation of affairs, when all the con-
tending powers wished for peace, but durfl not

VOL. II. Z venture

BooK V. venture too hastily on the steps necessary for at-
'*" ' taining it, two ladies undertook to procure this

a529. blessing so much desired by all Europe. These
"'. were Margaret of Austria, dowager of'Savoy,

the Emperor's aunt, and Louise, Francis's mo-
ther. They agreed on an interview at Cam-
bray, and being lodged in two adjoining
houses, between which a communication was
opened, met together without ceremony or ob-
servation, and held daily conferences, to which
no person whatever was dmitted. As both
were profoundly skilled in business, thoroughly
acquainted with the secrets of their refpecive
courts, and possessed with perfect confidence in
each other, they soon made great progress to-
wards a final accommodation and the ambaffa-
dors of all the confederates waited in anxious
suspense to know their fate, the determination
of which was entirely in their hands z.

srite BUT whatever diligence they used to haften
tr at I forward a general peace, the Pope had the ad-
Pope and dress and industry to get the start of his allies,
CJh .l by concluding at Barcelona a particular treaty

for himself. The Emperor, impatient to visit
Italy in his way to Germany; and desirous of
re-establishing tranquillity in the one country,
before he attempted to compose the disorders
which abounded in the other, found it necef-
fary to secure at least one alliance among the
Italian states, on which he might depend. That
with Clement, who courted it with unwearied
importunity, seemed more proper than any
other. Charles being extremely solicitous to
make some reparation for the insults which he
had offered to the sacred character of the Pope,
and to redeem past offences by new merit,

granted

z P. Heater. Rer. AuSr. lib x. c. 3. p. 133. Mem. de
iBelly, p. 122.

granted Clement, notwithftariding all his mif- BOOK V.
fortunes, terms more favourable than he could --
have expe&ed after a continued series of uc- 1529'
cess. Among other articles, he engaged to re-
store all the territories belonging to the ecclefi-
aftical state; to re-eftabliih the dominion of the
Medici in Florence; to give his natural daugh-
ter in marriage to Alexander the, head of that
family; and to put it in the Pope's power to
decide concerning the fate of Sforza, and the
pofieflion of the Milanese. In return for these
ample concessions, Clement gave the Emperor
the investiture of Naples without the reserve of
any tribute, but the present of a white steed, in
acknowledgment of his sovereignty; absolved
all who had been concerned in aiaulting and
plundering Rome; and permitted Charles and
his brother Ferdinand to levy the fourth of the
ecclesiastical revenues throughout their domini-
ons .

THE account of this tranfa&ion quickened Aguit .

the negociations at Cambray, and brought Mar- Pcref
garet and Louise to an immediate agreement. between
The treaty of Madrid served as the basis of that cF,':.s *n
which they concluded; the latter being intend-
ed to mitigate the rigour of the former. The
chief articles were, That the Emperor mhould
not, for the present, demand the restitution of
Burgundy, reserving, however, in full force, his
rights and pretensions to that dutchy: That
Francis hould pay two millions of crowns as
the ransom of his sons, and, before they were
set at liberty, hould restore such towns as he
frill held in the Milanese: That he hould resign
the sovereignty of Slanders and Artois: That he
hould renounce all his pretensions to Naples,

Z 2 Milan,
· Guic. 1. xix. 522.

Booz V. Milan, Genoa, and every other place beyond
'-`- ' the Alps; That he should immediately confum-
's9 mate the marriage concluded between him and

the Enfperor's filter Eleanora b.

Ad' anz-- THr's Francis, chiefly from his impatience to
:.'
. 'r.. procure liberty to his sons, sacrificed every thing

which had at first prompted him to take arms,
or which had induced him, by continuing hofti-
lities, during nine ucceffive campaigns, to
protraft the war to a length hardly known in
Europe before the establishment of standing
armies, and the imposition of exorbitant taxes,
became universal. The Emperor, by this trea-
ty, was rendered sole arbiter of the fate of Italy;
he delivered his territories in the Netherlands
from an ignominious badge of fubje&ion; and
after having baffled his rival in the field, he
prescribed to him the conditions of peace. The
different condua and 'spirit with which the two
Monarchs carried on the operations of war, led
naturally to such an issue of it. Charles, in-
clined by temper, as well as obliged by his situ-
ation, concerted all his schemes with caution,
pursued them with perseverance, and, observing
circumnlances and events with attention, let
none escape that could be improved to advan-
tage. Francis, moie enterprizing than fleady,
undertook great designs with warmth, but exe-
cuted them with remissness; and diverted by his
pleasures, or deceived by his favourites, he
often loft the most promising opportunities of
flccels. Nor had the charater of the two rivals
themselves greater influence on the operations
of the war, than the opposite qualities of the

generals

b P. Heutr. Rer Auilr. lib x. c. 3. p. 34. Sandov.
-litl. dell Emper. Carl. V. ii. 2S.

generals whom they employed. Among the BOOK V.
Imperialists, valour tempered with prudence; "-
fertility of invention aided by experience; dif- 529'
cernment to penetrate the designs of their ene-
mies; a provident sagacity in conduaing their
own measures; in a word, all the talents which
form great commanders and ensure victory,
were conspicuous. Among the French, these
qualities were either wanting, or the very reverse
of them abounded; nor could they boat of one
man (unless we except Lautrec, who was always
unfortunate) that equalled the merit of Pescara,
Leyva, Guafto, the Prince of Orange, and other
leaders whom Charles had to set in opposition to
them. Bourbon, Moron, Doria, who by their
abilities and conduct might have been capable
of balancing the superiority which the Imperial-
ifts had acquired, were loft through the care-
leffnefs of the King, and the malice or injustice
of his counsellors; and the most fatal blows
given to France during the progress of the war,
proceeded from the despair and resentment of
these three persons, who were forced to abandon
her service.

THE hard conditions to which Francis was Diononu.

obliged to submit were not the most afflicing brei,
circumstance to him in the treaty of Cambray.
He loft his reputation and the confidence of all
Europe, by abandoning his allies to his rival.
Unwilling to enter into the details necessary for
adjusting their interests, or afraid that whatever
he claimed for them mult have been purchased
by farther concefflons on his own part, he gave
them up in a body; and, without the least pro-
vision in their behalf, left the Venetians, the
Florentines, the duke of Ferrara, together with
such of the Neapolitan barons as had joined his

army,

Booi V.army, to the mercy of the Emperor. They ex-

152' M claimed loudly againit this base and perfidious
'59- action, of which Francis himself was so much

alhamed, that in order to avoid the pain of
hearing from their ambassadors the reproaches
which he jufly merited, it was some time before
he would consent to allow them an audience.
Charles, on the other hand, was attentive to the
interest of every person who had adhered to him;
the rights of some of his Flemish subje&s, who
had etates or pretensions in France, were fe-
cured; one article was inserted, obliging Francis
to restore the blood and memory of the confiable
Bourbon: and to grant his heirs the possession of
his lands which had been forfeited; another, by
which indemnification was stipulated for those
French gentlemen who had accompanied Bour-
bon in his exile'. This condut, laudable in
iielf, and placed in the mot striking light by a
comparison with that of Francis, gained Charles
as much esteem as the success of his arms had
acquired him glory.

Henrt Sc- FRANCIS did not treat the King of England
,i;mC. with the fame neglec as his other allies. He

communicated to him all the feps of his e-
gociation at Cambray, and luckily found that
Monarch in a Gtuation which left him no choice,
but to approve implicitly of his measures, and

iis scheme to concur with them. Henry had been solicit-
ordr.d ing the Pope for some time, in order to obtain
hs Quee. a divorce from Catharine of Aragon his Queen.

Several motives combined in prompting the
King to urge this fait. As he was powerfully
influenced at some seasons by religious confider-

ations,

c Guic. 1. xix p. SzS. P. Heater. Rer. Auftr. lib. x.
c. 4. p. 3.

ations, he entertained many scruples concern- BOOK V.
ing the legitimacy of his marriage with his bro- -----
ther's widow; his affections had long been ';Z9
estranged from the Queen, who was older than
himself, and had loft all the charms which she
pofleffed in the earlier part of her life; he was
pafionately desirous of having male issue; Wol-
fey artfully fortified his scruples, and encouraged
his hopes, that he might widen the breach be-
tween him and the Emperor, Catharine's ne-
phew; and, what was more forcible perhaps in
its operation than all these united, the King had
conceived a violent love for the celebrated Anne
Boleyn, a young lady of great beauty, and of
greater accomplishments, whom, as he found
it impossible to gain her on other terms, he
determined to raise to the throne, The Papal
authority had often been interposed to grant
divorces for reasons less specious than those
which Henry produced. When the matter was
first proposed to Clement, during his imprison-
ment in the castle of St. Angelo, as his hopes
of recovering liberty depended entirely on the
King of England, and his ally of France, he
exprefled the warmet inclination to gratify him,
But no sooner was he set free, than he discover-
ed other sentiments. Charles, whoefpoufed the
prote&ion of his aunt with zeal inflamed by
resentment, alarmed the Pope on the one hand
with threats, which made a deep imprefrion on
his timid mind and allured him on the other
with those promises in favour of his family,
which he afterwards accomplished. Upon the
profpe& of these, Clement not only forgot all
his obligations to Henry, but ventured to en-
danger the interest of the Romish religion in
England, and to run the rifque of alienating that
kingdom for ever from the obedience of the

Papal

Boo V. Papal fee. After amusing Henry during two

years, with all the subtleties and chicane which
1529t the court of Rome can so dexterously employ

to protra& or defeat any cause; after displaying
the whole extent of his ambiguous and deceit-
ful policy, the intricacies of which the Englilh
historians, to whom it properly belongs, have
found it no easy matter to trace and unravel;
he, at last, recalled the powers of the delegates
whom he had appointed to judge in the point,
avocated the cause to Rome, leaving the King
no other hope of obtaining a divorce but from
the personal decision of the Pope himself. As
Clement was now in firit alliance with the Em-
peror, who had purchased his friendship by such
exorbitant concessions, Henry despaired of pro-
curing any sentence from the former, but what
was dictated by the latter. His honour, however,
and passions concurred in preventing him from
relin:quilhing his scheme of a divorce, which he
determined to accomplish by other means, and
at any rate; and the continuance of Francis's
friendship being necessary to counterbalance the
Emperor's power, he, in order to secure that,
not only offered no remonstrances against the to-
tal neglec of their allies, in the treaty of Cam-
bray, but made Francis the prefcnt of a large
fum, as a brotherly contribution towards the
payment of the ransom for his sons d.

Aogufn 12. MEANWHILE the Emperor landed in Italy
,,' ifit with a numerous train of the Spanish nobility,
ialy. and a considerable body of troops. He left the

government of Spain during his absence to the
Empress Iabella. By his long residence in that
country, he had acquired such thorough know-
ledge of the character of the people, that he

could
d Herbert. Mem. de Bellay, p. 122.

could perfely accommodate the maxims of his Boor V.
government to their genius. He could even ^'~
affiume, upon omne occasions, such popular '529-
manners, as gained wonderfully upon the Spa-
niards. A triking instance of his disposition
to gratify them had occurred a few days before
he embarked for Italy: He was to make his
publick entry into the city of Barcelona; and
tome doubts having arisen among the inhabit-
ants, whether they should receive him as Empe-
ror, or as Count of Barcelona, Charles instantly
decided in favour of the latter, declaring that
he was more proud of that ancient title, than of
his Imperial crown. Soothed with this flattering
expreflion of his regard, the citizens welcomed
him with acclamations of joy, and the states of
the province swore allegiance to his son Philip,
as heir of the county of Barcelona. A similar
oath had been taken in all the kingdoms of
Spain, with equal fatisfation e.

THE Emperor appeared in Italy with the

pomp and power of a conqueror. Ambassadors
from all the princes and states of that country
attended his court, waiting to receive his deci-
sion with regard to their fate. At Genoa, where
he first landed, he was received with the accla-
mations due to the protecor of their liberties.
Having honoured Doria with many marks of di-
ftin&ion, and bestowed on the republick several
new privileges, he proceeded to Bologna, the
place fixed upon for his interview with the
Pope. He asseted to unite in his publick entry Nov. 5.
into that city the state and majesty that suited
an Emperor, with the humility becoming an
obedient son of the church; and while at the
head of twenty thousand veteran soldiers, able

to
e Sandov. i. p. p. 50. Ferrer. ix. 116.

BooK V. to give law to all Italy, he kneeled down to kill

~^~ the feet of that very Pope whom he had so
'529' latelydetained a prisoner. TheItalians, after

suffering so much from the ferocity and licen-
tioufnefs of his armies, and after having been
long accustomed to form in their imagination a
pi&ure of Charles which bore some resemblance
to that of the barbarous monarchs of the Goths
or Huns, who had formerly affliced their
country with like calamities, were furprized 'to
fee a prince of a graceful appearance, affable
and courteous in his deportment, of regular
manners, and of exemplary attention to all the
offices of religion f. They were ill more ato-
nifhed when he fettled all the concerns of the
princes and fates which now depended on him,
with a degree of moderation and equity much
beyond what they had expeted.

His mode- CHARLES himself, when he set out from Spain,
,, , far from intending to give any such extraordi-
f it. nary proof of his felf-denial, seems to have been

resolved to avail himself to the utmost of the
superiority which he had acquired in Italy. But
various circumstances concurred in pointing out
the neceflity of pursuing a very different courle.
The progress of the Turkish Sultan, who after
over-running Hungary, had penetrated into
Str- 3. Aufria, and laid siege to Vienna with an army

of an hundred and fifty thousand men, loudly
called on him to collet his whole force to op-
pose that torrent; and though the valour of the
Germans, the prudent condut of Ferdinand,
coober 6. together with the treachery of the Vizier, soon

obliged Solyman to abandon that enterprize
with infamy and loss, the religious disorders still

growing
' Sandov. Hist. del Emp. Carl. V. ii. 50, 53, &c.

growing in Germany made the Emperor's pre- BooK V.
fence highly necessary there g: The Florentines, --
instead of giving their consent to the re-establish- '259
ment of the Medici, which by the treaty of
Barcelona the Emperor had bound himself to
procure, were preparing to defend their liberty
by force of arms; the vast preparations for his
journey had involved him in unusual expences;
and on this, as well as many other occasions,
the multiplicity of his affairs, together with the
narrowness of his revenues, obliged him to con-
trad his vast schemes of ambition, and to forego
present and certain advantages, that he might
guard against more remote but unavoidable
dangers. Charles, from all these considerations,
finding it necessary to assume an air of modera-
tion, aed his part with a good grace. He
admitted Sforza into his presence, and not only
gave him a full pardon of all past offences, but
granted him the investiture of the dutchy, toge-
ther with his niece, the King of Denmark's
daughter, in marriage. He allowed the duke of
Ferrara to keep possession of all his dominions,
adjusting the points in dispute between him and
the Pope with an impartiality not very agreeable
to the latter. He came to a final ac-6mmoda-
tion with the Venetians, upon the reasonable
condition of their restoring whatever they had
usurped during the late war, either in the Nea-
politan or Papal territories. In return for so
many concessions he exacted considerable fums
from each of the powers with whom he treated,
which they paid without relucance, and which
afforded him the means of proceeding on his
journey towards Germany with a magnificence
suitable to his dignity h.

THESE

g Sleidan, 121. Guic. 1. xx. 5;o. h Sandov. ii.
5S. &c.

Boo0 V. TRESE treaties, which restored tranquillity to
*-.-- s Italy after a tedious war, the calamities of which
Re,53 had chiefly affected that country, were publifled
blifes the at Bologna with great Iblemnity on the irf
t'hM c!,day of the year one thousand five hundred and
in Forenc. thirty, amidit the univerlal acclamations of the

people, applauding the Emperor, to whose mo-
deration and generolity they ascribed the blef-
sings of peace which they had so long desired.
The Florentines alone did not partake of this
general joy. Animated with a zeal for liberty
more laudable than prudent, they determined
to oppose the restoration of the Medici. The
Imperial army had already entered their terri-
tories, and formed the siege of their capital.
But though deserted by all their allies, and left
without any hope of succour, they defended
themselves many months with an obstinate va-
lour worthy of better success, and even when
they surrendered, they obtained a capitulation
.which gave them hopes of securing tome remains
of their liberty. But the Emperor, from his
desire to gratify the Pope, frultrated all their
expecations, and abolishing their ancient form
of government, raised Alexander di Medici to
the fame absolute dominion over that state which
his family hve retained to the present times.
Philibert de Chalons prince of Orange, the Im-
perial general, was killed during this siege. His
estate and titles descended to his sifter Claude de
Chalons, who was married to Rene count of
Nassau, and he transmitted to her posterity of
the house of Nassau the title of Princes of
Orange, which they have rendered so illus-
trious'.

AFTER

i Guic. . xx. .54, &c. P.Heuter. Rer. Aufr. lib.
N. c. 4. p. 236.

AFTER the publication of the peace at Bo- BOOK V.

logna, and the ceremony of his coronation as
King of Lombardy and Emperor of the Romans, stat53 ;as
which the Pope performed with the accustomed fir. civil
formalities, nothing detained Charles in Italy k; nd, GelC-
and he began to prepare for his journey to mny.
Germany. His prelence became every day more' *4
necessary in that country, and was solicited with
equal importunity by the Catholics and by the
favourers of the new doctrines. During that
long interval of tranquillity which the absence
of the Emperor, the contests between him and
the Pope, and his attention to the war with
France, afforded them, the latter had gained
much ground. Most of the princes who had
embraced Luther's opinions, had not only efta-
blifhed in their territories that form of worship
which he approved, but had entirely suppressed
the rites of the Romish church. Many of the
free cities had imitated their condut. Almost
one half of the Germanick body had revolted
from the Papal fee; and its dominion, even in
that part which had not hitherto shaken off the
yoke, was considerably weakened by the exam-
ple of the neighbouring states, or by the secret
progress of those dotrines which had undermined
it among them. Whatever fatisfaation the Em-
peror, while he was at open enmity with the fee
of Rome, might have felt in those events that
tended to mortify and embarrass the Pope, he
could not help perceiving now, that the religious
divisions in Germany would, in the end, prove
extremely hurtful to the Imperial authority.
The weakness of former Emperors had suffered
the great vassals of the Empire to make such
successful encroachments upon their power and

prerogative,

k H. Cornel. Agrippa de duplici Cororatione Car. V.
ap. Scard. ii. 266.

gooKiV. prerogative, that during the whole course of a
*- . war, which had often required the exertion of
1530' his utmost strength, Charles hardly drew any

effetual aid from Germany, and found that
magnificent titles or obsolete pretensions were
almost the only advantages which he had gained
by fwaving the Imperial sceptre. He now be-
came fully sensible that if he did not recover in
some degree the prerogatives which his prede.
ceffors had loft, and acquire the authority, as
well as poflefs the name, of head of the Empire,
his high dignity would contribute more to ob-
strut than to promote his ambitious schemes.
Nothing, he saw, was more eflential towards
attaining this, than to suppress opinions which
might form new bonds of confederacy among
the princes of the Empire, and unite them by
ties stronger and more sacred than any political
connection. Nothing seemed to lead more cer-
tainly to the accomplishment of his designs, than
to employ zeal for the established religion, of
which he was the natural protetor, as the in-
ftrument of extending his civil authority.

r ceedi - ACCORDINGLY, a prolpe& no sooner opened
. sOt,, of conming to an accommodation with the Pope,

s~ch 15, than, by the Emperor's appointment, a diet of
's9' the Empire was held at Spires, in order to take

into consideration the state of religion. The
decree of the diet assembled there in the year
one thousand five hundred and twenty-fix, which
was almost equivalent to a toleration of Luther's
opinions, had given great offence to the reft of
Christendom. The greatest delicacy of address,
however, was requisite in proceeding to any de-
cifion more rigorous. The minds of men kept
in perpetual agitation by a controversy carried
on during twelve years, without intermission of
debate, or abatement of zeal, were now inflamed

to

to an high degree. They were accustomed to Boo V
innovations, and saw the boldett of them fuc- '
cefsful. Having not only abolished old rights, '530.
but substituted new forms in their place, they
were influenced as much by attachment to the
system which they had embraced, as by aversion
to that which they had abandoned. Luther
himself, of a spirit not to be worn out by the
length and obstinacy of the combat, or to be-
come remiss upon success, continued the attack
with as much vigour as he had begun it. His
disciples, of whom many equalled him in zeal,
and some surpassed him in learning, were no less
capable than their master to conduct the con-
troverfy in the propereft manner. Many of the
laity, ome even of the princes, trained up
amidst these incessant disputations, and in the
habit of listening to the arguments of the con-
tending parties who alternately appealed to them
as judges, came to be profoundly killed in all
the questions which were agitated, and, upon
occasion, could shew themselves not inexpert in
any of the arts with which these theological en-
counters were managed. It was obvious from
all these circumstances, that any violent decision
of the diet must have immediately precipitated
matters into confusion, and have kindled in
Germany the flames of a religious war. All,
therefore, that the Archduke, and the other
commissioners appointed by the Emperor, de-
manded of the diet, was, to enjoin those states
of. the Empire which had hitherto obeyed the
decree issued against Luther at Worms in the
year one thousand five hundred and twenty-four,
to ptrfevere in the observation of it, and to pro-
hibit the other states from attempting any far-
ther innovation in religion, particularly from
abolifling the mass, before the meeting of a
general council. After much dispute, a decree

to

BooK v. to that effet was approved of by a majority of

voices'.

1530.

The fi,.;o- THE EleCor of Saxony, the marquis of Bran-
bh oft denburgh, the Landgrave of Hesse, the dukes

iiIft of Luncnburgh, the prince of Anhalt, together
spa 9 with the deputies of fourteen Imperial or free

cities ", entered a solemn protest against this de-
cree, as unjust and impious. On that account
they were distinguished by the name of PRO-
TEbTANTS ", an appellation which hath since
become better known, and more honourable, by
its being applied indiscriminately to all the sets
of whatever denomination which have revolted
from the Roman fee. Not satisfied with this
declaration of their dissent from the decree of
the diet, the Protestants sent ambassadors into
Italy to lay their grievances before the Emperor
from whom they met with the most difcourag-

Di.btrt;- ing reception. Charles was at that time in close
Pof th union with the Pope, and solicitous to attach
Epror. him inviolably to his interest. During their long

residence at Bologna, they held many confulta-
tions concerning the most effetual means of
extirpating the herefies which had sprung up in
Germany. Clement, whose cautious and timid
mind the proposal of a general council filled
with horror even beyond what Popes, the con-
ftant enemies of such assemblies, usually feel,
employed every argument to difluade the Em-
peror from consenting to that measure. He
reprelented general councils as fatious, ungo-
vernable, presumptuous, formidable to civil
authority, and too flow in their operation to

remedy

I Sleid. Hist. 17. m The fourteen cities wer&Straf-

burgh, Nurembergh, Ulm, ConRance, Reutlingen, Wind-
fieim, Meinengen, Lindaw, Kempten, Hailbron, lfna,
V eiemburgh, Nordlingen, and St Gal. n Sleid. HilR.
119. F.Paul, Hist. p4. Seckend. ii. 127.

remedy disorders which required an immediate BOOK V.
cure. Experience, he said, had now taught both --v'
the Emperor and himself, that forbearance and ' 530
lenity exasperated the spirit of innovation, which
they ought to have mollified; it was necessary,
therefore, to have recourse to the rigorous me-
thods which such a desperate cafe required Leo's
sentence of excommunication, together with the
decree of the diet atWorms, should be carried into
execution; and it was incumbent on the Emperor
to employ his whole power, in order to overawe
thole, on whom the reverence due either to ec-
clefiaftical or civil authority had no longer any
influence. Charles, whose views were very dif-
ferent from the Pope's, and who became daily
more sensible how obstinate and deep-rooted the
evil was, thought of reconciling the Protestants
by means less violent, and confidered the con-
vocation of a council as no improper expedient
for that purpose; but promised, if gentler arts
failed of success, that then he would exert him-
self with vigour to reduce those stubborn ene-
mies of the Catholic faith .

SUCH were the sentiments with which the Em- Emperor

peror set out for Germany, having already ap- the Det of
pointed a diet of the Empire to be held at Augf- Augsburg.
burg. In his journey towards that city, he had Marh 22.
many opportunities of observing the disposition
of the Germans with regard to the points in
controversy, and found their minds every where
so much irritated and inflamed, as convinced
him that nothing tending to severity or rigour
ought to be attempted, until all other measures
proved ineffe&ual. He made his publick entry
into Augsburg with extraordinary pomp; and

VOL. II. A a found

° F. Paul, xlvii. Seek. . ii. 142. His. deConfeff. d'Aux-
bourg, par D. Chytreus, 4to. Antw. 1572, p. 6.

BooK V. found there such a full assembly of the members
,-V- of the diet as was suitable both to the import-
Ju'5. ance of the affairs which were to come under

their consideration, and to the honour of an
Emperor, who, after a long absence, returned
to them crowned with reputation and success.
His presence seems to have communicated to all
parties an unusual spirit of moderation and desire
of peace. The Elecor of Saxony would not
permit Luther to accompany him to the diet,
left he should offend the Emperor by bringing
into his pretence a person excommunicated by
the Pope, and the author of all those diflenfions
which it now appeared so difficult to compose.
At the Emperor's desire, all the Protestant
princes sorbad the divines who accompanied
them to preach in publick during their residence
at Augsburg. For the fame reason they em-
ployed Melanchon, the man of the greatest
learning, as well as of the most pacifick and gen-
tle spirit among the reformers, to draw up a con-
session of their faith, expressed in terms as little
offensive to the Roman Catholics, as a regard

The con- for truth would permit. Melanahon, who fel-
er S, dom suffered the rancour of controversy to en-

venom his flyle, even in writings purely pole-
mical, executed a talk so agreeable to his natu-
ral disposition with great moderation and success.
The Creed which he composed, known by the
name of the Confession of Augsburg, from the
place where it was presented, was read publickly
in the diet; some Popifli divines were appointed
to examine it; they brought in their animad-
versions; a dispute ensued between them and
Melansthon, econded by some of his brethren;
but though Melanahon oftened some articles,
made concessions with regard to others, and put
the least exceptionable sense upon all; though

the

the Emperor himself laboured with great earnest- BOOK V.
ness to reconcile the contending parties; so many '
marks of diftin&ion were now established, and '130'
such insuperable barriers placed between the two
churches, that all hopes of bringing about a
coalition seemed utterly desperate P;

FROM the divines, among whom his endea-

vours had been so unsuccessful, Charles turned
to the princes their patrons. Nor did he find
them, how desirous soever of accommodation,
or willing to oblige the Emperor, more disposed
than the former to renounce their opinions.' At
that time, zeal for religion took poffeflion of the
minds of men, to a degree which can scarcely be
conceived by those who live in an age when the
passions excited by the first manifestation of
truth, and the first recovery of liberty, have in a
great measure ceased to operate. This zeal was
then of such strength as to overcome attach-
ment to their political interest, which is com-
monly the predominant motive among princes.
The Ele&or of Saxony, the Landgrave of Hesse,
and other chiefs of the Protestants, though soli-
cited separately by the Emperor, and allured by
the promise or profpe& of those advantages
which it was known they were most solicitous to
attain, refused, with a fortitude highly worthy
of imitation,' to abandon what they deemed the
cause of God, for the fake of any earthly ac-
quifition 9.

EVERY scheme in order to gain or disunite verede-
the Protestant party proving abortive, nothing epa,,

A a 2 now tnts.

P Seckend. lib. ii. 59, &c. Abr. Sculteti Annales

Evangelici ap. Herm. Vonder. Hard. HiR. Liter. Reform.
Lips. 717. fol. p. 159. q Sleid. 132. Scultet.
Annal. 58.

}ooK V. now remained for the Emperor but to take some
'-"' vigorous measures towards asserting the doc-
';3O. trines and authority of the eftabliihed church.

These, Campeggio, the papal nuncio, had al-
ways recommended as the only proper and es-
feftual course of dealing with such obstinate
N... 19 heretics. In compliance with his opinions and

remonstrances, the diet issued a decree, con-
demning most of the peculiar tenets held by the'
Protestants; forbidding any person to prote& dr
tolerate such as taught them; enjoining a
ftrit observance of the established rites; and,
prohibiting any further innovation under severe
penalties. All orders of men were required to
aift with their persons and fortunes in carrying
this decree into execution; and such as refused
to obey'it, were declared incapable of ain'asi
judges, or of appearing as parties in the Imperial
chamber, the supreme court of judicature in the'
Empire. To all which was subjoined a promise,
that an application should be made to the'Pope
requiring him to call a general council within 'fix
months, in order to terminate all' contrdvrfiel
by its sovereign decisions r.

T-rr rnier THE severity of this decree, which they:con:
't Smnl' fidered as a prelude to the most violent perse-
;ie. cution, alarmed the Protestants, and convinced

them that the Emperor was resolved on their
deftru&ion. The dreadof those calamitieswhich
were ready to fall on the church, oppressed the
feeble spirit of Melanthon; and as if the cause
had already been desperate, he gave up himself
to melancholy and lamentation.. But Lutheer
who during the meeting of the diet had endea-
voured to confirm and animate his party by
several treatises which he addressed to them, was

not
' lid. 139.

not disconcerted or dismayed at the profpet- of BOOK V.
this new danger. He comforted Melancthon'
and his other desponding disciples, and exhorted 1530
the princes not to abandon those truths which
they had lately aferted with such laudable bold-
nesss. His exhortations made the deeper im-
prefilon upon them, as they were greatly alarmed
at that time by the account of a combination
among the Popish princes of the Empire for the
maintenance of the established religion, to which
Charles himself had acceded '. This convinced
them that it was necessary to stand on their
guard; and that their own safety, as well as the
success of their cause, depended on union. Filled
with this dread of the adverse party, and with
these sentiments concerning the conduct proper
for themselves, they aflembled at Smalkalde.
There they concluded a league of mutual de- Dec.2
fence against all aggressors , by which they
formed the Protestant states of the Empire into
one regular body, and beginning already to con-
fider themselves as such, they resolved to apply
to the Kings of France and England, and to
implore them to patronize and afflit their new
confederacy.

AN affair not conneced with religion furnished The empe-
them with a pretence for courting the aid of r Prorpoi.s

o tohave his

foreign princes. Charles, whose ambitious views br,,ther .
enlarged in proportion to the increase of hisi ied King
power and grandeur, had formed a scheme of mns.
continuing the Imperial crown in his family,
by procuring his brother Ferdinand to be elected
King of the Romans. The prelent juncture
was favourable for the execution of that design.
The Emperor's arms had been every where vic-

torious;

Seek. ii. 80o. Sleid. 14o. t Seek. ii. 2oo.
iii. t. u Sleid. Hilt. 142.

Boot V. torious; he had given law to all Europe at the
v'' late peace; no rival now remained in a condition
1539- to balance or to controul him; and the Elec-

tors, dazzled with the splendor of his success, or
overawed by the greatness of his power, durfi
scarcely dispute the will of a prince, whole soli-
citations carried with them the authority of com-
mands. Nor did he want plausible reasons to
enforce the measure. The affairs of his other
kingdoms, he said, obliged him to be often
absent from Germany; the growing disorders
occasioned by the controversies about religion,
as well as the formidable neighbourhood of the
Turks, who continually threatened to break in
with their desolating armies into the heart of the
Empire, required the constant presence of a
prince endowed with prudence capable of com-
posing the former, and with power as well as
valour sufficient to repel the latter. His bro-
iher Ferdinand possessed these qualities in an
eminent degree; by residing long in Germany,
he had acquired a thorough knowledge of their
constitution and manners; having been present
almost from the first rife of their religious dif-
fenfions, he knew what remedies were most pro-
per, what they could bear, and how to apply
them; as his own dominions lay on the Turkish
frontier, he was the natural defender of Germany
against the invasions of the Infidels, being
prompted by interest no less than he would be
bound in duty to oppose them.

T'cPro.eft- THESE arguments made little impression on
,t rIe the Protestants. Experience taught them, that

nothing had contributed more to the undisturbed
progress of their opinions, than the interregnum
after Maximilian's death, the long absence of
Charles, and e

the flacknes he reins of go-
vernment which these occasioned; after deriving

such

tich advantages from a ltate of anarchy, they BooK V.
were extremely unwilling to give themselves a - '
new and a fixed matter. They perceived clearly '530.
the extent of Charles's ambition, that he aimed
at rendering the Imperial crown hereditary in
his family, and would of course establish in the
Empire an absolute dominion, to which elecive
princes could not have aspired with equal faci-
lity. They determined, therefore, to oppose Ser-
dinand's elecion with the utmost vigour, and to
route their countrymen, by their example and
exhortations, to withstand this encroachment on
their liberties. The Eletor of Saxony, accord- s153,
ingly, not only refused to be present in the elec- January 5.
toral college, which the Emperor summoned to
meet at Cologne, but instructed his eldest son to
appear there, and to protest against the elec6ion
as informal, illegal, contrary to the articles of
the golden bull, and subversive of the liberties
of the Empire. But the other Eletors, whom He i cho-
Charles had been at great pains to gain, without '
regarding either his absence or protest, chose
Ferdinand King of the Romans; who a few days
after was crowned at Aix-la-Chapelle .

WHEN the Protestants, who were assembled aNegocia-

second time at Smalkalde, received an account roten^n'h
of this tranfation, and heard, at the fame time, witbhrance.
that prosecutions were commenced, in the Im-
perial chamber, against some of their number,
on account of their religious principles, they
thought it necessary, not only to renew their
former confederacy, but immediately to dispatch
their ambassadors into France and England.
Francis had observed, with all the jealousy of
a rival, the reputation which the Emperor had

acquired

x Sleid. 142. Seek. iii. . P. Heuter Rer. Aur. lib.
x. c6. p. 240.

BooKV. acquired by his eeming disinterestedness and

C'c ' moderation in fettling the affairs of Italy; and
Feb.9'. beheld, with great concern, the successful ftep

which he had taken towards perpetuating and
extending his authority in Germany by the elec-
tion of a King of the Romans. Nothing, how-
ever, would have been more impolitick than to
precipitate his kingdom into a new war when ex-
haufted by extraordinary efforts, and discouraged
by ill success, before it had got time to recruit
its strength, or to forget past misfortunes. As
no provocation had been given, and hardly a
pretext had been afforded him, he could not
violate a treaty of peace which he himself had so
lately solicited, without forfeiting the esteem of
all Europe, and being detested as a prince void
of probity and honour. He observed, with
great joy, powerful facions beginning to form
in the Empire; he listened with the utmost eager-
ness to the complaints of the ProteRant princes;
and without seeming to countenance their reli-
gious opinions, determined secretly to cherish
those sparks of political discord which might be
afterwards kindled into a flame. For this pur-
pose, he ent William de Bellay, one of the
ablest negociators in France, into Germany,
who visiting the courts of the malecontent
princes, and heightening their ill-humour by va-
rious arts, concluded an alliance between them
and his mastery, which though concealed at that
time, and produtive of no immediate effects,
laid the foundation of an union fatal on many
occasions to Charles's ambitious projects; and
Ihewed the discontented princes of. Germany
where, for the future, they might find a pro-
tetor no less able than willing to undertake

their
Bellay, 1zg, a. 13o. b. Sec. iii. 14.

their defence against the encroachments of the BooK V.
Emperor.

TIE King of England, highly incensed against w;ih En-

Charles, in complaisance to whom, the Pope"nd.
had long retarded, and now openly opposed his
divorce, was no less difpoled than Francis to
strengthen a league which might be rendered so
formidable to the Emperor. But his favourite
project of the divorce led him into such a labv-
rinth of schemes and negociations, and he was,
at the fame time, so intent on abolishing the pa-
pal jurifdi&ion in England, that he had no lei-
sure for foreign affairs. This obliged him to
reft satisfied with giving general promifcs, toge-
ther with a small supply in money, to the confe-
derates of Smalkalde .

MEANWHILE, many circumstances convinced charles

Charles that this was not a juncture when the 0.,lthb
extirpation of heresy was to be attempted by
violence and rigour; that, in compliance with
the Pope's inclinations, he had already proceeded
with imprudent precipitation; and that it was
more his interest to consolidate Germany into
one united and vigorous body, than to divide
and enfeeble it by a civil war. The Protestants,
already considerable as well by their numbers
as by their zeal, had acquired additional weight
and importance by their joining in that confe-
deracy into which the rash steps taken at Augf-
burg had forced them. Having now discovered
their own strength, they despised the decisions
of the Imperial chamber; and being secure of
foreign protecion, were ready to set the head of
the Empire at defiance. At the fame time the
peace with France was precarious, the friendship

of
Herbert, 152, 54.

Booi V. of an irresolute and interested pontiff was not
'- ' to be relied on; and Solyman, in order to re-
';'3' pair the infamy and loss which his arms had sus-

tained in the former campaign, was preparing to
enter Austria with more numerous forces. On all
these accounts, especially the last, a speedy ac-
commodation with the malecontent princes, be-
came necessary, not only for the accomplishment
of his future schemes, but for ascertaining his pre.
sent safety. Negociations were, accordingly, car-
ried on by hisdire&ion with the Elector of Saxony
and his associates; after many delays occasioned
by their jealousy of the Emperor, and of each
other, after innumerable difficulties arising from
the inflexible nature of religious tenets, which

C;rr.t:ihm capnot admit of being altered, modified, or re.
f...r.b. linquified, in the fame manner as points of poli-
ilr'i3. tical interest, terms of pacification were agreed
Auguii 3 upon at Nuremberg, and ratified solemnly in

the Diet at Ratisbon. In this treaty it was fti-
pulated, that universal peace be established in
Germany, until the meeting of a general council,
the convocation of which within fix months the
Emperor hall endeavour to procure: That no
peron be molested on account of religion: That
a flop be put to all processes begun by the Im-
perial chamber againt Protestants, and the fen-
tences already pasTed to their detriment be de-
clared void. On their part, the Protestants
engaged to assist the Emperor with all their
forces in refilling the invalion of the Turks .
Thus by their firmness in adhering to their prin-
ciples, by the unanimity with which they urged
all their claims, and by their dexterity in avail-
ing themselves of the Emperor's situation, the
Protefiants obtained terms which amounted al-
most to a toleration of their religion; all the

concefiions
a Do Mont Corps Diplomatique, tom.iv. part ii. 87.89.

concessions were made by Charles, none by BOOK V.
them; even the favourite point of their approv- '--J
ing his brother's election was not mentioned; 1532.
and the Protestants of Germany, who had hi-
therto been viewed only as a religious set, came
henceforth to be confidered as a political body
of no finall consequence b.

THE intelligence which Charles received ofCa.mpign

Solyman's having entered Hungary at the head iU"ry.
of three hundred thousand men, cut ihort the de-
liberations of the Diet at Ratisbon; the contin-
gent, both of troops and money, which each
prince was to furnish towards the defence of the
Empire, having been already fettled. The Pro-
teftants, as a testimony of their gratitude to the
Emperor, exerted themselves with extraordinary
zeal, and brought into the field forces which ex-
ceeded in number the quota imposed on them;
the Catholicks imitating their example, one of
the greatest and best appointed armies that had
ever been levied in Germany, assembled near
Vienna. Being joined by a body of Spanilh and
Italian veterans, under the marquis del Guafto;
by some heavy-armed cavalry from the Low-
Countries and by the troops which Ferdinand
had raied in Bohemia, Austria, and his other
territories, it amounted in all to ninety thousand
disciplined foot, and thirty thousand horse, be-
fides a prodigious swarm of irregulars. Of this
vast army, worthy the first prince in Christen-
dom, the Emperor took the command in per-
son; and mankind waited in fufpence the issue
of a decisive battle between the two greatest
Monarchs in the world. But each of them
dreading the other's power and good fortune,
they both conduced their operations with such

excessive
b Sleid. 149, &c. Seck. iii. g9,

.BooK V- exceflive caution, that a campaign, for which
'---' such immense preparations had been made, ended

,132- without any memorable event. Solyman, find-
.r cao ing it impoflible to gain ground upon an enemy
'Pr- always attentive and on his guard, marched

back to Constantinople towards the end of au-
tumn c. It is remarkable, that in such a martial
age, when every gentleman was a soldier, and
every prince a general, this was the first time
that Charles, who had already carried on such
extensive wars, and gained so many victories,
appeared at the head of his troops. In this first
essay of his arms, to have opposed such a leader
as Solyman, was no snail honour; to have
obliged him to retreat, merited very considerable
praise.
Ass=e ,6. ABOUT the beginning of this campaign, the

Elector of Saxony died, and was succeeded by his
son John Frederick. The Reformation rather
gained than loft by that event; the new Eletor,
no less attached than his predecefiors to the opi-
nions of Luther, occupied the station which they
had held at the head of the Protestant party,
and defended, with the boldness and zeal of
youth, that caule which they had softered and
reared with the caution of old age.

TherEpc- IMMEDIATELY after the retreat of the Turks,

'. ir.c.- Charles, impatient to revisit Spain, set out on
h poe in his way thither, for Italy. As he was extremely
hi, -yto desirous of an interview with the Pope, they

met a second time at Bologna, with the fame
external demonstrations of refpet and friend-
ship, but with little of that confidence, which
had subsisted between them during their late ne-

gociations

t ovii Hifi. lib. xxx. p. 1ti, &c. Barre Hilt. de l'Enm-
2rre, i. S. 3 7.

gociations there. Clement was much dissatisfied BOOK V.
with the Emperor's proceedings at Augsburg;-
his concessions with regard to the speedy convo- 532
cation of a council, having more than cancelled
all the merit of the severe decree against the
doctrines of the Reformers. The toleration
granted to the Protestants at Ratisbon, and the
more explicit promise concerning a council, with
which it was accompanied, had irritated him
itill farther. Charles, however, partly from con- Negoc.i;i-
viction that the meeting of a council would be at- ing °gene
tended with salutary effecs, and partly from his ral council.
desire to please the Germans, having solicited
him by his ambassadors to call that assembly
without delay, and now urging the fame thing
in person, Clement was greatly embarrassed what
reply he should make to a request, which it was
indecent to refuse, and dangerous to grant. He
endeavoured at first to divert Charles from the
measure but finding him inflexible, he had re-
course to artifices which he knew would delay,
if not intirely defeat, the calling of that assem-
bly. Under the plausible pretext of its being
previously necessary to fettle, with all parties
concerned, the place of the council's meeting;
the manner of its proceedings; the right of the
persons who hould be admitted to vote; and
the authority of their decisions he dispatched
a nuncio, accompanied by an ambassador from
the Emperor to the Elecor of Saxony, as head
of the Protestants. With regard to each of
these articles, inextricable difficulties and con-
tests arose. The Protestants demanded a coun-
cil to be held in Germany; the Pope infilted
that it should meet in Italy: They contended
that all points in dispute should be determined
by the words of holy scripture alone; he confi-
dered not only the decrees of the church, but
the opinions of fathers and doctors as of equal

authority:

BcoK V. authority: They required a free council, in which
'- - the divines commiflioned by different churches
1s32- Ihould be allowed a voice; he aimed at model-

ling the council in such a manner as would ren-
der it entirely dependant on his pleasure. Above
all, the Protestants thought it unreasonable that
they should bind themselves to submit to the de-
crees of a council, before they knew on what
principles these decrees were to be founded, by
what persons they were to be pronounced, and
what forms of proceeding they would observe.
The Pope maintained it to be altogether unne-
ceflary to call a council, if those who demanded
it did not previously declare their resolution to
acquiesce in its decrees. In order to adjut such
a variety of points, many expedients were pro-
posed; and the negociations spun out to such a
length, as effectually answered Clement's purpose
of putting off the meeting of a council, without
drawing on himself the whole infamy of obftrut-
ing a measure which all Europe deemed so effen-
tial to the good of the church d.

and for re- TOGETHER with this negociation about call-
Ta.rquilliy ing a council, the Emperor carried on another,
rs ItaI,. which he had still more at heart, for securing

the peace etablifhed in Italy. As Francis had
renounced his pretensions in that country with
great relucance, Charles made no doubt but
that he would lay hold on the first pretext as-
forded him, or embrace the sirs opportunity
which prelented itielf of recovering what he had
loft. It became necessary, on this account, to
take measures for afiembling an army able to
oppose him. As his treasury, drained by a long
war, could not supply the fums requisite for
keeping such a body constantly on foot, he at-

tempted
d F. Paul, His. 61. Seckend. iii. 73.

tempted to throw that burden on his allies, and BOOK V.
to provide for the safety of his own dominions -
at their expence, by proposing that the Italian '532
states hould enter into a league of defence
against all invaders; that, on the first appear-
ance of danger, an army should be raised and
maintained at the common charge; and that
Antonio de Leyva hould be appointed the ge-
neraliffimo. Nor was the proposal unacceptable
to Clement, though for a reason very different
from that which induced the Emperor to make
it. He hoped, by this expedient, to deliver 533.
Italy from the German and Spanish veterans,
which had so long filled all the powers in that
country with terror, and still kept them in sub-
jetion to the Imperial yoke. A league was Feb. 14.
accordingly concluded; all the Italian states,
the Venetians excepted, acceded to it; the fum
which each of the contra&cing parties should
furnish towards maintaining the army was fixed;
the Emperor agreed to withdraw the troops
which gave so much umbrage to his allies, and
which he was unable any longer to support.
Having disbanded part of them, and removed the
reft to Sicily and Spain, he embarked on board
Doria's gallies, and arrived at Barcelona e. April a%.

NOTWITHSTANDING all his precautions for Defigrn nd

negociati-

securing the peace of Germany, and maintain- gnothe
ing that system which he had established in Italy, F.nhKing

-1. T? i i , ' * gainft the

the Emperor became every day more and more Emperor;
apprehensive that both would be oon disturbed
by the intrigues or arms of the French King.
His apprehensions were well founded, as nothing
but the desperate situation of his affairs could
have brought Francis to give his content to a
treaty so dishonourable and disadvantageous as

that
' Guic. I. xx. 551. Frreras, ix. 149.

B,,oK V. that of Cambray: He, at the very time of rati-
'' - fying it, had formed a resolution to observe it
1'33- no longer than necellity compelled him, and took

a solemn protest, though with the most profound
secrecy, againfi fveral articles in the treaty, par-
ticularly that whereby he renounced all preten.
sions to the dutchy of Milan, as unjust, injuri-
ous to his heirs, and invalid. One of the crown
lawyers, by his command, entered a protest to
the fame purpose, and with the like secrecy,
when the ratification of the treaty was regiltered
in the parliament of Paris . Francis seems to
have thought that, by employing an artifice un-
worthy of a King, deftruaive of publick' faith,
and of the mutual confidence on which all tranf-
a&ions between nations are founded, he was re-
leafed from any obligation to perform the most
solemn promises, or to adhere to the most sacred
engagements. From the moment he concluded
the peace of Cambray, he wished and watched for
an opportunity of violating it with safety. He
endeavoured, for that reason, to strengthen his
alliance with the King of England, whole friend-
ship he cultivated with the greatest assiduity. He
put the military force of his own kingdom on a
better and more refpe&able footing than ever.
He artfully fomented thejealoufy and discontent
of the German princes.

rtrt;cal !y BUT above all, Francis laboured to break
Ppe.tc the strict confederacy which subsisted between

Charles and Clement; and he had oon the
fatisfaaion to observe appearances of disgust
and alienation arising in the mind of that fufpi-
cious and interested Pontiff, which gave him
hopes that their union would not be lating. As
the Emperor's decision in favour of the duke of

Ferrara
f Du Mont Corps Diplom. tom. iv. part z. p. S.

Ferrara had greatly irritated the Pope, Francis BooK V.
aggravated the injustice of that proceeding, and -"--
flattered Clement that the papal lee would find in 1533
him a more impartial and no less powerful pro,
teEtor. As the importunity with which Charles
demanded a council was extremely offensive to
the Pope, Francis artfully created obttacles to
prevent it, and attempted to divert the German
princes, his allies, from insisting so obstinately
on that point s. As the emperor had gained
such an ascendant over Clement by contributing
to aggrandize his family, Francis endeavoured
to allure him by the fame irresistible bait, pro,
posing a marriage between his second son, Henry
duke of Orleans, and Catharine the daughter
of the Pope's cousin Laurence di Medici. On
the first overtures of this match, the Emperor
could not persuade himself that Francis really
intended to debate the royal blood of France by
an alliance with Catharine, whose ancestors had
been so lately private citizens and merchants in
Florence, and believed that he meant only to
flatter or amuse the ambitious Pontiff. He
thought it necessary, however, to efface the im-
pression which uch a dazzling offer might have
made, by promising to break off the marriage
which had been agreed on between his own niece,
the King of Denmark's daughter, and the Duke
of Milan, and to substitute Catharine in her
place. But the French ambassador's producing
unexpecedly full powers to conclude the mar-
riage treaty with the duke of Orleans, this ex-
pedient had no effect. Clement was so highly
pleased with an honour which added such lutre
and dignity to the house of Medici, that he of-
sered to grant Catharine the investiture of con-
fiderable territories in Italy by way of portion;

g Bellay, 14i, &c. Seck. iii. 48. F. Paul, 63.
VOL. II. B b he

BooK V. he seemed ready to support Francis in profecut.

c'- '

y ing his ancient claims in that country, and con-
'533- fnted to a personal interview with that Mo-

narch h.

inteie, CHARLES was at the utmost pains to prevent
poe .d a meeting, in which nothing was likely to pass
Frand. but what would be of detriment to him; nor

could he bear, after he had twice condescended
to visit the Pope in his own territories, that Cle-
ment should beflow such a mark of diftindion
on his rival, as to venture on a voyage by sea,
at an unfavourable season, in order to pay court
to Francis in the French dominions. But the
Pope's eagerness to accomplih the match over-
came all scruples of pride, or fear, or jealousy,
which must have influenced him on any other
oaker. occasion. The interview, notwithstanding feve-

ral artifices of the emperor to prevent it, took
place at Marseilles, with extraordinary pomp
and demonltrations of confidence on both fides,
and the marriage, which the ambition and abi-
lities of Catharine rendered in the sequel as fatal
to France, as it was then thought diflionourable,
was consummated. But whatever schemes may
have been secretly concerted by the Pope and
Francis in favour of the duke of Orleans, to
whom his father proposed to make over all his
rights in Italy, so careful were they to avoid
giving any cause of offence to the Emperor, that
no treaty was concluded between them '; and
even in the marriage-articles, Catharine re-
nounced all claims and pretensions in Italy, ex-
cept to the dutchy of Urbino k.

BUT at the very time when he was carrying

Pope's os- on thee negociations, and forming this connec-
dus «ith htion
egCd to tion
the King of hj
Enland's hGuic. 1.XX. 551, 5J3. Bellay, 138. i Guic .
divrce . x55 j. k Da Mont Corps Diplom. iv. p. ii. ol.

tion with Francis, which gave so great umbrage Book V.
to the emperor, such was the artifice and dupli- *
city of Clement's charater, that he suffered the '133.
latter to dire& all his proceedings with regard
to the King of England, and was no less atten-
tive to gratify him in that particular, than if the
mot cordial union had still subsisted between
them. Henry's suit for a divorce had now con-
tinued near fix years; during all which period
the pope negociated, promised, retracted, and
concluded nothing. After bearing repeated de-
lays and disappointments, longer than could
have been expeted from a prince of such a cho-
lerick and impetuous temper, his patience was
at last so much exhausted, that he applied to
another tribunal for that decree which he had
solicited in vain at Rome. Cranmer, archbihop
of Canterbury, by a sentence founded on the
authority of Universities, Do&ors, and Rabbies,
who had been consulted with refpe& to the
point, annulled the King's marriage with Ca-
tharine; her daughter was declared illegitimate;
and Anne Boleyne acknowledged as Queen of
England. At the fame time Henry began not
only to neglet and to threaten the Pope, whom
he had hitherto courted, but to make innova-
tions in the church, of which he had formerly
been such a zealous defender. Clement, who
had already seen so many provinces and king-
doms revolt from the Holy See, became appre-
henfive at last that England would imitate their
example; and partly from his solicitude to pre-
vent that fatal blow, partly in compliance with
the French King's solicitations, determined to
give Henry such fatisfaaion as might ftll retain
him within the bosom of the church. But the 1534.
violence of the Cardinals, devoted to the Em- M-r,"h 3-
peror, did not allow the Pope leisure for exe-
cuting this prudent resolution, and hurried him,

B b 2 with

BOot V. with a precipitation fatal to the Roman See, to
*- -' iffuc a bull rescinding Cranmer's sentence, con.

34 firming Henry's mamage with Catharine, and

declaring him excommunicated, if, within a
time specified, he did not abandon the wife he
had taken, and return to her whom he had de-
Pu- ferted. Enraged at this unexpeted decree,

;'.i Henry kept no longer any measures with the
EngOd. court of Rome; his subje&s seconded his resent-

ment and indignation; an at of Parliament was
passed, abolishing the papal power and jurifdic-
tion in England; by another, the King was
declared supreme head of the church, and all
the authority of which the Popes were deprived
was vefied in him. That vast fabric of eccle-
fiaftical dominion, which had been raised with
such art, and whose foundations seemed so deep,
being no longer supported by the veneration of
the people, was overturned in a moment. Henry
himself, with the caprice peculiar to his cha-
racter, continued to defend the dotrines of the
Romilh church as fiercely as he attacked its
jurifdi&ion. He alternately persecuted the Pro-
teftants for rejeting the former, and the Catho-
licks for acknowledging the latter. But his sub-
jects being once permitted to enter into new
paths, did not chufe to stop hort at the precise
point prescribed by him. Having been encou-
raged by his example to break some of their set-
ters, they were so impatient to {hake off what still
remained k, that in the following reign, with the
general applause of the nation, a total fepara-
tion was made from the church of Rome in arti-
cles of do&rine, as well as in matters of difci-
pline and jurifdition.

A SHORT
k Herbe:t. Burn. Hifl. of Reform.

A SHORT delay might have saved the See of BooK V.

Rome from all the unhappy consequences of""
Clement's ra(hnefs. Soon after his sentence De'ati4f
against Henry, he fell into a languishing diftem- crmcnt.
per, which gradually wafting his constitution,
put an end to his Pontificate, the most unfor- Sept. 5.
tunate, both during its continuance, and by its
effecs, that the church had known for many
ages. The very day on which the Cardinals Eaion of
entered the conclave, they raied to the papal o'. ','
throne Alexander Farnese, dean of the sacred
college, and the eldest member of that body,
who assumed the name of Paul III. The ac-
count of his promotion was received with extra-
ordinary acclamations of joy by the people of
Rome, highly pleased, after an interval of more
than an hundred years, to fee the crown of St.
Peter placed on the head of a Roman citizen.
Persons more capable of judging, formed a fa-
vourable presage of his administration, from the
experience which he had acquired under four
Pontificates, as well as the characer of prudence
and moderation which he had uniformly main-
tained in a station of great eminence, and during
an acive period that required both talents and
address '.

EUROPE, it is probable, owed the continu-

ance of its peace to the death of Clement; for
although no traces remain in history of any
league concluded between him and Francis, it is
scarcely to be doubted but that he would have
seconded the operations of the French arms in
Italy, that he might have gratified his ambition
by feeing one of his family possessed of the fu-
preme power in Florence, and another in Milan.
But upon the election of Paul III. who had hi.

therto
! Guic. 1. xx. S56. F. Paul, 64.

o-r V. therto adhered uniformly to the Imperial interest,

-~ Francis found it necessary to suspend his opera.
,5'' tions for some time, and to put off the com-

mencement of hostilities against the Emperor,
on which he was fully determined.

lfTcrrceioa WHILE Francis waited for an opportunity to
bfp^hf^in renew a war which had hitherto proved so fatal
Gcfne. to himself and his fubjecs, a tranfation of a

very singular nature was carried on in Germany..
Among many beneficial and salutary effecs of
which the Reformation was the immediate cause,
it was attended, as must be the cafe, in all ac-
tions and events wherein men are concerned,
with some consequences of an oppofire nature.
When the human mind is rouzed by grand
objects, and agitated by strong palions, its
operations acquire such force, that they are apt
to become irregular and extravagant. Upon
any great revolution in religion, such irregulari-
ties abound molt, at that particular period, when
men, having thrown off the authority of their
ancient principles, do not yet fully comprehend
the nature, or feel the obligation of those new
tenets which they have embraced. The mind,
in that situation, puhfing forward with the bold-
ness which prompted it to reject established opi-
nions, and not guided by a clear knowledge of
the system substituted in their place, disdains all
restraint, and runs into wild notions, which often
lead to scandalous or immoral condu. Thus,
in the first ages of the Christian church, many of
the new converts, having renounced their an-
tient Creeds, and being but imperfetly acquaint-
ed with the dotrines and precepts of Chrifti-
anity, broached the moit extravagant opinions,
equally subversive of piety and virtue; all which
errors disappeared or were exploded when the

knowledge

knowledge of religion increased, and came to Boor V.
be more generally diffused. In like manner, ---
soon after Luther's appearance, the rashness or '534.
ignorance of some of his disciples led them to
publifl tenets no less absurd than pernicious,
which being proposed to men extremely illite-
rate, but fond of novelty, and at a time when
their minds were turned wholly towards religious
speculations, gained too easy credit and autho-
rity among them. To these causes must be im-
puted the extravagances of Muncer, in the year
one thousand five hundred and twenty-five, as
well as the rapid progress which they made
among the peasants; but though the infurre&ion
excited by that Fanatic was soon suppressed, feve-
ral of his followers lurked in different places,
and endeavoured privately to propagate his opi-
nions.

IN those provinces of Upper Germany, which Origin and

had already been so cruelly wafted by their en- teh'ntr
thufiaftic rage, the magistrates watched their
motions with such evere attention, that ma-
ny of them found it necessary to retire into
other countries, some were punilhed, others
driven into exile, and their errors were entirely
rooted out. But in the Netherlands and Weftpha-
lia, where the pernicious tendency of their opinions
was more unknown, and guarded against with less
care, they got admittance into several towns, and
spread the infecion of their principles. The most
remarkable of their religious tenets related to the
Sacrament of Baptism, which, as they contended,
ought to be administered only to persons grown
up to years of understanding, and should be per-
formed not by sprinkling them with water, but
by dipping them in it: For this reason they
condemned the baptism of infants, and rebap-
tizing all whom they admitted into their society,

the

Booi V. the eft came to be dilringuilhed by the name
'-""Jos Anabaptists. To this peculiar notion con-
'34' cerning baptism, which has the appearance of

being tounded on the pra&ice of the church in
the apotqolick age, and contains nothing incon-
fitent with the peace and order of human so-
ciety, they added other principles of a most en-
thufiaftick, as well as dangerous nature. They
maintained that, among Chrifians who had the
precepts of the gospel to direc, and the spirit
of God to guide them, the office of magistracy
was not only unnecessary, but an unlawful en-
troachment on their piritual liberty; that the
liflin&ions occasioned by birth, or rank, or
wealth, being contrary to the spirit of the gofpl,
which confiders all men as equal, hfould be en-
tirely abolilhed; that all Christians, throwing
their pofleflions into one common fock, should
live together in that state of equality which be-
comes members of the fame family; that as
neither the laws of nature, nor the precepts of
the New Testament had placed any restraints
upon men with regard to the number of wives
which they might marry, they should use that
liberty which God himlelf had granted to the
patriarchs.
Settle i SUCH opinions, propagated and maintained

. with enthufiaftick zeal and boldness, were not

long of producing the violent effects natural tO
them. Two anabaptist prophets, John Matthias,
a baker of Haerlem, and John Boccold, or
Beiukels, a journeyman taylor of I.eyden, pof-
sessed with the rage of making proselytes, fixed
their residence at Munster, an Imperial city in
Westphalia, of the first rank, under the fove-
reignty of its bishop, but governed by its own
senate and consuls. As neither of these Fanatics
wanted the talents requisite in desperate en-

terprizes,

terprizes, great resolution, the appearance of BOOK V.
fanftity, bold pretensions to inspiration, and a
confident and plausible manner of discoursing, '534'
they soon gained many converts. Among thele
were Rothman, who had first preached the Pro-
teftant doctrine in Munster, and Cnipperdoling,
a citizen of good birth, and considerable emi-
nence. Emboldened by the countenance of such
disciples, they openly taught their opinions;
and not satisfied with that liberty, they made
several attempts though without success, to
seize the town, in order to get their tenets efta-
blifhed by public authority. At last, having Become
secretly called in their aflbociates from the neigh- that city.
bouring country, they suddenly took pofieffion
of the arsenal and fenate-houfe in the night-time,.
and running through the streets with drawn
swords, and horrible howlings, cried out al-
ternately, " Repent, and be baptized," and
" Depart ye ungodly." The senators, the ca- Februry.
nons, the nobility, together with the more fober
citizens, whether Papists or Protestants, terrified
at their threats and outcries, fled in confusion,
and left the city under the dominion of a frantick
multitude, consisting chiefly of strangers. No-
thing now remaining to overawe or controul
them, they set about modelling the government
according to their own wild ideas; and though
at first they. showed so much reverence for the
ancient constitution, as to ele& senators of their
own set, and to appoint Cnipperdoling and an- Efnblinh
other proselyte consuls, this was nothing more f govrn.
than form; for all their proceedings were di-ment.
rected by Matthias, who, in the style, and with the
authority of a prophet, uttered his commands,
which it was instant death to disobey. Having
begun with encouraging the multitude to pillage
the churches, and deface their ornaments; he
enjoined them to destroy all books except the

Bible,

BoK V. Bible, as useless or impious; he appointed the
'--' estates of such as fled, to be confiscated, and fold

,534- to the inhabitants of the adjacent country; he

ordered every man to bring forth his gold, ilver,
and precious effects, and to lay them at his feet;
the wealth amassed by these means, he deposited
in a publick treasury, and named deacons to dif-
penfe it for the common use of all. The mem-
bers of this commonwealth being thus brought
to a perfect equality, he commanded all of them
to cat at tables prepared in publick, and even pre.
fcribcd the dilhts which were' to be served up
each day. aving finished his plan of reforma-
tion, his next care was to provide for the defence
of the city; and he took measures for that pur-
pole with a prudence which favoured nothing of
fanaticism. He colleced vati magazines of
every kind; he repaired and extended the forti-
fications, obliging every person without diflinc-
tion to work in his turn; he formed such as were
capable of bearing arms into regular bodies, and
endeavoured to add the vigour of discipline to
the impetuosity of enthusiasm. He sent emif-
saries to the Anabaptilts in the Low-Countries,
inviting them to afcemble at Munifer, which he
dignified with the name of Mount-Sion, that
from thence they might set out to reduce all the
nations of the earth under their dominion. He
himself was unwearied in attending to every
thing necessary for the security or increase of' the
fe,; animating his disciples by his own example
to refue no labour, as well as to repine at no
hardihip; and their enthusiastic pallions being
kept from subsiding by a perpetual fucceflion of
exhortations, revelations, and prophecies, they
seemed ready to undertake or to susser any thing
in mainenance of their opinions.

WHILE

WHILE they were thus employed, the bishop of Boor V.

Munster having assembled a considerable army, ' '
advanced to besiege the town. On his approach, Tb,5,op
Matthias sallied out at the head of ome chofent Munfier
troops, attacked one quarter of his camp, forced ,gin'
it, and after great slaughter, returned to the city them.
loaded with glory and spoil. Intoxicated with
this success, he appeared next day brandilhing a
spear, and declared, that, in imitation of Gideon,
he would go forth with a handful of men and smite
the host of the ungodly. Thirty persons, whom he May.
named, followed him without hesitation in this
wild enterprize, and rulhing on the enemy with
a frantick courage, were cut off to a man. The
death of their prophet occasioned at first great
consternation among his disciples, but Boc- John f
cold, by the fame gifts and pretensions which ir great
had gained Matthias credit, Ioon revived their uthority

fuc among the

spirits and hopes to such a degree, that he fuc-abpti.
ceeded him in the fame absolute direction of all
their affairs. As he did not possess that enter-
prizing courage which distinguished his prede-
ceffor, he satisfied himself with carrying on a
defensive war, and without attempting to annoy
the enemy by rallies, he waited for the succours
he expected from the Low-Countries, the arri-
val of which was often foretold and promised by
their prophets. But though less daring in ac-
tion than Matthias, he was. a wilder enthusiast,
and of more unbounded ambition. Soon after
the death of his predecessor, having, by obscure
visions and prophecies, prepared the multitude
for some extraordinary event, he stripped him-
self naked, and marching through the streets,
proclaimed with a loud voice, "That the king-
dom of Sion was at hand; that whatever was
highest on the earth mhould be brought low, and
whatever was lowest lhould be exalted." In
order to fulfil this, he commanded the churches,

as

Boor V. as the moit lofty buildings in the city, to be
'v"" levelled with the ground; he degraded the fe-

3 nators cholen by Matthias, and depriving Cnip-

perdoling of the consulship, the highest office
in the commonwealth, he appointed him to exe-
cute the lowest and molt infamous, thatof com-
mon hangman, to which itrange transition the
other agreed, not only without murmuring, but
with the utmost joy; and such was the defpotick
r:gour of Boccold's administration, that he was
called almc, t every day to perform ome duty or
o:her of his wretched function. In place of the
depotld senators, he named twelve judges, ac-
cording to the number of tribes in Israel, topre-
file in all affairs; retaining to himself the fame
authority which Moses anciently poefled as
lkgiflator of that people.

reaed NoT satisfied, however, with power or titles
~i-s* which were not supreme, a prophet, whom he

had gained and tutored, having called the mul-
titude together, declared it to be the will of
God, that John Boccold hould be King of Sion,
Jure 14- and fit on the throne of David. John, kneeling

down, accepted of the heavenly call, which he
solemnly protested had been revealed likewise to
himself, and was immediately acknowledged as
Monarch by the deluded multitude. From that
moment he assumed all the state and pomp of
royalty. He wore a crown of gold, and was
clad in the richest and molt sumptuous garments.
A Bible was carried on his one hand, a naked
sword on the other. A great body of guards
accompanied him when he appeared in publick.
*He coined money stamped with his own image,
and appointed the great officers of his household
and kingdom, among whom Cnipperdoling was
nominated governor of the city, as a reward for
his former iubmiflion.

HAVING

HAVING now attained the height of power, BooK V.

Boccold began to discover passions, which he ''-
had hitherto restrained or indulged only in fe- Hi'5le
cret. As the excesses of enthusiasm have been ti"", te1n-
observed in every age to lead to sensual gratifi- "ndcondul.
cations, the fame constitution that is fufccptible
of the former, being remarkably prone to the
latter, he inftru6ted the prophets and teachers
to harangue the people for several days concern-
ing the lawfulness, and even neceflity of taking
more wives than one, which they afferred to be
one of the privileges granted by God to the
faints. When their ears were once accustomed
to this licentious dotrine, and their paliions in-
flamed with the profpec of such unbounded
indulgence, he himself set them an example of
using what he called their Christian liberty, by
marrying at once three wives, among which the
widow of Matthias, a woman of singular beauty,
was one. As he was allured by beauty, or the
love of variety, he gradually added to the num-
ber of his wives until they amounted to fourteen,
though the widow of Matthias was the only one
dignified with the title of Qieen, or who flared
with him the splendor and ornaments of royalty.
After the example of their prophet, the multi-
tude gave themselves up to the most licentious
and uncontrouled gratification of their desires.
No man remained satisfied with a ingle wife.
Not to use their Christian liberty was deemed a
crime. Persons were appointed to search the
houses for young women grown up to maturity,
whom they instantly compelled to marry. To-
gether with polygamy, freedom of divorce, its
inseparable attendant, was introduced, and be-
came a new source of corruption. Every excess
was committed of which the passions of men are
capable, when restrained neither by the authority

of

Boor V. of laws nor the sense of decency ; and by a
'- - monfrrous and almost incredible conjunction,
' 534 voluptuoufnefs was engrafted on religion, and

dissolute riot accompanied the aufterities of fa-
natical devotion.

A confede- MEANWHILE, the German princes were highly
h" ^ng" offended at the insult offered to their dignity by
btptlt. Boccold's presumptuous usurpation of royal ho-

nours; and the profligate manners of his follow-
ers, which were a reproach to the Chrjftian
name, filled men of all professions with horror.
Luther, who-had testified against this fanatical
spirit on its first appearance, now deeply lamented
its progress, and exposing the delusion with
great firength of argument, as well as acrimony
of style, called loudly on all the states of Ger-
many to put a stop to a phrenzy no less perni-
cious to society, than fatal to religion. The
Emperor, occupied with other cares and pro-
je&s, had not leisure to attend to such a distant
object. But the princes of the Empire, aflem-
bled by the King of the Romans, voted a supply
of men and money to the bithop of Munster,
who being unable to keep a sufficient army on

Befir the foot, had converted the siege of the town into
t.,wa. a blockade.

m Prophet & concionatorum autoritate juxta et exem-

plo, toti urbe ad rapiendas pulcherrimas quafque fzminas
difcarfum e. Nec intra paocos dies, in tanta hominum
tarba fere ulla reperta eft fpra annum decimum quar-
tum, quz Rluprum paffa non fuerit. Lamb. Horten. p.
303. Vulg6 viris quinas effe uxores, pluribus senas, non-
nullis feptenas & o&onas. Puellas supra duodecimum ztatis
annum tatim amare. Id. 3o. Nemo una contentis suit,
neque cniquam extra effatas & viris immaturas continenti
efe licuit. Id. 307. Tcebo hic, ut fit fuus honor auribus,
quata barbaric et malitia ufi font in puellis vitiandis non-
dom aptis matrimcnio, id qued mihi neque'ex vano,
neque ex vlgi fermonibus hautum e, fed ex ea vetula,
cui cura sic vitiataram demandata fuir, auditum. Job.
(orvinus, 316.

a blockade. The forces raised in consequence BOOK -
of this resolution, were put under the command ---'
of an officer of experience, who approaching the '535'
the town towards the end of spring in the year one
thousand five hundred and thirty-five, pryffed it
more closely than formerly; but found the forti-
fications so strong, and so diligently guarded,
that he durt not attempt an afault. It was now
above fifteen months since the Anabaptilts had
established their dominion in Muniter; they had
during that time undergone prodigious fatigue
in working on the fortifications, and perform-
ing military duty. Notwithstanding the prudent May.
attention of their king to provide for their sub- ti,'lm,
fiftence, and his frugal as well as regular ceco- of the he-
nomy in their public meals, they began to feel sigd.
the approach of famine. Several small bodies
of their brethren, who were advancing to their
afliftance from the Low-Countries, had been
intercepted, and cut to pieces; and while all
Germany was ready to combine against them,
they had no profpet of succour. But such was
the ascendant which Boccold had acquired over
the multitude, and so powerful the fascination
of enthusiasm, that their hopes were as sanguine
as ever, and they hearkened with implicit cre-
dulity to the visions and predictions of their pro-
phets, who assured them, that the Almighty
would speedily interpose, in order to deliver the
city. The'faith, however, of some few, haken
by the violence and length of their fuffcrings,
began to fail; but being fufpe&ed of an in-
clination to surrender to the enemy, they were
punished with immediate death, as guilty of
impiety in diftrufling the power of God. One
of the King's wives, having uttered certain words
which implied orme doubt concerning his divine
milion, he instantly called the whole number
together, and commanding the blasphemer, as

he

Booi V. he called her, to kneel down, cut off her head
'--v-- with his own hands; and so far were the reft

35S' from exprefling any horror at this cruel deed,

that they joined him in dancing with a frantick
joy around the bleeding body of their compa-
nion.

Te city BY this time, the besieged endured the ut.
t Ae; mot rigour of famine; but they chore rather

to susser hardlhips, the recital of which is ifock-
ing to humanity, than to liften to the terms of
capitulation offered them by the bishop. At
last, a deserter, whom they had taken into.
their service, being either less intoxicated with
the fumes of enthusiasm, or unable any longer
to bear such diRrefs, made his escape to the
enemy. He informed their general of a weak
part in the fortifications which he had observed,
and assuring him that the besieged, exhausted
with hunger and fatigue, kept watch there with
little care, he offered to lead a party thither in
the night. The proposal was accepted, and a
chosen body of troops appointed for the ser-
vice; who, caling the walls unperceived, feiz-
ed one of the gates, and admitted the reft of
June 14. the army. The Anabaptists, though furprized,

defended themselves in the market-place with
valour, heightened by despair; but being over-
powered by numbers, and surrounded on every
hand, mot of them were slain, and the remain-
der taken prisoners. Among the lat were the

puniihment King and Cnipperdoling. The King, loaded
,and his afwith chains, was carried from city to city as a
ciates. fpe&acle to gratify the curiosity of the people,

and was exposed to all their insults. His fpi-
rit, however, was not broken or humbled by
this fad reverse of his condition; and he adher-
ed with unlhaken firmness to the diftinguihfing

tenets

tenets of his set. After this he was brought Book V.
back to Munster, the scene of his royalty and '--
crimes, and put to death with the most exqui- ' s3s
site as well lingering tortures, all which he
bore with aftonilhing fortitude. This extra-
ordinary man, who had been able to acquire
such amazing dominion over the minds of his
followers, and to excite commotions so danger-
ous to society, was only twenty-fix years of
age .

TooGTHER with its Monarch, the kingdom ch.maer

of the AnabaptiRs came to an end. Their prin- Gs, heet'
ciples having taken deep root in the Low Coun- period.
tries, the party still subsists there, under the
name of Mennonies; but by a very singular
revolution, this set, so mutinous and fanguina-
ry at its firlt origin, hath become altogether in-
nocent and pacifick. Holding it unlawful to
wage war, or to accept of civil offices, they de-
vote themselves entirely to the duties of private
citizens, and by their industry and charity en-
deavour to make reparation to human society
for the violence committed by their founders°.
A small number of this set which is fettled in
England, retain its peculiar tenets concerning
baptism, but without any dangerous mixture of
enthusiasm.

VOL. II. C c THE

n Sleid. . &c. Tumultuum Anabaptiftarnm Liber

unus. Ant. Lamberto Hortenfio auAore ap. Scardium,
vol. ii. p. 298, &c. De Miferabili MonaRerienfium ob-
fidione, &c. libellus Antonii Corvini ap. Scard. 31.
Annales Anabaptiftici a Joh. Henrico Ottio, 4to. Bafi-
lea, 167z. Cor. Heerlbachius Hilt Anab. Edit. 1637.
p. 140.
o Bayle Diaion. Art. dnataptifti.

Boor V. THE mutiny of the Anabaptists, though it
'-" -'drew general attention, did not so entirely en-
vp sg, gross the princes of Germany, as not to allow
and utho- leisure for other tranfa&ions. The alliance be-
rity of the
eg^e of tween the French King and the confederates at
sm:h"d*. Smalkalde, began about this time to produce

great effe&s. Ulric, Duke of Wurtemberg,
having been expelled his dominions in the year
one thousand five hundred and nineteen, on ac-
count of his violent and oppressive adminiftra-
tion, the house of Aufria had got possession of
his duchy. That prince having now by a long
exile atoned for the errors in his condut, which
were the effet rather of inexperience than of a
tyrannical disposition, was become the object of
general compassion. The Landgrave of Hefle,
in particular, his near relation, warmly espoused
his interest, and used many efforts to recover for
him his ancient inheritance. But the King of
the Romans obstinately refused to relinquish a
valuable acquisition which his family had made
with so much cafe. The Landgrave, unable to
compel him, applied to the King of France, his
new ally. Francis, eager to embrace any op-
portunity of diftrefling the house of Austria, and
desirous of wresting from it a territory, which
gave it footing and influence in a part of Ger-
many at a dilsance from its other dominions,
encouraged the Landgrave to take arms, and
kecretly supplied him with a large fum of money.
This he employed to raise troops, and marching
with great expedition towards Wurternberg, at-
tacked, defeated, and dispersed a considerable
body of Austrians, entrusted with the defence
of the country. All the Duke's subje&s haft-
ened, with emulation,- to receive their native
Prince, and re-invested him with that authority,
which is still enjoyed by his descendants. At

the

the fame time the exercise of the Protestant re- Boo V.
ligion was established in his dominions P. :.

1535.
FERDINAND, how sensible soever of this un, TheKingof

the Romans

expected blow, not daring to .aitack a Prince courttbm.
whom all the Protestant powers in Germany
were ready to support, judged. it:expedient to
conclude a treaty with him, by which, in the
most ample form, he recognized his title to the
duchy. The success of the Landgrave's opera-
tions in behalf of the Duke of Wurtemberg;
having convinced Ferdinand that a rupture with
a league so formidable as that of Smalkalde was
to be avoided with the utmost care, he entered
likewise into a negociation with the Elector of
Saxony, the head of that union, and by some
concessions in favour of the Protestant religion,
and others of advantage to the Elecor himself,
he prevailed on him, together with his confe-
derates, to acknowledge his title as King of the
Romans. At the. fame time, in order to pre-
vent any such precipitate or irregular elecion in
times to come, it was agreed that no person
mhould hereafter be promoted to that dignity
without the unanimous consent of the Elecors;
and the Emperor soon after confirmed this ftipu-
lation .

THESE as of indulgence towards the Pro- Pul i.

teftants, and the close union into which the eri' g.n-.
King of the Romans seemed to be entering with il to meet
the Princes of that party, gave great offence at Mt.
Rome. Paul III. though he had departed from.
a resolution of his predecessor, never to consent
to the calling of a general council, and had pro-

C c2 mifed,

P Sleid z. Bellay, i59, &c. q Sleid. 173.
Corps Diplum. torn. iv. p. . 19.

BOe V. mired, in the firt consistory held after his lec-

tion, that he would convoke that aembly, f
535 much desired by all Christendom, was no led

enraged than Clement at the innovations in
Germany, and no left averse to any scheme fae
reforming either the dotrines of the church, or
the abuses in the court of Rome: But having
been a wit~i of the universal censure which
Clement had incurred by his obstinacy with re-
gard to thee points, he hoped to avoid the fame
rproach by the eeming alacrity with which he
propoed a council; flaeing himself, however,
that such difficulties would arise concerning the
time and place of meeting, the persons who had
a right m be prfent, and the order f their pro.
ceedings, as would effctually defeat the inten-
ion of those who demanded that afmby,
without exposing himself to any imputation for
refufng to call it. With this view he dispatched
nuncios to the several courts, in order to make
known his intention, and that he had fixed on
Mantua as a proper place in which to hold the
council. Such difficulties as the Pope had fore-
fen, immediately presented themselves in great
number. The French King did not approve of
the place which Paul had chosen, as the Papal
and Imperial influence would necessarily be too
great in a town situated in that part of Italy.
The King of England not only concurred with
Francis in urging that objecion, but refused,
besides, to acknowledge any council called in
the name and by the authority of the Pope. The
Doc. t. German Protetants having met together at

Smalkalde, infifed on their original demand of
a council to be held in Germany, and pleading
the Emperor's promise, as well as the agreement
at Ratilbon to that efit, declared that they
would not confider an aembly held at Mantua

as

as a legal or free representative of the church. Boo V.
By this diversity of Sentiments and views, such '---'
a field for intrigue and negociation opened, as '535.
made it easy for the Pope to assume the merit of
being eager to alemble a council, while at the
fame time he could put off its meeting at plea-
sure. The Protestants, on the other hand, sus-
pe&ing his designs, and sensible of the import-
ance which they derived from their union, re-
newed for ten years the league of Smalkaldc,
which now became stronger and more formi-
dable by the accession of several new mem-
bers r.

DURING these tranfa'tions in Germany, the

Emperor undertook his famous enterprize against
the piratical states in Africa. That part of the
African continent lying along the coast of the
Mediterranean sea, which anciently formed the
kingdoms of Mauritania and Maflylia, together
with the republick of Carthage, and which is
now known by the general name of Barbary, The Empe-
had undergone many revolutions. Subdued by dtoutP
the Romans, it became a province of their Afric, .d

: Rate of that

empire. country.

r This league was concluded December, one thouland

five hundred and thirty-five, but not extended or signed
in form till September in the following year. The
Princes who acceded to it were John Eleftor of Saxony,
Ernest Duke of Brunswick, Philip Landgrave of Hele,
Ulric Duke of Wurtemberg, Barnim and Philip Dukes
of Pomerania, John George, and Joachim Princes of
Anhalt, Gbhard and Albert Counts of Mansfield.
William Count of Naflan. The cities, Stralburg, Nn-
remburg, Constance, Ulm, Magdeburg, Bremen, Reut-
lingen, Hailbron, Memmengen, Lindaw, Campen, lfna,
Bibrac, Winrheim, Aufburg' Francfon, Efling, Brunf-
wick, ;ofiar, Hanover, Gottingen, Eilhbeck, sHnburg,
Minden.

BooK V. empire. Conquered afterwards by the Vandals,
'"-' ' they ereced a kingdom there. That being over-

53i- turned by Belisarius, the country continued sub-

ject to the Greek Emperors, until it was over-
run, towards the end of the seventh century, by
the rapid and irresistible arms of the Arabs. It
remained for tome time a part of that vast empire
which the Caliphs governed with absolute autho-
rity. Its immense distance, however, from the
feat of government, encouraged the descendants
of those leaders, who had subdued the country, or
the chiefs of the Moors, its ancient inhabitants,
to throw off the yoke, and to set up for indepen-
dence. The Caliphs, who derived their autho-
rity from a spirit of enthusiasm, more fitted for
making conquests than for preserving them, were
obliged to connive at ats of rebellion which
they could not prevent; and Barbary was divided
into several kingdoms, of which Morocco, Al-
giers, and Tunis, were the most considerable.
The inhabitants of these kingdoms were a mixed
race, Arabs, Negroes from the southern pro-
vinces, and Moors, either natives of Africa, or
who had been expelled out of Spain; all zealous
profelfors of the Mahometan religion, and in-
lamed againif Christianity with a bigotted hatred
proportional to their ignorance and barbarous

manners.

r,s! -- AsMON-G these people, no less daring, incon-
r ..
-; ftant, and treacherous, than the ancient inhabit-

'' ants of the fame country described by the Ro-

man hiftoriars, frequent seditions broke out, and
many changes in government took place. These,
as they affeced only the internal state of a coun-
try so barbarous, are but little known, and de-
fkrve to be o: But about the beginning of the
sixteenth century a sudden revolution happened,

which,

which, by rendering the states of Barbary formi- BooK V.
dable to the Europeans, hath made their history '- |
worthy of more attention. This revolution was nd 5 ,he
brought about by persons born in a rank of life Barbiroila.
which entitled them to a no such illustrious
part. Horuc and Hayradin, the sons of a potter
in the ile of Lesbos, prompted by a restless and
enterprizing spirit, forsook their father's trade,
ran to sea, and joined a crew of pirates. They
soon diftinguihed themselves by their valour
and activity; and becoming matters of a small
brigantine, carried on their infamous trade with
fich conduct and success, that they assembled a
fleet of twelve gallies, beides many vessels of
smaller force. Of this fleet Horuc, the elder
brother, called Barbarossa from the red colour
of his beard, was admiral, and Hayradin second
in command, but with almost equal authority.
They called themselves the friends of the sea,
and the enemies of all who fail upon it; and their
names oon became terrible from the Straits of
the Dardanels to those of Gibraltar. Together
with their fame and power, their ambitious views
extended; and while ating as corsairs, they
adopted the ideas, and acquired the talents of
conquerors. They often carried the prizes which
they took on the coasts of Spain and Italy into
the ports of Barbary, and, enriching the inhabit-
ants by the tale of their booty, and the thought-
less prodigality of their crews, were welcome
guests in every place at which they touched.
The convenient situation of these harbours, lying
lo near the greatef commercial states at that
time in Christendom, made the brothers with
for an eftablihment in that country. An op-
portunity of accomplithing this quickly pre-
lented itself, which they did not susser to pass
unimproved. Eutemi, King of Algiers, having

attempted

Boos V. attempted several times, without success, to take
'.' a fort which the Spanilh governors of Oran had
'53S' built not far from his capital, was so ill advised

as to apply for aid to Barbaroff, whose valour
1516. the Africans confidered as irrefifible. The

active Corsair gladly accepted of the invitation,
and leaving his brother Hayradin with the fleet,
marched at the head of five thousand men to
Algiers, where he was received as their deliverer.
Such a force gave him the command of the
town; and as he perceived that the Moors
neither fufpeed him of any bad intention, nor
were capable, with their light-armed troops,
of opposing his disciplined veterans, he fecredy
Homc. the murdered the monarch whom he had come to

er br- aflift, and caused himself to be proclaimed King
mam- of Algiers in his fRead. The authority which
tr of A- he had thus boldly usurped, he endeavoured to

ftablith by arts suited to the genius of the peo.
pie whom he had to govern; by liberality with.
out bounds to thole who favoured his promotion,
and by cruelty no less unbounded towards all
whom he had any reason to distrust. Not satisfied
with the throne which he had acquired, he at-
tacked the neighbouring King of Tremecen,
and having vanquilhed him in battle,- added his
dominions to those of Algiers. At the fame
time, he continued to infest the coats of Spain
and Italy with fleets which resembled the arma-
ments of a great Monarch, rather than the light
squadrons of a Corsair. The devastations which
thfe committed, obliged Charles, about the be
ginning of his reign, to furnish the marquis de
Comares, governor of Oran, with troops fufEli
ails. cient to attack him. That officer, aflifted by

the dethroned king of Tremeceri, executed the
commillion with such spirit, that Barbarossa'S
troops being beat in several encounters, he him-

self

self was shut up in Tremecen. After defending BooK V.
it to the lat extremity, he was overtaken in at- v-J
tempting to make his escape, and fain while he '535.
fought with an obstinate valour, worthy of his
former fame and exploits.

His brother Hayradin, known likewise by the Theprogrre

name of Barbarossa, assumed the sceptre of Al- inthe
giers, with the fame ambition and abilities, but ond bro.
with better fortune. His reign being undi-' '
furbed by the arms of the Spaniards, which had
full occupation in the wars among the European
powers, he regulated, with admirable prudence,
the interior police of his kingdom, carried on his
naval operations with great vigour, and extended
his conquests on the continent of Africa. But
perceiving that the Moors and Arabs submitted
to his government with the utmost reluctance,
and being afraid that his continual depredations
would, one day, draw upon him the arms of the
Christians, he put his dominions under the pro- Puts hie do-
tetion of the Grand Seignior, and received from der'thn puo
him a body of Turkish soldiers sufficient for his teaion of
security against his domeftick as well ashis foreign he Sultan.
enemies. At last, the fame of his exploits daily
increasing, Solyman offered him the command
of the Turkilh fleet, as the only person whose
valour and ikill in naval affairs entitled him to
command against Andrew Doria, the greatest
fea-officer of that age. Proud of this diftin&ion,
Barbarossa repaired to Constantinople, and with
a wonderful versatility of mind, mingling the
arts of a courtier with the boldness of a Corsair,
gained the entire confidence both of the Sultan
and his Vizier. To them he communicated a
scheme which he had formed of making himself
mailer of Tunis, the most flourishing kingdom,
at that time, on the coast of Africa; and this be-

ing

BooK V. ing approved of uy them, he obtained whatever
-'' he demanded for carrying it into execution.
1535.

Hi1 Ichcme His hopes of success in this undertaking were
in' T'is founded on the intestine divisions in the kingdom

of Tunis. Mahmed, the last King of that coun.
try, having thirty-four sons by different wives,
namedMuley-Hafcen,one of the youngest among
them, his successor. That weak Prince, who
owed this preference not to his own merit, but
to the ascendant which his mother had acquired
over a Monarch doating with age, first poisoned
Mahmed his father, in order to prevent him from
altering his destination; and then, with the bar-
barous policy which prevails wherever polygamy
is permitted, and the right of succession is not
precilely fixed, he put to death all his brothers
whom he could get into his power. Alrafchid,
one of the eldest, was so fortunate as to escape
his rage; and finding a retreat among the
wandering Arabs, made several attempts, by
the affiftancc of some of their chiefs, to recover
the throne, which of, right belonged to him.
But there proving unsuccessful, and the Arabs,
from their natural levity, being ready to deliver
him up to his merciltfs brother, he fled to Al-
giers, the only place of refuge remaining, and
implored the protection of Barbarossa, who, dif-
cerning at once all the advantages which might be
gained by supporting his title, received him with
every poflible demonitration of friendship and
respect. Being ready, at that time, to set fail
for Constantinople, he easily persuaded Alraf-
chid, whose eagernes to obtain a crown disposed
him to believe or undertake any thing, to ac-
company him thither, promising him effetual
aflis^ance from Solyman, whom he represented
to be the most generous, as well as most power-

ful,

ful, Monarch in the world. But no sooner were BOOK V.
they arrived at Constantinople, than the false---
Corsair, regardless of all his promises to him, '535
opened to the Sultan a plan for conquering
Tunis, and annexing it to the Turkish empire,
by making use of the name of this exiled Prince,
and by means of the party ready to declare in his
favour. Solyman approved, with too much
facility, of this perfidious proposal, extremely
suitable to the charater of its author, but alto-
gether unworthy of a great Prince. A power-
ful fleet and numerous army were soon assem-
bled; at the fight of which the credulous Alraf-
chid flattered himself, that he would soon enter
his capital in triumph.

BUT just as this unhappy Prince was going to ts fruccet,.

embark, he was arrested by order of the Sultan,
shut up in the seraglio, and was never heard of
more. Barbarossa failed with a fleet of two hun-
dred and fifty vessels towards Africa. After ra-
vaging the coasts of Italy, and spreading terror
through every part of that country, he appeared
before Tunis; and landing his men, gave out
that he came to assert the right of Alrafchid,
whom he pretended to have left sick aboard the
Admiral galley. The fort of Goletta, which
commands the bay, soon fell into his hands,
partly by his own address, partly by the treachery
of its commander; and the inhabitants of Tunis,
weary of Muley-Hafcen's government, took
arms, and declared for Alrafchid with such zeal
and unanimity, as obliged the former to fly so
precipitately, that he left all his treasures behind
him. The gates were immediately set open to
Barbarossa, as the restorer of their lawful fove-
reign. But when Alrafchid himself did not
appear, and when instead of his name, that of

Solyman

Boo V. Solyman alone was heard among the acclama.
'-V-- tions of the Turkish soldiers marching into the
'535. town, the people of Tunis began to fufpet the

Corsair's treachery. Their suspicions being soon
converted into certainty, they ran to arms with
the utmost fury, and surrounded the citadel, into
which Barbarossa had led his troops. But hav-
ing foreseen such a revolution, he was not un-
prepared for it; he immediately turned against
them the artillery on the ramparts, and by one
brilk discharge, dispersed the numerous but un-
direced assailants, and forced them to acknow.
ledge Solyman as their sovereign, and to submit
to himself as his viceroy.

Bnbrm.st-'s His first care was to put the kingdom, of
.mi.,blc which he had thus got possession, in a proper

posture of defence. He strengthened the citadel
which commands the town; and fortifying the
Goletta in a regular manner, at vast .expence,
made it the principal station for his fleet, and
his great arsenal for military as well as' naval
stores. Being now possessed of such extensive
territories, he carried on his depredations againt
the Christian States to a greater extent, and with
more deftrufive violence than ever. Daily com-
plaints of the outrages committed by his cruizers
were brought to the Emperor by his subjects,
both in Spain and Italy. All Christendom
seemed to expet from him, as its greatest and
most fortunate Prince, that he would put an end
to this new and odious species of oppression.

ahbeexild At the lame time Muley-Hafcen, the exiled
K otTo-
i,,ir, King of Tunis, finding none of the Mahometan
«he Ep-f Princes in Africa willing or able to aflift him in

.A i recovering his throne, applied to Charles as the
1', 53 only person who could assert his rights in oppo-

fition to such a formidable usurper. The em-

peror,

peror, equally desirous of delivering his domi- BooK V.
nions from the dangerous neighbourhood of Bar- -v-
baroffa; of appearing as the protecor of an !s35.
unfortunate Prince; and of acquiring the glory
annexed in that age, to every expedition against
the Mahometans, readily concluded a treaty
with Mulky-Hafcen, and began to prepare for
invading Tunis. Having made trial of his own
abilities for war in the late campaign in Hun-
gary, he was now become so fond of the military
charaer, that he determined to command on
this occasion in person. The united strength of Hiprera-
hisdominions was called out upon an enterprize to"nourth
in which the emperor was about to hazard his
glory, and which drew the attention of all Eu-
rope. A Fmilh fleet carried from the ports
of the Low-Country a, body of German infan-
try,; the gallies of Naples and Sicily took on
board the veteran bands of Italians and Spa-
niards, which had diftinguilhed theifelves by
so many victories over the French; the Emperor
himfcel embarked at Barcelona with the sower
of the Spanilh nobility, and was joined by a
considerable squadron from Portugal, under the
command of the Infant Don Lewis, the Em-
prefi's brother; Andrew Doria conduced his
own gallies, the best appointed at that time in
Europe, and commanded by the most skilful
officers: The Pope furnilhed all the afliftance in
his power towards such a pious enterprize; and
the order of Malta, the perpetual enemies of
the Infidels, equipped a squadron, which, though
small, was formidable by the valour of the
knights who served on board it. The port of
Cagliari in Sardinia was the general place of
rendezvous. Doria was appointed High-Admi-
ral of the fleet; the command of the land-

forces
Harei Annale Braban. i, 599.

Boo V. forces under the Emperor was given to the mar-

V'7v7 quis de Guafto.
i53-

Larnd in ON the sixteenth of July, the fleet, consisting
frica. of near five hundred veflels, having on board

above thirty thousand regular troops, set fail
from Cagliari, and after a prosperous naviga-
tion, landed within fight of Tunis. Barbarossa
having received early intelligence of the Em-
peror's immense armament, and fufpeting its
destination, prepared with equal prudence and
vigour for the defence of his new conquest. He
called in all his corsairs from their different ita-
tions; he drew from Algiers what forces could
be pared; he dispatched messengers to all the
African Princes, Moors as well as Arabs, and
by representing Muley-Hafcen as an infamous
apostate, prompted by ambition and revenge,
not only to become the vassal of a Christian
Prince, but to conspire with him to extirpate the
Mahommedan faith, he inflamed those ignorant
and bigotted chiefs to such a degree, that they
took arms as in a common cause. Twenty thou-
sand horse, together with a vast body of foot,
toon aflembled at Tunis; and by a proper dif-
tribution of presents among them from time to
time, Barbarossa kept the ardour which had
brought them together from subsiding. But as
he was too well acquainted with the enemy whom
he had to oppose, to think that there light troops
could resist the heavy-armed cavalry and veteran
infantry which composed the Imperial army, his
chief confidence was in the strength of the Go-
letta, and in his body of Turkilh soldiers who
were armed and disciplined after the European
fashion. Six thousand of these, under the com-
mand of Sinan, a renegado Jew, the bravest and
most experienced of all his corsairs, he threw
Lyo' f into that fort, which the emperor immediately

invested.

invested. As Charles had the command of the BooK V.
sea, his camp was so plentifully supplied not'""^
only with the necessaries, but with all the luxu- 53S
ries of life, that Muley-Hafcen, who had not
been accustomed to fee war carried on with such
order and magnificence, was filled with admira-
tion of the Emperor's power. His troops, ani-
mated by his presence, and confidering it as
meritorious to ined their blood in such a pious
cause, contended with each other for the posts
of honour and danger. Three separate attacks
were concerted; and the Germans, Spaniards, and-
Italians, having one of these committed to each
of them, pushed them forward with the eager
courage which national emulation inspires. Sinan
displayed resolution and kill becoming the con-
fidence which his master had put in him; the
garrison performed the hard service on which
they were ordered with great fortitude. But
though he interrupted the besiegers by frequent
rallies; though the Moors and Arabs alarmed
the camp with their continual incursions; the
breaches soon became so considerable towards
the land, while the fleet battered those parts of
the fortifications which it could approach, with
no less fury and success, that an assault being
given on all fides at once, the place was taken Takes it by
by itorm. Sinan, with the remains of his Tjly25
garrison, retired, after an obstinate resistance,
over a shallow part of the bay towards the city.
By the reduction of the Goletta, the Emperor
became matter of Barbarossa's fleet, consisting
of eighty-leven gallies and galliots, together with
his arsenal, and three hundred cannon, mostly
brass, which were planted on the ramparts; a
prodigious number in that age, and a remark-
able proof of the strength of the fort, as well as
of the greatnrfs of the corsair's power. The
Emperor marched into the Goletta through the

bret-h,

BOOK V. breach, and turning to Muley-Hafcen who at-

' tended him, "Here," fays he, " is a gate open
5to you, by which you lal return to take po

ffdion of your dominions."

BARBAKOSSA, though he felt the full weig

of the blow which he had received, did not
however, lose courae, or ahbdo the deince
of Tunis. But as the wallsr of great extent,
and extreely weak; a he could not depend
on the elity of the inhabians, nor hope that
the Moors and Arabs would sustain t had-
Ihips of a siege, he boldly deterined to advance
with his army, which amounted to fifty thou-
iand men , towards the Imperial camp, aad to
decide the fae of his kingdom by the ie of a
battle. This resolution he communicatd mo i
principal officers, and representing to them the
faal consequences which might follow, if ten
tboufand Christian aves, whom he had Blit up
in the citadel, Ihould attempt to mutiny during
the abince of the army, he propofd as a ne-
ccfary precaution for the publick security, to
mafacre them without mercy before he began
his march. They all approved warmly of his
intention to fight; but. inured as they were, in
their piratical depredations to scenes of bod-
shed and cruelty, the barbarity of his propoal
concerning the saves, sild them with horror;
and Barbarossa, rather from the dread of irritat-
ing them, than swayed by motives of humanity,
consented to spare the lives of the slaves.

nD,~ BY this time the Emperor had begun to ad-
Babf' vance towards Tunis; and though his troops

suffered inconceivable hardlhips in their march,
over burning sands, defitute of water, and ex-
posed to the intolerable heat of the fun, they

soon
t Epifres de Princes, par Rucelli, p. 19, &c.

toon came up with the enemy. The Moors and Boo V.
Arabs, emboldened by their vast superiority in V
humber,' immediately rufied oh to the attack 's3s-
with loud shouts; but their undisciplined courage
could not long stand the ihock of regular bat-
talions; and though Barbarossa, with admirable
presence of mind, and by exposing his own per-
son to the greatest dangers, endeatoured to rally
them, the rout became so general, that he him-
self was hurried along with them in their flight
back to the city. There he found every thing
in the u'tmost confbfion; some of the inhabit-
ants flying with their families and effe&s; others
teady to set open their gates to the conqueror;
the Turkish soldiers preparing to retreat; and the
citadel, which in such circumstances might have
afforded him some refuge, already in the poflef-
sion of the Christian captives. These unhappy
men, rendered desperate by their situation, had
laid hold on the opportunity which Barbarossa
dreaded. As soon as his army was at some dif-
tance from the town, they gained two of their
keepers, by whose afliftance, knocking off their
fetters, and bursting open their prisons; they
overpowered the Turkish garrison, and turned
the artillery of the fort against their former maf-
ters. Barbarossa, disappointed and enraged, ex-
claiming sometimes against the false compaffiori
of his officers, and sometimes condemning his
own imprudent compliance with their opinion,
fled precipitately to Bona.

MEANWHILE Charles, satisfied with the easy Tunis ur-

and almost bloodless viitory which he had"reo'cs.
gained, and advancing slowly with the precau-
tion necessary in an enemy's country, did nor
yet know the whole extent of his own good for-
tune. But at last, a messenger dispatched by

VOL, II. D d the

Book V. the .aves acquainted him with the success of

-~ their noble effort, for the recovery of their liber-
»3s- ty; and at the fame time deputies arrived from

the town, in order to present him the keys of
t4eir gates, and to implore his prote&ion from'
military violence. While he was deliberating
concerning the proper measures for this purpose,
the ldiers, fearing that they ihould be deprived
of te booty wich they had expected, rufied
fi&dcaly, aq4 without orders, into the town,
-an began to kill and plunder without diftinc-
tion. It was then too late to restrain their cru-
elty, their avarice, or licentioufne. All the
outrags of which soldiers are capable in the fury
qs a ftQrm, all the excesses of which nen can
be guilty when their pafpns ae heightened
by the contempt pd hatred which difference in
mqanners and religion infpirc, were committed.
Abpve thirty thousand of the ipaccept inh4bit-
ans perifled on that unhappy day, and tn
thousand were carried away as slaves. M'uly-
Hfccn took polefflion of a throne surrounded
xith carnag, abhorred by his subjes on whom
he had brpught such calamities, and pitied even
.by t hpfe whose ranefs had been the occasion of
them. The Enperor lamented the fatal acci-
dent which had stained the lustre of his victory;
and amidst such a scene of horror there was but
one ectacle that afforded him any fatisfaRion.
Ten thoufandChriflian saves, among whom were
several persons of diftincion, met him as he en-
tered the town; and falling on their knees,
thanked and bkfled him as their deliverer.

Reftorthe AT the fame time that Charles accomplished
tied Kig his promise to the Mooriih King of re-establish-
throDn. ing him in his dominions, he did not neglect

what was necessary for bridling the power of the

African

African corsairs, for the security of his own sub- Boot V.
jedts, and for the interest of the Spaniih crown: `~
In order to gain there ends, he concluded a '535.
treaty with Muley-Hafcen on the following con-
ditions; that he hould hold the kingdom of
Tunis in fee of the crown of Spain, and do ho-
mage to the Emperor as his liege lord; that
all the Christian aves now within his domi-
nions, of whatever nation, should be set at liberty
without ransom; that no subject of the Empe-
ror's would for the future be detained in fervi-
tude; that no Turkilh corsair fould be admitted
into the ports of his dominions; that free trade,
together with the publick exercise of theChriftian
religion, mould be allowed to all the Emperor's
subjects; that the Emperor Mould not only re-
tain the Goletta, but that allthe other sea-ports
in the kingdom which were fortified lhould be
put into his hands; that Muley-Hafcen Mhould
pay annually twelve thousand crowns for the
fubfftence of the Spaniih garrison in the Golet-
ta; that he flould enter into no alliance with
any of the Emperor's enemies; and should pre-
sent to him every year, as an acknowledgment
of his vassalage, fix Moorifi horses, and as many
hawks ". Having thus fettled the affairs of
Africa; chastised the insolence of the corsairs;
secured a safe retreat for the hips of his fubjecs,
and a proper station for his own fleets, on that
coast from which he was most infested by pira-
tical depredations; Charles embarked again for AB. I7.
Europe, the tempestuous weather, and sickness
among his troops, not permitting him to pursue
Barbarossa x.

D d 2 By

* Du Monts Corps Diplomat. ii. a28. Smmonte Hist.

di Napoli, iv. 89.

x Job. Etropii Diarium Expedition. Tunetanz ap.
Scard. v. ii. p. 32o, &c. Jovii Hiftor. lib. xxxiv. 153, &c.

Sandov.

BooV. By this expedition, the merit of which seems
'--' to have been estimated in that age, rather by
T5;,ry the apparent generosity of the undertaking, the
which the magnificence wherewith it was conduced, and
Zred the success which crowned it, than by the in-

portance of the consequences that attended it,
the Emperor attained a greater height of glory
than at any other period of his reign. Twenty
thousand saves whom he freed from bondage,
either by his arms, or by his treaty with Muley-
Hafcen Y, each of whom he cloathed and fur-
nified with the means of returning to their
respective countries, spread all over Europe the
fame of their benefator's munificence, extolling
his power and abilities with the exaggeration
flowing from gratitude and admiration. In com-
parison with hi:n, the other Monarchs of Eu-
rope made an inconsiderable figure. They
seemed to be solicitous about nothing but their
private and particular interests; while Charles,
with an elevation of sentiment, which became the
chief Prince in Christendom, appeared to be
concerned for the honour of the Christian name,
and attentive to the public security and welfare.

Sandov. ii. 4, &c. Vertot His de Cheval. de Malthe.
Epiltres des Princes, par Rufcelli, traduites par Belleforet,
p. 119, 120. &c. Anton. Pontii Confentini His. Belli adv.
Barbar. ap. Matthai AnaleAa.

y Summonte Hilt. de Nap. vol. iv. p. 103.

THE

# THE HISTORY OF THE REIGN OF THE EMPEROR CHARLES V. BOOK VI.

THE
H I S TORY

OF THE
R E I G N

OF THE
EMPEROR CHARLES V.

B OOK VI.

NFORTUNATELY for the reputation BooK VI.

J of Francis I. among his contemporaries, -'
his condut, at this junture, appeared a perfect Th'Scanfi
contrast to that of his rival, as he laid hold ofanew
on the opportunity afforded him, by the Empe- bethe
ror's having turned his whole force againt the Emperor
common enemy, to revive his pretensions in'drn
Italy, and to plunge Europe into a new war.
The treaty of Cambray, as has been observed,
did not remove the causes of enmity between the
two contending Princes; it covered up, but did
not extinguish the flames of discord. Francis,
in particular, who waited with impatience for a
proper occasion of recovering the reputation as
well as territories which he had loft, continued
to carry on his negociations in different courts
against the Emperor, taking the utmost pains .to
heighten the jealousy which many Princes en-

tertained

BooK VI. tertained of his power or designs, and to inspire
'-" ' the reft with the fame suspicion and fear: Among
'53S5 others, he applied to Francis Sforza, who,

though indebted to Charles for the poffeflion of
the dutchy of Milan, had received it on such
hard conditions, as rendered him not only a
vaflal of the Empire, but a tributary dependant
upon the Emperor. The honour of having
married the Emperor's niece, did not reconcile
him to this ignominious fate of fubje&ion, which
became so intolerable even to Sforza, a weak
and poor-fpirited Prince, that he listened with
eagerness to the first proposals Francis made of
refuing him from the yoke. These proposals
were conveyed to him by Maraviglia, or Mer-
veille, as he is called by the French historians,
a Milanese gentleman residing at Paris, and
soon after, in order to carry on the negociation
with greater advantage, Merveille was ent to
Milan, on pretence of visiting his relations, but
with secret credentials from Francis as his envoy.
In this character he was received by Sforza. But
notwithtanding his care to keep that circum-
stance concealed, Charles fufpeting, or having
received information of it, rmontrated and
threatened in such an high tone, that the Duke
and his ministers, equally intimidated, gave the
world immediately a molt infamous proof of
their servile fear of offending the Emperor. As
Mcrveille had neither the prudence nor the tem-
per which the fun&ion wherein he was em-
ployed required, they artfully decoyed him in-
to a quarrel, in which he happened to kill his an-
Dec. s133. agonist, one of the Duke's domefticks, and hav-

ing intantly seized him, they ordered him to be
tried for that crime, and to be beheaded. Fran-
cis, no less aftonilhed at this violation of a cha-
racer held sacred among the most uncivilized na-

tions,

tions, than enraged at the insult offered to the di- Bobc vyr.
nity of his crown, threatened Sforza With th6 es- -'
fe&sof his indignation, and complained to the Em- 'i3
peror, ihom he confidered as the real author
of that unexampled outrage. But meeting with
no fatisfa&ion from either, he appealed to all the
Princes of Europe, and thought himself noi
entitled to take vengeance for an injury, which
it wobld have bnii indecent and pufillanimoug
to let pass with impunity.

BEING thus furnified with a pretext for be- Fran der-

ginning a war, on which he had already refolved,.i. °f
he multiplied his efforts in order to draw in other
Princes to take part in the quarrel. But all his
meaftires for this purpbfe were disconcerted by
unforefeeri events. After having sacrificed the
honour of his house by the marriage of his son
with Catharine of Medici, in order to gain Cle-
ment, the death of that Pontiff had deprived
hifi of all the advantages which he expected to
derive from his friendship. Paul, his fucceflbr,
though attached by inclination to the imperial
inteirft, seemed determined to maintain the neu-
tradlty suitable to his characer as the common
father of the contending Princes. The King of
Englard, occupied with dobmetick cares and pro-
jects declined, for onte, engaging in the affairs
of the continent, and refused to afift Francis,
unless hte ould imitate his exatmple, i throw-
ing fs the Papal fuprermcy. Thee disappoint- Hi egoci-
m'icts led him to solicit, with greater earnest- tio with
neds, the aid of the Proteftrat Princes aociated photet
by the league of Smalkalde. That he might
the more easily acquire their confidence, he en-
deavoured to accommodate himself to their pre-
dominant paflion, zeal for their religious tenets.
He affeced a wonderful moderation with regard

to

Boos Vl. to the points in dispute; he permitted Bellay,
'-^' his envoy in Germany, to explain his sentiments
535. concerning some of the most important articles,

in terms not far different from tbofe used by the
Protestants he 'even condescended to invite
Melanahion, whole gentle manners and pacific
spirit diftinguilhed hir among the Reformers,
to visit Paris, that by his'affiftance' he might
concert the most proper measures for reconciling
the contending sects, which so unhappily divided
the church b. These concessions must be-confi:
dered rather as arts of policy, than the result of
convicion; for whatever impression the new
opinions in religion had made on his sifters, the
Queen of Navarre and Dutchess of Ferrara, the
gaiety of Francis's own temper, and his' love of
pleasure, allowed him little leisure to examine
theological controversies.

iritfes BUT soon after he loft all the fruits of this
L'E" disingenuous artifice, by a ftep very inconsistent

with his declarations to the German Princes.
This ftep, however, the prejudices of the age,
and the religious sentiments of his own subje&s,
rendered it necessary for him to take. His close
union with the King of England, an excommu-
nicated heretick; his frequent negociations with
the German Protestants; but above all, his giv-
ing publick audience to an envoy from Sultan
Solyman, had excited violent suspicions con-
cerning the sincerity of his attachment to reli-
gion. To have attacked the Emperor, who
on all occasions, made high pretensions to zeal
in defence of the Catholick faith, and at the very

-juncure

· Freheri Script. Rer. German. iii. 354, &c. Slid.
Hist 1;7, 8. Sgckend. lib. iii.- 103

b Camerarii Vita Ph. Melanahonis, 1°o. Hag. 655.
p. 2.

juncture when he was preparing for his expe-BooJ VI.
dition against Barbarossa, which was then con- ^
fidered as a pious enterprize, could not have '3
failed to confirm such unfavourable sentiments
with regard to Francis, and called on him to
vindicate himself by some extraordinary demon-
itration of his reverence for the established doc-
trines of the church. The indiscreet zeal of
some of his fubjets, who had imbibed the Pro-
teftant opinions, furnished him with such an
occasion as he desired. They had affixed to the
gates of the Louvre, and other public places,
papers containing indecent refletions on the
doctrines and rites of the Popish church. Six of
the persons concerned in this rash action were dif-
covered and seized. The King, in order to avert
the judgments which it was supposed their blaf-
phemies might draw down upon the nation,
appointed a.folemn procession. The holy sacra-
ment was carried through the city in great pomp;
Francis walked uncovered before it, bearing a
torch in his hand; the princes of the blood sup-
ported the canopy over it the nobles marched
in order behind. In the pretence of this nume-
rous assembly, the King, accustomed to express
himself on every fubje& in itrong and animated
language, declared that if one of his hands were
infected with heresy, he would cut it off with
the other, and would not spare even his own
children, if found guilty of that crime. As a
dreadful proof of his being in earnest, the fix un-
happy persons were publickly burnt before the
procession was finished, with circumstances of
the most ihocking barbarity attending their exe.
cution c.

THE

c Belcarii Comment. Rer. Gallic, 66. Slkid. Hilt.
375, &c.

Boot VI. THE Princes of the league of Smalkldel, filled
'-. with resentment and indignation at the cruelty

f3óm. with which their brethren were treated, could
to join im not conceive Francis to be sincere, when he

offered to protest in Germany those very tenets,
which he persecuted with such rigour in his own
dominions; so that all Bellay's art and eloquence
in vindicating his matter, or apologizing for his
condut, made but little impression upon them.
They corfidered likewise, that the Emperor,
who hitherto had never employed violence against
the dorines of the Reformers, nor even given
them much molefation in their progress, was
now bound by the agreement at Ratisbon, not
to disturb such as had embraced the new opi-
nions; and the Protestants wifely regarded this
as a more certain and immediate security, than
the precarious and distant hopes with which
Francis endeavoured to allure them. Besides,
the manner in which he had behaved to his allies
a the peace of Calmbray, was too recent to be
forgotten, and did not encourage others to rely
much on his friendhiip or generosity. Upon
all thee accounts, the Protetant Princes refused
to assist the French King in any hoffile attefmpt
against the Emperor. The Ele&or of Saxony,
the most zealous among them, in order to avoid
giving any umbrage to Charles, would not per-
mit Melancthon to visit the court of Prance,
although that Reformer, flatteed piaps by
the invitation of so grea a monartch, r hoping
that his prefenee tere might be of figti advarn-
tage to the Proftat caul, difcoveed a ftirng
inclination to undertake the jurney d

The resd' BUT though none of the many princes who
· rd, envied or dreaded the power of Charles, would
b. fectond

d Camerarii Vita Mclan. 142, &c. 41 5. Seckend. lib.
iii. 107.

second Francis's efforts in order to reduce andBooc vrt
circumscribe it, he, nevertheless, commanded'-*'
his army to advance towards the frontiers of '535.
Italy. As his sole pretext for taking arms was
that he might chastise the Duke of Milan for his
insolent and cruel breach of the law of nations,
it might have been expeced that the whole
weight of his vengeance was to have fallen on
his territories. But on a sudden, and at their
very commencement, the operations of war took
another direction. Charles Duke of Savoy, one
of the least aive and able Princes of the line
from which he descended, had married Beatrix
of Portugal, the Empress's sifter. By her great
talents, she soon acquired an absolute ascendant
over her husband; and proud of her affinity to
the Emperor, or allured by the magnificent pro-
mises with which he flattered her ambition, he
formed an union between the Duke and the Im-
perial court, extremely inconsistent with that
neutrality, which wife policy as well as the fitua-
tion of his dominions had hitherto induced him
to observe in all the quarrels between the con-
tending Monarchs. Francis was abundantly
sensible of the distress to which he might be ex-
posed, if, when he entered Italy, he ihould leave
behind him the territories of a Prince, devoted
so obsequiously to the Emperor, that he had sent
his eldest son to be educated in the court of
Spain, as a kind of hostage for his fidelity.
Clement the Seventh, who had represented this
danger in a trong light during his interview
with Francis at Marseilles, suggested to him, at
the fame time, the proper method of guarding
against it, having advised him to begin his ope-
rations against the Milanese, by taking poffeflion
of Savoy and Piedmont, as the only certain way
of securing a communication with his own do-

minions.

Booc-VI. minions. Francis, highly irritated at the Duke

on many accounts, particularly for having sup-

r'k3! plied the Constable Bourbon with the money
frflof that enabled him to levy the body of troops
s..-'! - which ruined the French army in the fatal battle

of Pavia, was nor unwilling to let him now feel
both how deeply he resented, and how severely
he could punish these injuries. Nor did he
want several pretexts which gave some colour of
equity to the violence that he intended. The
territories of France and Savoy lying contiguous
to each other, and intermingled in many places,
various disputes, unavoidable in such a situation,
subsisted concerning the limits of their refpeftive
property; and besides, Francis, in right of his
mother Louise of Savoy, had large claims upon
the Duke her brother, for her share in their fa-
ther's fuccefiion. Being unwilling, however,
to begin hostilities without some cause of quarrel
more specious than there pretensions, many of
which were obsolete, and others dubious, he
demanded permifflion to march through Pied-
mont in his way to the Milanese, hoping that
the Duke, from an excess of attachment to the
Imperial interest, might refuse this request, and
thus give a greater appearance ofjuftice to all
his operations against him. But, if we may be-
lieve the historians of Savoy, who appear to be
better informed with regard to this particular
than those of France, the Duke readily, and
with a good grace, granted what it was not in
his power to deny, promising free paflage to the
French troops as was desired; so that Francis,
as the only method now left of justifying the
mealures which he determined to take, was
obliged to infif for full fatisfadion with regard
to every thing that either the crown of France or
his mother Louise could demand of the house

of

of Savoy . Such an evasive answer, as mightBooK V.
have been expeted, being made to this requifi- --
tion, the French army under the admiral Brion '535
poured at once into the Duke's territories at
different places. The countries of Breffe and
Bugey, united at that time to Savoy, were over-
run in a moment. Most of the towns in the
dutchy of Savoy opened their gates at the ap-
proach of the enemy; a few which attempted to
make resistance were easily forced; and before
the end of the campaign, the Duke saw himself
stripped of all his dominions, but the province
of Piedmont, in which there were not many
places in a condition to be defended.

To complete the Duke's misfortunes, the city The city of

of Geneva, the sovereignty of which he claimed, oGenev'-
and in some degree poffefled, threw off his yoke; liberty.
and its revolt drew along with it the loss of the
adjacent territories. Geneva was, at that time,
an Imperial city; and though under the diret
dominion of its own bishops, and the remote
sovereignty of the Dukes of Savoy, the form of
its internal constitution was purely republican,
being governed by syndics and a council chosen
by the citizens. From these diftin& and often
claihing jurifditions, two opposite parties took
their rife, and had long subsisted in the state;
the one, composed of the advocates for the pri-
vileges of the community, assumed the name of
Eignotz, or confederates in defence of liberty;
and branded the other, which supported the epif-
copal or ducal prerogatives, with the name of
Mammelukes or slaves. At length, the Protestant ,3.
opinions beginning to spread among the citizens,
inspired such as embraced them with that bold

enter-

e Hiftoire Genealogique de Savoye, par Guichenon,
2 tom. fol. Lyon. i66o, i. 639, &c.

BooK VI enterprizing spirit which always accompanied or
- - a was naturally produced by them in their first
'535' operations. As both the Duke and Bilhop were

from interest, from prejudice, and from political
considerations, violent enemies of the Reforma-
tion, all the new converts joined with warmth
the party of the Eignotz; and zeal for religion,
mingling with the love of liberty, added strength
to that generous pafion. The rage and animo-
fity of two factions, ihut up within the fame
walls, occasioned frequent infurre&tions, which
terminating mostly to the advantage of the
friends of liberty, they daily gained ground.

THE Duke and Bishop, forgetting their an-

cient contests about jurifdi&ion, had united
against their common enemies, and each attack.
ed them with his proper weapons. The Bilhop
excommunicated the people of Geneva as guilty
of a double crime; of impiety, in apostatizing
from the eftablilhed religion; and of sacrilege,
in invading the rights of his fee. The Duke at-
tacked them as rebels against their lawful Prince,
and attempted to render himself master of the
I534. city, first by furprize, and then by open force.

The citizens, despising the thunder of the Bi-
shop's censures, boldly afierted their indepen-
dence against the Duke; and partly -by their
own valour, partly by the powerful afiftance
which they received from their allies, the canton
of Berne, together with some small supplies both
of men and money, secretly furnished by the
King of France, they defeated all his attempts.
Not satisfied with having repulsed him, or with
remaining always upon the defensive themselves,
they now took advantage of the duke's inabi-
lity to resist them, while overwhelmed by the
armies of France, and seized several catles and

places

places of strength which he poffefled in theBoox VI.
neighbourhood of Geneva; thus delivering the'---
city from those odious monuments of its former '535
subjection, and rendering the publick liberty
more secure for the future. At the fame time
the canton of Berne invaded and conquered the
Paijs de Vaud, to which it had some pretensions.
The canton of Friburgh, though zealously at-
tached to the Catholick religion, and having no
fubje& of contest with the Duke, laid hold on
part of the spoils of that unfortunate Prince. A
great portion of these conquests or usurpations
being still retained by the two cantons, add con-
fiderably to their power, and have become the
most valuable part of their territories. Geneva,
notwithifanding many schemes and enterprizes
of the pukes of Savoy to re-establish their do-
minion there, still keeps pofleflion of its inde-
pendince; and in consequence of that blessing,
has attained a degree of consideration, wealth
and elegance, which it could not otherwise have
reached .

AMIDST such a succession of difaRfrous events, The Empe-

the Duke of Savoy had no other resource but` ,unrblh
the Emperor's prote&ion, which, upon his re- Dk of
turn from Tunis, he demanded with the moftc''
earnest importunity; and as his misfortunes
were occasioned chiefly by his attachment to the
Imperial interest, he had a uR tite to imme-
diate assistance. Charles, however, was not in
a condition to upport him with that vigour and
dispatch which the exigency of his affairs called
for. Most of the troops employed in the Afri-

can

f Hist. de l4 Ville de Geneve, par Spon. xi0. Utr.

1685. p. 99 HiR. de la Reformation de Suifle, par Ron.
chat, Gen. 1728. tom. iv. p. 94, &c. tom. v. p. 216,
&c. Mem. de Bellay, 8 .

Boos Vl.can expedition, having been raised for that ser-
v "'v-vice alone, were disbanded as soon as it was
'535 finished; the veteran forces under Antonio de

Leyva were hardly sufficient for the defence of
the Milanese; and the Emperor's treasury was
entirely drained by his vas efforts against the
Infidels;
Oa. 4. BUT the death of Francis Sforza, occasioned;

_h oke according to some hiRforians, by the terror of a
f Mian. French invasion, which had twice been fatal to

his family, afforded the Emperor full leisure to
prepare for aion. By this unexpected event,
the nature of the war, and the causes of discord,
were totally changed. Francis's first pretext for
taking arms, in order to chastise Sforza for the
insult offered to the dignity of his crown, was at
once cut off; but as that Prince died without
issue, all Francis's rights to the dutchy of Milan,
which he had yielded only to Sforza and his
polterity, returned back to him in full force.
As the recovery of the Milanese was the fa-
vourite obje& of that Monarch, he instantly
renewed his claim to it; and if he had supported
his pretensions by ordering the powerful army
quartered in Savoy to advance, without losing a
moment, towards Milan, he could hardly have
failed to secure the important point ofpofleffion,
But Francis, who became daily less enterprizing
as he advanced in years, and who was overawed
at some times into an excess of caution by the

Fricis remembrance of his past misfortunes, endea-
tP'atf voured to establish his rights by negociation,
iduchy. not by arms; and from a timid moderation,

fatal in all great affairs, neglected to improve
the favourable opportunity which presented it-
self. Charles was more decisive in his opera-
tions, and in quality of sovereign, took pof-
session of the dutchy, as a vacant fief of the Emr

pire.

pire. While Francis endeavoured to explain and Booc VI.
aftert his title to it, by arguments and memori- --
als, oremployed various arts in order to reconcile 153S5
the Italian powers to the thoughts of his regain-
ing footing in Italy, his rival was silently taking
effecual steps to prevent it. The Emperor, how-
ever, was very careful not to discover too early'
any intention of this kind; but teeming to ad-
mit the equity of Francis's claim, he appeared
solicitous only about giving him pofflefion in
such a mannner as might not disturb the peace of
Europe, or overturn the balance of power in Italy,
which the politicians of that country were so fond
of preserving. By this artifice hedeceived Francis,
and gained so much confidence with the relt of
Europe, that almost without incurring any sus-
picion, he involved the affair in new difficulties,
and protracted the negociations at pleasure.
Sometimes he proposed to grant the inveftiure
of Milan to the Duke of Orleans, Francis's
second son, sometimes to the Duke of Angoa-
leme, his third son as the views and inclinations
of the French court varied, he transferred his
choice alternately from the one to the other, with
such profound and well-conducted difimulation,
that neither Francis nor his ministers seem to
have penetrated his real intention; and all mili-
tary operations were entirely suspended, as if no-
thing had remained but to enter quietly into pof-
feflion of what they demanded.

DURING the interval gained in this manner, 1536

Charles, on his return from Tunis, a'iembledp eparations
the states both of Sicily and Naples, and as they f w.r.
thought themselves greatly honoured by the pre-
fence of their sovereign, and were no less pleased
with the apparent disinterestedness of his expe-
dition into Africa, than dazzled by the success
which had attended his arms, prevailed on them

VOL. II. E e to

Boot VI. to vote him such liberal subsidies as were seldom

W^ granted in that age. This enabled him to re-
535' cruit his veteran troops, to levy a body of Ger-

mans, and to take every other poper precaution
for executing or supporting the neafures on
which he had determined. Blllay, the French
envoy in Germany, having dikcovered the inten-
tion of raising troops in that country, notwith-
standing all the pretexts employed in order to
conceal it, first alarmed his mailer with this evi-
dent proof of the Emperor's inincerity '. But
Francis was so poflfeld at that time with the
rage of negociation, in all the artifices and re-
finements of which his rival far surpassed him,
that instead of beginning his military operations,
and pulhing them with vigour, or seizing the
Milanese before the Imperial army was asem-
bled, he satisfied himself with making new offers
to the Emperor, in order to procure the invefti-
ture by his voluntary deed. His offers were, in-
deed, so liberal and advantageous, that if ever
Charles had intended to grant his demand, he
could not have reje&ed them with decency. He
dextrouly eluded them, by declaring, that, un-
til he consulted the Pope in person, he could not
take his final resolution with regard to a point
which so nearly concerned the peace of Italy.
By this evasion he gained some farther time for
ripening the schemes which he had in view.
The Empe- THE Emperor at last advanced towards Rome,

e"nrs and made his publick entry into that city with
April . extraordinary pomp; but it being found necef-

fary to remove the ruins of an ancient templeof
Peace, in order to widen one of the streets,
through which the cavalcade had to pass, all the
historians take notice of this trivial circumstance,

which
4 Mer. de Bellay, 92.

which they are fond to interpret as an omen of Booz VT.
the bloody war that followed. Charles, it is ---
certain, had by this time banished all thoughts '53
of peace; and at last threw off the mask, with
which he had so long covered his designs from
the court of France, by a declaration of his fen-.
timents no less singular than explicit. The
French ambassadors having in their mailer's
name demanded a definitive reply to his pro-
positions concerning the invefiture of Milan,
Charles promnied to give it next day in piefence
of the Pope and Cardinals affcrnbled in full Hi public
confitory. These being accordingly met, and gtin"
all the foreign ambassadors invited to attend, Frnci .
the Emperor stood up, and addressing himself
to the Pope, expatiated for some time on the
sincerity of his own wishes for the peace of
Christendom, as well as his abhorrence of war.
the miseries of which he enumerated at great
length, with studied and elaborate oratory; he
complained that all his endeavours to preserve
the tranquillity of Europe had hitherto been de-
feated by the restless and unjust ambition of the
French King; that even during his minority he
had proofs of the unfriendly and hostile inten-
tions of that Monarch; that afterwards, he had
openly attempted to wrest from him the Imperial
crown which belonged to him by a title no lefsjuft
than natural; that he had next invaded his king-
dom of Navarre; that not satisfied with this, he
had attacked his territories as well as those of his
allies both in Italy and the Low-Countries; that
when the valour of the Imperial troops, rendered
irresistible by the protetion of the Almighty,
had checked his progress, ruined his armies, and
seized his person, he continued to pursue by de-
ceit what he had undertaken with injustice; that
lie had violated every article in the treaty of

I e 2 Madrid,

Boot VI. Madrid, to which he owed his liberty, and as
V"' soon as he returned to his dominions took mea-
3536. fures for r-kindling the war which that pacifica-

tion had happily extinguilhed; that when new
misfortunes compelled him to sue again for
peace at Cambray, he concluded and observed
it with equal insincerity that soon thereafter he
had formed dangerous connexions with the here-
tical Princes in Germany, and incited them to
disturb the tranquillity of the Empire; that now
he had driven the Duke of Savoy, his brother-
in-law and ally, out of the greater part of his ter-
ritories; that after injuries bo often repeated, and
amidst so many sources of discord, all hope of
amity or concord became dcfperatei and though
he was ill willing to grant the investiture of
Milan to one of the princes of France, there was
little probability of that events taking place, as
Francis, on the one hand, would not consent to
what he judged necessary for securing the tran-
quillity of Europe, nor, on the other, could he
think it reasonable or safe to give a rival the un-
conditional pofeffion of all that he demanded.
Let us not, however, added he, continue wan-
tonly to fled the blood of our innocent subje&s;

chlleaeze let us decide the quarrel man to man, with what
btglc arms he pleases to chufe, in our lhirts, on an

ifand, a bridge, or aboard a galley moored in a
river; let the dutchy of Burgundy be put in
deposit on his part, and that of Milan on mine;
thee ihall be the prize of the conqueror; and
after that, let the united forces of Germany,
Spain, and France, be employed to humble the
power of the Turk, and to extirpate heresy out
of Christendom. But if he, by declining this me-
thod of terminating our differences, renders war
inevitable, nothing hall divert me from prose-
cuting it to such extremity, as shall reduce one

of

of us to be the poorest gentleman in his own Book VI.
dominions. Nor do I fear that it will be on me
this misfortune hall fall; I enter upon ation 536.
with the fairest profpe& of success; the justice
of my cause, the union of my fubjets, the num-
ber and valour of my troops, the experience and
fidelity of my generals, all combine to ensure it.
Of all these advantages, the King of France is
defitute; and were my resources no more cer-
tain, and my hopes of Vitory no better founded
than his, I would instantly throw myself at his
feet, and with folded hands, and a rope about
my neck, implore his mercy h.

THIS long harangue the Emperor delivered

with an elevated voice, a haughty tone, and the
greateit vehemence of expression and gesture.
The French ambassadors, who did not fully
comprehend his meaning, as he spake in the
Spaniih tongue, were totally disconcerted, and
at a loss how they should answer such an unex-
pected invective; when one of them began to
vindicate his master's condu&t, Charles inter-
posed abruptly, and would not permit him to
proceed. The Pope, without entering into any
particular detail, satisfied himself with a hort but
pathetick recommendation of peace, together
with an offer of employing his sincere endea-
vours in order to procure that blessing to Chris-
tendom; and the assembly broke up in the
greatest aftonilhment at the extraordinary scene
which had been exhibited. In no part of his
conduct, indeed, did Charles ever deviate foThe mo-
widely from his general characer. Instead oftivesof this
that prudent recolletion, that compoed and re- sure.
gular deportment so ftricly attentive to deco-
rum, and so admirably adapted to conceal his

own
h Bellay, 199. Sandov. Hiflor. del Emper. II. zz6.

Booc VI. own pallions, for which he was at all other times
--,- conspicuous, he appears on this occasion before
53ó. 'the most august aembly in Europe, boasting

of his own power and exploits with insolence;
inveighing against his enemy with indecency;
and challenging him to combat with an oftenta-
tious valour, more becoming a champion in
romance, than the first Monarch in Christen-
dom. But the well known and powerful opera-
tion of continued prosperity, as well as of exag-
gerated praise, even upon the firmest minds,
lufficiently account for this seeming inconsistency.
After having compelled Solyman to retreat,
and having stripped Barbarossa of a Kingdom,
Charles began to confider his arms as invincible.
He had been entertained, ever since his return
from Africa, with repeated scenes of triumphs
and publick rejoicings; the orators and poets of
Italy, the most elegant at that time in Europe,
had exhausted their genius in panegyrick, to
which the astrologers added magnificent pro-
mises of a more splendid fortune fill in store.
Intoxicated with all these, he forgot his usual re-
serve and moderation, and was unable to restrain
this extravagant sally of vanity, which became
the more remarkable, by being both so uncom-
mon and so publick.

HE himself seems to have been immediately

sensible of the impropriety of his behaviour; and
when the French ambassadors demanded next
day a more clear explanation of what he had
said concerning the combat, he told them, that
they were not to confider his proposal as a formal
challenge to their matier, but as an expedient
for preventing bloodlied; he endeavoured to
obften other expressions in his discourse; and
spoke in terms full of refpe& towards Francis.

But

But though this flight apology was far fromBooK VI.
being sufficient to remove the offence which had '-v
been given, Francis, by an unaccountable in- '536.
fatuation, continued to negociate, as if it had
still been possible to bring their differences to a
period by an amicable composition. Charles,
finding him so eager to run into the snare, fa-
voured the deception; and by seeming to liften
to his proposals, gained time to prepare for the
execution of his own designs .

AT last, the Imperial army assembled on the Charles

frontiers of the Milanese, to the amount of forty ivade
thousand foot, and ten thousand horse; while
that of France encamped near Vercelli in Pied-
mont, being greatly inferior in number, and
weakened by the departure of a body of Swiss,
whom Charles artfully persuaded the Popish
cantons to recal, that they might not serve
against the Duke of Savoy, their ancient ally.
The French general, not daring to rifque a
battle, retired as oon as the Imperialists ad-
vanced. The Emperor put himself at the head May 6.
of his forces, which the Marquis del Guafto,
the Duke of Alva, and Ferdinand de Gonzaga
commanded under him, though thefupremedirec-
tion of the whole was committed to Antonio de
Leyva, whose abilities and experience justly en-
titled him to that diftin&ion. Charles soon dif-
covered his intention not to confine his opera-
tions to the recovery of Piedmont and Savoy,
but to push forward and invade the southern
provinces of France. This scheme he had long
meditated, and had long been taking measures
for executing it with such vigour as might en-
sure success. He had remitted large umns to his
sifter, the governess of the Low-Countries, and

to
i Mem. de Bellay, 205, &c.

Boor VI. to his brother, the King of the Romans, inftru&-
``Y~~ ing them to levy all the forces in their power,
'536. in order to form two separate bodies, the one

to enter France on the fide of Picardy, the
other on the fide of Champagne; while he, with
the main army, fell upon the opposite frontier
of the kingdom. Trusting to these vast pre-
parations, he thought it impoftible that Francis
could reift so many unexpeted attacks, on such
different quarters; and begun his enterprize
with such confidence of its happy issue, that he
desired Jovius the historian to make a large pro-
vision of paper sufficient to record the victories
which he was going to acquire.

His ministers and generals, instead of enter-

taining the fame sanguine hopes, represented to
him in the strongest terms the danger of leading
his troops so far from his own territories, to such
a distance from his magazines, and into pro-
vinces which did not yield sufficient subsistence
for their own inhabitants. They entreated him
to confider the inexhaustible resources of France
in maintaining a defenlive war, and the aive
zeal with which a gallant nobility would serve a
Prince whom they loved, in repelling the ene-
mies of their country; they recalled to his re-
membrance the fatal miscarriage of Bourbon
and Pescara, when they ventured upon the fame
enterprize under circumstances which seemed as
certainly to promise success; the Marquis del
Guafto in particular, fell on his knees, and
conjured him to abandon the undertaking as
desperate. But many circumstances combined
in leading Charles to disregard all their remon-
ftrances. He could seldom be brought, on any
occasion, to depart from a resolution which he
had once taken; he was too apt to under-rate

and

and despise the talents of his rival the King of Boor Vt.
France, because they differed so widely from his -"
own; he was blinded by the presumption which 3
accompanies prosperity; and relied, perhaps, in
some degree on the prophecies which predi&ted
the increase of his own grandeur. He not only
adhered obstinately to his own plan, but deter-
mined to advance towards France without wait.
ing for the redu&ion of any part of Piedmont,
except such towns as were absolutely necessary
for preserving his communication with the Mi-
lanefe.

THE Marquis de Saluces, to whom Francis Recove

had entrusted the command of a small body of tof he
troops left for the defence of Piedmont, rendered s.avy's do-
this more easy than Charles had any reason torno.
expet. That nobleman, educated in the court
of France, distinguished by continual marks of
the King's favour, and honoured so lately with
a charge of such importance, suddenly, and
without any provocation or pretext of disgust,
revolted from his benefactor. His motives to
this treacherous a&ion, were as childilh as the
deed itself was base. Being strongly poflefled
with a superstitious faith in divination and aftro-
logy, he believed with full assurance, that the
fatal period of the French nation was at hand;
that on its ruins the Emperor would eftablilh an
universal monarchy; that therefore he ought to
follow the ditates of prudence, in attaching
himself to his rising fortune, and could incur no
blame for deserting a Prince whom heaven had
devoted to deftrutionk. His treason became
itill more odious, by his employing that very
authority with which Francis had invested him,
in order to open the kingdom to his enemies.

Whatever
k Bellay, 222, a. 246, b.

BooK VI. Whatever was proposed or undertaken by the
*'V ' officers under his command for the defence of

536. their conquests, he rejeced or defeated. What-

ever properly belonged to himself as commander
in chief, to provide or perform for that purpose,
he totally neglected. In this manner, he ren-
dered towns even of the greatest consequence
untenable, by leaving them destitute either of
provisions, or ammunition, or artillery, or a
sufficient garrilbn; and the Imperialists must
have reduced Piedmont in as short a time as was
necefiary to march through it, if Montpezat,
the governor of Foffano, had not, by an extra-
ordinary effort of courage and military condu&,
detained them almost a month before that in-
considerable place.

Fri.cr's BY this meritorious and seasonable service, he
de -,e 's gained his mailer sufficient time for aflembling
h., krsg- his forces, and for concerting a system of de-

fence againfi a danger which he now saw to be
inevitable. Francis fixed upon the only proper
and effectual plan for defeating the invasion of a
powerful enemy; and his prudence in chufihg
this plan, as well as his perseverance in execut-
ing it, deserve the greater praise, as it was
equally contrary to his own natural temper, and
to the genius of the French nation. He deter-
mined to remain altogether upon the defensive;
never to hazard a battle, or even a great fkir-
mifh, without certainty of success; to fortify his
camps in a regular manner; to throw garrisons
only into towns of great strength; to deprive
the enemy of subsistence, by laying waste the
country before them; and to save the whole
kingdom, by sacrificing one of its provinces.
The execution of this plan he committed en-
tirely to the marechal MontmoQency, who was

the

the author of it; a man wonderfully fitted by BOOK VI.
nature for such a trust. Haughty, evere, con-
sident in his own abilities, and despising those ofEot3,
other men; incapable of being diverted from Montmo-
any resolution by remonstrances or entreaties; the 'xecu.
and, in prosecuting any scheme, regardless alike tion of it.
of love and of pity.

MONTMORENCY made choice of a ftrongHeencamps

camp under the walls of Avignon, at the con- at Avi'°n'.
fluence of the Rhone and Durance; one of
which plentifully supplied his troops with all
necessaries from the inland provinces, and the
other covered his camp on that ide, where it
was most probable the enemy would approach.
He laboured with unwearied indufry to render
the fortifications of this camp impregnable, and
assembled there a considerable army, though
greatly inferior to that of the enemy; while the
King with another body of troops encamped at
Valence, higher up the Rhone. Marseilles and
Aries were the only towns he thought it necef-
fary to defend; the former, in order to retain
the command of the sea; the latter, as the bar-
rier of the province of Languedoc; and each of
these he furnished with numerous garrisons of
his best troops, commanded by officers, on
whose fidelity and valour he could rely. The
inhabitants of the other towns, as well as of the
open country, were compelled to abandon their
houses, and were conduted to the mountains,
to the camp at Avignon, or to the inland pro-
vinces. The fortifications of such places as might
have afforded felter or defence to the enemy,
were thrown down. Corn, forage, and provi-
sions of every kind, were carried away or de-
stroyed; all the mills and ovens were ruined, and
the wells filled up or rendered useless. The de-
vaftation extended from the Alps to Marseilles,

and

Boot VI. Whatever was proposed or undertaken by the

ó-- ~ officers under his command for the defence of
1536. their conquests, he reje&ed or defeated. What-

ever properly belonged to himself as commander
in chief, to provide or perform for that purpose,
he totally negle&ed. In this manner, he ren-
dered towns even of the greatest consequence
untenable, by leaving them destitute either of
provisions, or ammunition, or artillery, or a
fuflicient garrison; and the Imperialists must
have reduced Piedmont in as ihort a time as was
necessary to march through it, if Montpezat,
the governor of Foffano, had not, by an extra.
ordinary effort of courage and military condut,
detained them almost a month before that in-
considerable place.

Fra.cS's BY this meritorious and seasonable service, he
peas O h gained his mailer sufficient time for assembling
his klrg- his forces, and for concerting a system of de-
d'~ fence against a danger which he now saw to be

inevitable. Francis fixed upon the only proper
and effetual plan for defeating the invasion of a
powerful enemy; and his prudence in chufihg
this plan, as well as his perseverance in execut-
ing it, deserve the greater praise, as it was
equally contrary to his own natural temper, and
to the genius of the French nation. He deter-
mined to remain altogether upon the defensive;
never to hazard a battle, or even a great kir-
mifi, without certainty of success; to fortify his
camps in a regular manner; to throw garrisons
only into towns of great strength; to deprive
the enemy of subsistence, by laying waste the
country before them; and to save the whole
kingdom, by sacrificing one of its provinces.
The execution of this plan he committed en-
tirely to the marechal Montmorency, who was

the

the author of it; a man wonderfully fitted by BooK VI.
nature for such a trust. Haughty, evere, con-- ~
sident in his own abilities, and despising those of Ent13s
other men; incapable of being diverted from Montmo-
any resolution by remonstrances or entreaties; the execu-
and, in prosecuting any scheme, regardless aliketion of it.
of love and of pity.

MONTMORENCY made choice of a ftrongHeencamp,

camp under the walls of Avignon, at the con- at Avignn.
fluence of the Rhone and Durance; one of
which plentifully supplied his troops with all
necessaries from the inland provinces, and the
other covered his camp on that ide, where it
was most probable the enemy would approach.
He laboured with unwearied industry to render
the fortifications of this camp impregnable, and
assembled there a considerable army, though
greatly inferior to that of the enemy; while the
King with another body of troops encamped at
Valence, higher up the Rhone. Marseilles and
Aries were the only towns he thought it necef-
fary to defend; the former, in order to retain
the command of the sea; the latter, as the bar-
rier of the province of Languedoc; and each of
these he furnished with numerous garrisons of
his best troops, commanded by officers, on
whose fidelity and valour he could rely. The
inhabitants of the other towns, as well as of the
open country, were compelled to abandon their
houses, and were conduted to the mountains,
to the camp at Avignon, or to the inland pro-
vinces. The fortifications of such places as might
have afforded helter or defence to the enemy,
were thrown down. Corn, forage, and provi-
sions of every kind, were carried away or de-
stroyed; all the mills and ovens were ruined, and
the wells filled up or rendered useless. The de-
vaftation extended from the Alps to Marseilles,

and

Boo VI. and from the sea to the confines of Dauphine;

- nor does history afford any instance among civi-
1536. lized nations, in which this cruel expedient for

the publick safety was employed with the fame
rigour.

Che. en. MEANWHILE, the Emperor arrived, with the
n A'c- van of his army, on the frontiers of Provence,

and was still so possessed with confidence of fuc-
cess, that during a few days, when he was
obliged to halt until the ref of his troops came
up, he began to divide his future conquests
among his officers; and as a new incitement to
serve him with zeal, gave them liberal promises
of offices, lands, and honours in France '. The
face of desolation, however, which presented
itself to him, when he entered the country, be-
gan to damp his hopes; and convinced him that
a Monarch, who, in order to distress an enemy,
had voluntarily ruined one of his richest pro-
vinces, would defend the ref with obstinate de-
fpair. Nor was it long before he became sensible,
that Francis's plan of defence was as prudent as
it appeared to be extraordinary. His fleet, on
which Charles chiefly depended for fubfifence,
was prevented for some time by contrary winds,
and other accidents to which naval operations
are subjet, from approaching the French coast;
even after its arrival, it afforded, at best, a pre-
carious and scanty supply to such a numerous
body of troops m; nothing was to be found in
the country itself for their support; nor could
they draw any considerable aid from the domi-
nions of the Duke of Savoy, exhausted already
by maintaining two great armies. The Empe-
ror was no less embarrassed how to employ, than
how to subsist his forces; for though he was

now
I Bellay, 66. a. m Sandov. ii. 231.

now in poffeflion of almost an entire province, Boon VI.
he could not be said to have the command of it, '~
while he held only defenceless towns; and while 3536.
the French, besides their camp at Avignon,
continued maters of Marfeilles.and Aries. At
firt he thought of attacking the camp, and of
terminating the war by one decisive blow; but
Ikilful officers, who were appointed to view it,
declared the attempt to be utterly impracticable.
He then gave orders to invest Marseilles and cfiges
Aries, hoping that the French would quit their M"rse"l
advantageous post in order to relieve them;
but Montmorency adhering firmly to his plan,
remained immoveable at Avignon; and the Im-
perialifts met with such a warm reception from
the garrisons of both towns, that they relin-
quilhed their enterprizes with loss and disgrace.
As a last effort, the Emperor advanced once more
towards Avignon, though with an army harassed
by the perpetual incursions of small parties of the
French light troops, weakened by diseases, and
dispirited by disasters, which seemed more into-
lerable, because they were unexpe&ed.

DURING these operations, Montmorency found Montmo-

himself exposed to greater danger from his own titude ind-
troops than from the enemy; and their inconfi- hei'"g to h
derate valour went near to have precipitated the fe, de
kingdom into those calamities, which he with
such industry and caution had endeavoured to
avoid. Unaccustomed to behold an enemy ra-
vaging their country almost without controul;
impatient of such long inacion; unacquainted
with the flow and remote, but certain effe&s of
Montmorency's system of defence; the French
wilhed for a battle with no less ardour than the
Imperialists. They confidered the conduct of
their general as a disgrace to their country. His
caution they imputed to timidity; his circum-

fpetion

Boo[ VI. fpef&ion to want of spirit; and the constancy
'- --' with which he pursued his plan, to obfine or
1536 pride. These reflleions, hifpered, at sis,

among the soldiers and fbhle~i were adop&, '
by degrees, by officers of higher rank; aid- i
many of them envied Moioretecys fav6We
with the King, and mote w e c*1fatfi #1i
his harih disgusting manner, the d*etoStde OeA
became great in his catSp winch was alnt witA
general murmurings and almoef open complaitts
againt his measures. Moritoefety, Oh wni6st
the sentiments of his own troops mrdei asd little
impreflon as the insults of the enemy, adhered
fticdily to his sysem; though, in order to re-
concile the army to his mexims, no les contrary
to the genius of the nation, than to the ideas of
war among undisciplined troops, he affued a
unusual affability in his deportment, and often
explained, with great condefeenfion, the motives
of his condu&, the advantages which had already
resulted from it, and the certain success with
which it would be attended. At last Francis
joined his army at Avignon, which having re-
ceived several reinforcements, he now confidered
as of strength sufficient to face the enemy. As
he had put no small constraint upon himself, in
consenting that his troops should remain so
long upon the defensive, it cannot be doubt-
ed but that his fondness for what was dar-
ing and splendid, added to the impatience both
of officers and soldiers, would at last have over-
ruled Montmorency's salutary caution .

The retret HAPPILY the retreat of the enemy delivered
d.ce the kingdom from the danger which any rash
of ith ir resolution might have occasioned. The Em-
r"'"" r' peror, after spending two inglorious months in

Provence,
* Mem. de Bllay, 269, &c. 312, &c.

Provence, without having performed any thing BOOK VI.
suitable t his vast preparations, or that could -
justify the confidence with which he had boasted 1536.
of his own power, found that, betides Antonio
de Leyva, and other officers of diftin&ion, he
had loft one half of his troops by diseases, or by
famine; and that the reft were in no condition
to fruggle any longer with calamities, by which
so many of their companions had perilhed.
Neceffiy, therefore, extorted from him orders
to retire; and though he was ome time in mo-
tion before the French suspected his intention, a
body of light troops, assisted by crowds of pea-
sants, eager to be revenged on those who had
brought such desolation on their country, hung
upon the rear of the Imperialists, and, by seizing
every favourable opportunity of attacking them,
threw them often into confusion. The road by
which they fled (for they pursued their march
with such dilbrder and precipitation, that it
scarcely deserves the name of a retreat) was
strewed with arms or baggage, which in their
hurry and trepidation they had abandoned, and
covered with the sick, the wounded, and the
dead; insomuch, that Martin Bellay, an eye-
witness of their calamities, endeavours to give
his readers some idea of it, by comparing their
miseries to' those which the Jews suffered from
the victorious and deftru&ive arms of the Ro-
mans . If Montmorency at this critical mo-
ment had advanced with all his forces, nothing
could have.faved the whole Imperial army from
utter ruin. But that general, by standing so
long and so obstinately on the defensive, had
become cautious to excess; his mind, tenacious
of any bent it had once taken, could not assume

a con-

o Mem. de Belay, 3 16. Sandov. Hifl. de! Erncpr. ii.
2z.

Boor VI. a contrary one as suddenly as the change of cir-
'--v' cumfances required; and he still continued to

53 repeat his favourite maxims, that it was more

rudent to allow the lion to escape, than to drive
him to despair; and that a bridge of gold should
be made for a retreating enemy.

THE Emperor having conducted the shattered

remains of his troops to the frontiers of Milan,
and appointed the marquis del Guafto to succeed
Leyva in the government of that dutchy, set
out for Genoa. As he could not bear to ex-
pose himself to the scorn of the Italians, after
such a fad reverse of fortune; and did not choose,
under his present circumstances, to revisit those
cities through which he had so lately pafled in
triumph for one conquest, and in certain ex-
pectation of another, he embarked directly for

Nonmbr. Spain P.

OpPet; NOR was the progress of his arms on the op-
" Pk' pofite frontier of France such as to alleviate, in

any degree, the losses which he had sustained in
Provence. Bellay, by his address and intrigues,
had prevailed on so many of the German Princes
to withdraw the contingent of troops which they
had furnilhed to the King of the Romans, that
he was obliged to lay aside all thoughts of his
intended irruption into Champagne. Though
a powerful army, levied in the Low Countries,
entered Picardy, which they found but feebly
guarded, while the strength of the kingdom was
drawn towards the south; yet the nobility tak-
ing arms with their usual alacrity, supplied by
their spirit the defe&ts of the King's preparations,
and defended Peronne, and other towns which
were attacked, with such vigour, as obliged the

enemy
P Jovii Hiflor. lib. xxxv. p. 174, &c.

enemy to retire without making any conquest of Booz Vr.
importance q. -

136.

THus Francis, by the prudence of his own

measures, and by the union and valour of his
fubjets, rendered abortive those vast efforts in
which his rival had almost exhausted his whole
force. As this humbled the Emperor's arrogance
no less than it checked his power, he was mor-
tified more sensibly on this occasion than on any
other, during the course of the long contelts be-
tween him and the French Monarch.

ONI circumstance alone embittered the joy bethofthe

with which the success of the campaign inspired D"p"bm.
Francis. That was the death of the Dauphin,
his eldest son, a Prince of great hopes, and ex-
tremely beloved by the people on account of his
resemblance to his father. This happening fud-
denly, was imputed to poison, not only by the
vulgar, fond of ascribing the death of illustrious
perlonages to extraordinary causes, but by the
King and his ministers. The count de Monte- m
cuculi, an Italian nobleman, cup-bearer to the poiron.
Dauphin, being seized on suspicion and put to
the torture, openly charged the imperial gene-
rals, Gonzaga and I eyva, with having inRii-
gated him to the commiflion of that crime: he
even threw out some indirect and obscure accu-
fations against the Emperor himself At a time
when all France was animated with implacable
hatred against Charles, this uncertain and extorted
charge was confidered as an inconteftible proof
of guilt, while the confidence with which both
he and his officers asserted their own innocence,
together with the indignation as well as horror
which they expreflfd on their being supposed

VoL. II. F f capable

q Meen. de Bellay, 318, &c.

Boo VI. capable of such a detestable ation, were little
'- ~'attended to, and less regardedr. It is evident,
'536. however, that the Emperor could have no in-

ducement to perpetrate such a crime, as Francis
was still in the vigour of life himself, and had,
two sons, beside the Dauphin, grown up to a
good age. That single consideration, without
mentioning the Emperor's general chara&er,
unblemished by the imputation of any deed re-
fembling this in atrocity, is more than sus-
ficient to counterbalance the weight of a dubious
testimony uttered during the anguiih of torture'.
According to the molf unprejudiced historians,
the Dauphin's death was occaioned by his hav-
ing drunk too freely of cold water after over-
heating himself at tennis; and this account, as
it is the most simple, is likewise the most cre-
dible. But if his days were cut hort by poison,
it is not improbable that the Emperor con-
je&ured rightly, when he affirmed that it had
been administered by the direction of Catharine
of Medici, in order to secure the crown to the
Duke of Orleans, her huiband . The advan-
tages resulting to her by the Dauphin's death,
were obvious as well as great; nor did her
boundless and daring ambition ever scruple at
any ation necessary towards attaining the objecs
which he had in view.

,537- NEXT year opened with a transaction very

thep.i.- uncommon, but so incapable of producing any
Aet of a-. effec, that it would not deserve to be mentioned,
nsag nft
theEmp - if it were not a striking proof of the personal
ror. animosity which mingled itself in all the hofti-

lites between Charles and Francis, and which
often betrayed them into such indecencies to-

wards

r Men. de Bellay, 289. Sandov. Hil. del Emper.
ii. 231. t Vera y Zuniga Vida de Carlo V. p. 75.

wards each other, as lessened the dignity of Boo V.
both. Francis, accompanied by the peers and.'"~"
princes of the blood, having taken his feat in t537
the parliament of Paris with the usual folemni-
ties, the advocate-general appeared and after
accusing Charles of Autria, (for so he asseted:
to call the Emperor) of having violated the
treaty of Cambray, by which he was absolved
from the homage due to the crown of France
for the counties of Artois and Slanders, insisted
that this treaty being now void, he was still to
be confidered as a vafial of the crown, and by
consequence, had been guilty of rebellion in
taking arms against his sovereign; and therefore
he demanded that Charles Ihould be summoned
to appear in person, or by his counsel, before
the parliament of Paris, his legal judges, to an-
fwer for his crime. The request was granted
a herald repaired to the frontiers.of Picardy, and
summoned him with the accustomed formalities,
to appear againt -a day prefixed. That term
being expired, and no person appearing in his
name, the parliament gave judgment, " That
Charles of AuRria had forfeited, by rebellion and
contumacy, those fiefs; declared Slanders and
Artois to be re-united to the crown of France;
and ordered their decree for this purpose to be
published by found of trumpet on the frontiers
of these provinces . '

SOON after this vain display of his. resentment,, Cmptign

rather than of his power, Francis marched to- t "Low-
wards the Low-Countries, as if he had intended Countries
to execute the sentence which his parliament had Mr'h.
pronounced, and to seize those territories which
it had awarded to him. As the Queen of Hun-

F f - gary,

Lettres et Memoires d'Etat, par Ribier, 2 tom.Blois..
1666. tom. i. p. .

Boo VI. gary, to whom her brother the Emperor had
-" -committed the government of that part of his
'*7- dominions was not prepared for so early a cam-

paign, he at first made some progrefi and took
fevcral towns of importance. But being obliged
loon to leave his army, in order to superintend
the other operations of war, the Flemings hav-
ing ambled a numerous army, not only re'
coverd most of the places which they had loft,
but began to make conqueffs in their turn. At
last they invested Terouenne; and the Duke of
Oreans, now Dauphin, by the death of his
brother, and Monmoency, whom Francis had
honoured with the contable's sword, as the re-
ward of his great ferices during the former
campaig deermined to hazard a battle in
A p~ order to reieve it. While they were advancing

' ifor this purpof, and within a few miles of the

enemy, they wre fopt hort by the arrival of an
herald from the Queen of Hungary, acquaint-
ing them that a ufpenfion of arms was now
agreed upon.

TRIs.unexpe ed event was owing to the zeal-

ous endeavours of the two sifters, the Queens
of France and of Hungary, who had long la-
boured to reconcile the contending Monarchs.
The war in the Netherlands had laid waste the
frontier provinces of both countries, without any
real advantage to either. The French and
Flemings equay regretted the interruption of
their commerce, which was beneficial to both.
Charles as well as Francis, who had each strained
to the utmost, in order to support thevaft opera-
tions of the former campaign, found that they
could not now keep armies on foot in this qar-
ter, without weakening their operations in Pied-
mont, where both wished to push the war with
the greatest vigour. All these circumstances fa-

cilitated

cilitated the negociations of the two Queens; a Boor VI.
truce was concluded, to continue in force for'--
ten months, but it extended no farther than the ju370
Low-Countries x.

IN Piedmont the war was still prosecuted with Andin

great animosity; and though neither Charlesiedt'
nor Francis could make the powerful efforts to
which this animosity prompted them, they con-
tinued to exert themselves like combatants,
whose rancour remains after their strength is ex-
haufted. Towns were alternately loft and re-
taken; kirmiihes were fought every day; and
much blood was hed, without any decisive ac-
tion, that gave the superiority to either fide. At
last the two Queens, determining not to leave
unfinilhed the good work which they had begun,
prevailed, by their importunate solicitations, the
one on her brother, the other on her husband,
to conent also to a truce in Piedmont for three
months. The conditions of it were, that each
should keep poffeflion of what was in his hands,
and after leaving garrisons in the towns, hould
withdraw his army out of the province; and that
plenipotentiaries hould be appointed to adjust
all matters in dispute by a final treaty r.

THE powerful motives which inclined both Motive of

Princes to this accommodation, have been often
mentioned. The expences of the war had far
exceeded the fums which their revenues were
capable of upplying, nor durst they venture
upon any great addition to the impositions then
established, as fubjets were not yet taught to
bear with patience the immense burdens to which
they have become accustomed in modern times.

The
x Memoires de Ribier, 56. Y Ibid. 62.

BOoK VI. The Emperor, in particular, though he had

-'- ° contrad debts which in that age appeared
'537' prodigious , had it not in his power to pay

the large arrears long due to his army. At
the fame time he had no profpeEt of deriving
any aid in money or men either from the
Pope or Venetians, though he had employed
promises and threats, alternately, in order to
procure it. But he found the former not only
fixed in his resolution of adhering feadily to the
neutrality which he had always declared to be
suitable to his characer, but pallionately de-
lirous of bringing about a peace. He perceived
that the latter were still intent on their ancient
object of holding the balance even between the
rivals, and solicitous not to throw too great a
weight into either scale.

or^ui; WHAT made a deeper imprefflon on Charles
*ti'~ than all these, was the dread of the Turkilh

ithtbeh arms, which by his league with Solyman,
Eer...therancis had drawn upon him. Though Francis,
oR fcodi- without the aliftance of a single ally, had a war

to maintain against an enemy greatly superior
in power to himself, yet so great was the horror
of Christians, in that age, at any union with
Infidels, which they confidered not only as dif-
honourable but profane, that it was long before
he could be brought to avail himself of the obh
vious advantages resulting from such a confede-
racy. eceflity at last surmounted his delicacy
and cruples. Towards the close of the preced,
ing year, La Forest, a secret agent at the Otto-
man Porte, had concluded a treaty with the
Sultan, whereby Solyman engaged to invade
the kingdom of Naples, during the next camr

paignt
tRibier, i. 294.

paign, and to attack the King of the Romans in Book Vl.
Hungary with a powerful army, while Francis'- -
undertook to enter the Milanese at the fame 537'
time with a proper force. Solyman had punc-
tually performed what was incumbent on him.
Barbarofla with a great fleet appeared on the
coast of Naples, filled that kingdom, from which
all the troops had been drawn towards Piedmont,
with consternation, landed without resistance
near Taranto, obliged Castro, a place of some
strength, to surrender, plundered the adjacent
country, and was taking measures for securing
and extending his conquests, when the unexpet-
ed arrival of Doria, together with the Pope's
gallies, and a squadron of the Venetian fleet,
made it prudent for him to retire. In Hungary
the progress of the Turks was more formidable.
Mahmet, their general, after gaining several
small advantages, defeated the Germans in a
great battle at Effek on the Drave . Happily
for Christendom, it was not in Francis's power
to execute with equal exaanefs what he had fti-
pulated; nor could he assemble at this juncture
an army strong enough to penetrate into the Mi-
lanefe. By this he failed in recovering possession
of that dutchy; and Italy was not only saved
from the calamities of a new war, but from
feeling the desolating rage of the Turkifi arms,
as an addition to all that it had suffered b. As
the Emperor knew that he could not long resist
the efforts of two such powerful confederates,
nor could expea that the fame fortunate acci-
dents would concur a second time to deliver
Naples, and to preserve the Milanese: As he
foresaw that the Italian states would not only
tax him loudly with insatiable ambition, but

might

Iftuanhaffi His. Hung. lib. xiii. p. 139.
' Jovii Hiftor. lib. xxxv. p. 183.

BOc VI. might even turn their arms against him, if he
- -' hould be so regardlels of their danger as obfti-
1537. natcly to protra& the war, he thought it necf.

fary, both for his safety and reputation, to give
his conent to a truce. Nor was Francis willing
to sustain all the blame of obftruting the r-
cftablilment of peace, or to expose himelf on
that account to the danger of being deserted by
the Swiss and other foreigners in his service. He
even began to apprehend that his own fubjets
would serve him coldly, if by contributing to
aggrandize the power of the Infidels, which it
was his duty, and had been the. ambition of his
aicetors to depress, he continued to at in direc&
opposition to all the principles which- ought to
influence a Monarch distinguished by:the title of
Molt Christian King.. He choe, for-all their
reasons, rather to run the risk of difobliging
his new ally the Sultan, than by an unseasonable
adherence to the treaty with him, to forfeit what
was of greater consequence... ...

Negiai- BUT though both parties consented to a truce,
p., b, theplenipotentiaries found insuperable difficul-
Ween ties in fettling the articles of a definitive treaty.
Fl.'d Each of the Monarchs, with the arrogance of a

conqueror, aimed at.giving law to the others
and neither would so far acknowledge his infe-
riority, as to sacrifice any point of honour, or to
relinquish any matter of right; so that the pleni-
;s53. potentiaries spent the time in long and fruitless

negociations, and separated after agreeing to
prolong the truce for.a few months .

The Pore TH Pope, however, did not despair of ac-
tht in complifhing a paint in which the plenipotentia-
pC.o ries had failed, and took upon himself the sole

burden of negociating a peace. To form a con-

federacy

federacy capable of defending Christendom from BooK VI.
the formidable inroads of the Turkish arms, and ---'
to concert eff&ual measures for the extirpation 1538
of the Lutheran heresy, were two great objets
which Paul had much at heart; and he confider-
ed the union of the Emperor with the King of
France as an efleniial preliminary to both. To
be the instrument of reconciling these contend-
ing Monarchs, whom his predeceflors by their
interested and indecent intrigues had so often
embroiled, was a circumstance which could not
fail of throwing distinguished lustre on his cha-
rater and administration. Nor was he withog
hopes that, while he pursued this laudable ena,
he might secure advantages to his own family,
the aggrandizing of which he did not neglect,
though he aimed at it with a less audacious am-
bition than was common among the Popes of
that century. Influenced by these confidera-
tions, he proposed an interview between the
two Monarchs at Nice, and offered to repair
thither in person, that he might ac as mediator
in composing all their differences. When a
Pontiff of a venerable characer, and of very
advanced age, was willing, from his zeal for
peace, to undergo the fatigues of such a distant
journey, neither Charles nor Francis could with
decency decline the interview. But though both
came to the place of rendezvous, o great was
the difficulty of adjusting the ceremonial, or such
the remains of distrust and rancour on each fide,
that they refused to fee one another, and every
thing was tranfafted by the intervention of the
Pope, who visited them alternately. With all
his zeal and ingenuity he could not find out a
method of removing the obstacles which pre-
vented a final accommodation, particularly those
arising from the pofleflion of the Miaineft; nor

was

Booi VI. was all the weight of his authority sufficient to
--v-~-overcome the obfinate perseverance of either
'3efr Monarch in aferting his own claims. At last,
tn yA.. that he might not seem to have laboured altog-
°N, Nc,. ther without effet, he prevailed on them to sign
J- ne . a truce for ten years, upon the fame condition

with the former, that each hould retain what
was now in his polfcflion, and in the mean time
lhould fend ambassadors to Rome, to discuss
their prerenfions at leisure c.

THUS ended a war of no long continuance,

but very extensive in its operations, and in which
both parties exerted their utmost strength.
Though Francis failed in the object that he had
principally in view, the recovery of the Mi-
lanefe, he acquired, nevertheless, great reputa-
tion by the wisdom of his measures, as well as
the success of his arms in repulsing a formidable
invasion; and by securing poifeffion of one half
of the Duke of Savoy's dominions, he added no
inconsiderable acceflion to his kingdom. Where-
as Charles, repulsed and baffled, after having
boasted so arrogandy of victory, purchased an
inglorious truce, by sacrificing an ally who had
rafily confided too much in his friendhip and
power. The unfortunate Duke murmured,
complained, and remonstrated against a treaty
so much to his disadvantage, but in vain he
bad no means of redress, and was obliged to
submit. Of all his dominions, Nice, with its
dependencies, was the only corner of which he
himself kept poifeflion. He saw the reft divid-
ed between a powerful invader and the ally to
whose protection he had trusted, while he re-

mained

c Recueil des Traitez, ii. lto. Relatione del Nicolo

Tiepolo de l'abocamcno di Nizza chcz. Du Mont Corps
Diplomat. par. ii . p. 17.

mained a fad monument of the imprudence of Boor vl.
weak Princes, who by taking part in the quar- ''-
rel of mighty neighbours, between whom they s538
happen to be situated, are crushed and over-
whelmed in the shock.

A FEW days after igning the treaty of truce, Intervie

the Emperor set fail for Barcelona, but was bt.,E
driven by contrary winds to the ifand St. Mar- Francis u
garet on the coast of Provence. When Francis, B
who happened to be not far distant, heard of
this, he confidered it as an office of civility to
invite him to take shelter in his dominions, and
proposed a personal interview with him at
Aigues-mortes. The Emperor, who would not
be out-done by his rival in complaisance, instant-
ly repaired thither. As soon as he cast anchor in
the road, Francis, without waiting to fettle any
point of ceremony, but relying implicitly on
the Emperor's honour for his security, visited
him on board his galley, and was received and
entertained with the warmest demonstrations of
esteem and affection. Next day the Emperor
repaid the confidence which the King had placed
in him, He landed at Aigues-mortes with as
little precaution, and met with a reception equal-
ly cordial. He remained on hore during the
night, and in both visits they vied with each
other in expressions of refpet and friendship .
After twenty years of open hostilities, or of fe-
cret enmity; after so many injuries reciprocally
inflicted or endured; after having formally given
the lie and challenged one another to single com-
bat; after the Emperor had inveighed so pub-

lickly

d Sandov. Hilt. vol. ii. 238. Relaton de l'entrevue

de Charl. V. & Fran. I. par M. de la Rivoire. Hist. de
PanguFd, par D. D. c & Vaifct tom . v. Prcuvcs,
P. 93.

Boor VI lickly against Francis as a Prince void of honour

- and integrity; and Francis had accused him as
'53. accessary to the murder of his eldest son; such

an interview appears altogether singular and even
unnatural. But the history of these Monarchs
abounds with such surprising transitions. From
implacable enmity they appeared to pass, in a
moment, to the most cordial reconcilement;
from suspicion and distrust to perfet confidence;
and from praaifing all the dark arts of a deceit-
ful policy, they could assume, of a sudden, the
liberal and open manners of two gallant gentle-
men.

THE Pope, besides the glory of having re-

stored peace to Europe, gained, according to
his expectation, a point of great consequence to
his family, by prevailing on the Emperor to be-
troth Margaret of Auitria, his natural daughter,
formerly the wife of Alexander di Medici, to
his grandson Ocavio Farnese, and in confidera-
tion of this marriage, to bestow several honours
and territories upon his future fon-in-law. A

'' 'f very tragical event, which happened about the
Alc aoder beginning of the year one thousand five hundred
. .,''J. and thirty-feven, had deprived Margaret of her

first hulband. That young prince, whom the
Emperor's partiality had raised to the supreme
pawer in Florence, upon the ruins of the publick
liberty, negleced entirely the cares of govern-
menr, and abandoned himself to the mos diffo-
lute debauchery. Lorenzo di Medici, his near-
eft kinsman, was not only the companion but
direcotr of his pleasures, and employing all the
powers of a cultivated and inventive genius in
this dishonourable ministry, added such elegance
as well as variety to vice, as gained him an abfo-
lute ascendant over the mind of Alexander. But

while

while Lorenzo seemed to be funk in luxury, and Boot Vr.
affected such an appearance of indolence and --''
effeminacy, that he would not wear a sword, 1538.
and trembled at the fight of blood, he concealed,
under that disguise, a dark, designing, audacious
spirit. Prompted either by the love of liberty,
or allured by the hope of obtaining he e supreme
power, he determined to afffiinate Alexander,
his benefator and friend. Though he long
revolved this design in his mind, his reserved
and suspicious temper prevented him from com-
municating it to any person whatever; and con-
tinuing to live with Alexander in their usual fa-
miliarity, he, one night, under pretence of hav-
ing secured him an aflignation with a lady of
high rank, whom he had often solicited, drew
that unwary Prince into a secret apartment of his
houie, and there stabbed him, while he lay care-
lefsly on a couch, expeEting the arrival of the
lady whose company he had been promised. But
no sooner was the deed done, than standing
aftoniffied, and struck with horror at its atrocity,
he forgot, in a moment, all the motives which
had induced him to commit it. Instead of rouz-
ing the people to recover their liberty by pub-
lifing the death of the tyrant, instead of taking
any tep towards opening his own way to the
dignity now vacant, he locked the door of the
apartment, and, like a man bereaved of reason
and presence of mind, fled with the utmost pre-
cipitation out of the Florentine territories. It
was late next morning before the fate of the un-
fortunate Prince was known, as his attendants,
accustomed to his irregularities, never entered his
apartment early. Immediately the chief persons
in the state assembled. Being induced partly by
the zeal of cardinal Cibo for the houl of Me-
dici, to which he was nearly related, partly by

the

BooK VI. the authority of Francis Guicciardini, who re-
--*-J called to their memory, and represented in Rrik-
c538o ing colours, the caprice as well as turbulence of
M~di their ancient popular government, they agreed
Pdot'f t to place Cosmo di Medici, a youth of eighteen,
Fl.n~ie the only male heir of that illustrious house, at

the head of the government; though at the
fame time such was their love of liberty, that
they eftablilhed several regulations in order to
circumscribe and moderate his power.
His gocern. MEANWHILE Lorenzo having reached a place

bS i'of safety, made known what he had done to
Ilortine Philip Strozzi, and the other Florentines who

had been driven into exile, or who had vo-
luntarily retired, when the republican form of
government was abolilhed, in order to make
way for the dominion of the Medici. By them,
the deed was extolled with extravagant praises,
and the virtue of Lorenzo was compared with
that of the elder Brutus, who disregarded the
ties of blood, or with that of the younger, who
forgot the friendlhip and favours of the tyrant,
that they might preserve or recover the liberty
of their country e. Nor did they reft satisfied
with empty panegyricks; they immediately
quitted their different places of retreat, assem-
bled forces, animated their vassals and parti-
fans to take arms, and to seize this opportu-
nity of re-eftablilhing the publick liberty on its
ancient foundation. Being openly affited by
the French ambassador at Rome, and secretly
encouraged by the Pope, who bore no good-
will to the house of Medici, they entered the
Florentine dominions with a considerable body of
men. But the perbons who had ele&ed Cosmo

poifefled
· Lettere di Principi, tern. iii. p. 52.

poflelfed not only the' means of supporting his BooK VI.
government, but abilities to employ them in the
most proper manner. They levied, with the 1538.
greatest expedition, a good number of troops;
they endeavoured, by every art, to gain the ci-
tizens of greatest authority, and to render the
adminiitration of the young Prince agreeable to
the people. Above all, they courted the Em-
peror's protection, as the only firm foundation
of Cosmo's dignity and power. Charles, know-
ing the propensity of the Fiorentines to the
friendhip ot France, and how much all. the
partisans of a republican government detested
him as the oppressor of their liberties, saw it to
be greatly for his interest to prevent the re-efta-
blilhment of the ancient contfitution in Florence.
For this reason, he not only acknowledged
Cosmo as head of the Florentine state, and con-
ferred on him all the titles of honour with which
Alexander had been dignified, but engaged to
defend him to the utmost; and as a pledge of
this, ordered the commanders of such of his
troops.as were stationed on the frontiers of Tuf-
cany, to support him against all aggressors. By
their aid, Cosmo obtained an easy vi&ory over
the exiles, whose troops he surprised in the
night-time, and took most of the chiefs pri-
foners: an event which broke all their measures,
and fully eftablilhed his own authority. But
though he was extremely desirous of the additi-
onal honour of marrying the Emperor's daugh-
ter, the widow of his predecessor, Charles, fe-
cure already of his attachment, chose rather to
gratify the Pope by bestowing her on his ne-
phew f.

DURING

f Jovii Hist. c. xcviii. p. 218, &c. Belcarii Comment.

I. xxii. p. 696. Iforia de si tempi di Giov. Bat. Adriani.
Ven. 1587. p. 10.

BooK VI. DURING the war between the Emperor and
'-r*' Francis, an event had happened which abated

cTh3e in some degree the warmth and cordiality of
hp betee friendship which had long subsisted between the

'V' latter and the King of England. James the Fifth
egio of Scotland, an enterprizing young Prince, hav-
*''"' ing heard of the Emperor's intention to invade

Provence, was so fond of shewing that he did
not yield to any of his ancestors in the sincerity
of his attachment to the French crown, and o
cager to distinguish himself by some military
exploit, that he levied a body of troops with
an intention of leading them in perfoi to the
affiance of the King of France.. Though some
unfortunate accidents prevented his carrying any
troops into France, nothing could divert him
from going thither in person. Immediately upon
his landing he hastened to Provence; but had
been detained so long in his voyage that he came
too late to have any-lhare in- the military opera-
tions, and met the King on his return after the
retreat of the Imperialis But Francis was so
greatly pleased with his zeal, and no less with
his manners and conversation, that he could not
refuse him his daughter Magdalen, whom he

J- '. demanded in marriage. It mortified Henry ex-
'537 tremely to fee a Prince of whom he was immo-

derately jealous, form an alliance, from which
he derived such an accession of reputation as well
as security . He could not, however, with de-
cency, oppose Francis's bestowing his daughter
upon a Monarch descended from a race of
Princes, the mos ancient and faithful allies of
the French crown. But when James, upon the
sudden death of Magdalen, demanded as his
second wife Mary of Guise, he warmly soli-

cited
s HiR. of Scotland, vol. i p. 77.

cied Francis to deny his suit, and in order to BOK VI.
disappoint him, aiked that lady in marriage for
himself. When Francis preferred the Scottish $3'
{ing's sincere courtship to his artful and male-
vofent proposal, he dicovered much difittis-
fiation, The pacification agreed upon at Nice,
and the familiar interview of the two rivals ac
Aigecs-mortes, filled Henry's mind with new
fiiicions, as if Francis had altogether renoun-
ced his fricndlhip for the fake of new connec-
tias. with the Emperor. Charles, thoroughly rThoerm
acquainted with the temper of the Englifl King, Henry.
and watchful to observe all the hiftings and
caprices of his paflions, thought this a favour.
able opportunity of renewing his negociations
with him, which had been long broken off. By
the death of Queen Catharine, whose interest the
Emperor could not with decency have abandon-
ed, the chief cause of their discord was removed;
so that without touching upon the delicate
question of her divorce, he might now take
what measures he thought moRs effetual for re-
gaining Henry's good-will. For this purpose,
he began with proposing several marriage treaties
to the King. He offered his niece, a daughter
of the King of Denmark, to Henry himself; he
demanded the princess Mary for one of the
Princes of Portugal, and was even willing to re*
ceive her as the King's illegitinate daughter'.
Though none of theft projected alliances ever
took place, or perhaps were ever seriously intend-
ed, they occasioned such frequent intercourse be-
tween the courts, and so many reciprocal profef-
sions of civility and esteem, as considerably
abated the edge of Henry's rancour against the
Emperor, and paved the way for that union be-

VOL. II. G g tween

h Mem. de Ribier, t i 495.

Bool VI tween them which afterwards proved so difadvan.
'-v'' tageous to the French King.

1538.
Proeaof THE ambitious schemes in which the Empe-

ti or- ror had been engaged, and the wars he had been

carrying on for some years, proved, as usual, ex-
tremely favourable to the progress of the Refor-
mation in Germany. While Charles was absent
upon his African expedition, or intent on his
vast projects against France, his chief objec in
Germany was to prevent the dissensions about
religion from disturbing the publick tranquillity,
by granting such indulgence to the Protestant
Princes as might induce them to concur with
his measures, or at least hinder them from tak-
ing part with his rival. For this reason, he was
careful to secure to the Protestants the poffellion
of all the advantages which they had gained by
the articles of pacification at Nuremberg, in the
year one thousand five hundred and thirty-two i;
and except some flight trouble from the pro-
ceedings of the Imperial chamber, they met with
nothing to disturb them in the exercise of their
religion, or to interrupt the successful zeal with

Negoci- which they propagated their opinions. Mean-
tir.lam while the Pope continued his negociations for
with re- convoking a general council; and though the
sict"l Protestants had expressed great diffatisfa&ion
councl with his intention o fix upon Mantua as the

place of meeting, he adhered obstinately to his
choice, issued a bull on the second of June, one
thousand five hundred and thirty-fix, appointing
it to assemble in that city on the twenty-third of
May the year following; he nominated three
cardinals to preside in his name; enjoined all
Christian Princes to countenance it by their au-
thority, and invited the prelates of every nation

to
i Du Mont. Corps Diplomrn. tomrn. iv. part 2. p. 138.

i

to attend in person. This citation of a council, BooK VI.
an assembly which from its nature and intention -
demanded quiet times, as well as pacific difpo- '538.
fitions, at the very juncure when the Emperor
was on his march towards France, and ready to
involve a great part of Europe in the confusions
of war, appeared to every person extremely un-
seasonable. It was intimated, however, to all
the different courts by nuncios dispatched of
purpofek. With an intention to gratify the
Germans, the Emperor, during his residence
in Rome, had warmly Solicited the Pope to call
a council; but being at the fame time willing
to try every art in order to persuade Paul to de-
part from the neutrality which he preserved be-
tween him and Francis, he sent Heldo his vice-
chancellor into Germany, along with a nuncio
dispatched thither, instructing him to second
all the nuncio's representations, and to enforce
them with the whole weight of the Imperial au-
thority. The Protestants gave them audience Fb. v,
at Smalkalde, where they had affenbled in a 537
body, in order to receive them. But after
weighing all their arguments, they unanimously
refused to acknowledge a council summoned in
the name and by the authority of the Pope
alone; in which he assumed the lole right of pre-
fiding; which was to be held in a city not only
far distant from Germany, but fubjett to a
Prince, a stranger to them, and cloely connet-
ed with the court of Rome; and to which their
divines could not repair with safety, specially
after their doctrines had been stigmatized in the
very bull of convocation with the name of
heresy. These and many otherobjections against
the council, which appeared to them unanfwer-
able, they enumerated in a large manifeflo,

G g 2 which
k Pallavic. Hill. Ccnc. Trid. 113.

Booz VI which they publifbed in vindication of thpir cop-
---' dua&.
1538.

AGAINST this the court of Rome exclaimed

as a flagrant proof of their obstinacy and pre
fumption, and the Pope till persisted in his rer
solution to hold the council at the time and in
the place appointed. But some unexpe&ed dif-
ficulties being started by the Duke of Mantua,
both about the right ofjurifdictio over the per-
sons who resorted to the council, and the cu-
rity of his capital amidst such a concoprfe of
strangers, the Pope, after fruitless endeavours
oao a. to adjust thee, first prorogued the council for

3 irnme months, and afterwards transferring the

place of meeting to Vicenza in the Venetian ter-
ritories, appointed it to assemble on the first of
May in the following year. As neither the Em,
peror nor French King, who had not then come
to any accommodation, would permit their sub-
jets to repair thither, not a single prelate ap-
peared on the day prefixed; and the Pope, that
his authority might not become altogether con-
temptible by so many ineffetual intimations,
put off the meeting by an indefinite proroga-
tion .

A prti. BUT, that he might not seem to have
t't"c turned his whole attention towards a reforma-
thc opc. tion which he was not able to accomplish, while

he negleted that which was in his own power,
he deputed a certain number of cardinals and
bishops, with full authority to inquire into the
abuses and corruptions of the Roman court; and
to propose the most effectual method of remov-
ing them. This scrutiny, undertaken with re-

luctance,

I Scidan, 1. xii. 123, &c. Sckend. Com. lib. iii. p.
143, &c. m F. Paul. 117. Pallavic. 117.

lucance, ivas carried on slowly and with remiss- Boor VL
ness. All defects were touched with a gentle
hand, afraid of probing too deep, or ofdifcover- 1 53
ing too much. But even by this partial exami-
nation, many irregularities were detected, and
many enormities exposed to light, while the re-
medies which they suggested as molf proper,
were either inadequate, or were never applied.
The report and resolutions of these deputies,
though intended to be kept secret, were tranf-
mitted by some accident into Germany, and be-
ing immediately made publick, afforded ample
matter for reflecion and triumph to the Pro-
teftants n. On the one hand they demonstrated
th: necessity of a reformation in the head as well
as the members of the church, and even pointed
out many of the corruptions against which Lu-
ther and his followers had remonstrated with the
greatest vehemence. They hewed on the other
hand, that it was vain to expet this reforma-
tion from ecclefiafticks themselves, who, as Lu-
ther strongly expressed it, piddled at curing
warts, while they overlooked or confirmed ul-
cers .

TnE earnestness with which the Emperor A lgue

seemed, at first, to press their acquiescing in the fomed in
Pope's scheme of holding a council in Italy, to tht at
alarmed the Protefant Princes so much, that Smalklade.
they thought it prudent to strengthen their con-
federacy, by admitting several new members
who olicited that privilege, particularly the
King of Denmark. Heldo, who, during his re-
fidence in Germany, had observed all the ad-
vantages which they derived from that union,
endeavoured to counterbalance its effects by an
alliance among the catholick powers of the Em-

pire.
a Sleidan, 33. o Seek. 1. iii. 164.

BooK VI.pire. This league, diftinguithed by the name of

Ho.y, was merely defensive; and though con-
1539' cluded by Heldo in the Emperor's name, was

afterwards disowned by him, and subscribed by
very few Princes P.

Alarms tah THE Protestants soon got intelligence of this
Pro''""naffociation, notwithstanding all the endeavours

of the contracting parties to conceal it; and
their zeal, always apt to fufpe& and to dread,
even to excess, every thing that seemed to
threaten religion, instantly took the alarm as if
the Emperor had been just ready to enter upon
the execution of some formidable plan for the
extirpation of their opinions. In order to difap-
point this, they held frequent consultations, they
courted the Kings of France and England with
great afliduity, and even began to think of raif-
ing the refpe&ive contingents both in men and
money which they were obliged to furnish by the
treaty of Smalkalde. But it was not long be-
fore they were convinced that these apprehen-
sions were without foundation, and that the
Emperor, to whom repose was absolutely necef-
fary after efforts so much beyond his strength in
the war with France, had no thoughts of dif-
turbing the tranquillity of Germany. As-a proof
April 19. of this, at an interview with the Protestant

Princes in Francfort, his ambassadors agreed that
all concessions in their favour, particularly those
contained in the pacification of Nuremberg,
should continue in force for fifteen months;
that during this period all proceedings of the
Imperial chamber against them hould be sus-
pended; that a conference hould be held by a
few divines of each party, in order to discuss the

points
P Seek. iii. 171. Recucil de Traitez.

points in controversy, and to propose articles ofBoor VI.
accommodation which hould be laid before the 'V
next diet. Though the Emperor, that he might '539
not irritate the Pope, who remonitrated against
the first part of this agreement as impolitick,
and against the latter as an impious encroach-
ment upon his prerogative, never formally rati-
sied this convention, it was observed with confi-
derable exa&nefs, and greatly strengthened the
balis of that ecclesiastical liberty, for which the
Protestants contended .

A FEW days after the convention at Francfort, Apil t4.

George Duke of Saxony died, and his death was eftblifhedin
an event of great advantage to the Reformation. every prt
That Prince, the head of the Albertine, or younger
branch of the Saxon family, poffefied, as mar-
quis of Mifnia and Thuringia, extensive territories,
comprehending Dresden, Leipfick, and other ci-
ties now the most considerable in the eletorate.
From the first dawn of the Reformation, he had
been its enemy as avowedly as the eletoral
Princes were its protecors, and had carried on
his opposition not only with all the zeal flowing
from religious prejudices, but with a virulence
inspired by personal antipathy to Luther, and
imbittered by the domeftick animosity subsisting
between him and the other branch of his family.
By his death without issue, his fucceflion fell.to
his brother Henry, whose attachment to the
Protestant religion surpassed, if possible, that of
his predecessor to popery., Henry no sooner took
poifeffion of his new dominions, than, disregard-
ing a clause in George's will, dictated by his
bigotry, whereby he bequeathed all his terri-
tories to the Emperor and King of the Romans,
if his brother hould attempt to make any inno-

vation
1 F. Paul, 8z. Slcid. 247. Seck. 1. iii. 200oo.

Boo, VI. vation in religion, he invited some Pooteftant

-"-' divines, and among them Luther himnElf, to
'139 ILeipfick. By their advice and assistance he

overturned in a few weeks the whole system of
ancientrites, establishing the full exercise of the
reformed religion, with the universal applause
of his subje&s, who had long wilhed for this
change, which the authority of their Duke alone
had hitherto prevented r. This revolution de-
livered the Protestants from the danger to which
they were exposed by having an inveterate enemy
situated in the middle of their territories; and
their dominions now extended, in one great and
almost unbroken line, from the ihore of the Bal-
tick to the banks of the Rhine.

A mutiny SooN after the conclusion of the truce at
o tbfpNice, an event happened, which satisfied all Eu-

rope that Charles had prosecuted the war to
the utmoRf extremity that the state of his affairs
would permit. Vast arrears were due to his
troops, whom he had long amused with vain
hopes and promises. As they now foresaw that
little attention would be paid to their demands,
when by the re-eftablifment of peace their ser-
vices became of less importance, they loft all pa-
tience, broke out into an open mutiny, and de-
dared that they thought themselves entitled to
seize by violence what was detained from them
contrary to all justice. Nor was this spirit of
sedition confined to one part of the Emperor's
dominions; the mutiny was almost as general as
the grievance which gave rife to it. The soldi-
ers in the Milanese plundered the open coun-
try without controul, and filled the capital itself
with consternation. Those in garrison at Go-
letta threatened to give up that important for-

trefs
r SleideC, 249.

tefi toBarbarofla. In Sicily the troops proceeded Boor Vt.
to fill greater excesses; having chaced away ' ---
their officers, they eleted others in their stead, ' 39
defeated a body of men whom the viceroy sent
against them, took and pillaged several cities,
conduting themfelvae all the while, in such a
manner, that their operations resembled rather
the.regular proceedings of a concerted rebellion,
than the rahnefs and violence of a military mu-
tiny. But by the address and prudence of the
~gnerals, who, partly by borrowing money in
their own name, or in that of their master,
partly by extorting large fums from the cities
n their rcfpecive provinces, raised what was
sufficient to discharge the arrears of the soldiers,
thee infurretions were quelled. The greater
part of the troops was disbanded, such a num-
ber only being kept in pay as was neceflary
for garrisoning the principal towns, and pro-
testing the sea-coasts from the insults of the
Turks .

IT was happy for the Emperor that the abi- Corte of

lities of his generals extricated him out of these caniOe hdtd
difficulties, which it exceeded his own power to
have removed. He had depended, as his chief
resource for discharging the arrears due to his
soldiers, upon the subsidies which he expeted
from his Castilian fubjets. For this purpose,
he aiembled the Cortes of Castile at Toledo,
and having represented to them the great ex-
pence of his military operations, together with
the vast debts in which there had necessarily in-
volved him, he proposed to levy such supplies
as the present exigency of his affairs demanded,
by a general excise on commodities. But the

Spaniards

, Jovii Hiftor. 1. xxxvii. 203. c. Sandov. Ferreras,
ix. 209.

Bou K VI. Spaniards already felt themselves oppressed with
*-..-- a load of taxes unknown to their ancestors.
rt'39 They had often complained that their country
rim.n, nd was drained not only of its wealth but of its
e:fTfitlsf i-

o

that inhabitants, in order to prosecute quarrels in
..mbl:. which it was not interested, and to fight battles

from which it could reap no benefit; and they
determined not to add voluntarily to their
own burdens, or to furnish the Emperor with
the means of engaging in new enterprizes no les
ruinous to the kingdom than most of those which
he had hitherto carried on. The nobles, in
particular, inveighed with great vehemence
against the imposition proposed, as an encroach-
ment upon the valuable and diftinguilhing pri-
vilege of their order, that of being exempted
from the payment of any tax. They demanded
a conference with the representatives of the cities
concerning the state of the nation. They con-
tended that if Charles would imitate the example
of his predecessors, who had resided constantly
in Spain, and would avoid entangling himself in
a multiplicity of tranfa&ions foreign to the con-
cerns of his Spanish dominions, the fsated reve-
nues of the crown would be fully sufficient to
defray the necelTary expences of government.
They represented to him that it would be unjust
to lay new burdens upon the people, while this
prudent and effctual method of re-eftablithing
public credit, and securing national opulence,
was totally neglected '. Charles, after employ-
ing arguments, entreaties, and promises, but
without success, in order to overcome their ob-

Th-cirnt ftinacy, dismissed the assembly with great indig-
.,tbc..t. nation. From that period neither the nobles nor
fub.ened the prelates have been called to there assemblies,

on pretence that such as pay no part of the pub-

lick
t Sandov Hist. vol. ii. 69g.

lick taxes, should not claim any vote in layingBooK Vl.
them on. None have been admitted to the Cortes v"-'
but the procurators or representatives of eigh- '539
teen cities. These, to the number of thirty-fix,
being two from each community, form an as-
fembly which bears no resemblance either in
power or dignity or independence to the ancient
Cortes, and are absolutely at the devotion of the
court in all their determinations ". Thus the
imprudent zeal with which the Castilian nobles
had supported the regal prerogative, in oppo-
fition to the claims of the commons during the
commotions in the year one thousand five hun-
dred and twenty-one, proved at last fatal to
their own body. By enabling Charles to depress
one of the orders in the flare, they destroyed
that balance to which the constitution owed its
security, and put it in his power, or in that of
his successors, to humble the other, and to strip
it of its most valuable privileges.

AT that time, however, the Spanish grandees The Spani,,

flill possessed extraordinary power as well as pri- g roreir
vileges, which they exercised and defended with ed high pr;-
an haughtiness peculiar to themselves. Of this vil'tg'.
the Emperor himself had a mortifying proof du-
ring the meeting of the Cortes at Toledo. As
he was returning one day from a tournament ac-
companied by most of the nobility, one of the
serjeants of the court, out of officious zeal to
clear the way for the Emperor, firuck the Duke
of Infantado's horse with his batton, which that
haughty grandee relenting, drew his sword, beat
and wounded the officer. Charles, provoked
at such an insolent deed in his presence, immedi-
ately ordered Ronquillo the judge of the ourt

to

u Sandov. ibid. La Science do Gouvernement, par
1M. de Real, tom. ii. p. 1oz.

EonK Vl.to arrest the Duke; Ronquillo advanced toexe-
~'-'"' cute his charge, when the constable of Caflle
':-'" interposing, checked him, claimed the right of

jurifdiEtion over a grandee as a privilege of his
office, and condu&ed Infantado to his own apart-
ment. All the nobles present were so pleased
with the boldness of the constable in asserting
the rights of their order, that deserting the Em-
peror, they attended him to his house with in-
finite applaufcs, and Charles returned to the
palace without any person along with him but
the cardinal Tavera. The Emperor, however
sensible of the affront, saw the danger of irri-
tating a jealous and high spirited order of
men, whom the slightest appearance of offence
might drive to the most unwarrantable extremes.
For that reason, instead of fraining at any ill-
timed exertion of his prerogative, he prudently
connived at the arrogance of a body too potent
for him to control, and sent next morning to
the Duke of Infantado, offering to inflic what
punishment he pleased on the person who had
affronted him. The Duke confidering this as a
full reparation to his honour, instantly forgave
the officer; bestowing on him, besides, a con-
fiderable present as a compensation for his wound.
Thus the affair was entirely forgotten ; nor
would it have deserved to be mentioned, if it
were not a striking example of the haughty and
independent spirit of the Spanifl nobles in that
age, as well as an instance of the Emperor's dex-
terity in accommodating his conduct to the cir-
cumlsances in which he was placed.

1:
i a;on CHARLES was far from discovering any such
'" ~"' condescension or lenity towards the citizens of

Ghent, who not long after broke out into open

rebellion
- Sandov. ii. 274. Ferraras, ix. zl . Miniana, 113.

rebellion againt his government. An event B.oK VI.
which. happened in the year one thousand five '---
hupdred and thirty-fix, gave occasion to this '539
rafli insurrection so fatal to that fourilhing city.
At that time the Queen dowager of Hungary,
governess of the Netherlands, having received
orders from her brother to invade France with
all the forces which he could raise, he aftem-
bled the fates of the United Provinces, and ob-
tained from them a subsidy of twelve hundred
thousand flirins, to defray the expence of that
undertaking. Of this um, the county of
Slanders was obliged to pay a third part as its
proportion. But the citizens of Ghent, the mot PrctenfiCns
considerable city in that country, averse to as 'h'"''i-
war with France, with which they carried on an
extensive and gainful commerce, refused to pay
their quota, and contended, that in consequence
of stipulations between them and the ancestors
of their present sovereign the Emperor, no tax
could be levied upon them, unless they had
giver their express consent to the imposition of
it. The governess, on the other hand, main-
tained, that as the subsidy of twelve hundred
thousand florins had been granted by the States
of Slanders, of which their representatives were
members, they were bound, of course, to con-
form to what was enacted by them; as it is the
first principle in society, on which the tranquillity
and order of government depend, that the in-
clinations of the minority must be over-ruled
by the judgment and decision of the superior
number.

THE citizens of Ghent, however, were not Proce.ir.,

willing to relinquish a privilege of such high ^ ,l
importance as that which they claimed. Having
been accustomed, under the government of the

hou

Book VI. house of Burgundy, to enjoy extensive immuni-
' -v ties, and to be treated with much indulgence,
'539- they disdained to sacrifice, to the delegated power

of a regent, those rights and liberties which they
had often and successfully aferted against their
greatest Princes. The Queen, though fle en-
deavoured at first to sooth them, and to recon-
cile them to their duty by various concessions,
was at last so much irritated by the obifinacy with
which they adhered to their claim, that she or-
dered all the citizens of Ghent, on whom flhe
could lay hold in any part of the Netherlands,
to be arrested. But this rash aion made an
impression very different from what {he expe&ed,
on men, whose minds were agitated with all the
violent passions which indignation at opprefflon
and zeal for liberty inspire. Less affected with
the danger of their friends and companions, than
irritated at the governess, they openly despised
her authority, and sent deputies to the other
towns of Slanders, conjuring them not to aban-
don their country at such a juncure, but to con-
cur with them in vindicating its rights against
the encroachments of a woman, who either did
not know or did not regard their immunities.
All but a few inconsiderable towns declined en-
tering into any confederacy against the gover-
ness they joined, however, in petitioning her
to put off the term for payment of the tax so
long, that they might have it in their power to
fend some of their number into Spain, in order
to lay their title to exemption before their fove-
reign. This he granted with some difficulty.
But Charles received their commissioners with an
haughtiness to which they were not accustomed
from their ancient Princes; and enjoining them
to yield the fame refpeful obedience to his
sifter, which they owed to him in person, re-

mitted

mitted the examination of their claim to the Boo V.
council of Malines. This court, which is pro-
perly a standing committee of the parliament or '539-
states of the county, and which poffefles the
supreme jurifdition in all matters civil as well
as criminal Y, pronounced the claim of the citi-
zens of Ghent to be ill-founded, and appointed
them forthwith to pay their proportion of the
tax.

ENRAGED at this decision, which they con- rhey uke
fidered as notoriously unjust, and rendered def- .'rm,.

ofer to lb-

perate on feeing their rights betrayed by that mi to
very court which was bound to prote& them, the Frace.
people of Ghent ran to arms in a tumultuary
manner, drove such of the nobility as resided
among them out of the city; secured several
of the Emperor's officers; put one of them
to the torture, whom they accused of having
stolen or destroyed the record, that contained
the privileges of exemption from taxes which
they pleaded; chose a council to which they
committed the direcion of their affairs; gave
orders for repairing and adding to their fortifi-
cations; and openly ereOed the standard of re-
bellion against their sovereign z. Sensible, how-
ever, of their inability to support what their
zeal had prompted them to undertake, and de-
firous of securing a protector against the for-
midable forces by whiLh they might expect oon
to be attacked, they sent some of their number to
Francis, offering not only to acknowledge him
as their sovereign, and to put him in immediate
pofeffion of Ghent, but to assist him with all

their

y Defcrittione di tutti paefi balli di Lud. Guicciardini.

Ant. 1;71. fol p. 53. Mcmoiies fur la r vole
de Gantois en 1539, par Jean d'lHollander, ecrit en 47-
A la Haye 1747. P. Heuter. Rer. Aufr. lib. xi. p. z2..
Sandov. Hillor. tom. ii. p. z82.

BooK VI. their forces in recovering those provinces in dit
'-.' Netherlands, which had anciently belonged to
'539' the crown of France, and had been so lately re.

united to it by the decree of the parliament of
Paris. This unexpeted proposition coming
from persons who had it in their power to hay*
performed instantly one part of what they un4r-
took, and who could contribute so effeitually
towards the execution of the whole, opened va
as well as alluring profpets to Francis's ambi-
tion. The counties of Slanders and Arois were
of greater value than the duchy of Milan, which
he had so long laboured to acquire with p.
fionate but fruitless defre their situation with
refpea to France rendered it more easy to con,
quer or to defend them; and they might be
formed into a separate principality for the Duke
of Orleans, no less suitable to his dignity than
that which his father aimed at obtaining. To
this, the Flemings, who were acquainted with
the French manners and government, would
not have been averse; and his own subjea,
weary of their deftrutive expeditions into Italy,
would have turned their arms towards this quar.
ter with more good-will, and with greater vi.
Frr.ci, de- gour. Several considerations, nevertheless, pre-

"tl 'r vented Francis from laying hold of this oppor-

tunity, the molt favourable in appearance which
had ever presented itself, of extending his domi-
nions or distressing the Emperor. From the
time of their interview at Aigues-mortes, Charles
had continued to court the King of France with
wonderful attention; and often flattered him
with hopes of gratifying at last his wilhes con-
cerning the Milanese, by granting the invefti-
ture of it either to him or to one of his sons. But
though there hopes and promises were thrown
out with no other intention than to detach him
from his confederacy with the grand Seignior,

or

er to raise suspicions in Solyman's mind by the Boor VI.
appearance of a cordial and familiar intercourfce'
subsisting between the courts of Paris and Ma- '539'
drid, Francis was weak enough to catch at the
hadow by which he had been so often deceived,
and from eagerness to seize it, relinquished what
muff have proved a more substantial acquisition.
Besides this, the Dauphin jealous to excess of
his brother, and unwilling that a Prince who
seemed to be of a restless and enterprizing nature
lhould obtain an eftabliflment, which from its
situation might be confidered almost as a do-
meftick one, made use of Montmorency, who, by
a firgular piece of good fortune, was at the
fame time the favourite of the father and of the
son, to defeat the application of the Flemings,
and to divert the King from espousing their cause.
Montmorency, accordingly, represented in strong
terms, the reputation and power which Francis
would acquire by recovering that footing which
he had formerly in Italy, and that nothing could
be so efficacious to overcome the Emperor's aver-
sion to this, as his adhering sacredly to the truce,
and refuting on this occasion to countenance his
rebellious fubjeis. Francis, apt of himself to
over-rate the value of the Milanese, because he
estimated it from the length of time as well as
from the great efforts which he had employed in
order to re-conquer it, and fond of every action
which had the appearance of generosity, assented
without difficulty to sentiments so agreeable to
his own, rejected the propositions of the citizens
of Ghent, and dismissed their deputies with an
harlh anfwcr *.

NOT satisfied with this, by a farther refine-Commun;-
ment in generosity, he communicated to thei,,teoion,

Vo. . H h Emperoro the Em-

peror.

a Mem. de Bellay, p. 263. P. Hetter. Rer. Auafr. lib.
xi. 263.

BooK Vl. Emperor his whole negociation with the male-

contents, and all that he knew of their schemes
1539. and intentions b. This convincing proof of

Francis's disinterestedness relieved Charles from
the most disquieting apprehensions, and opened a
way to extricate himself out of all his difficulties.
He had already received full information of all
the tranfa&ions in the Netherlands, and of the
rage with which the people of Ghent had taken
arms against his government. He was thoroughly
acquainted with the genius and qualities of his
subje&s in that country; with their love of li-
berty; their attachment to their ancient privi-
leges and customs; as well as the invincible ob-
ftinacy with which their minds, flow but firm
and persevering, adhered to any measure on
which they had leisure to fix. He easily saw
what encouragement and support they might
have derived from the afliftance of France; and
though now free from any danger on that quar-
ter, he was still sensible that some immediate as
well as vigorous interposition was necessary, in
order to prevent the spirit of difaffe&ion from
spreading in a country where the number of
cities, the multitude of people, together with
the great wealth diffused among them by com-
merce, rendered it peculiarly formidable, and
would supply it with inexhaustible resources.

Cb tal'*i No expedient, after long deliberation, appeared
oasaceto him so effectual as his going in person to the
ighjU.e Netherlands; and the governess his sifter being
Neher- of the fame opinion, warmly solicited him to
1hods undertake the journey, There were only two

different routes which he could take; one by land,
through Italy and Germany, the other entirely
by sea, from some port in Spain to one in the
Low-Countries. But the former was more te-

dious
1, Sandov. Hifior. tom. ii. 284.

dious than suited 'the present exigency of his BooK VI.
affairs; nor could he in consistency with his dig- i 539.
nity or even his safety pass through Germany
without such a train both of attendants and of
troops, as would have added greatly to the time
that he must have consumed in his journey; the
latter was dangerous at this season, and while
he remained uncertain with respect to the friend-
Thip of the King of England, was not to be ven-
tured upon, unless under the convoy of a power-
ful fleet. This perplexing situation, in which he
was under a necellity of chufing, and did not
know what to chufe, inspired him at last with the
singular and seemingly extravagant thought of
palling through France, as the most expeditious Propose to
way of reaching the Netherlands. He proposed Fr'n'ce.
in his council to demand Francis's permission for
that purpose. All his counsellors joined with
one voice in condemning the measure as no less
rash than unprecedented, and which must infal-
libly expose him to disgrace or to danger; to
disgrace, if the demand were rejeted in the
manner that he had reason to expet; to danger,
if he put his person in the power of an enemy
whom he had often offended, who had ancient
injuries to revenge, as well as subje&s of present
contest still remaining undecided. But Charles,
who had studied the character of his rival with
greater care, and more profound discernment
than any of his ministers, persisted in his plan,
and flattered himself that it might be accom-
plifhed not only without danger to his own per-
son, but even without the expence of any con-
cession detrimental to his crown.

WITH this view he communicated the matter To which

to the French ambassador at his court, and lent F,''""
Granvelle his chief minister to Paris, in order to

H h 2 obtain

Book VLobtain from Francis permission to pass through
''~* his dominions, and to promise that he would
'539 soon fettle the affair of the Milanese to his satis-

faction. But at the fame time he intreated that
Francis would not exat any new promise, or
even inGft on former engagements, at this junc-
ture, left whatever he ihould grant, under his
present circumstances, might seem rather to be
extorted by necessity, than to flow from friend-
lhip or the love of justice. Francis, instead of
attending to the snare which such a flight artifice
scarcely concealed, was o dazzled with the
splendour of overcoming an enemy by ats of
generofty, and so pleased with the air of fupe-
riority which the rectitude and disinterestedness
of his proceedings gave him on this occasion,
that he at once assented to all that was demanded.
Judging of the Emperor's heart by his own, he
imagined that the sentiments of gratitude, arising
from the remembrance of good offices and liberal
treatment, would determine him more forcibly
to fulfil what he had so often promised, than the
most preciie stipulations that could be inserted in
any treaty.

Frecep- UPON this, Charles, to whom every moment
ki~,gd,. was precious, set out, notwithstanding the fears

and suspicions of his Spanih fubjets, with a
fiall but splendid train of about an hundred
persons. At Bayonne, on the frontiers of
France, he was received by the Dauphin and
the Duke of Orleans, attended by the constable
Montmorency. The two Princes offered to go
into Spain, and to remain there as hostages for
the Emperor's safety: but this he rejeted, de-
daring that he relied with implicit confidence
on the King's honour, and had never demanded
nor would accept of any other pledge for his fecu-

rity.

rity. In all the towns through which he passed, Boox VI'
the greatest poflible magnificence was displayed;
the magistrates presented him the keys of the 1539
gates; the prison doors were set open; and, by
the royal honours paid to him, he appeared
more like the sovereign of the country than a
stranger. The King advanced as far as Chatel-
rault to meet him; their interview was diftin-
quifhed by the warmest expressions of friendship
and regard. They proceeded together towards 549.
Paris, and presented to the inhabitants of that
city, the extraordinary fpetacle of two rival
Monarchs, whole enmity had disturbed and laid
waste Euope during twenty years, making their
solemn entry together with all the symptoms of
a confidential harmony, as if they had forgotten
for ever past injuries, and would never revive
hostilities for the future c,

CHARLES remained fix days at Paris; but The "E'

amidst the perpetual caresses of the French rde,
court, and the various entertainments contrived
to amuse or to do him honour, he discovered an
extreme impatience to continue his journey,
arising as much from an apprehension of danger
which constantly oppressed him, as from the
necessity of his preence in the Low-Countries,
Conscious of the difingenuity of his own inten-
tions, he trembled when he reflected that some
fatal accident might betray them to his rival, or
lead him to fufpe& them; and though his arti-
sices to conceal these Ihould be successful, he
could not help fearing that motives of interest
might at last triumph over the scruples of ho-
nour, and tempt Francis to avail himself of the
advantage now in his hands. Nor were there
wanting persons among the French ministers,

who
< Thuan. Hit. lib. i. e. 14. Mem. de Bellay 264.

Boo Vl. who advised the King to turn his own arts

'_ against the Emperor, and as the retribution due
'540. for so many instances of fraud or falsehood to

seize and detain his person until he granted him
full fatisfation with regard to all the just claims
of the French crown. But no consideration could
induce Francis to violate the faith which he had
pledged, nor could any argument convince him
that Charles, after all the promises that he had
given, and all the favours which he had received,
might ifill be capable of deceiving him. Full of
this false confidence he accompanied him to St.
Quintin, and the tws Princes, who had met him
on the borders of Spain, did not take leave of
him until he entered his dominions in the Low-
Countries.

d d~nge As soon as the Emperor reached his own ter-
M',t. ritories, the French ambassadors demanded the
Jaa' 4. accomplishment of what he had promised con-

cerning the investiture of Milan; but Charles,
under the plausible pretext that his whole atten-
tion was then engrossed by the consultations ne-
celary towards fupprefing the rebellion in Ghent,
put off the matter for some time. But in order
to prevent Francis from fufpe&ing his sincerity,
he ifill continued to talk of his resolution with
refpe& to that matter in the fame strain as when
he entered France, and even wrote to the King
much to the fame purpose, though in general
terms, and with equivocal expressions, which he
might afterwards explain away or interpret at
pleasure

Reductioa MEANWHILE, the unfortunate citizens of
eGt'', Ghent, destitute of leaders capable either of

direting their councils, or conducting their

troops
Memoiro de Ribier, i. 504.

troops; abandoned by the French King and un- BooK Vl
supported by their countrymen; were unable to
resist their offended sovereign, who was ready to '540
advance against them with one body of troops
which he had raised in the Netherlands, with
another drawn out of Germany, and a third
which had arrived from Spain by sea. The near
approach of danger made them, at last, so fen-
fible of their own folly, that they ent ambafla-
dors to the Emperor, imploring his mercy, and
offering to set open their gates at his approach.
Charles, without vouchsafing them any other an-
fwer, than that he would appear among them
as their overeign, with the sceptre and the
sword in his hand, began his march at the head
of his troops. Though he chose to enter the
city on the twenty-fourth of February, his birth-
day, he was touched with nothing of that ten-
dernefs or indulgence which was natural towards
the place of his nativity. Twenty-fix of the '"ndPuh-

ment of the

principal citizens were put to death; a greater citizens.
number was ent into banishment; the city was April z.
declared to have forfeited all its privileges and
immunities; the revenues belonging to it were
confiscated; its ancient form of government was
abolished; the nomination of its magistrates was
vested for the future in the Emperor and his fuc-
ceffors; a new system of laws and political ad-
ministration was prescribed b, and in order to
bridle the seditious spirit of the citizens, orders
were given to ere& a strong citadel, for defraying
the expence of which a fine of an hundred and
fifty thousand florins was imposed on the in-
habitants, together with an annual tax of fix
thousand florins for the support of a garrison c.
By these rigorous proceedings, Charles not only

punished

b Les coutumes & loix du Compte de Flandre, par Alex.
e Grande, 3 tom. fol. Cambray, 1719, tom. i. p. 169.
c Harai Annales Brabantie, vol. i. 617.

BooK Vl.puniflhed the citizens of Ghent, but set an awful
L--- example of severity before his other' fubjets in

'540' the Netherlands, whose immunities and privi-

leges, partly the effe, partly the cause of their
extensive commerce, circumscribed the royal
prerogative within very narrow bounds, and of:
ten stood in the way ofmeafures which he wiffied
to undertake, or fettered and retarded him ih
his operations.

Chirlee- CHARLES having thus vindicated and re-efta-
f to a'- blifed his authority in the Low-Countries, and
ga,.ntt being now under no necessity of continuing the
. Fr i-
c fame scene of falsehood and dissimulation with

which he had long amused Francis, began gra-
dually to throw aside the veil under which he had
concealed his intentions with respect to the Mi-
lanefe. At firtt, he eluded the demands of the
French ambassadors, when they again reminded
him of his promises; then he proposed, by way
of equivalent for the dutchy of Milan, to grant
the Duke of Orleans the investiture of Slanders,
clogging the offer, however, with impracticable
conditions, or such as he knew would be rject-
ed'. At last, being driven from all his evasions
and subterfuges by their infiting for a categori-
cal answer, he peremptorily refued to give up
a territory of such value, or voluntarily to make
such a liberal addition to the strength of an ene-
my by dimini/hing his own power'. He denied
at the fame time, that he had ever made any
promise which could bind him to an ation so
foolish, and so contrary to his ow itrefc f.

Or all the tranfations in the Emperor's life,

this, without doubt, reflects the greatest dif-
honour on his reputation g. Though Charles

was

d Mem. de Ribier, i. 509, 514. Ribier, i. 5S,
fBellay, 365-6. gJovii Hilt. lib. xxxix. p. 38. a.

was not extremely scrupulous at other times BooK VI.
about the means which he employed for accom-
plifhing his ends, or always observant of'the 5l40.
itrit precepts of veracity and honour, he had
hitherto maintained some regard for the maxims
of that less precise and rigid morality by which
Monarchs think themselves entitled to regulate
their conduct. But, on this occasion, the scheme
that he formed of deceiving a generous and
open-hearted Prince; the illiberal and mean
artifices by which he carried it on; the insen-
fibility with which he received all the marks of
his friendship, as well as the ingratitude with
which he requited them; are all equally unbe-
coming the dignity of his character, and incon-
fiftent with the grandeur of his views.

THIS tranfa&ion exposed Francis to as much

scorn as it did the Emperor to censure. After
the experience of a long reign, after so many
opportunities of discovering the duplicity and
artifices of his rival, the credulous implicity
with which he trusted him at this jun&ure seemed
to merit no other return than it atually met
with. Francis, however, remonstrated and ex-
claimed, as if it had been the first instance in
which the Emperor had deceived him. Feeling,
as is usual, the insult which was offered to his
understanding still more sensibly than the injury
done to his interest, he discovered such resent-
ment, as made it obvious that he would lay hold
on the first opportunity of being revenged, and
that a war, no less rancorous than that which
had so lately raged, would soon break out anew
in Europe.

TnIS year is rendered memorable by the efta- The Pope
blifhment of the Order of Jesuits; a body whose bthoize.

influence tion of the

Order of
Jesuits.

Bootvl.influence on ecclesiastical as well as civil affairs
'-""-hath been si considerable, that an account of the
1540. genius of its laws and government justly merits

a place in history. When men take a view of
the rapid progress of this society towards wealth
and power; when they contemplate the admi-
rable prudence with which it had been governed;
when they attend to the persevering and fyfte-
matic spirit with which its schemes have been
carried on; they are apt to ascribe such a fingu-
lar institution to the superior wisdom of its foun-
der, and to suppose that he had formed and di-
gested his plan with profound policy. But the
Jesuits, as well as the other monaftick orders, are
indebted for the existence of their order not to
the wisdom of their founder, but to his enthu-
fiafrn. Ignatio Loyola, whom I have already
mentioned on occasion of the wound which he
received in defending Pampelunahwas a fanatick
distinguished by extravagancies in sentiment and
condua, no less incompatible with the maxims
of fober reason, than repugnant to the spirit of
true religion. The wild adventures, and vi-
fionary schemes, in which his enthusiasm engaged
him, equal any thing recorded in the legends of
the Romish faints; but are unworthy of notice
in history.

F.^nticim PROMPTED by this fanatical spirit, or incited
3 i~er. by the love of power and diftintion, from which

such pretenders to superior fancity are not ex-
empt, Loyola was abitious of becoming the
founder of a religious order.. The plan, which
he formed of its conititution and laws, was fug-
gested, as he gave out, and as his followers still
teach, by the immediate inspiration of heaven'.

But

h Vol. ii. Book ii. p. 192. i Compte Rendu des

Confitutions des Jesuites, au Parlemeat de Provence, par
M. de Monclar, p. 285.

But notwithstanding this high pretension, his BooK Vl.
design met at first with violent opposition. The -,'
Pope, to whom Loyola had applied for the fanc- '540
tion of his authority to confirm the institution,
referred his petition to a committee of Cardinals.
They represented the establishment to be unne-
ceffary as well as dangerous, and Paul refused
to grant his approbation of it. At last, Loyola
removed all his scruples by an offer which it was
impossible for any Pope to resist. He proposed The Pope's
that besides the three vows of poverty, of chastity, contfiV
and of monaftick obedience, which are common the order.
to all the orders of regulars, the members of his
society hould take a fourth vow of obedience
to the Pope, binding themselves to go whither-
soever he hould command for the service of re-
ligion, and without requiring any thing from the
Holy See for their support. At a time when
the papal authority had received such a hock
by the revolt of so many nations from the Ro-
mifh church; at a time when every part of the
popish system was attacked with so much vio-
lence and success, the acquisition of a body of
men, thus peculiarly devoted to the See of
Rome, and whom it might set in opposition to
all its enemies, was an object of the highest con-
sequence. Paul, instantly perceiving this, con- sept. 7.
firmed the institution of the Jesuits by his bull;
granted the most ample privileges to the mem-
bers of the society; and appointed Loyola to
be the first general of the order. The event
hath fully justified Paul's discernment, in ex-
pe&ing such beneficial consequences to the See
of Rome from this infituton. In less than half
a century, the society obtained establishments in
every country that adhered to the Roman catho-
lick Church; its power and wealth increased
amazingly; the number of its members became

great

Booz vl great; their charater as well as accomplish-

-v--J ments were still greater; and the Jesuits were
1540 celebrated by the friends, and dreaded by the

enemies of the Romilh faiths as the most able
and enterprizing order in the church.

its ontitu- THE conffitution and laws of the society were
sr rg- `perfeced by Laynez and Aquaviva, the two
pnrtilr generals who succeeded Loyola, men far fupe-
a"a. rior to their master in abilities, and in the science

of government. They framed that system of
profound and artful policy which diftinguihes
the order. The large infusion of fanaticism,
mingled with its regulations, should be imputed
to Loyola its founder. Many circumstances
concurred in giving a peculiarity of character to
the order of Jesuits, and in forming the mem-
bers of it not only to take greater part in the
affairs of the world than any other body of
monks, but to acquire superior influence in the
condu&t of them.

Tbrobjic THE primary object of almost all the monaftick
6UedC orders is to separate men from the world, and

from any concern in its affairs. In the solitude
and silence of the cloister, the monk is called
to work out his own salvation by extraordinary
ars of mortification and piety. He is dead to
the world, and ought not to mingle in its tranf-
ations. He can be of no benefit to mankind,
but by his example and by his prayers. On the
contrary, the Jesuits are taught to confider them-
selves as formed for aion. They are chosen
soldiers, bound to exert themselves continually
in the service of God, and of the Pope, his vicar
on earth. Whatever tends to inftrru the igno-
rant; whatever can be of use to reclaim or to
oppose the enemies of the Holy See, is their
proper object. That they may have full leisure

for

for this a&ive service, they are totally exempted Boo VI.
from those funtions, the performance of which 'v-
is the chief business of other monks. They ap- 1540-
pear in no processions; they pratife no rigorous
aufterities; they do not consume one half of
their time in the repetition of tedious offices k.
But they are required to attend to all the tranf-
actions of the world, on account of the influence
which there may have upon religion; they are
dire&ted to study the dispositions of persons in
high rank, and to cultivate their friendship';
and by the very confRitution as well as genius
of the order, a pirit of action and intrigue is
infused into all its members.

As the objet of the society of Jesuits differed Pecliari-

from that of the other monaftick orders, the di- oemloft,
verfity was no less in the form of its govern- poicy, pr-
ment. The other orders are to be confidered as with refp
voluntary aflociations, in which whatever affects tothepower
the whole body, is regulated by the common.i g
suffrage of all its members. The executive
power is vested in the persons placed at the head
of each convent, or of the whole society; the
legislative authority resides in the community.
Affairs of moment, relating to particular con-
vents, are determined in conventual chapters;
such as refpet the whole order are confidered in
general congregations. But Loyola, full of the
ideas of implicit obedience, which he had de-
rived from his military profession, appointed that
the government of his order ould be purely
monarchical. A general, chosen for life by
deputies from the several provinces, pofeffed
power that was supreme and independent, ex-

tending

k Compte Rendu, par M. de Monclar, p. xiii. 290. Sur

la deftrut. des Jesuites, par M. D'Alembert, p. 42.
l Compte par M. de Monclar, p. xii.

Booc VI. tending to every person, and to every cafe. He,
'-"'by his sole authority, nominated provincials,

540 reors, and every other officer employed in the

government of the society, and could remove
them at pleasure. In him was veiled the fove-
reign administration of the revenues and funds
of the order. Every member belonging to it
was at his disposal; and, by his uncontrol-
able mandate, he could impose on them any
task, or employ them in what service soever he
pleased. To his commands they were required
to yield not only outward obedience, but to re-
sign up to him the inclinations of their own wills,
and the Sentiments of their own understandings.
They were to liften to his injunctions, as if they
had been uttered by Christ himself. Under his
direcion, they were to be mere paflive intru-
ments, like clay in the hands of the potter, or
like dead carcasses incapable of resistance m. Such
a singular form of policy could not fail to im-
press its character on all the members of the
order, and to give a peculiar force to all its
operations. There is not, in the annals of man.
kind, any example of such a perfec despotism,
exercised not over monks shut up in the cells of
a convent, but over men dispersed among all the
nations of the earth.

crmn- As the constitutions of the order vest, in the
a, - General, such absolute dominion over all its

mi, him to members, they carefully provide for his being

eith te perfectly informed with refpe& to the character
grseft d- and abilities of his subjects. Every novice who
"""a' offers himself as a candidate for entering into the

order, is obliged to manfeft his conscience to the

superior,

m Compte Rendo an Parlem. de Bretagne, par M. de

Chalotais, p. 41, &c. Compte par M. de Monclar. 83.
i8. 343.

superior, or a person appointed by him; and BOOK Vl.
is required to confess not only his fins and de-
fe&s, but to discover the inclinations, the pas- '54°
lions, and the bent of his foul. This manifefta-
tion mufft be renewed every fix months . The
society not satisfied with penetrating in this man-
ner into the innermost recesses of the heart, di-
re&s each member to observe the words and
actions of the novices; they are constituted spies
upon their condu&t; and are bound to disclose
every thing of importance concerning them to
the superior. In order that this scrutiny into
their character may be as complete as poflible,
a long noviciate muff expire, during which they
pass through the several gradations of ranks in
the society, and they must have attained the full
age of thirty-three years, before they can be ad-
mitted to take the final vows, by which they
become profefed members °. By these various
methods, the superiors, under whose immediate
infpe&ion the novices are placed, acquire a
thorough knowledge of their dispositions and
talents. In order that the General, who is the
foul that animates and moves the whole society,
may have under his eye every thing necessary to
inform or dire& him, the provincials and heads
of the several houses are obliged to transmit to
him regular and frequent reports concerning the
members under their inspection. In these they
descend into minute details with refpec to the
charater of each person, his abilities natural or
acquired, his temper, his experience in affairs,
and the particular department for which he is

best

n Comptepar M. de Menclar. p. 121, &c. ° Compte

pir M. de Moncl. 215. 241. Sur 1* defir. des Jef. par ivl.
D'Alemb. p. 39.

Boo VI. best fitted P. These reports, when digested and
'·^ arranged, are entered into registers, kept of pur-
's40' pole that the General may, at one comprehen-

five view, survey the state of the society in every
corner of the earth; observe the qualifications
and talents of its members; and thus choose,
with perfect information, the instruments, which
his absolute power can employ in any service for
which he thinks meet to destine them q.

pie of As it was the profefled intention of the order
'S = of Jesuits to labour with unwearied zeal in pro-

of the moting the salvation of men, this engaged them,

ol f course, in many active fun&tions. From their
first institution, they confidered the education of
youth as their peculiar province; they aimed at

being

p M. de Chalotais has made a calculation of the number

of these reports, which the General of the Jefaits most an-
nually receive according to the reglations of the society.
These amount in all to 6;84. If this unm be divided by
37, the number of provinces in the order, it appears that
177 repots concerning the sate of each province are tranf-
mitted to Rome annually. Compte, p. 52. Besides this,
there may be extraordinary letters, or such as are feat by
the monitors or spies whom the General and Provincials
entertaiin each honfe. Compte par M. de Moncl. p. 431.
Hil. des Jefaites, Ams. 1761. tom. iv. p. 56. The pro-
vincials and beads of houses not only report concerning
the members of the ocirty, but are bound to give the Ge-
neral an account of the civil affairs of the country wherein
they are ettled, as far a the knowledge of these may be
of benefit to religion. This condition may extend to
every particular; so that the General is fnrnilhed with full
information concerning the tranfations of every Prince
and fate in the world. Compte par M. de Moncl. 443.
Ht. des Jefit. ibid. p. 58. When the afairs with refpet
to which the provincials or rectors write are of importance,
they are direaed to use cyphers, and each of them has a
particular cypher from theGeneral. Compte par M. Char-
lotais, p. 54.

q Compte par M. de Moncl. p. 21. 439.-Compte par
M. de Chalotais, p. z5. 222.

'being spiritual guides and confessors; they BooK Vl.
preached frequently in order to inftru&t the peo-
pie; they set out as miflionaries to convert un- I540°
believing nations. The novelty of the inftitu-
tion, as well as the singularity of its objets,
procured the order many admirers and patrons.
The governors of the society had the address to
avail themselves of every circumstance in its fa-
vour, and, in a short time, the number as well
as influence of its members increased wonder-
fully. Before the expiration of the sixteenth
century, the Jesuits had obtained the chief direc-
tion of the education of youth in every catholick
country in Europe. They had become the con-
feffors of almost all its monarchs; a funftion of
no small importance in any reign, but under a
weak Prince, superior even to that of minister.
They were the spiritual guides of almost every
person eminent for rank or power. They pof-
lefled the highest degree of confidence and in-
terest with the papal court, as the most zealous
and able champions for its authority. The ad-
vantages which an ative and enterprising body
of men might derive from all these circumstances
are obvious. They formed the minds of men
in their youth. They retained an ascendant
over them in their advanced years. They pof-
sessed, at different periods, the diretion of the
most considerable courts in Europe. They
mingled in all affairs. They took part in every
intrigue and revolution. The General, by
means of the extensive intelligence which he re-
ceived, could regulate the operations of the
order with the most perfec discernment, and by
means of his absolute power could carry them
on with the utmost vigour and effet r.

VOL. II. I i TOGETHER

r When Loyola, in the year 1540, petitioned the Pope
to authorize the infitution of the order, he had only ten

disciples.

Boox VI. TOGETHER with the power of the order, its
"'-/'awealth continued to increase. Various expe-
ptgfof dients were devised for eluding the obligation of
it weiath. the vow of poverty. The order acquired ample

poffefions in every catholick country; and by
the number as well as magnificence of its pub-
lick buildings, together with the value of its pro-
perty, moveable or real, it vied with the most
opulent of the monaftick fraternities. Besides the
sources of wealth common to all the regular
clergy, the Jesuits poffefled one which was pecu-
liar to themselves. Under pretext of promoting
the success of their missions, and of facilitating
the support of their missionaries, they obtained
a special licence from the court of Rome, to
trade with the nations which they laboured to
convert. In consequence of this, they engaged
in an extensive and lucrative commerce, both in
the East and Weft Indies. They opened ware-
houses in different parts of Europe, in which
they vended their commodities. Not satisfied
with trade alone, they imitated the example of
other commercial ocieties, and aimed at ob-
taining settlements. They acquired poffeflion,
accordingly, of a large and fertile province in
the southern continent of America, and reigned
as sovereigns over some hundred thousand sub-
jects '.

UNHAPPILY

disciples. But in the year 16o8, fixtv-eight years after
their first institution, the number of Jefaits had increased
to ten thousand five hundred and eighty-one. In the year
171o, the order possessed twenty-four profe.d houses;
fifty-nine houses of probation; three hundred and forty
refidencies; fix hundred and twelve colleges; two hun-
dred mifflons; one hundred and fifty seminaries and board-
ing-fchools; and consisted of 19,998 Jesuits. Hid. des
Jesuites, tom. i. p. 20.

Hill. des Jef. iv. 168-- 196, &c.

UNHAPPILY for mankind, the vast influenceBooc VI.

Which the order of Jesuits acquired by all therfe'-
different means, has been often exerted with pe'rciou
the most pernicious effe&. Such was the ten- eftas of
dency of that discipline observed by the society tvil riety.'
in forming its members, and such the funda-
mental maxims in its constitution, that every
Jesuit was taught to regard the interest of the
order as the capital objec& to which every con-
fideration was to be sacrificed. This spirit of
attachment to their order, the most ardent, per-
haps, that ever influenced any body of men ',
is the charateriftic principle of the Jesuits, and
serves as a key to the genius of their policy, as
well as the peculiarities in their sentiments and
condu&.

As it was for the honour and advantage of

the society, that its members should possess an
ascendant over persons in high rank or of great
power, the desire of acquiring and preserving
such a diretion of their condu&t, with greater
facility, has led the Jesuits to propagate a fyflem
of relaxed and pliant morality, which accom-
modates itself to the passions of men, which jufti-
fies their vices, which tolerates their imperfec-
tions, which authorizes almost every ation that
the most audacious or crafty politician would wish
to perpetrate.

As the prosperity of the order was intimately

connected with the preservation of the papal au-
thority, the Jesuits influenced by the fame prin-
ciple of attachment to the interests of their so-
ciety, have been the molt zealous patrons of
thole dotrines, which tend to exalt ecclesiastical
power on the ruins of civil government. They
have attributed to the court of Rome a juril-

I i 2 diction
' Comte par M. de Mrncl. p 2S;

BooK VI. dicion as extensive and absolute as was claimed

" ' by the most presumptuous pontiffs in the dark
540. ages. They have contended for the entire in-

dependence of ecclefiafticks on the civil magi-
ftrate. They have publihed such tenets con-
cerning the duty of opposing Princes who were
enemies of the catholick faith, as countenan&d
the most atrocious crimes, and tended to dif-
solve all the ties which conned fubjets with their
rulers.

As the order derived both reputation and au-

thority from the zeal with which it stood forth
in defence of the Romish church against the at-
tacks of the reformers, its members, proud of
this diltintion, have confidered it as their pe-
culiar funtion to combat the opinions, and to
check the progress, of the Protestants. They
have made use of every art, and have employed
every weapon against them. They have set
themselves in opposition to every gentle or to-
lerating measure in their favour. They have
inceflantly stirred up against them all the rage
of ecclesiastical and civil persecution.

MONKs of other denominations have, indeed,

ventured to teach the fame pernicious do&trines,
and have held opinions equally inconsistent with
the order and happiness of civil society. But
they, from reasons which are obvious, have ei-
ther delivered such opinions with greater reserve,
or have propagated them with less success.
Whoever recollets the events which have hap-
pened in Europe during two centuries, will find
that the Jesuits may justly be confidered as re-
fponfible for most of the pernicious effects arif-
ing from that corrupt and dangerous casuistry,
from those extravagant tenets concerning eccle-
fiatical power, and from that intolerant spirit,

which

which have been the disgrace of the church of BooK VI.
Rome throughout that period, and which have -
brought so many calamities upon civil society u. '540.

BUT amidst many bad consequences flowingsome ad-

from the institution, of this orders mankind, it ultingfrom
must be acknowledged, have derived from it the intitu-
some considerable advantages. As the Jesuits tler.
made the education of youth one of their capital
objects, and as their first attempts to establish
colleges for the reception of students were vio-
lently opposed by the universities in different
countries, it became necessary for 'them, as the
most effetual method of acquiring the publick
favour, to surpass their rivals in science and in-
dufiry. This prompted them to cultivate the Prticuiarly
Itudy of ancient literature with extraordinary at- rte'"
dor.e This.pit them upon various methods for
facilitating the inftru&cion of youth; and by the
iimporetihets which they made in it, they have -
contributed so much towards the progress of po-
kitelearning, that on this account they have me-
rite-'W*ell of society. Nor has the order of
Jesuits been ficcefsful only in teaching the ele-
ments. of literature; it has produced likewise
eminent maflers in many branches of science,
and can alone boast of a greater number of in-
genious authors, than all the other religious fra,
ternities taken together ",

BUT

w Encyclopedic, Art. Jesuites, tom. viii. 513.
r M. 'Alembert has obierved, that though the Jesuits

have made extraordinary progress in erudition of every
species; though they can reckon up many of their brethren
who have been eminent mathematicians, antiquaries, and
critics; though they have even formed some orators of repu-
tation; yet the order has never produced one man, whose
mind was so much enlightened with found knowledge, as
to merit the name of a philosopher. But it seems to be the
unavoidable effect of monaftick education to contrat and

fetter

Boot VI. BUT it is in the new world that the Jesuits

C'- .have exhibited the most wonderful display 'of

M~r ce- their abilities, and have contributed most es-
i.ily fir feaually to the benefit of the human species.
the tttle-
Mnt of he The conquerors of that unfortunate quarter of
cruit in the globe had nothing in view but to plunder,

to enslave, and to extirminate its inhabitants.
The Jesuits alone have made humanity the object
of their fettling there. About the beginning of
the last century they obtained admission into the
fertile province of Paraguay, which stretches
across the southern continent of America, from
the bottom of the mountains of Potofi, to the
confines of the Spanish and Portuguese fettle-
ments on the banks of the river de la Plata.
They found the-inhabitants in a ate little dif-
ferent from that which takes place among men
when they first begin to unite together; strangers
to the arts subsisting pecariouy by hunting
or fishing and hardly acquainted with the -first
principles of fubordination;-and .govertimeot
The Jesuits set themselves to inftru& and to
civilize tlefe savages. They taught tbeti.-to
cultivate the ground, to rear tame animals, and
to build houses. They brought them t. liv
together in villages, They trained them to arts.

and

fetter the human mind. The partial attachment of a monk
to the interft of his order, whih isoften incompatible
with that of other citizens; the habit of implicit obedience
to the will of a superior, together with the frequent return
of the wearisome and frivolous duties of the cloister, debase
his faculties, and etingnifh thartenerfity of fenttment
and spirit, which qualifies men for thinling-or feelingju'tly
with refpec to what is proper in life and conduct. Father
Paul of Venice is, perhaps, the only person educated in a
cloister, that ever was altogether faperior to its prejudices,
or who viewed the tranfadions of men,-and reafoned-con'
cerning the ntercts of society, with -the enlarged senti-
ments of a philosopher, with the discernment of a nian con.
versant in asirs, and with the liberality of a gentleman.

and manufacures. They made them taste the BooK VI.
sweets of society, and accustomed them to the '-
bleflings of security and order. These people be- L54.
came the subje&s of their benefactors, who have
governed them with a tender attention, refem-
bling that with which a father direts his chil-
dren. Refpeted and beloved almost to adora-
tion, a few Jesuits presided over some hundred
thousand Indians. They maintained a perfect
equality among all the members of the commu-
nity. Each of them was obliged to labour, not
for himself alone, but for the publick. The pro-
duce of their fields, together with the fruits of
their industry of every species, were deposited in
common storehouses, from which each individual
received every thing necessary for the supply of
his wants. By this inflitution, almost all the
passions which disturb the peace of society, and
render the members of it unhappy, were extin-
guifhed. A few magistrates, chosen by the In-
dians themselves, watched over the publick tran-
quillity, and secured obedience to the laws. The
sanguinary punifiments frequent under other
governments were unknown. An admonition
from a Jesuit, a flight mark of infamy, or, on
some singular occasion, a few lashes with a whip,
were ffficient to maintain good order among
these innocent and happy people Y.

BUT even in this meritorious effort of the Evc here

Jesuits for the good of mankind, the genius and ti...n^b'o-
spirit of their order have mingled and are dif- icy of the
cernible. They plainly aimed at eftablilhing in erabblef,
Paraguay an independent empire, subject to the
society alone, and which, by the superior excel-

lence

y HiR. du Paraguay par Pere de Charlevoix, tom ii. 42,
&c. Voyage au Perou par Don G. Juan & D. Ant. de
Ulloa, tom. i. 54o, &c. Par. 4to. 175z.

Boo VI. lence of its confiitution and police, could scarce-
''hY'' ly have failed to extend its dominion over all the

l'4o' southern continent of America. With this view,

in order to prevent the Spaniards or Portuguese
in the adjacent settlements from acquiring any
dangerous influence over the people within the
limits of the province subjec to the society, the
Jesuits endeavoured to inspire the Indians with
hatred and contempt of there nations. They cut
off all intercourse between their fubjecs and the
Spanish or Portuguese settlements. They pro-
hibited any private trader of either nation from
entering their territories. When they were
obliged to admit any person in a publick charac-
ter from the neighbouring governments, they
did not permit him to have any converiation with
their subjects; and no Indian was allowed even
to enter the house where there firangers resided,
unless in the presence of a Jesuit. In order to
render any communication between them as dif-
ficult as possible, they industriously avoided giv-
ing the Indians any knowledge of the Spanish, or
of any other European language; but encouraged
the different tribes, which they had civilized, to
acquire a certain diale&t of the Indian tongue,
and laboured to make that the universal lan-
guage throughout their dominions. As all these
precautions, without military force, would have
been insufficient to have rendered their empire
secure and permanent, they inftru&ed their sub-
jects in the European arts of war. They formed
them into bodies of cavalry and infantry, com-
pletely armed and regularly disciplined. They
provided a great train of artillery, as well as
magazines stored with all the implements of war.
Thus they effablifhed an army so numerous and
well-appointed, as to be formidable in a coun-
try, where a few sickly and ill-difciplined batta-

lions

lions composed all the military force kept on foot BooK Vr.
by the Spaniards or Portuguese z*.

1540o.

THE Jesuits gained no inconsiderable degree of Reafro for

power during the reign of Charles V. who, with si a vinew
his usual sagacity, discerned the dangerous ten- of the g
. r iP . . *' . -i ». . °i . vernmert
dency of the institution, and checked its pro- andprogref
grefs a. But as the order was founded in theoftheorder.
period of which I write the history, and as the
age to which I address this work hath seen its fall,
the view which I have exhibited of the laws and
genius of this formidable body will not, I hope,
be unacceptable to my readers; especially as
one circumstance has enabled me to enter into
this detail with particular advantage. Europe
had observed, for two centuries, the ambition
and power of the order. But while it felt many
fatal effects of there, it could not fully discern
the causes to which they were to be imputed. It
was unacquainted with many of the singular re-
gulations in the political constitution or govern-
ment of the Jesuits, whichformed the enterprizing
spirit of intrigue that diftinguiihed its members,
and elevated the body itself to such a height
of power. It was a fundamental maxim with
the Jesuits, from their first institution, not to
publish the rules of their order. These they
kept concealed as an impenetrable mystery.
They never communicated them to strangers;
nor even to the greater part of their own mem-
bers. They refused to produce them when re-
quired by courts of justice b; and by a strange
solecism in policy, the civil power in different
countries authorized or connived at the efta-
blilhment of an order of men, whose constitution

and

z Voyage de Juan & de Ulloa, tom. i. 549. Recucil des

toutes les Pieces qui ont paru fur les Affaires des Jesuites
en Portugal, tom. i. p. 7, &c.

a Compte par M. de Moncl. p. 312. b Hill. deJef.
tom. iii. 236, &c. Compte par M. de Chalot, p. 38.

BooK VI. and laws were concealed with a solicitude, which
- --' alone was a good reason for having excluded
'540. them. During the prosecutions lately carried

on against them in Portugal and France, the
Jesuits have been so inconsiderate as to produce
the mysterious volumes of their institute. By
the aid of these authentick records, the principles
of their government may be delineated, and the
sources of their power investigated with a degree
of certainty and precision, which, previous to
that event, it was impossible to attainc. But as
I have pointed out the dangerous tendency of
the constitution and spirit of the order with the
freedom becoming an historian, the candour
and impartiality no less requisite in that charac-
ter call on me to add one observation, That no
class of regular clergy in the Romifi church has
been more eminent for decency, and even purity
of manners, than the major part of the order of
Jesuits . The maxims of an intriguing, am-
bitious, interested policy, might influence those
who governed the society, and might even cor-
rupt the heart, and pervert the condu& of some
individuals, while the greater number, engaged
in literary pursuits, or employed in the fun&ions
of religion, was left to the guidance of those
common principles which restrain men from

vice,

c The greater part of my information concerning the go-

vernment and laws of he order of Jesuits, I have derived
fiom the reports of M. de Chalotais and M. de Monclar. I
reit no; my narrative, however, upon the authority even of
there refpetab!e magifirates, and elegant writers, but upon
innumerable passages which they have extraced from the
contiitutions of the order, depofi:ed in their hands. Hof-
pinian, a ProeRlant Divine of Zur;ch, in his Hiforia Je-
fuitrca, printed A. D. 16:9, publi(hed a small part of the
cenaitutions of the Jesuits, of which by some accident he
had got a copy: p. 13-54.
d Sur la deitrut. de: Jef. par M. D'Alembert, p. 5.

vice, and excite them to what is becoming and BooK V.
laudable. The causes which occasioned the ruin '-.
of this mighty body, as well as the circumstances '540+
and effects with which it has been attended in
the different countries of Europe, though ob-
jecs extremely worthy the attention of every in-
telligent observer of human affairs, do not fall
within the period of this history.

No sooner had Charles re-established order in Affairs of

the Low-Countries, than he was obliged to turn Germany.
his attention to the affairs of Germany. The
Protestants pressed him earnestly to appoint that
conference between a select number of the di-
vines of each party, which had been stipulated
in the convention at Francfort. The Pope con-
fidered such an attempt to examine or decide the
points in dispute as derogatory to his right of
being the supreme judge in controversy; and
being convinced that it would either be ineffec-
tual by determining nothing, or prove danger-
ous by determining too much, he employed
every art to prevent the meeting. The Em-
peror, however, finding it more for his interest
to sooth the Germans, than to gratify Paul, paid
little regard to his remonstrances. In adiet held Aconbf-
at Haguenaw, matters were ripened for the con- tween the
ference, In another diet assembled at Worms, PtPte nd
the conference was begun, Melan&hon on the Divines,
one fide, and Eckius on the other, sustaining the ° .5.
principal part in the dispute; but after they had
made some progress, though without conclud-
ing any thing, it was suspended by the Empe-
ror's command, that it might be renewed with
greater solemnity in his own pretence in a diet
summoned to meet at Ratisbon. This assembly ,.
was opened with great pomp, and with a gene-
ral expectation that ts proceedings would be

vigorous

Boor V. vigorous and decisive. By the consent of both

v--'aparties, the Emperor was entrusted with the
'541 power of nominating the persons who should

manage the conference, which it was agreed
1hould be conduted not in the form of a public
disputation, but as a friendly scrutiny of exami-
nation into the articles which had given rife to
the present controversies. He appointed Eckius,
Gropper and Pflug, on the part of the Catholics;
Melan&hon, Bucer, and Piftorius, on that of
the Protestants; all men of-diftinguifhed repu-
tation among their own adherents, and, except
Eckius, all eminent for their moderation, as
well as desirous of peace. As they were about
to begin their consultations, the Emperor put
into their hands a book,'com'pofed, as he said,
by a learned divine in the Low-Countries, with
such extraordinary perspicuity and temper, as,
in his opinion, might go far to unite and'com-
prehend the two contending parties. Gropper,
a canon of Cologne, whom he had named among
the managers of the conference, a man of address
as well as of erudition, was afterwards fufpe&ed
to be the author of this hort treatise. It con-
tained positions with regard to twenty-two of the
chief articles in theology, which included most
of the questions then- agitated in the controversy
between the Lutherans and the church of Rome.
By ranging his fenrimentain a natural order, and
expressing them with great simplicity; by em-
ploying often the very words of scripture, or of
the primitive fathers; by softening the rigour of
some opinions, and explaining away what was
absurd in others; by concessions, now on one
fide, and now on the other; and especially by
hanifhing'as much as p'ffible fcholaftick phrases,
those words and terms of art in controversy,
which serve as badges of diftinAion to the dif-

ferent

ferent fe&s, and for which theologians often con- BooR vr.
tend more fiercely than for opinions themselves ;
he framed his work in fuoh a manner, as pro- '54'
mifed fairer than any thing that had hitherto
been attempted, to compose and to terminate re-
ligious dissensions'.

BUT the attention of the age was turned, with Fruitlef.

such acute observation, towards theological con-
troverfies, that it was not easy to impose on it
by any gloss, how artful or specious soever.
The length and eagerness of the dispute had fe-
parated the contending parties so completely,
and had set their minds at such variance, that
they were not to be reconciled by partial concef-
sions. All the zealous Catholics, particularly
the ecclesiastics who had a feat in the diet, joined
in condemning Gropper's treatise as too favour-
able to the Lutheran opinions, the poison of
which heresy it conveyed, as they pretended,
with greater danger, because it was in some de-
gree disguised. The rigid Protestants, especially
Luther himself, and his patron the Eletor of
Saxony, were for rejecing it as an impious
compound of error and truth, craftily prepared
that it might impose on the weak, the timid, and
the unthinking. But the divines, to whom the ex-
amination of it was committed, entered upon
that business with greater deliberation and tem-
per. As it was more easy in itself, as well as
more consistent with the dignity of the church
to make concessions, and even alterations with re-
gard to speculative opinions, the discussion where-
of is confined chiefly to schools, and which pre-
sent nothing to the people that either strikes their
imagination or affeas their senses, they came to
an accommodation about these without much

labour,
e Goldaft. Conlit. Imper. ii. p. 18z.

BooK V. labour, and even defined the great article con-
'- ~

. cerning justification to their mutual fatisfaeion.
'154' But, when they proceeded to points of jurifdic.

tion, where the interest and authority of the
Roman See were concerned, or to the rites and
forms of external worhip, where every change
that could be made must be publick, and draw
the observation of the people, there the Catho-
licks were altogether untratable; nor could the
church either with safety or with honour abolih
its ancient institutions. All the articles relative
to the power of the Pope, the authority of coun-
cils, the administration of the sacraments, the
worship of faints, and many other particulars did
not, in their nature, admit of any tempera-
ment; so that after labouring long to bring
about an accommodation with refpet to these,
the Emperor found all his endeavours ineffectual.
Being impatient, however, to close the diet, he
at last prevailed on a majority of the members

tectf, of to approve of the following recess; " That the
ihe ''t of articles concerning which the divines had agreed
Rtifiwon i-
f.zor of a in the conference, Ihould be held as points de-
g ...l cided, and be observed inviolably by all; that

the other articles about which they had differed,
should be referred to the determination of a ge-
neral council, or if that could not be obtained, to
a national fynod of Germany; and if it mhould
prove impracticable, likewise, to assemble a
fynod, that a general diet of the Empire should
be called within eighteen months, in order to
give some final judgment upon the whole con-
troverfy; that the Emperor mhould use all his
interest and authority with the Pope, to procure
the meeting either of a general council or fynod;
that, in the mean time, no innovations ihould be
attempted, no endeavours should be employed to
gain proselytes; and neither the revenues of the

church,

church, nor the rights of the monasteries, hould Boor VI.
be invaded" .,-

1541.

ALL the proceedings of this diet, as well as Givesor-

the recess in which they terminated, gave great tPpitb
offence to the Pope. The power which the mdProter-
Germans had assumed, of appointing their own t
divines to examine and determine matters of
controversy, he confidered as a very dangerous
invalion on his rights; the renewing of their
ancient proposal concerning a national fynod,
which had been so often rejected by him and his
predecessors, appeared extremely undutiful; but
the bare mention of allowing a diet, composed
chiefly of laymen, to pass judgment with respect
to articles of faith, was deemed no less criminal
and profane, than the worst of those herefies
which they seemed zealous to suppress. On the
other hand, the Protestants were no less diffatis-
fled with a recess, that considerably abridged the
liberty which they enjoyed at that time. As they Charles
murmured loudly againtt it, Charles, unwilling cpourts th
to leave any feeds of discontent in the Empire,
granted them a private declaration, in the most
ample terms, exempting them from whatever
they thought oppressive or injurious in the recess,
and ascertaining to them the full possession of all
the privileges which they had ever enjoyed .

EXTRAORDINARY as these concessions may Afrarsof

appear, the situation of the Emperor's affairs at Hungar
this juncture made it necessary for him to grant
them. He foresaw a rupture with France to be
not only unavoidable, but near at hand, and durst

not

f Sleidan, 267, &c. Pallav. 1. iv. c. . p. 136. F.

Paul, p. 86. Seckend. 1. iii. 256.

g Sleid. 283. Seckend. 366. Dumont Corps Diplom.
iv. p.ii. p. 210.

Boor VI. not give any such cause of disgust or fear to the

'-- Protestants, as might force them, in felf-defence,
'1'- to court the prote&tion of the French King,

from whom, at present, they were much alien-
ated. The rapid progress of the Turks in Hun-
gary, was a more powerful and present cause of
the moderation which Charles discovered. A
great revolution had happened in that kingdom,
John Zapol Scaepus having choken, s has been
related, rather to possess a tributary kingdom;
than to renounce the royal dignity to which he
had been accustomed, had, by the assistance of
his mighty protecor Solyman, wrested from
Ferdinand a great part of the country, and left
him only the precarious poffefion of the reft.
But being a prince of pacifick qualities, the fre-
quent attempts of Ferdinand, or of his partisans
among the Hungarians, to recover what they
had loft, greatly disquieted him; and the necef-
fity on these occasions, of calling in the Turks,
whom he confidered and felt to be his matters
rather than auxiliaries, was hardly less mortify-
ing. In order, therefore, to avoid these diftref-
fes, as well as to secure quiet and leisure for en-
joying the arts and amusements in which he de-
A. D. 4,. lighted, he secretly came to an agreement with

his competitor, on this condition; That Ferdi-
nand hould acknowledge him as King of Hun-
gary, and leave him, during life, the unmolested
pofleffion of that part of the kingdom now in
his power; but that, upon his demise, the sole
right of the whole hould devolve upon Ferdi-
nand h. As John had never been married, and
was then far advanced in life, the terms of the
contrat seemed very favourable to Ferdinand.
But, oon after, some of the Hungarian nobles,
solicitous to prevent a foreigner from ascending
their throne, prevailed on John to put an end

to
h Iftuanhaffii Hil. Hung. lib. xii. p. 135.

to a long celibacy, by marrying Isabella, the Boo' Vr.
diiughter oif Sigifmond, King of Poland. John "
had the fatisfa&tion, before his death, whi-ch hap- De.''th4fbe
pened within less than a yeai after his marriage,Kingof
to fee a son born to inherit his kingdom; TdHona""7'
him, itholt regarding his treaty with Ferdi-
nand, #hich be eonfidered; ho doubt, as void,
upon an event iot foreeen when it was conclud-
ed; he bequeatlied his crowri i ppointing the
Queen and George Martinuzzi, biihop of V a-
radii, guardians of his son,' and regents of the
kingdom. The greater part of the Hungarians
Immediately ackno*ledged the yoing King; to
*ihoin, In menory of the founder of their io-
narchy, they gave the flame of Stephen i.

FiarlArIsD though extremely difcoiicerted erdinand's

by this bnexpected event; resolved not to aban-obtai the
don the ki.gdom which he had acquired by hisctowu.
compiat With John. He sent ambaffados to'
the Queen to claim poffelfioh; and to offer the
pro*ine of Transylvania as a settlement for her
ton, preparing at the fame time to aftert his
right by fore of arms. But John had combn
mitted the care of his son to petfons, ho had
too much spirit to give up the crown tamely, aid
who possessed abilities sufficient to defend it;
The Queen; t all the address peculiar t her
own sex, added a masculine courage, ambition;
and magnaniimity. Martinuzzi, who had raised ch.ramder
hiifelf from the lowest rank in life to his pre-:Pdpr.
sent dignity, was one of those extraordihary nuzi.
men, who, by the extentas well as variety oftheir
talents, are fitted to a& a superior part in bust-
ling and fatious times: In discharging the
funcions of his ecclesiastical ofice, he put on
the femblarce of an humble and austere fan'it;

VoL. II. K k He

' Jdii Hilt. lib. xxii. p. 39; a. Se.

Boo, Vi. He discovered, in civil tranfa~ons, industry,

- dexterity, and boldness. During war he laid
'541' aside the caflbck, and appeared on horseback

with his fcymitar and buckler, as ative, as of-
tentatious, and as gallant as any of his country-
men. Amidst all there different and contradic-
tory forms which be could aflume, an insatiable
desire of dominion and authority was confpicu-
ous. From such persons it was obvious what
answer Ferdinand had to expe&. He soon per-
ceived that he muff depend on arms alone for
recovering Hungary. Having levied for this
purpose a considerable body of Germans, whom
his partisans among the Hungarians joined with
their vafials, he ordered them to marchinto that
part of the kingdom which adhered to Stephen.
Martinuzzi, unable to make head against such
a powerful army in the field, satisfied himself
with holding out the towns, all of which, efpe-
cially Buda, the place of greatest consequence,
he provided with every thing neceflary for de-
fence; and in the mean time he sent ambassadors

cai i the to Solyman, beseeching him to extend towards
Tarks. the son, the fame Imperial protection which had

so long maintained the father on his throne. The
Sultan, though Ferdinand used his utmost en-
deavours to thwart this negociation, and even
offered to accept of the Hungarian crown on
the fame ignominious condition of paying tri-
bute to the Ottoman Porte, by which John had
held it, saw such profpefts of advantage from
espousing the interest of the young King, that
he instantly promiied him his protection; and
commanding one army to advance forthwith
towards Hungary, he himself followed with an-
other. Meanwhile the Germans, hoping to ter-
minate the war by the redution of a city in
which the King and his mother were hut up,

had

had formed the siege of Buda. Martinuzzi, Boo, VI.
having drawn thither the strength of the Hun.- '-
garian nobility, defended the town with such *541.
courage and skill, as allowed the Turkiih forces
time to come up to its relief. They instantly
attacked the Germans, weakened by fatigue,
difeales, and desertion, and defeated them with
great slaughter k.

SOLYMAN oon after joined his vi&orious Solyman'

troops, and being weary of so many expensive u""
expeditions undertaken in defence of dominions
which were not his own, or being unable to resist
this alluring opportunity of seizing a kingdom,
while possessed by an infant, under the guardian-
ihip of a woman and a priedl, he allowed in-
terested considerations to triumph with too much
facility over the principles of honour and the
Sentiments of humanity. What he planned un-
generoufy, he executed by fraud. Having pre-
vailed on the Queen to fend her son, whom he
pretended to be desirous of feeing, into his
camp, and having at the fame time invited the
chief of the nobility to an entertainment there,
while they, fufpe&ing no treachery, gave them-
selves up to the mirth and jollity of the feast, a
felec band of troops by the Sultan's orders
seized one of the gates of Buda. Being thus
malterof the capital, of the King's person, and
of the leading men among the nobles, he ordered
the Queen, together with her son, to be conducted
toTranfylvania, which province he allotted to
them, and, appointing a Baiha to reside in Buda
with a large body of soldiers, annexed Hungary
to the Ottoman Empire. The tears and com-
plaints of the unhappy Queen had no influence
to change his purpose, nor could Martinuzzi

K k 2 either
k Iuanhaffii Hist. Hung. lib. xit. p. 15o,

BooK vI. either resist his absolute and uncontroulable cort-
'- ~' mand, or prevail on him to recal it'.

ltla d'to BEFolk the account of this violent ufurpatiorl
SoCujy. teached Ferdinand, he was so unlucky as to

have dispatched new ambassadors to olyman
with a frelh representation of his right to the
crown of Hungary, as well as a renewal of his
former overture to hold the kingdom of the
Ottoman Porte, and to pay for it an annual tri-
bute. This ill-timed proposal was rejeced with
scorn. The Sultan elated with success, and
thinking that he might preferibe what terms he
pleased to a Prince who voluntarily proffered
conditions so unbecoming his own dignity, de-
clared that he would not suspend the operations
of war, unless Ferdinand instantly evacuated all
the towns which he still held in Hungary, and
consented to the imposition of a tribute upon
Austria, in order to reimburse the fums which
his presumptuous invasion of Hungary had
obliged the Ottoman Porte to expend in defence
of that kingdom m;

SucH was the state of affairs in Hungary.

As the unfortunate events there had either hap-
pened before the dissolution of the diet at Ra-
tilbon, or were dreaded at that time, Charles
saw the danger of irritating and inflaming the
minds of the Germans, while such a formidable
enemy was ready to break into the Empire; and
perceived that he could not expec any vigorous
assistance, either towards the recovery of Hun-
gary, or the defence of the Austrian frontier, un-
less he courted and satisfied the Protestants. By
the concessions which have been mentioned, he

gained

Iftoanhaffii, lib. xiv. p. 56, Jovii hiftor. lib. xxxir;

p. 2476, &c.
m Iftanhaffii hist. Hung. lib. xiv. p 158.

gained this point, and such liberal supplies both Booc V!.
of men and money were voted for carrying on
the war against the Turks, as left him under lit- 1541'
tie anxiety about the security of Germany dur-
ing next campaign D,

IMMEDIATELY upon the conclusion of the diet, Emperor vi.

the Emperor set out for Italy. As he paffedfi"'laly
through Lucca he had a flort interview with
the Pope; but nothing could be concluded, con-
cerning the proper method of comnpofing the
religious disputes in Germany, between two
rinces, whose views and interest with regard to
that matter were at this junture so opposite.
The Pope's endeavours to remove the causes of
discord between Charles and Francis, and to
extinguish those mutual animofities which.threat-
ened to break out suddenly into open hoffility,
were not more successful.

THE Emperor's thoughts were bent so entire- Hit epedi-

ly, at that time, on the great enterprize which ai'id
he had concerted against Algiers, that he liften- motive of
ed with little attention to the Pope's schemes or"'
overtures, and hastened tojoin his army and fleet 0.

ALGIERS still continued in that tate of de-

pendence on the Turkish empire to which Bar-
baroffa had fubje&ted it. Ever since he, as cap-
tain Bafha, commanded the Ottoman fleet, Al-
giers had been governed by Hafcen-Aga, a re-
negado eunuch, who, by pasing through every
station in the Corsair's service, had acquired such
experience in war, that he was well fitted for a
station which required a man of tried and daring
courage. Hafcen, in order to hew how well he
deserved that dignity, carried on his piratical
depredations against the Christian States with

amazing
Sleid. 283. * Sandoy. hillor. tor. ii. 289.

Boon VI. amazing a&tivity, and out did, if polible, Bar-

c--i' baroffa himself in boldness and cruelty. The
S4+'1 commerce of the Mediterranean was greatlyin-

terrupted by his cruilers, and such frequent
alarms given to the coasts of Spaip, that there
was a necessity of ere&ing watch-towers at pro-
per distances, and of keeping guards constantly
on foot, in order to descry the approach of his
squadrons, and to prote~ the inhabitants from
their deicnts P. Of this the Emperor's fubjets
had long complained, representing it as an en-
terprife corresponding to his power, and becom-
ing his humanity, to reduce Algiers, which,
since the conquest of Tunis, was the common
receptacle of all the free-booters; and to exter-
minate that lawless race, the implacable ene-
mies of the Christian name. Moved partly by
their entreaties, and partly 'allured by the hope
of adding to the glory which he had acquired
by his las expedition into Africa, Charles, be-
fore he f Madrid, in his way to the Low-Coun-
tries, had issued orders both in Spain and Italy
to prepare a fleet and army for this purpose.
No change in circumftanccs, since that time,
could'divert him from this resolution, or prevail
on -him to turn his arms towards Hungary;
though the fucccfs of the Turks in that country
seemcd more immediatli to require his presence
there; though many of his mot faithful adhe-
rents in Germany'urged that the defence of the
Empire ought to be his first and peculiar care;
though such as bore him no good-will ridiculed
his preposterous condu& in flying from an ene-
my almost at hand, that he might go in quest of
a remote and more ignoble foe. But to- attack
the Sultan in Hungary, how splendid soever that
measure might appear, was an undertaking which
exced his power, and was not consistent with

his
P Jovii hil 1. al. p. 266.

his interest. To draw troops out of Spain or Boo V.
Italy, to march them into a country fQ distant '--'
as Hungary, to provide the vast apparatus ne- s
ceffary for transporting thither the artillery, am-
munition, and baggage of a regular army, and
to push the war in that quarter, where it could
iot be brought to any issue during several cam-
paigns, were undertakings so expensive and un-
wieldy as did not correspond with the low con-
dition of the Emperor's 'treasury. While his
principal force was thus employed, his domi-
nions in Italy and the Low-Counltries must have
lain open to the French King, who would hot
have dllowed such a favourable opportunity of
attacking them to go unimproved. Whereas the
African expedition, the preparations for which
were already finified, and almost the whole ex-
pence of it defrayed, would depend upon a
single effort, and besides the security and fa.
tis faion which the success of it muff give
his subject, would detain him so short a
space, that Francis could hardly take advantage
of his absence, to invade his dominions i Eu-
rope.

ON all these accounts, Charles adhered to his His peps.

first plan, and with such determined obftinacy,"ti'"'
that he paid no regard to the Pope, who advised,
or to Andrew Doria, who conjured him not to
expose his whole armament to almost unavoid-
able deftrution, by venturing at such an advan-
ced season of the year, and while the autumnal
winds were so violent, to approach the danger-
ous coast of Algiers. Having embarked on
board Doria's gallies at Porto-Venere, in the
Genoese territories, he soon found that this ex-
perienced sailor had not judged wrong concern-
ing the element with which he.was so well ac-

quainted;

Book VI. quainted; for such a storm arose that it was wir1
"'--*^* the utmost difficulty adi danger he reached Sr.

$+ ' dinia, the place of general rendezvous. But a

his courage was undatuntedaldjhs temper
often inflexible, neither the remtqnftrances of tfi
Pope and Doria, nor the danier to which h~
had already been exposed by 4ifragrding them
had any other effe than to c6nrd him in hi
faral reblution. .The frc' 'inded,' wh i li
h1ad colaed was ch as, m t inpired
Prnce Ifs advenyurous, and Ie cndent in his
own tchenes, wth he most fangume hopes o
fucce&- It conifin of twenty thouiad soo
and two thouisnd hoie, Spaniards, taltains' @
Germans, mnoftly veteraps,' togeter with thre
tbuand volunteers the lower of tie $panib
and Italian nobility, fond of pang court to tti
Emperor by attening him n favourite e
pediion, 'and eager to hare i the glory which
they believed he was going to reap; to eie
were added a thouilnd soldiers lnt' rom Maia
by tihe order of St. John, led by an hundred 'of
its mos gallant Knights.
Ludsin THE voyage, from Majorca to the African

coait, was not leds tedious, or full of hazard,
than that which he had just finiflied. 'W henih.
approached the land, the roll of the tea, and
vFbemence of the winds, would not permit th
troops to disembark. But at lalt, the Emperor,
seizing a favourable opportunity,. landed tiem
without opposition, not far from Algiers, ani
iDtprediately advanced towards the town.' To.
oppose this mighty army, Hafcen' had onlt
eight hundred Turks, and five thousand Moork
partly natives of Africa, and partly refugees
from Granada. He returned, however, a fierce
and haughty answer when fummnoned to furren-

der.

der. But, with such a handful of foldicrs, nei RBoot vi.
ther his desperate courage, nor consummate skill -
in war, could .have long resifted forces superior 541'
to thofi which had defeated Barbarofla at the
bead of sixty thousand men, and which had re-
duced Tuni, in spite of all his endeavours t
save it.

BUT ho far soever the Emperor might think The dirf-

himself :beyond the reach of any danger from the b-Id big
enemy, he was suddenly exposed to a more dread- amy,
ful calamity, and one against which human pru-
dence and human efforts availed nothing. On
the secnd day after his landing, and before he
had time for any thing but to disperse some light
armed Arabs, who molested his troops on their
march, the clouds began to gather, and the hea,
vens to appear. with a fierce and threatening as-
pect. Towards evening, rain began to fall, ac-
companied with violent wind, and the rage of the
tempest increasing during the night, the soldiers
who had brought nothing aihore but their arms,
remained exposed to all its fury, without tents,
qr heiter, or cover of any kind. The ground
was soon so wet that they could not lie down on
it ; their camp being in a low situation was over-
flowed with water, and they funk at every Rsep
to the ankles in mud; while the wind blew.with
such impetuodty, that, to-prevent their falling,
they were obliged to thrust their spears into the
ground, and to support themselves by taking
hold of them. Hafcen was too vigilant an officer
to allow an enemy in such distress to remain un-

olefted. About the dawn .f morning, be al-
lied out with. soldiers, who, having beep screen-
ed from the storm under their own roofs, were
freh and vigorous.. A body of Italians who
were Rationed nearet the city, dispirited and be-

numbed

Boor VL numbed with cold, fled at the approach of the

Turks. The troops at the post behind them,
'54' discovered greater courage but as the rain had

extinguished their matches and wet their powder,
their mukets were useless, and having scarcely
strength to handle their other arms, they were
soon thrown into confusion. Almost the whole
army, with the Emperor himself in person, was
obliged to advance, before the enemy could be
repulsed, who, after spreading such general con-
fcrnation, and killing a considerable number of
men, retired at last in good order.
ad feet. BUT all feeling or remembrance of this loss

and danger were quickly obliterated by a more
dreadful as well as affiaing fpecacle. It was
now broad day; the hurricane had abated no-
thing of its violence, and the fca appeared agi-
tated with all the rage of which that deftrutive
element is capable; all the hips, on which alone
the whole army knew that their safety and sub-
fiftence depended, were seen driven from their
anchors, ome dahing against each other, some
beat to pieces on the rocks, many forced aihore,
and not a few finking in the waves. In less than
an hour, fifteen hips of war, and an hundred
and forty transports with eight thousand men.
perilhed; and such of the unhappy crews as
escaped the fury of the Lea, were murdered with-
out mercy, by the Arabs, as soon as they reached
land. The Emperor stood in silent anguish and
aftonilhment beholding this fatal event, which
at once blasted all his hopes of success, and bu-
ried in the depths the vast stores which. he had
provided, as well for annoying the enemy, as for
fubfiting his own troops. He had it not in his
power to afford them any other afliftance or re-
lief, than by fending some troops to drive away

the

the Arabs, and thus delivering a few who were Boos V.
so fortunate as to get ahore from the cruel fate -'
which their companions had met with. At last '54'
the wind began to fall, and to give some hopes
that as many hips might escape, as to save the
army from perishing by famine, and transport
them back to Europe. But these were only
hopes; the approach of evening covered the lea
with darkness; and it being impofible for the
officers aboard the ihips which had outlived the
torm, to fend any intelligence to their compa-
nions who were ahore, they remained'during
the night in all the anguish of fufpence and un-
certainty. Next day, a boat dispatched by Doria
made hist to reach land, with information, that
having weathered out the storm, to which, du-
ring fifty years knowledge of the ea, he had
never seen any equal in fierceness and horror, he
had found it necessary to bear away with his
shattered ships to Cape Metafuz. He advised
the Emperor, as the face of the sky was fill
lowering and tempestuous, to march with all
speed to that place, where the troops could re-
embark with greater cafe.

WHATEVER comfort this intelligence afford- Obliged

ed Charles, from being assured that part of"'""
his. fleet had escaped, was balanced by the new
cares and perplexity in which it involved him
with regard to his army. Metafuz was at least
three days march from his present camp; all
the provisions which he had brought ahore at
his first landing were now consumed; his fol-
diers, worn out with fatigue, were hardly able
for such a journey, even in a friendly country;
and being dispirited by a succession of hardships,
which vitory itself would scarce have rendered
tolerable, they were in no condition to undergo

new

BooK VI new toils. But the situation of the army was
'--' such, as allowed not one moment for delibera-
1'41s tion, nor left it in the least doubtful what to

choose. They were ordered instantly to march,
the wounded, the ick and the feeble being
placed in the center; such as seemed most vi.
gorous were stationed m the front and rear,
Then the fad effets of what they had suffered
began to appear more manifestly than ever, and
new calamities were added to all those which
they had already endured. Some could scarcely
bear the weight of their arms; others, spent
with the toil of forcing their way through deep
and almost impaflible roads, funk down and
died; many perished by famine, as the whole
army subsisted chiefly on roots and berries, or
the flesh of horses, killed by the Emperor's or,
der, and distributed among the several batta-
lions; many were drowned in brooks, which
were fwoln so much by the extensive rains, that
in passing them they waded up to the chin not
a few were killed by the enemy, who, during the
greatest part of their retreat, alarmed, harassed,
and annoyed them night and day. At last they
arrived at Metafuz and the weather being now
so calm as to restore their communication with
the fleet, they were supplied with plenty of pro-'
visions, and cheered with the profpet of safety.

His fort- DURING this dreadful series of calamities, the
tmid. Emperor discovered great qualities, many of

which an almost uninterrupted flow of prosperity
had hitherto afforded him no opportunity of
displaying. He appeared conspicuous for firm-
ness and constancy of spirit, for magnanimity,
fortitude, humanity, and compassion. He en-
dured as great hardships as the meanef soldier;
he exposed his own person wherever danger

threatened;

threatened; he encouraged the defponding;BooK VI.
visited the sick and wounded; and animated all '"
by his words and example. When the army em- 1s41.
barked, he was among the last who left the
shore, although a body of Arabs hovered at no
great diflance, ready to fall on the rear. By
these virtues, Charles atoned, in ome degree,
for his obftinaty and presumption in undertak-
ing an expedition so fatal to his subjects

THE calamities which attended this nfor- eturnsto

tunate enterprize did not end here; for no sooner EP'rop
were the forces got on board, than a new storm
arising, though less furious than the former, scat-
tered the fleet, and obliged them, separately,
to make towards such ports in Spain or Italy as
they could first reach; thus spreading the ac-
count of their disasters, with all the circum-
fiances of aggravation and horror, which their
fear or fancy suggested. The Emperor himself,
after escaping great dangers, and being forced
into the port of Bugia in Africa, where he was Decem. .
obliged by contrary winds to remain several
weeks, arrived at last in Spain, in a condition
very different from that in which he had return-
ed from his former expedition against the In-
fidels .

z Catol. V. Expeditio ad Argyriam per Nicolaum Villag-

nonem Equitem Rhodium ap Scardium, v. ii. 365. Jovii
His. 1. xl. p. 269, &c Vera y Zuniga vida de Carlos V.
p. 83. Sandov. Hiftor. ii. 299, &c.

END OF VOL. II.
