A~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~

(~~~~~~~~~~~~/I //~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~

/~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~
~~,~.rHEM i

THE
H I S T O K Y

0 F
A MERI A.

V O L, II,

THE
H I S T O R Y

O F
AMERIC A.

By WILLIAM ROBERTSON, D.D.
PRINCIPAL OF THE UNIVERSITY OF EDINBURGH,

AND HISTORIOGRAPHER TO HIS MAJESTY FOR SCOTLAND.

VOLUME THE SECOND.

D U B L IN:
Printed for Messrs. PRICE, WHITESTONE, W. WATSON, CORCORANS

R. CROSS, SLEATER, SHEPPARD, CHAMBERLAINE, POTTS,J. HOEY,

FITZSIMONS, WILLIAMS, E. LYNCH, S. WATSON, W. COLLES,

W. WILSON, MONCRIEFFE, WALKER, EXSHAW, M. HAY,

ARMITAGE, PORTER, HALLHEAD, T. STEWART, FLIN,

FAULKNER, BURNET, JENKIN, MILLS, BEATTYj

SPOTSWOOD, GILBERT, VALLANCE, P. WILSON,

R. STEWART, P. HOEY, WOGAN, E. CROSS,

MACELRATH, HIOLEY, WHITE, KIDI,

GRUEBER, HILLARY, M'KENLY,

andMAGEE. M, DCC, LXXVIs,

aid

~~~~~ ~ ~ ~ ~ ~ ~ ~

0*~~~~~~~~
iii TIU Irpuifo li

# BOOK IV.

1T R E
HI STORY

o F
A M E R I C A.

B O K IV.

TW E NTY-S IX years had now elapsed since B OO K
Columbus conducted the people of Europe to the, IV.
New World. During that period the Spaniards t an'

·. .~~~~~ ~ °

...

* ,r . What parts

had made great progress in exploring its various f America
regions. They had visited all the ifiands scattered ere then

known.

in different clutters through that part of the ocean
which flows in between North and South America.
They had failed along the eastern coast of the con-
tinent from the river de la Plata to the bottom of
the Mexican gulf, and had found that it Wretched
without interruption through this vast portion of the
globe. They had discovered the great Southern
Ocean, which opened new prospects in that quarter.
They had acquired some knowledge of the coast of
Florida, which led them to observe the continent
as it extended in an opposite direction; and though
they pushed their discoveries no farther towards the
north, other nations had visited those parts which

VOL. I. B they

B o o K they neglected. The English, in a voyage, the

IV. motives and success of which shall be related in
'"V zanother part of this History, had failed along the

coast of America from Labrador to the confines of
Florida; and the Portuguese, in quest of a shorter
passage to the East Indies, had ventured into the
northern seas, and viewed the fame regions a. Thus,
at the period where I have chosen to take a view of
the state of the New World, its extent was known
almost from its northern extremity to thirty-five
degrees south of the equator. The countries which
itretch from thence to the southern boundary of
America, the great empire of Peru, and the exten-
five dominions subjet to the sovereigns of Mexico,
were fill undiscovered.

The vast WHEN we contemplate the New World, the first
extent of circumstance that strikes us is its immense extent.
World. It was not a small portion of the earth, so inconfi-

derable that it might have escaped the observation
or research of former ages, which Columbus disco-
vered. He made known a new hemisphere, of
greater extent than either Europe, or Asia, or Afri-
ca, the three noted divisions of the ancient conti-
nent, and not much inferior in dimensions to a
third part of the habitable globe.

AMERICA is remarkable not only for its magni-

tude, but for its position. It stretches from the
northern polar circle to a high southern latitude,
above fifteen hundred miles beyond the farthest ex-
tremity of the old continent on that fide of the line.
A country of such extent passes through all the cli-
mates capable of becoming the habitation of man,
and fit for yielding the various productions peculiar
either to the temperate or to the torrid regions of
the earth.

a Herrera, dec. I. lib. vi. c. 16.

NEXT

NEXT to the extent of the New World, the 1 o o K0

grandeur of the objects which it presents to view IV.
is most apt to firike the eye of an observer. " b
Nature seems here to have carried on her ope- jeas it pre-
rations with a bolder hand, and to have diftin- fen to'
guifhed the features of this country by a pecu-
liar magnificence. The mountains of America itsmduin
are much superior in height to those in the othertains
divisions of the globe. Even the plain of Quito,
which may be confidered as the base of the Andes,,
is elevated farther above the sea than the top of
the Pyrenees. This fiupendous ridge of the An-
des, no less remarkable for extent than elevationi
rifes in different places more than one-third above
the Pike of Teneriffe, the highert land in the an-
cient hemisphere. The Andes may literally be
said to hide their heads in the clouds; the florms
often roll, and the thunder burfis below their fum-
mits, which, though exposed to the rays of the furl
in the centre of the torrid zone, are covered with
everlafling snows b

FROM those lofty mountains. descend rivers pro- riveii

portionally large, with which the streams in the
ancient continent are not to be compared, either
for length of course,. or the vast body of water
which they roll towards the ocean; The Marag-
non, the Orinoco, the Plata, in South America,
the Miflifippi and St. Laurence in North America,
flow in such spacious channels, that, long before
ihey feel the influence of the tide, they resemble
arms of the sea rather than rivers of fresh water c;

THE lakes of the New World are no less con-iake;.

fpicuous for grandeur than its mountains and rivers.
There is nothing in other parts of the globe which

b See NOTE I. . See NOTE II.

B 2 refembie~

0 oo K resembles the prodigious chain of lakes in Nortf
IV. America. They may properly be termed inland'
·Y seas of fresh water ; and even those of the second

or third class in magnitude, are of larger circuit
than the greatest lake of the ancient continent.

Jts form fa- THE New World is of a form extremely fa-,
ommerc, vourable to commercial intercourse. When a con-

tinent, like Africa, is compored of one vast solid
mnafs, unbroken by arms of the sea: penetrating
into its interior parts, with few large rivers, and
those at a considerable diitance from each other,
the greater part of it seems defined to remain for
ever uncivilized, and to be debarred from any
a'tive or enlarged communiication with the reft
of mankind. When, like Europe, a continent is
opened by inlets of the ocean of vast extent, such
as the Mediterranean and Baltic; or when, like
Afiag. its coast is broken by deep bays advancing
far into the country, such as the Black Sea, the
gulfs of Arabia, of Persia, of Bengal, of Siam,
and of Leotang; when the surrounding seas are
filled with- large and fertile islands, and the. conti-
nent itself watered with a variety of navigable
rivers,' those regions may be said to poisess what-
ever can facilitate the progress of their inhabitants
ia commerce and improvement. In all there re-
fpets America may bear a comparison: with the
other quarters of the globe. The gulf of Mexico,
which flows in between! North and South America,
may be confidered as a Mediterranean sea, which
opens a maritime commerce with all the :fertile
countries by which it is encircled. The. islands
scattered in it are inferior only to those in the In-
dian Archipelago, in number, in magnitude, and.
in value. As we stretch along the northern divi-
sion of the American.hemifphere, the Bay of Che-
fapeak presents a spacious inlet, which conduds

the

she navigator far into the interior parts of provin- B O O K
ces no less fertile than extensive; and if ever the IV.
progress of culture and population shall mitigate
the extreme rigour of the climate in the more
northern diftrits of America, Hudson's Bay may
become as subservient to commercial intercourse in
'that quarter of the globe, as the Baltic is in Eu-
rope. The other great portion of the New World
is encompassed on every fide by the sea, except
one narrow -neok, which separates the Atlantic
from the Pacific Ocean; and though it be not
opened by spacious .bays or arms of the sea, its
interior parts are rendered accessible by a number
of large rivers, fed by so many auxiliary streams,
flowing in such various direEtions, that, without
any aid from the hand of industry and art, an in-
land'navigation may be carried on through all the
provinces from the river de la Plata to the gulf of
Paria. Nor is this bounty of nature confined to
the southern division of America; its northern con-
tinent abounds no less in rivers which are navigable
.almost to their sources, and by its immense chain
of lakes provision is made for an inland communi-
cation, more extensive and commodious than in
any quarter of the globe. The countries firetch-
ing from the gulf of Darien on one fide, to that of
California on the other, which form the chain that
binds the two parts of the American continent to-
gether, are not destitute of peculiar advantages,
Their coall on one fide is waffled by the Atlantic
Ocean, on the other by the Pacific. Some of
their rivers flow into the former, some into the
latter, and secure to them all the commercial be-
nefits that may result from a communication with
both.

BUT what most distinguishes America from other Tempera.
parts of the earth, is the peculiar temperature of its tur f it

climate,

B O O K climate, and the different laws to which it is sub-.

IV. jeA witb refpeat to the difiribution of heat and
.... cold. We cannot determine precisely the portion

of heat felt in any part of the globe, merely by
measuring its distance from the equator. The cli-
mate of a country is affected, in some degree, by
its elevation above the sea, by the extent of conti--
nent, by the nature of the foil, the height of adja-.
cent mountains, and many other circumfiances.
The influence of these, however, is, from various
causes, less considerable in the greater part of the
ancient continent; and from knowing the position
of any country there, we can pronounce with more '
certainty what will be the warmth of its climate, .
and the nature of its productions.
predonmi THE maxims which are founded upon obferva-.

dc of tion of our hemisphere will not apply to the other.

There, cold predominates. The rigour of the fri-
gid zone extends over half of that which should be
temperate by its position. Countries where the
grape and the fig should ripen, are buried under
iihow one half of the year; and lands situated in
the fame parallel with the most fertile and best cul-
tivated provinces in Europe, are chilled with per-
petual frofis, which almoif destroy the power of
vegetation d. As we advance to those parts of
America which lie in the fame parallel with pro-
vinces of Asia and Africa, blessed with an uniform
enjoyment of such genial warmth as is most
friendly to life and vegetati6n,'the' dominion of
cold continues to be felt, and winter, though dur-
ing a short period, often reigns with extreme fe..
verity. If we proceed along the American conti-
nent into the torrid zone, we shall find the cold
prevalent in the New World extending itself also

d See NOTE III.

to

to this region of the globe, and mitigating the B o o K
excess of its fervour. While the negro on the. lV
coast of Africa is scorched with unremitting heat,
the inhabitant of Peru breathes an air equally mild
and temperate, and is perpetually shaded under a
canopy of grey clouds, which intercepts the fierce
beams of the fun, without obftru&ing his friendly
influence e. Along the eastern coast of America,
the climate, though more similar to that of the
torrid zone in other'parts of the earth, is neverthe-
less considerably milder than in those countries of
Asia and Africa which lie in the fame latitude. If
from the southern tropic we continue our progress
to the extremity of the American continent, we
meet with frozen seas, and countries horrid, barren,
and scarcely habitable for cold, sooner than in the
north f.

VARIOUS causes combine in rendering the cli- caufesof

mate of America so extremely different from that this
of the ancient continent. Though the utmost
extent of America towards the north be not yet
discovered, we know that it advances nearer to the
pole than either Europe or Asia. The latter have
large seas to the north, which are open during part
of the year; and even when covered with ice, the
wind that blows over them is less intensely cold
than that which blows over land in the fame high
latitudes. But in America the land stretches from
the river St. Laurence towards the pole, and
spreads out immensely to the weft. A chain of
enormous mountains, covered with snow and ice,
runs through all this dreary region. The wind,

e Voyage de Ulloa, ton. i, p. 453. Anson's Voyage,
p. 184.

f Anson's Voyage, p. 74. ; and Voyage de Quiros, chez

Hist. Gen. des Voyages, tom. xiv. p. 83. Richard Hifl.
Natur. de PAir, ii. 305, &c.

in

B 0 0 K in pafling over such an extent of high and frozen

IV. land, becomes so impregnated with cold, that it

acquires a piercing keenness, which it retains in its
progress through warmer climates, and is not en-
tirely mitigated until it reach the Gulf of Mexico.
Over all the continent of North America, a north-
westerly wind and excessive cold are synonymous
terms. Even in the most sultry weather, the mo-
ment that the wind veers to that quarter, its pene-
trating influence is felt in a transition from heat to
cold, no less violent than sudden. To this pow-
erful cause we may ascribe the extraordinary domi-
nion of cold, and its violent inroads into the
southern provinces in that part of the globe g.

OTHER causes, no less remarkable, diminish the

a&ive power of heat in those parts of the Ame-
rican continent which lie between the tropics. In
all that portion of the globe, the wind blows in an
invariable direation from east to weft. As this
wind holds its co:rse across the ancient continent,
it arrives at the countries which firetch along the
wefiern shore of Africa, inflamed with all the fiery
particles which it hath collected from the sultry
plains of Asia, and the burning sands in the Afri-
can defarts. The coast of Africa is, accordingly,
the region of the earth which feels the most fervent
heat, and is exposed to the unmitigated ardour of
the torrid zone. But this fame wind which brings
such an acceflion of warmth to the countries lying
between the river of Senegal and Cafraria, traverses
the Atlantic Ocean before it reaches the American
shore. It is cooled in its passage over this vait
body of water, and is felt as a refreshing gale along
the coasts of Brasil h, and Guiana, rendering these

g Charlevoix Hill. de Nov. Fr. iii. 165. Hist. generals
Voyages, tom. xv. 215, &c.

h See NOTE IV.

countries.

countries, though among the warmest in America, B o o K
temperate, when compared with those which lie- IV.
opposite to them in Africa'. As this wind ad-', -'·
yances in its course across America, it meets with ;
immense plains, covered with impenetrable forests,
or occupied by large rivers, marshes, and stag-
nating waters, where it can recover no confider-
able degree of heat. At length it arrives at the
Andes, which run from north to south through the
whole continent. In pasing over their elevated
and frozen summits, it is so thoroughly cooled,
that the greater part of the countries beyond them
hardly feel the ardour to which they seem exposed
by their situation k. In the other provinces of A-
merica, from Tierra Firm' westward to the Mex-
ican empire, the heat of the climate is tempered,
in some places, by the elevation of the land above
the sea, in others, by their extraordinary humidity,
and in all, by'the enormous mountains scattered
over this tradt. The islands of America in the
Torrid Zone are either small or mountainous, and
are fanned alternately by refreshing sea and land
breezes.

THE causes of the extraordinary cold towards

the southern limits of America, and in the seas be-
yond it, cannot be ascertained in a manner equally
satisfying. It was long supposed that a vast con-
tinent, difiinguifhed by the name of Terra dufJra-
lis Incognita, lay between the southern extremity of
America and the Antarctic pole. The fame prin-
ciples which account for the extraordinary degree
of cold in the northern regions of America, were
employed in order to explain that which is felt at

1 See NOTE V.
i AcofRa Hist. Novi Orbis, lib. ii. c. ii. Buffon Hil.

Naturelle, &c. tom. ii. 512, &c.ix. 107, &c. Osborn's Col-
let. of Voyages, ii. p. 868.

Cape

B O O K Cape Horn and the adjacent countries. The im-

IV. mense extent of the southern continent, and the
'VJ large rivers which it poured into the ocean, were

mentioned and admitted by philosophers as causes
sufficient to occasion the unusual sensation of cold,
and the frill more uncommon appearances of frozen
seas in that region of the globe. But the imagin-
ary continent to which such influence was ascribed,
having been searched for in vain, and the space
which it was supposed to occupy having been
found to be an open sea, new conjectures must be
formed with respect to the causes of a temperatureof
climate, so extremely different from that which we
experience in countries removed at the fame dif-
tance from the opposite pole 1.

Condition AFTER contemplating those permanent and cha-
when first
dieoviered. raateriftic qualities of the American continent,

which arise from the peculiarity of its situation, and
the disposition of its parts, the next objec that
merits attention is its condition when first disco-
vered, as far as that depended upon the industry
and operations of man. The effets of human in-
genuity and labour are more extensive and confi-
derable, than even our own vanity is apt at first to
imagine. WVhen we survey the face of the habitable
globe, no small part of that fertility and beauty,
which we ascribe to the hand of Nature, is the work
of man. His efforts, when continued through a
fucceflion of ages, change the appearance and im-
prove the qualities of the earth. As a great part
of the ancient continent has long been occupied
by nations far advanced in arts and indufiry, our
eye is accustomed to view the earth in that form
which it assumes when rendered fit to be the refi-
dence of a numerous race of men, and to supply
them with nourishment.

See NOTE VI.

BUT

BUT in the New World; the fiate of mankind B O O K

was ruder, and the aspea of Nature extremely dif-. IV.
ferent. Throughout all its vast regions, there were Rud and
only two monarchies remarkable for extent of ter-uncultivat-
ritory, or distinguished by any progress in im- ed
provement. The reft of this continent was pof-
sessed by small independent tribes, destitute of arts
and industry, and neither capable to corre&t the
defecs, nor desirous to meliorate the condition of
that part of the earth allotted to them for their ha-
bitation. Countries, occupied by such people, were
almost in the fame state as if they had been without
inhabitants. Immense forests covered a great part
of the uncultivated earth ; and as the hand of in-
duftry had not taught the rivers to run in a proper
channel, or drained off the stagnating water, many
of the most fertile plains were overflowed with in-
undations, or converted into marshes. In the south-
ern provinces, where the warmth of the fun, the
moisture of the climate, and the fertility of the foil,
combine in calling forth the mot- vigorous powers
of vegetation, the woods are so choked with its
rank luxuriance, as to be almost impervious, and
the surface of the ground is hid from the eye under
a thick covering of shrubs and herbs and weeds.
In this slate of wild unaflifted nature, a great part
of the large provinces in South America, which
extend from the bottom of the Andes to the sea,
itill remain. The European colonies have cleared
and cultivated a few spots along the coast, but the
original inabitants, as rude and indolent as ever,
have done nothing to open or improve a country,
poffefling almost every advantage of situation and
climate. As we advance towards the northern
provinces of America, Nature continues to wear
the fame uncultivated aspei, and in proportion as
the'rigour of the climate increases, appears more
desolate and horrid. There, the forests, though not

encumbered

B O O K encumbered with the fame exuberance of vegeta.

IV. tion, are of equal extent; prodigious marshes over-
-'.~' spread the plains, and few marks appear of human

activity in any attempt to cultivate or embellish the
earth. No wonder that the colonies sent from Eu-
rope were astonished at their first entrance into the
New World. It appeared to them waste, solitary,
and uninviting. When the Engliffi began to fettle
in America, they termed the countries of which
they took poffeflion, T7he Wilderness. Nothing but
their eager expectation of finding mines of gold,
could have induced the Spaniards to penetrate
through the woods and marshes of America, where,
at every ftep, they observed the extreme difference
between the uncultivated face of Nature, and that
which it acquires under the forming hand of in--
duftry and art m.

Unwhole. THE labour and operations of man not only im-
iom.' prove and embellish the earth, but render it more

wholesome, and friendly to life. When any region
lies negleted and destitute of cultivation, the air
tfagnates in the woods, putrid exhalations arise from
the waters; the surface of the earth, loaded with
rank vegetation, feels not the purifying influence
of the fun ; the malignity of the distempers natural
to the climate increases, and new maladies no less
noxious are engendered. Accordingly, all the pro-
vinces of America, when first discovered, were
found to be remarkably unhealthy. This the Spa-
niards experienced in every expedition into the
New World, whether destined for conquest or set-
tlement. Though by the natural constitution of
their bodies, their habitual temperance, and the
persevering vigour of their minds, they were as
mnuch formed as any people in Europe for active

" See NOTE VII.

service

service in a sultry climate, they felt severely the B O O K
fatal and pernicious qualities of those uncultivated IV.
regions through which they marched, or where they
endeavoured to plant colonies. Great numbers
were cut off by the unknown and violent diseases
with which they were infected. Such as survived
the defirudive rage of those maladies, were not ex-
empted from the noxious effets of the climate.
They returned to Europe, according to the de-
scription of the early Spanish historians, feeble,
emaciated, with languid looks, and complexions of
such a sickly yellow colour,! as indicated the un-
wholesome temperature of the countries where they
had resided. . :'

THE uncultivated fiat.of the New World af-its animals.

feted not only the temperature of the air, but the
qualities of its productions. The principle of life
seems to haye. been less ative and vigorous there,
than in the anicient continent, Notwithstanding
the vast extent of America,' and the variety of its
climates, th -'different fpecjes of animals peculiar
to it are much'fewer in proportion, than those of
the other, .hmijfphere. In the islands, there were
only four kinams ,'6f quadrupeds known, the largest
of which dd.,notiexceed;- e. size of'a rabbit. On
the contineh t.thevariety was greater, and though
the individuals .ps each dind coul'd not fail of multi-
plying exceedt'igi when almobft unmolested by
men, who were.inither so nume:ous, nor so united
in society, as to:'biormidable'enemies, to the ani-
mal creation, the: number.i' of. dfitimnt .species must
fiill be confidered. as extremoly small. Of two
hundred different kinds of animals spread over the
face of the earth, ohty about one-third existed in
America, at the time of its discovery 0. Nature was

n Gomara Hifl. . 20. 22. 'Oviedo Hist. lib. ii..c. 3.
lib. v. c. to. P. Mart. Epilt. 545 . Deead. p. 176.

o Buffon Hilt. Naturelle, tom. ix. p. 86.

not

B 0 K not only less prolific in the New World, but ihe

Iv. appears likewise to have been less vigorous in her
tJ productions. The animals originally belonging to

this quarter of the globe appear to be of an inferior
race, neither ib robust, nor so fierce, as those of
the other continent. America gives birth to no
creature of such bulk as to be compared with the
elephant or rhinoceros, or that equals the lion and
tyger in strength and ferocity P. The I'apyr of
Brasil, the quadruped of the firit magnitude in the
New World, is not larger than a calf of fix months
old. The Puma and Jaguar, its fiercest beasts of
prey, which the Europeans have inaccurately deno-
minated lions and tygers, possess neither the un-
daunted courage of the former, nor the ravenous
cruelty of the latter q. They are inactive and ti-
mid, hardly formidable to man, and often turn
their backs upon the least appearance of refiniance r.
The fame qualities in the climate of America which
stinted the growth, and enfeebled the spirit, of its
native animals, have proved pernicious to such as
have migrated into it voluntarily from the other
continent, or have been transported thither by the
Europeans -. The bears, the wolves, the deer of
America, are not equal in size to those of the Old
World t. Most of the domestic animals, with which
the Europeans itored the provinces wherein they
fettled, have degenerated with refpea either to
bulk or quality, in a country whose temperature

P See NOTE VIII.
q Buffon Hill. Natur. tom. ix. p. 87. Margravii Hill. Nat.
Brasil, p. 229.

r Buffon Hilt. Natur. ix. 13. 203. Acofta Hill. lib. iv.

c. 34. Pifonis Hill. p. 6. Herrera, dec. 4. lib. iv. c. I.
lib. x. c. 13.

s Churchill, v. p. 69I. Ovalle Relat. of Chili Church. iii.

p. io. Sommario de Oviedo, c. 14-22. Voyage du Des
Marchais, iii. 299.

t Buffon Hillt. Natur. ix. 103. Kalm Travels, i. 1oz.
Biet Voy. de France Equinox. p. 339.

and

and foil seem to be less favourable to the flrength B OO K
and perfection of the animal creation u. IV.

THE fame causes, which checked the growth Ines and

and the vigour of the more noble animals, were reptiles.
friendly to the propagation and increase of reptiles
and infeats. Though this is not peculiar to the New
World, and those odious tribes, the offspring of
heat, moisture, and corruption, infest every part of
the torrid zone; they multiply faster, perhaps, in
America, and grow to a more monstrous bulk. As
this country is, on the whole, less cultivated, and
less peopled, than the other quarters of the earth,
the active principle of life waftes its force in pro-
duaions of this inferior form. The air is often
darkened with clouds of infedts, and the ground
covered with shocking and noxious reptiles. The
country around Porto-Bello swarms with toads in
such multitudes, as hide the surface of the earth.
At Guyaquil, snakes and vipers are hardly less
numerous. Carthagena is infested with numerous
flocks of bats, which annoy not only the cattle but
inhabitants x. In the islands, legions of ants have,
at different times, consumed every vegetable pro-
duetion y, and left the earth entirely bare, as if it
had been burnt with fire. The damp forests, and
rank foil of the countries on the banks of the Ori-
noco and Maragnon, teem with almot every offen-
five and poisonous creature, which the power of a
sultry fun can quicken into life z.

I See NOTE IX.
X Voyage de Ulloa, tom. i. p. 89. Id. p. 147. Herrera,
dec. Ii. lib. iii. c. 1. 19.

Y See NOTE X.
2 Voyage de Condamine, p. i67. Cumilla, iii. 120, &c.

Hist. gener. des Voyages, xiv. 317. Dumont Memoires fur la
Louifiane, i. 1o8. Sommario de Oviedo, c. 52-62.

THE

B o o K THE birds of the New World are not diftin-

iv. jguifhed by qualities so conspicuous and charaaer-
Birds. iltical, as those which we have observed in its qua-

drupeds. Birds are more independent of man, and
less asseted by the changes which his indufiry and
labour make upon the slate of the earth. They
have a greater propensity to migrate from one
country to another, and can gratify this inflint of
their nature without difficulty or danger. Hence
the number of birds common to both continents
is much greater than that of quadrupeds; and
even such as are peculiar to America nearly refem-
ble those with which mankind were acquainted in
similar regions of the ancient hemisphere. The
American birds of the torrid zone, like those of tie
fame climate in Asia and Africa, are decked in
plumage, which dazzles the eye with the vivid
beauty of its colours, but nature, satisfied with
clothing them in this gay dress, has denied most of
them that melody of found, and variety of notes,
which catches and delights the ear. The birds of
the temperate climates there, in the fame manner
as in our continent, are less splendid in their ap-
pearance, but, in compensation for that defect,
have all the power and sweetness of music in their
voice. In some dittrits of America, the unwhole-
some temperature of the air seems to be unfavour-
able even to this part of the creation. The num-
ber of birds is less than in other countries, and the
traveller is itruck with the amazing solitude and
silence of its forests a. It is remarkable, however,
that America, where the quadrupeds are so dwarf-
ifh and dastardly, should produce .the Condor,
:?3 Bouguer Voy. au Perou, 17. Chanvalon, Voyage a la

Martinique, p. 96. Warren Defcript. Surinam. Olborn's
Colle&. ii. 924. Lettres Edif. xxiv. p. 339. Charlev. Hilt.
de la Nouv. France, iii, 15 5.

which

which is intitled to pre-eminence over all the flying B 0 0 K
tribe, in bulk, in strength, and in courage b. V.

THE foil, in a continent so extensive as America, Soil.

must of course be extremely various. In each of
its provinces, we fhall-find some distinguishing pe-
culiarity, the description of which belongs to those
who write their particular history. In general, we
may observe, that the nmoifture and cold, which
predominate so remarkably in all parts of America,
must have great influence upon the nature of its
foil; countries lying in the fame parallel with those
regions which never feel the extreme rigour of
winter in the ancient continent, are frozen over in
America during a great part of the year. Chilled
by this intense cold, the ground never acquires
warmth sufficient to ripen the fruits, which are
found in the corresponding parts of the other con-
tinent. If we would rear in America the produc-
tions which abound in any particular diitrid of
the world, we must advance several degrees nearer
to the line, than in the other hemisphere, as it re-
quires such an increase of heat to counterbalance
the natural frigidity of the foil and climate c. At
the Cape of Good Hope, several of the plants, and
fruits peculiar to the countries within the tropics,
are cultivated with success; whereas, at St. Au-
gufline, in Florida, and Charles-Town, in South-
Carolina, though considerably nearer the line, they
cannot be brought to thrive with equal certainty d
But, if allowance be made for this diversity, the
foil of America is naturally as rich and fertile as
in any part of the earth. As the country was
thinly inhabited, and by a people of little indus-

b Voyage de Ulloa, i. 363. Voyage de Condamine, i7g.

Buffon Hist. Nat. xvi. 184.. Voyage du Des Marchais, iii.
320.

c See NOTE XI.
d See NOTE XII.
VOL. II. C try,

B 0 K try, who had none of the domestic animals, which

IV. civilized nations rear in such vast numbers, the

earth was not exhauited by their consumption.
The vegetable productions, to which its fertility
gave birth, often remained untouched, and be-
ing suffered to corrupt on its surface, returned
with increase into its bosom e. As trees and
plants derive a great part of their nourishment
from air and water, if they were not destroyed
by man and other animals, they would render
to the earth more, perhaps, than they take from
it, and feed rather than impoverish it. Thus the
unoccupied foil of America might go on enriching
for many ages. The vast number as well as
enormous size of the trees in America, indicate
the extraordinary vigour of the foil in its native
fiate. When the Europeans first began to culti-
vate the New World, they were aflonifihed at the
luxuriant power of vegetation in its virgin mould
and in several places the ingenuity of the planter
is still employed in diminishing and wafting its
superfluous fertility, in order to bring it down to
a fiate fit for useful culture .

Row ,was HAVING thus surveyed the Rate of the New
eAopled World at the time of its discovery, and confider-

ed the peculiar features and qualities which dif-
tingfifh and charaterife it, the next inquiry that
merits attention is, How was America peopled ?
By what course did mankind migrate from the
one continent to the other ? and in what quartet
is it most probable that a communication was open-
ed between them ?

Buffon, Hist. Natur. i. 242 Kalm, i. 151.

f Charlevoix, Hist. de Nouv. Fran. iii. 405. Voyage du

Des Marchais, iii. 229. Lery ap De Bry, part iii. p. 174.
See NOTE XIII.

WE

WE know, with infallible certainty, that all the B 0 0 K

human race spring from the fame source, and that IV
the descendants of one man, under the protetionNotradition
as well as in obedience to the command of Hea-concernins
yen, multiplied and replenished the earth, Buttth res.
neither the annals nor the traditions of nations
reach back to those remote ages, in which they
took possession of the different countries where
they are now fettled. We cannot trace the
branches of this firit family, or point out with
certainty the time and manner in which they di-
vided and spread over the face of the globe. Even
among the mot enlightened people, the period
of authentic hiflory is extremely short, and every
thing prior to that is fabulous or obscure. It is
not surprising, then, that the unlettered inhabi-
tants of America, who have no solicitude about
futurity, and little curiosity concerning what is
palt, should be altogether unacquainted with their
own original. The Californians and Elkimaux,
in particular, who occupy those countries in Ame-
rica which approach nearest to the ancient conti-
nent, are so remarkably rude, that it is altogether
vain to search among them for such information
as might discover the place from whence they
came, or the anceliors of whom they are descended
Whatever light has been thrown on this subject,.
is derived, not from the natives of America, but
from the inquisitive genius of their conquerors.

WHEN the people of Europe unexpeAedly dif-various

covered a New World, removed at a vast distance theori'e
from every part of the ancient continent which
was then known, and filled with inhabitants whose
appearance and manners differed remarkably from
the reft of the human ipecies, the question concern-

f Venegas Hilt. of California, i. 60.

C ing

B 0 0King their original became naturally an object of

_V. curiosity and attention. The theories and fpecu-

lations of ingenious men with refpeCt.to this subjed,
would fill many volumes; but are often so wild
and chimerical, that I ihould offer an insult to the
underfianding of my readers, if I attempted either
to enumerate or to refute them. Some have pre-
sumptuously imagined that the people of America
were not the offspring of the fame common parent
with the relt of mankind, but that they formed a
separate race of men, distinguishable by peculiar
features in the constitution of their bodies, as well
as in the charaateriftic qualities of their minds.
Others contend, that they are descended from some
remnant of the antediluvian inhabitants of the
earth, who survived the deluge, which swept away
the greatefi part of the human species in the days
of Noah; and preposterously suppose rude, unci-
vilized tribes, scattered over an uncultivated con-
tinent, to be the most ancient race of people on
the earth. There is hardly any nation from the
north to the south pole, to which some antiquary,
in the extravagance of conjecture, has not ascribed
the honour of peopling America. The Jews, the
Canaanites, the Phoenicians, the Carthaginians, the
Greeks, the Scythians in ancient times, are sup-
posed to have fettled in this western world. The
Chinese, the Swedes, the Norwegians, the Welfla,
the Spaniards, are said to have sent colonies thither
in later ages, at different periods, and on various
occasions. Zealous advocates stand forth to flip-
port the refpeaive claims of those people; and
though they reli upon no better foundation than
the casual resemblance of some customs, or the
supposed affinity between a few words in their dif-
ferent languages, much erudition and more zeal
have been employed, to little purpose, in defence
of the opposite fyfterns. Those regions of conjec-
ture and controversy belong not to the historian.

His

His is a more limited province, confined to what B O 0 K
is eftabliihed by certain or highly probable evi- IV.
dence. Beyond -this I shall not venture, in offer-
ing a few observations, which may contribute to
throw some light upon this curious and much agi-
tated question.

I. THERE are authors who have endeavoured oughtnOt

-to be. found-

by mere conjectures to account for the peopling of ed on mere
America. Some have supposed that it was origi- c°6jeuC'
nally united to the ancient continent, and disjoined
from it by the ihock of an earthquake, or the ir-
ruption of a deluge. Others have imagined, that
some vessel being forced from its course by the vi-
olence of a westerly wind, might be driven by ac-
cident towards the American coast, and have giv-
en a beginning to population in that desolate con-
tinent g. But with refpe& to all those systems, it
is vain either to reason or inquire, because it is im-
possible to come to any decision. Such events as
they suppose are barely possible, and may have
.happened. That they ever did happen, we have
no evidence, either from the clear testimony of his-
tory or from the obscure intimations of tradition.

2. NOTHING can be more frivolous or uncer-or'0reem.

blance of

tain than the attempts to discover the original of manners,
the Americans, merely by tracing the resemblance
between their manners and those of any particular
people in the ancient continent. If we suppose two
bodies of men, though in the most remote regions
of the globe, to be placed in a state of society similar

g Parson's Remains of Japhet, p. 240. Ancient Univerf.

Hilt. vol. xx. p. 164. P. Feyjoo Teatro Critico, tom. v. p.
304. &c. Acolla Hill. Moral. Novi Orbis, lib. i. c. i6. 19.

in

B 0 0 Kin its degree of improvement, they must feel the

IV. fame wants, and exert the fame endeavours to sup-

ply them. The fame objects will allure, the fame
paflions will animate them, and the fame ideas and
sentiments will arise in their minds. The charac-
ter and occupations of the hunter in America must
be little different from those of an Asiatic, who de-
pends for fubfifience on the chace. A tribe of fa-
vages on the banks of the Danube mull nearly re-
femble one upon the plains waffed by the Miffifip-
pi. Infiead then of presuming, from this fimilari-
ty, that there is any affinity between them, we
should only conclude, that the disposition and man-
ners of men are formed by their situation, and
arise from the fiate and society in which they live.
The moment that begins to vary, the character of
a people mulltt change. In proportion as it ad-
vances in improvement, their manners refine, their
powers and talents are called forth. In every part
of the earth the progress of man hath been nearly
the fame, and we can trace him in his career from
the rude simplicity of savage life, until he attains
the indufRry, the arts, and the elegance of polished
society. There is nothing wonderful then in the
similitude between the Americans and the barba-
rous nations of our continent. Had Lafitau, Gar-
cia, and many other authors, attended to this, they
would not have perplexed a subjeA which they
pretend to illufirate, by their fruitless endeavours
to efiabliff an affinity between various races of peo-
ple in the old and new continents, upon no other
evidence than such a resemblance in their manners
as necessarily arises from the similarity of their
condition. There are, it is true, among every
people some cufloms, which, as they do not flow
from any natural want or desire peculiar to their
situation, may be denominated usages of arbitrary
inflitution. If between two nations fettled in remote

parts

parts of the earth, a perfect agreement with refpet B o o K
to any of these should be discovered, one might be IV
led to fufpet that they were connected by some
affinity. If a nation were found in America that
consecrated the seventh day to religious reft, if in
another the first appearance of the new moon was
celebrated with festivity, we might jufily fulppofe
that the former had derived its knowledge of this
usage of arbitrary institutions from the Jews, while
the latter might be confidered as nothing more
than an expression of joy natural to man on the
return of the planet which guides and cheers him
in the night. The inRfances of customs, merely
arbitrary, common to the inhabitants of both he-
mifpheres, are, indeed, so few and so equivocal,
that no theory concerning the population of the
New World ought to be founded upon them.

3. THE theories which have been formed withor ofrett.

refpet.to the original of the Americans, from ob-."""' '
servation of their religious rites and practices, are
no less fanciful, and destitute of solid foundation.
When the religious opinions of any people are
neither the result of rational inquiry, nor derived
from the inftrutions of revelation, they must needs
be wild and extravagant. Barbarous nations are
incapable of the former, and have not been blessed
with the advantages arising from the latter. Still,
however, the human mind, even where its ope-
rations appear moit wild and capricious, holds a
course so regular, that in every age and country
the dominion of particular passions will be attend-
ed with similar effets. The savage of Europe
or America, when filled with fuperilitious dread
of invisible beings, or with inquisitive solicitude
to penetrate into the events of futurity, trem-
bles alike with fear, or glows with impatience.
He has recourse to rites and practices of the fame

kind,

B 0 K kind, in order to avert the vengeance which he

IV. supposes to be impending over him, or to divine

the secret which is the object of his curiosity. Ac-
cordingly, the ritual of superstition, in one conti-
nent, seems, in many particulars, to be a transcript
of that established in the other, and both authorise
similar inflitutions, sometimes so frivolous as to ex-
cite pity, sometimes so bloody and barbarous as
to create horror. But without supposing any con-
sanguinity between such difiant nations, or ima-
gining that their religious ceremonies were convey-
ed by tradition from the one to the other, we may
ascribe this uniformity, which in many inflances
seems very amazing, to the natural operation of
superstition and enthusiasm upon the weakness of
the human mind.

Not peopled 4. WE may lay it down as a certain principle
by any nati-.
onhighly in this inquiry, that America was not peopled by
civilized, any nation of the ancient continent, which had

made considerable progress in civilization. The
inhabitants of the New World were in a Rtate of
society so extremely rude, as to be unacquainted
with those arts which are the firit essays of human
ingenuity in its advance towards improvement.
Even the most cultivated nations of America were
firangers to many of those timple inventions, which
were almost coeval with society in other parts of
the world, and were known in the earliest periods
of civil life. From this it is manifest, that the tribes
which originally migrated to America, came off from
nations which must have been no less barbarous than
their posterity, at the time when they were firfR disco-
vered by the Europeans. For, although the elegant
and refined arts may decline or perish, amidst the
violent shocks of those revolutions and disasters to
which nations are exposed, the necessary arts of life,
when once they have been introduced among any

people,

people, are never loft. None of the vicissitudes in B 0O K
human affairs affect these, and they continue to be IV.
practised as long as the race of men exilis. If '-
ever the use of iron had been known to the savages
of America, or to their progenitors, if ever they
had employed a plough, a loom, or a forge, the
utility of there inventions would have preserved
them, and it is impossible that they ihould have
been abandoned or forgotten. We may conclude
then, that the Americans sprung from some people,
who were themselves in such an early and unim-
proved flage of society, as to be unacquainted
with all the necessary arts, which remained un-
known among their poflerity.

5. IF appears no less evident, that America wasnorfrom

not peopled by any colony from the more southern thiouthern
nations of the ancient continent. None of theourconti-
rude tribes fettled in that part of our hemifphere"nnt
can be supposed to have visited a country so remote.
They possessed neither enterprise, nor ingenuity,
nor power, that could prompt them to undertake,
or enable them to perform, such a distant voyage.
That the more civilized nations in Asia or Africa
are not the progenitors of the Americans is mani-
fest, not only from the observations which I have
already made concerning their ignorance of the
most simple and necessary arts, but from an addi-
tional circumfiance. Whenever any people have
experienced the advantages which men enjoy, by
their dominion over the inferior animals, they can
neither subsist without the nourishment which they
afford, nor carry on their operations independent
of their ministry and labour. Accordingly, the
firfl care of the Spaniards when they fettled in
America, was to flock it with all the dometlic ani-
mals of Europe, and if prior to them, the Tyrians,
the Carthaginians, the Chinese, or any other po-

lifhed
l

B O O K lifhed people, had taken possession of that conti-

nent, we ihould have found there the animals pe-
culiar to those regions of the globe where they were
originally feated. In all America, however, there
is not one animal, tame or wild, which properly
belongs to the warm, or even the more temperate
countries of the ancient continent. The camel,
the dromedary, the horse, the cow, were as much
unknown in America, as the elephant or the lion.
From which it is obvious, that the people who first
fettled in the western world did not issue from the
countries where those animals abound, and where
men, from having been long accustomed to their
aid, would naturally confider it, not only as bene-
ficial, but as indispensably necessary to the improve-
ment, and even the preservation, of civil society.

The two 6. FROM confidering the animals with which
continents America is flored, we may conclude that the near-
seem to be
mot conti. eft point of contact between the old and new con-
guous to-
waUrds the inents is towards the northern extremity of both,
north. and that there the communication was opened,

and the intercourse carried on between them. All
the extensive countries in America which lie within
the tropics, or approach near to them, are filled
with indigenous animals of various kinds, entirely
different from those in the corresponding regions of
the ancient continent. But the northern provinces
of the New World abound with many of the wild'
animals which are common in such parts of our he-
mifphere as lie in a similar situation. The bear,
the wolf, the fox, the hare, the deer, the roebuck,
the elk, and several other species frequent the so-
refis of North America, no less than those in the
north of Europe and Asia h. It seems to be evi-
dent then, that the two continents approach each

Buffon Hist. Nat. ix. p. 97, &c.

other

other in this quarter, and are either .united, or so B O O K
nearly adjacent, that these animals might pass from IV.
the one to the other. - -

7. THE a&ual vicinity of the two continents This Thrcer-

rained by

so clearly efiablilhed by modern discoveries, as re-taifcovey.
moves the chief difficulty with refpec to the peo-
pling of America, While those immense regions,
which stretched eastward from the river Oby to the
sea of Kamchatka were unknown, or imperfectly
explored, the north-waft extremities of our hemif-
phere were supposed to be so far distant from any
part of the New World, that it was not easy to con-
ceive how any communication should have been
carried on between them. But the Ruffians, hav-
ing fubjeded the western part of Siberia to their
empire, gradually extended their knowledge of
that vast country, by advancing towards the east
into unknown provinces, These were discovered
by hunters in their excursions after game, or by
soldiers employed in levying the taxes, and the
court of Moscow estimated the importance of those
countries only by the small addition which they
made to its revenue. At length, Peter the Great
ascended the Ruffian throne. His enlightened,
comprehensive mind, intent upon every circum-
stance that could aggrandize his empire, or render
his reign illufirious, difeerned consequences of those
discoveries, which had escaped the observation of
his ignorant predecessors. He perceived, that in
proportion as the regions of Asia extended towards
the east, they murf approach nearer to America i
that the communication between the two conti-
nents, which had long been searched for in vain,
would probably be found in this quarter, and that
by opening this intercourse, some part of the wealth
and commerce of the western world might be made
to flow into his dominions by a new channel. Such

an

B O O K an objec suited a genius that delighted in grand

IV. schemes. Peter drew up infiruaions with his own

hand for prosecuting this design, and gave orders
for carrying it into execution '.

His successors adopted his ideas, and pursued

his plan. The officers whom the Ruffian court
employed in this service, had to firuggle with so
many difficulties, that their progress was extremely
flow. Encouraged by some faint traditions among
the people of Siberia, concerning a successful voy-
age in the year one thousand fix hundred and forty-
eight, round the north-eafi promontory of Asia,
they attempted to follow the fame course. Vessels
were fitted out, with this view, at different times,
from the rivers Lena and Kolyma; but in a frozen
ocean, which nature seems not to have destined for
navigation, they were exposed to many disasters,
without being able to accomplish their purpose.
No vefel fitted out by the Ruffian court ever
doubled this formidable Cape k; we are indebted
for what is known of those extreme regions of Asia,
to the discoveries made in excursions by land. In
all those provinces, an opinion prevails, that coun-
tries of great extent and fertility lie at no confider.
able distance from their own coafis. These the
Ruffians imagined to be part of America; and fe-
veral circumstances concurred not only in confirm-
ing them in this belief, but in persuading them
that some portion of that continent could not be
very remote. Trees of various kinds, unknown in
those naked regions of Asia, are driven upon the
coast by an eagierly wind. By the fame wind,
floating ice is brought thither in a few days; flights
of birds arrive annually from the fame quarter;

i Muller Voyages et Decouvertes par les Ruses, tom. i.
. 4, 5. 141.

' See NOTE XIV.

and

and a tradition obtains among the inhabitants, of B 0 0 K
an intercourse formerly carried on with some coun- IV.
tries situated to the east.

AFTER weighing all these particulars, and com-

paring the position of the countries in Asia which
they had discovered, with such parts in the north-
weft of America as were already known, the Ruf-
fian court formed a plan, which would have hardly
occurred to, any nation less accustomed to engage
in arduous undertakings, and to contend with
great difficulties. Orders were issued to build two
vessels at Ochotz, in the sea of Kamchatka, to fail
on a voyage of discovery. Though that dreary
uncultivated region furnished nothing that could
be of use in confiruEting them, but some larch
trees; though not only the iron, the cordage, the
fails, and all the numerous articles requisite for their
equipment, but the provisions for victualling them,
were to be carried through the immense deserts of
Siberia, along rivers of difficult navigation, and
roads almost impassable, the mandate of the fove-
reign, and the perseverance of the people, at last
surmounted every obfiacle. Two vessels were finish- 174r.
ed, and, under the command of the captains Behr- June 4.
ing and Tfchirikow, failed from Kamchatka in
quest of the New World, in a quarter where it had
never been approached. They shaped their course
towards the east; and though a storm soon feparat-
ed the vessels, which never rejoined, and many
disasters befell them, the expectations from the
voyage were not altogether frustrated. Each of the
commanders discovered land, which to them ap-
peared to be part of the American continent; and,
according to their observations, it seems to be situ-
ated within a few degrees of the north-west coast of
California. Each set some of his people ashore;

but

B O O K but in one place the inhabitants fled as the Ruffians

IV. approached; in another, they carried off those who

~ landed, and defiroyed their boats. The violence

of the weather, and the difirefs of their crews,
obliged both to quit this inhospitable coast. In
their return they touched at several islands, which
itretch in a chain from east to weft between the
country which they had discovered and the coast
of Asia. They had some intercourse with the na-
tives, who seemed to them to resemble the North
Americans. They presented to the Ruffians the
calumet, or pipe of peace, which is a symbol of
friendship universal among the people of North
America, and an usage of arbitrary institution, pe-
culiar to them.

THE islands of this new Archipelago have been

frequented by the Ruffian hunters since that time;
but the court seemed to have relinquiihed its scheme
of prosecuting discoveries in this quarter. It was
unexpectedly resumed in the year one thousand
seven hundred and fixty-eight, and captain Krenit-
zin had the command of two small vessels fitted
out for that purpose. In his voyage outward he
held nearly the fame course with the former navi-
gators, he touched at the fame islands, observed
their situation and productions more carefully, and
discovered several new islands, with which they had
not fallen in. Though he did not proceed so far to
the eall as to revisit the country which Behring and
Tfchirikow supposed to be part of the American
continent, yet, by returning in a course confider-
ably to the north of theirs, he corrected some capi-
tal mistakes into which they had fallen, and has
contributed to facilitate the progress of future na-
vigators in those seas l'

I See NOTE XV.

THUS

THUS the possibility of a communication be- B o OK

tween the continents in this quarter refis no longer IV.
upon mere conjecture, but is established by un-
doubted evidence m. Some tribe, or some families
of wandering Tartars, from the restless spirit pe-
culiar to their race, might migrate to the nearest
islands, and, rude as their knowledge of naviga-
tion was, might, by palling from one to the other,
reach at length the coast of America, and give a
beginning to population in that continent. The
distance between the Marian or Ladrone islands
and the nearest land in Asia, is greater than that
between the part of America which the Ruffians
discovered, and the coast of Kamchatka and yet
the inhabitants of' those islands are manifetfly of
Asiatic extract. If, notwithstanding their remote
situation, we admit that the Marian islands were
peopled from our continent, distance alone is no
reason why we Ihould hesitate about admitting that
ile original of the Americans may be from the
fame source. It is probable that future navigators
in those seas, by fleering farther to the north, may
find that the continent of America approaches iill
nearer to Aria. According to the information of
the barbarous people, who inhabit the country
about the north-east promontory of Asia, there
lies, off the coast, a small island, to which they fail
in less than a day. From that, they can descry a
large continent, which, according to their defcrip-
tion, is covered with forests, and possieed by peo-
ple whose language they do not underfand n. By
them they are supplied with the Ikins of martens,
an animal unknown in the northern parts of Siberia,
and which is never found but in countries abound-
ing with trees. If we could rely on this account,

m Muller's Voyages, tom. i. 248, &c. z67. 276.
" Muller's Voy. et Decouv. i. 166.

we-

B 0 O K we might conclude, that the American continent is

IV. separated from ours only by a narrow firait, and

all the difficulties with refpea to the communica-
tion between them would vanish. Perhaps the
merit of ascertaining this is reserved for the fove-
reign now feated on the throne of Peter the Great,
who, by perfecting his plan, may add this splendid
event to those which already distinguish her reign.

Another IT is likewise evident from recent discoveries,
ommuni- that an intercourse between our continent and
cation by e between our and
the north- America might be carried on with no less facility
we. - from the north-west extremities of Europe. As
A. D. 830. early as the ninth century, the Norwegians disco-

vered Greenland, and planted colonies there. The
communication with that country, after a long in-
terruption, was renewed in the last century. Some
Lutheran and Moravian missionaries, prompted by
zeal for propagating the Christian faith, have ven-
tured to fettle in this frozen and uncultivated re-
gion °. To them we are indebted for much cu-
rious information with refpet to its nature and in-
habitants. We learn, that the north-west coast of
Greenland is separated from America by a very
narrow firait; that, at the bottom of the bay into
which this firait conducts, it is highly probable that
they are united P; that the inhabitants of the two
countries have some intercourse with one another;
that the Efquimaux of America perfectly resemble
the Greenlanders in their aspet, dress, and mode
of living; that some tailors, who had acquired the
knowledge of a few words in the Greenlandifh lan-
guage, reported that these were understood by the
A.D. 1764. Efquimaux; that, at length, a Moravian missionary,

well acquainted with the language of Greenland,

o Crantz Hit. ofGreenl. i. 242. 244. Prevot Hifl. Gen.
des Voyages, tom. xv. iSz, not. (96).

P Eggede, p. z, 3.

having

having visited the country of the Efquimaux, found, B 0 Q K
to his aftonffhment, -that they jpoke the fame lan-. v.-
guage with the Greenianders, and were in every -
refpe&cthe fame people, and -he was accordinfy
received and entertained by them ap a friend apd .a
brother h .

Br these decifly c saSs, not Pnly jthe cofanuiw

jtty of eth Efqimia.ui aid 'Gree;nlanders is is t-
blfhed, but 'the ipolibility of peopling Airerica
from t-he oprth f Eiurope is demonitrated. ^f ithe
Norwegians, in a barbar.ous l.ge, when scien.ce bad
not begun to 1awn :in the nor h of Europe, -offefed
£uch naval skill -as tPo .open a communica.tion with
-G.reenJlad, itteir anceftqor, as -much addi&ed -to
roving by ife, as the Tairtars are to wandering ,b
land, rnight a-t Some mor.e rote eriod, acom-
piliJh the 4ane voyage, and gettle a icolony there.,
whose descendent- might, In progrefP of tite, xmi-
grate into Anerica. But if, instead of venturing
to fail .dir.etl-y from :their own coast to g-aeerlasl,
we i-fppofe :.at the NorwegianS held a more .au-
lious<courfe, and -d.adaceld fromr Slierand : to -the-
Feroe Ilands, and .from them -to Iceland, in all
whicb .they had :lated -lponies,, their progress mnay
have been so -gradual, hat this navigation canrot
be co.fidered aw

. .ther lmog or mr hazaridous,

ithan those voyages which that hardy ,and.ernteprif-
ing race of mlen i;s Anown tp rhave prforned in
.every ^ge.

8. "THOUGH it be. poflible that America may Probably

have received its sirss i{lh1ititts from our.conti- PO!'
nent, either by the north-wi' of Europe or thenorth-ct.
north-east of Alia, there seems to be good reason
*for fuppofmg that the progenitors of all the Arnm-
rican Tiations, from Cape Horn to the futhern con-

V 'CaMte' H i .

f rrl. p. 261, S.
VoT. II. D fine

B O O K fines of Labrador, migrated from the latter rather

1v. than the former. The Efquimaux are the only peo-

ple in America, who, in their aspet or characer,
bear any resemblance to the northern Europeans.
They are manifestly a separate species of men, dif-
tint fiom all the nations of that continent, in lan-
guage, in disposition, and in habits of life. Their
original, then, may warrantably be traced up to
that source, which I have pointed out. But, among
all the other inhabitants of America, there is such a
striking fimititude in the form of their bodies, and
the qualities of their minds, that, notwithfanding
the diversities occasioned by the influence of cli-
mate, or unequal progress in improvement, we
must pronounce, them to be descended from one
source. There may be a variety in the shades, but
we can every where trace the fame original colour.
Each tribe has something peculiar which diflin-
guifhes it, but in all of them we discern certain
features common to the whole race. It is remark-
able, that in every peculiarity, whether in their
persons or dispositions, which charaderife the A-
mericans, they have some resemblance to the rude
tribes scattered over the north-east of Asia, but
almost none to the nations fettled in the northern
extremkties of Europe. We may, therefore,-refer
.them to the former origin, and conclude that their
Asiatic progenitors, having fettled in those parts of
America, where the Ruffians have discovered the
proximity of the two continents, spread gradually
over its various regions. This account of the pro-
grefs of population in A erica, coincides with the
traditions of the .Mexicans concerning their own
origin, which, imperfec as they are, were'preferved
with more accuracy, and merit greater credit, than
those of any people in the New World. According
to them, their ancestors came from a remote coun-
try, situated to the north-east of Mexico. They

point

point out their various itations as they advanced B 0 K
from this, into the interior provinces, and it is pre- IV
cifely the fame route which they muft.have held, if
they had been emigrants from Asia. The Mexi-
cans, in describing the appearance of their proge-
nitors, their manners, and habits of life at that pe-
riod, exactly delineate those of the rude Tartars,
from whom I suppose them to have sprung r.

THUS have I finished a disquisition which has

been deemed of so much importance, that it would
have been improper to omit it in writing the history
of America. I have ventured to inquire, but with-
out presuming to decide. Satisfied with offering
conjectures, I pretend not to establish any system.
When an investigation is, from its nature, so intri-
cate and obscure, that it is impossible to arrive at
conclusions which are certain, there may'be' some
merit in pointing out such as are probable s.

THE condition and character of the American condition

nations, at the time when they became known: to andt cfthe
the Europeans, deserve more attentive consideration, Americas.
than the inquiry concerning their original. .:The
latter is merely an object of curiosity,. the former is
one of the most important as well as inftrucive re-
searches, which can occupy the philosopher or his-
torian. In order to complete the history of the hu-
man mind, and attain to a perfect knowledge of
its nature and operations, we must contemplate
man in all those various situations wherein he has
been placed.' We must follow him in his progress
through the different flages of society, as he gra-

rAcofta Hist. Nat. & Mor. lib. vii. c. 2, &c. GarciaOri-

gen de los Indios, lib. v. c. 3. Torquemada Monar. Ind.
lib. i. c. z, &c. Boturini Benaduci Idea de una Hist. de la
Amer. Septentr. § xvii .
p. 127.

Memoires fur la Louifiane, par Dumont, tom. i. p. 119.

.p 2. dually

B 00 K dually advances from the infant fiate of civil life

IV. towards its maturity and decline. We mut ob-

serve, at each period, how the faculties of his un-
derftanding unfold, we must attend to the efforts
of his acive powers, watch the motions of affection
as they rife in his breast, and mark whither they
tend, and with what ardour they are exerted. The
philosophers and historians of ancient Greece and
Rome, our guides in this as well as every other
difquiiition, had only a limited view of this subjec,
as they had hardly any opportunity of surveying
man in his rudest and motl early state. In all those
regions of the earth with which they were acquaint-
ed, civil society had made considerable advances,
and nations had finished a good part of their career
before they began to obrerve them. The Scythians
and Germans, the ruideft people of whom any an-
cient author has transmitted to us an authentic ac-
count, possieed flocks and herds, had acquired
property of various kinds, and, when compared
with mankind in their primitive slate, nay be rec-
koned tb. have attained to a great degree of ivii-
iftibn.

Less irm- tuT the discovery of the New World enlarged
in any par n the lphere olf contemplation, ah-d predented nations
of the to our view, in fRages of their progress, much le's
earth. , J

tht. advanced than those wherein they have been ob-

rerved in our continent. In America, man appears
under the rudest form in which we can conceive
him to {ubfift. We behold communities just be-
ginning to unite, and may examine the :sentiments
and actions of human beings in the infancy of social
life, while they feel but.imperfectly the force of its
ties, and ihave scarcely relinquiihed their native li-
eerty. That state of priraeval iStnplicity, whiih
was known in our continent only by the fancfiul
description ds poets, really existed i 'the other. The

greater

greater part of its inhabitants were firangers to in- B 0 Q K
dufiry and labour, ignorant of arts, and almoR un- IV
acquainted with property, enjoying in common the
blessings which flowed spontaneously from the
bounty of nature. There were only two nations
in this vast continent which had emerged from this
rude state, and had made any considerable progress
in acquiring the ideas, and adopting the inftituti-
ons, which belong to polihed societies. Their go-
vernment and manners will fall naturally under our
review in relating the discovery and conqueil of the
Mexican and Peruvian empires; and we shall have
there an opportunity of contemplating the Ameri-
cans in the itate of highest improvement to which
they ever attained.

AT present, our attention and researches (hall be This in.

turned to the small independent tribes which occu- totb
pied every other part of America. Among these, rudest
though with some diversity in their character, their 'be"
manners and institutions, the fiate of society was
nearly similar, and so extremely rude, that the de-
nomination of Savage may be applied to them all.
In a general hifiory of America, it would be highly
improper to describe the condition of each petty
community, or to investigate every minute circum-
fiance which contributes to form the character of
its members. Such an inquiry would lead to de-
tails of immeasurable and tiresome extent. The
qualities belonging to the pe6oli of all the different
tribes have such a near resemblance, that they may
be painted with the fame features. Where any cir-
cumftances seem to conflitute a diversity in their
character and manners worthy of attention, it will
be sufficient to point there out as they occur, and
to inquire into the causes of such peculiarities.

IT

B OO K IT is extremely difficult to procure satisfying

IV. and authentic information concerning nations while

Difficulty they remain uncivilized. To discover their true
ofobtain- character under this rude form, and to colleCt the
ing in-
formation, features by which they are distinguished, requires

an observer possesed of no less impartiality than
discernment. For, in every stage of society, the
faculties, the sentiments and desires of men are so
accommodated to their own slate, that they become
standards of excellence to themselves, they affix
the idea of perfection and happiness to those attain-
ments which resemble their own, and wherever the
objects and enjoyments to which they have been
accustomed are wanting, confidently pronounce a
people barbarous and miserable. Hence the mu-
tual contempt with which the members of commu-
nities, unequal in their degrees of improvement,
regard each other. Polished nations, conscious of
the advantages which they derive from their know-
ledge and arts, are apt to view rude nations with
peculiar scorn, and, in the pride of superiority, will
hardly allow either their occupations, their feelings,
or their pleasures, to be worthy of men. It has
seldom been the lot of communities, in their early
and unpolifhed state, to fall under the observation
of perolns, endowed with force of mind-fuperior to
vulgar prejudices, and capable of contemplating
man, under whatever afpeEt he appears, with a
candid and discerning eye.

from the in- THE Spaniards, who first visited America, and
capacity of ' '
Pte fir ob- who had an opportunity of beholding its various
ervers, tribes, while entire and unfubdued, were far from

poffefling the qualities requisite for observing the
itriking fpetacle presented to their view. Neither
the age in which they lived, nor the nation to which
they belonged, had made Ilch progress in true
fckijce, as inspires enlarged and liberal sentiments.

Tlhe.

The conquerors of the New World were mofily B 0.0 K
illiterate adventurers, defiitute of all the ideas which 1V.
1hould have directed them in contemplating ob-
jets, so extremely different from those with which
they were acquainted. Surrounded continually with
danger, or firuggling with hardships, they had
little leisure,. and less capacity for any fpecqlative
inquiry. Eager to take poffeflionof a 'country of
such vast extent and opulence, and happy in find-
ing it occupied by inhabitants so incapable to de-
fend it, they hastily' pronounced them to be a
wretched order of men, formed merely for fervi-
tude; and were more employed in computing the
profits of their labour, than in inquiring into the
operations of their minds, or the reasons of their
customs and institutions. The persons. who pene-
trated at subsequent periods into the interior pro-
vinces, -to which the knowledge and devartations
of the firfi conquerors did not reach, were gene-
rally of a similar character; brave and enterprising
in an high degree, but so uninformed as to be little
qualified either for observing or describing what
they beheld.

NOT only the incapacity, but the prejudices ofand-their

the Spaniards, render their accounts of the people prqudicc;
of America extremely defective. Soon after they
planted colonies in their new conquests, a difference
in opinion arose with respect to the treatment of the
natives. One party, solicitous to render their ser-
vitude perpetual, represented them as a brutish,
,obstinate race, incapable either of acquiring religi-
ous knowledge, or of being trained to the functions
of social life. The other, full of pious concern for
their converlion, contended that, though rude and
ignorant, they were gentle, affectionate, docile,
and by proper infiructions and regulations might
if formed gradually into good Christians and useful

citizens.

B 0 K citizens. This controversy, as I have ralready re-

Vr. lated, was carried on with all the warmth which is

natural, when attention to interest on the one hand,
and religious zeal on the other, animate the difput-
ants. Most of the laity espoused the former opi-
nion; all the ecclefiafiics were advocates for the
latter; arid we shIll unifornly find that, atcord-
ingly as an author belonged to either of these par-
ties, he is apt to magnify the virtues or aggravate
the defets of the Americans beyond measure.
Those repugnant accounts inereafe the difficulty of
attaining a perfect kowledge of their thara&er,
and render it necessary to peruse all the deferiptions
of them by Spanish writers with diftroft, and to re-
ceive their information with some allowance.

and from ALMOST tWO centuries efapfed after the difeo-
t o"0

f very of Arerica, before the manners of its inhabit-
lophers. ants attracted, in any considerable degree, the at-

tention of phitofophers. At length, they discover.
ed that the knowledge of their condition and cha-
racter might enable them to fill up a confidetable
chasm in the hiitory of the humnan species, and lead
to speculations no less curious than important.
They entered upon this new field of fludy. with
great ardour; but, inRead of throwing light upon
.the subjet, they have contributed, in some degree,
to involve it in additional obscurity. Too impa-
tient to inquire, they haflened to decide; and be-
gan to ereet fyitems, when they should have been
searching for fasts on which to establish their foun-
dations. Struck with the appearance of degeneracy
in the human species throughout the New Worlds
and afionifhed at beholding a vast continent occupi-
ed by a naked, feeble, and ignorant race of men,
some authors of great name have maintained, that
this part of the globe had but lately emerged from

the

the sea, and become fit for the residence of man; B 0 0 K
that every thing in it bore marks of a recent origi- IV.
nal and that its inhabitants, lately called into ex-
iftence, and still at the beginning of their career,
were unworthy to be compared with the people
of a more ancient and improved continentt. Others
have imagined, that, under the influence of an
unkindly climate, which checks and enervates the
principle of life, man never attained in America
the perfedcon which belongs to his nature, but
remained an animal of an inferior order, defective
in the vigour of his bodily frame, and deffitute
of sensibility, as well as of force, in the operations
of his mind u. In opposition to both these, other
philosophers have supposed that man arrives at his
highest dignity and excellence long before he
reaches a rate of refinement; and, in the rude
fimrplicity of savage life, displays an elevation of
sentiment, an independence of mind, and a warmth
of attachment, for which it is vain to search among
the members of polished societies x. They seem
to confider that as the most perfect fate of man
which is the leaf civilized. They describe the
manners of the rude' Americans with such rapture,
as if they proposed them for models to the reft of
the species. These contradicory theories have
been proposed with equal confidence, and un-
common powers of genius and eloquence have
been exerted in order to clothe them with an ap-
pearance of truth.

As all those circumfiances concur in rendering

an inquiry into the ffate of the rude nations in
America intricate and obscure, it is necefary to
carry it on with caution. When guided in our
researches by the intelligent observations of the

' M. de 3uffon Hilt. Nat. iii. 484, &c. ix. 103. 114.
u M. de P. Recherches Philof. fur les Americ. paflim;
. M. Rousseau.

few

B O O K few philosophers who have visited this part of the

Iv. globe, we may venture to decide. When obliged

to have recourse to the superficial remarks of vul-
gar travellers, of tailors, traders, buccaneers, and
miflionaries, we must often pause, and comparing
detached fats, endeavour to discover what they
wanted sagacity to observe. Without indulging
conjeture, or betraying a propensity to either
system, we must study with equal care to avoid
the extremes of extravagant admiration, or of fu-
percilious contempt for those manners which we
describe.

MetRod ob. IN order to conduct this inquiry with greater
hneinquiry. accuracy, it should be rendered as simple as pof-

fible. Man existed as an individual before he be-
came the member of a community; and the qua-
lities which belong to him under his former capa-
city should be known, before we proceed to exa-
mine those which arise from the latter relation.
This is peculiarly necessary in investigating the
manners of rude nations. Their political union
is so incomplete, their civil institutions and regu-
lations so few, so simple, and of such small au-
thority, that they ought to be viewed rather as
independent agents, than as members of a regu-
lar society. The character of a savage results al-
most entirely from his sentiments or feelings as an
individual, and is but little influenced by his im-
perfect subjection to government and order. I
fliall conduct my researches concerning the man-
ners of the Americans in this natural order, pro-
ceeding gradually from what is simple to what is
more complicated.

I SHALL confider, I. The bodily conflitution of

the Americans in those regions now under review.
II. The qualities of their minds. III. Their do-
meflic slate. IV. Their political slate and infti-
tutions. V. Their system of war, and public

security.

security. VI. The arts with which they were ac-B O O K
quainted. VII. Their religious ideas and inftitu- IV.
tions. VIII. Such singular detached cuitoms as v
are not reducible to any of the former heads. IX.
I shall conclude with a general review and efiimate
of their virtues and defecs.

I. THE bodily conflitution of the Americans.- The confti.
The human body is less affe&ced by climate than thattu"ob of

t heir bo-

of any other animal. Some animals are confined to dies.
a particular region of the globe, and cannot exist
beyond it; others, though they may be brought
to bear the injuries of a climate foreign to them,
cease to multiply when carried out of that diftrit,
which Nature defined to be their mansion. Even
such as seem capable of being naturalized in vari-
ous climates, feel the effect of every remove from
their proper station, and gradually dwindle an>c
degenerate from the vigour and perfection pecu-
liar to their species. Man is the only living crea-
ture whose frame is at once so hardy and so flexible,
that he can spread over the whole earth, become
the inhabitant of every region, and thrive and mul-
tiply under every climate. Subjet, however, to
the general law of Nature, the human body is not
entirely exempt from the operation of climate,
and when exposed to the extremes either of heat
or cold, its size or vigour diminishes,

THE firfi appearance of the inhabitants of theCompiex.

New W\Torld, filled the discoverers with such aflo-°n0&.
nifhment, that they were apt to imagine them a
race of men different from those of the other hemif-
phere. Their complexion is of a reddish brown,
nearly resembling the colour of copper Y. The hair
of their heads is always black, long, coarse, and

Y Oviedo Somalio, p. 46, D. Life of Columbus, c. 24.

lank.

BOOK lank. They have no beard, and every part

'v-. of their body is perfectly smooth. Their persons

are of a full size, extremely firaight, and well pro-
portioned z. Their features are regular, though of-
ten distorted by absurd endeavours to improve the
beauty of their natural form, or to render their as-

More fee- ped more dreadful to their enemies. In the islands,
let' where four-footed animals were both few and small,

and the earth yielded her produtions almost fpon-
taneoufly, the conflitution of the natives, neither
braced by the a&tive exercises of the chace, nor in-
vigorated by the labour of cultivation, was extreme-
ly feeble and languid. On the continent, where
the forefis abound with game of various kinds, and
the chief occupation of many tribes was to pursue
it, their frame acquired greater firmness. Still,
' .howevcr, the Americans were more remarkable for

Igility than strength. They resembled beasts
of prey, rather than animals formed for la-
'bour a. They were not only averse to toil, but
incapable of it and when rouzed by force from
their native indolence, and compelled to work,
they funk under taiks which the people of the
other continent would have performed with ease b.
This fecblenefs of constitution was universal among
the inhabitants of those regions in America which
we are surveying, and may be confidered as cha-
rateriftic of the species there c.

THE beardless countenance and smooth skin of

the American seems to indicate a defet of vigour,
occasioned by some vice in his frame. He is defiitute

Se: NOTE XVI. a See NOTE XVII.

b Oviedo Som. p. 51, C. Voy. de Correal, ii. 138. Wa-
ser's Description, p. 13 1.

c B. Las Casas Brev. Relac. p. 4. Torquem. Monar. i.

580. Oviedo Somario, p. 41. Hilor.lib. iii. c. 6. Herrera,
d:c. i. lib. ix. c. 5. Simon. p. 41.

of

cf one sign of manhood and of ftrergth. This pe-B 0 0 K
culiarity, by which the inhabitants of the New IV
World are distinguished from the people of all
other nations, cannot be attributed, as sone tra-
vellers have supposed, to their mode of subsist-
ence d. For though the food of many Americana
be so extremely insipid, that they are altogether
unacquainted vith the use of salt, rude tribes in
other parts of the earth have fubfilted on aliments
equally simple without this mark of degradation,
or any apparent symptom of a diminution in their
tigour.

As the external form of the Americas leads us Lers ppe-

to fufpe& that there is omre .natural debility in t""
their frame, the mnafnefs of their appetite for food :
has been mentioned ,by many authors as a con-
fnmtion rs this fufiickn. The quantity- of food
which men consume varies according to the tern,
perature of the limrate in which they live, the ide-
gree of ativity which they exert, and the iatural
vigor of their confiitnstiion Under the mmervat-
ing heat )of the tond zone and when men pass
their days in indolexoe anld ease, they require less
nomfIhment tihan the ative inhabitants of tempe-Z
rate or cold cormtries. But neither the warmth of
their cimate, nor their extreme laziness, w.ill ac-
cocnt for the uncommon ;defed :of appetite amng
the Americass. The SpSpiards rwee astonishes
with aohferving fflis, -nt only in the islands, but
in several parts of the .continent. 'The confiitu-
tronal temperance of the natives -far exceeded, :ii,
*eir opinion, the most mnortified
hermits e; while, on the other hand, the appetite of
the Spaniards appeared to the Americans infati-
ably voracious; and they affirmed, that one Spa-

a 'Chariev. Eiflt. ;de Noauv. ,F.r. iii. 3!-c.

i RmntfiS, iii. 5o4, F. 3o6, A. Sinmn :Conquitla, &S,. ,p.
39. Hakluyt, iii. 468. 5 .

niard

B O O K niard devoured more food in a day than was sus-

IV. ficient for ten Americans f
Lefsvehe- A PROOF of some feebleness in their frame still

rcnce of
dcfire. more firiking, is the insensibility of the Americans

to the charms of beauty, and the power of love.
That paflion which was destined to perpetuate life,
to be the bond of social union, and the source of
tenderness and joy, is the molt ardent in the hu-
man breast; and though the perils and ,hardships
of the savage state, though exceflive fatigue, on
some occasions, and the difficulty at all times of
procuring subsistence, may seem to be adverse to
this palion, and to have a tendency to abate its
vigour, yet the rudest nations in every other part
of the globe seem to feel its influence more pow-
erfully than the inhabitants of the New World.
The negro glows with all the warmth of desire
natural to his climate; and the most uncultivated
Asiatics discover that sensibility, which, from their
situation, we should expect them to have felt.
But the Americans are, in an amazing degree,
strangers to the force of this firfi inftint of nature.
In every part of the New World the natives treat
their women with coldness and indifference. They
are neither the -objects of that tender attachment
which takes place in civilized society, nor of that
ardent desire conspicuous -among rude nations.
Even in climates where this passion usually acquires
its greatest vigour, the savage of America views his
female with disdain, as an animal of a less noble
species. He is at no pains to win her favour by
the assiduity of courtship, and fill less solicitous to
preserve it by indulgence and gentlenefsg. Mifflo-

f Herrera, dec. i. lib. ii. c. 16.
g Hennepin Moeurs des Sauvages, 32, &c. Rochefort Hiit.

des Isles Antilles, p. 461. Voyage de Correal; ii. 141. Ramu-
fio, iii. 309. F. Lozano Defcr. del Gran Chaco, 71. Falk-
ner's Decfr. of Patagon. p. z5. Lettere di P. Cataneo ap.
Muratori I1 Christian. Felice, i. 305.

naries

naries themselves, notwithfianding the austerity of B O K
monastic ideas, cannot refrain from exprefiing their Iv.
astonishment at the difpaflionate coldness of the "
American young men in their intercourse with the
other sex h. Nor is this reserve to be ascribed to
any opinion which they entertain with refpet to
the merit of female chastity. That is an idea too
refined for a savage, and suggested by a delicacy
of sentiment and affetion to which he is a firanger..

BUT in inquiries concerning either the bodily Refleaion

or mental qualities of particular races of men, "ith'ef. t
there is not a more common or more seducing
error, than that of ascribing to a tingle cause, those
charateriftic peculiarities, which are the effect of
the combined operation' of many causes. The
climate and foil of America differ, ini so many re-
fpe&s, from those of the other hemisphere, and
this difference is fb obvious and firiking, that phi-
lofophers of great eminence have laid hold on this
as sufficient to account for what is peculiar in the
conflitution of its inhabitants. They reft on phy-
fical causes alone, and confider the feeble frame
and languid desire of the Americans, as confe-
quences of the temperament of that portion of the
globe which they inhabit. But the influences of
political and moral causes ought not to have been
overlooked. These operate with no less effet
than that on which they reft as a full explanation
of the singular appearances which have been men-
tioned. Wherever the slate of society is such as
to create many wants and desires, which cannot
be satisfied without regular exertions of industry,
the body accustomed to labour becomes robust

h Chanvalon. p. 51. Lettr. Edif. tom. cxiv. 318. . Tertre,
ii. 377. Venegaf. i. 81. Ribas Hist. de los Triumf. p. 1 .

and

B O O K and patient of fatigue. In a more simple fate,

IV. where the demands of men are so few and so mo-
"r--- 'derate, that they may be gratified, almost without

any effort, by the spontaneous producions of na-
.ture, the powers of the body are not called forth,
nor can they attain their proper strength. The
natives of Chili and of North-America, the two
temperate regions in the New World, who live -by
hunting, may be deemed an active and vigorous
race, when compared with the inhabitants of the
isles, or of those parts of the continent where hard-
ly any labour is requisite to -procure subsistence.
The exertions of a hunter are not, however, so
regular, or so continued, as those of persons .em-
ployed in the culture of .the.earth, or in the vari-
ous arts of civilized life, and though his agility
may be greater than theirs, his strength is on the
whole inferior. If another diretion were given ,to
the active povwers of man in the New World, and
his force augmented by exerci, he might acquire
a degree of vigour which he does not in his pre-
sent Rate possess. The truth of this is confinred
by experience. Wherever the Americans have
been gradually accutomed to hard labour, their
confitutions become robust, and ,they have been
found capable of performing such talks, as seemed
not only to exceed the powers of such a feeble
frame as has been deemed peculiar to their coun-
try, but to equal any effort of the natives, either
of Africa or of Europe .

THEr fame reasoning will apply to what has

been observed concerning their slender demand for
food. As a proof that this should be ascribed, as
much to their extreme indolence, and often total
want of occupation, as to any thing peculiar in the

i See NOTE XVIII.

physical

physical firuture of their bodies, it has been ob- B o o K
served, that in those diftriAs, where the people of IV.
America are obliged to exert any unufual'effort of
activity, in order to procure fubfiifence, or where.
ever they are employed in severe labour, their ap-
petite is not inferior to that of other men, and, in
some places, it has firuck observers as remarkably
voracious k

THE operation of political and moral causes is

frill more conspicuous, in modifying the degree of
attachment between the sexes. In a fIate of high
civilization, this passion, inflamed by restraint, re-
fined by delicacy, and cherished by fashion, occu-
pies and engrosses the heart. It is-no longer a
simple inftindt of nature; sentiment heightens the
ardour of desire, and the moR tender emotions of
which our frame is susceptible, soothe and agitate
the foul. This description, however, applies only
to those, who, by their situation, are exempted
from the cares and labours of life. Among persons
of inferior order, who are doomed by their condi-
tion to incessant toil, the dominion of this paffin
is less violent, and their solicitude to procure sub-
fifence, and to provide for the firfi demand of nat
ture, leaves little leisure for attending to its second
call. But if the nature of the intercourse between
the sexes varies so much in persons of different rank
in polished societies, the condition of man, while he
remains uncivilized, must occasion a variation fill
more apparent. We may well suppose, that aridft
the hardships, the dangers, and the simplicity of
savage life, where subsistence is always precarious,
and often scanty, where men are almost continually
engaged in the pursuit of their enemies, or in
guarding againfi their attacks, and where neither

k Gumilla, ii. 12. 70. 237. Laficau, i. 515. Ovalle
Church. iii. 8r. Murarori, i. 29;.

VOL. II. E dress

B O o Kdrefs nor reserve are employed as arts of femrafe.

IV. allurement, that the attention of the Americans to
^^v-' their women would be extremely feeble, without

imputing this solely to any physical defec or de-
gradation in their frame.

IT is accordingly observed, that in those coun-

tries of Arerica, where, from the fertility of the
foil, the mildness of the climate, or some farther
advances which the natives have made in improve-
ment, the means of subsistence are more abundant,
and the hardships of savage life are less severely
felt, the animal passion of the sexes becomes more
ardent. Striking examples of this occur among
some tribes feated on the banks of great rivers well
fiored with food, among others who are masters of
hunting-grounds abounding so much with game,
that they have a regular and plentiful supply of
nourishment with little labour. The superior de-
gree of security and affluence which they enjoy, is
followed by their natural effedts The passions
implanted in the human frame by the hand of na-
ture acquire additional force; new taftes and desires
are formed; the women, as they are more valued
and admired, become more attentive to dress and
ornament; the men, beginning to feel how much
of their own happiness depends upon them, no
longer disdain the arts of winning their favour and
affetion. The intercourse of the sexes becomes
very different from that which takes place among
their ruder countrymen; and as hardly any restraint
is imposed on- the gratification of desire, either by
religion,, or laws, or decency, the dissolution of
their manners is excessive l

None of NOTWITHSTANDING the feeble make of the
them de-
formed. Americans, almost none of them are deformed, or

l Biet. 389. Charlev. iii. 423. Dumont mem. fur Lou-
ifiane, i. 155. mu

mutitatedy,

friutilted, or defective in any of their senses. All b0O K
travellers have been firuck with this circumstance, i'
and have celebrated the uniform fymmtretry and
perfetion of their external figure: Some authors
search for the catife of this appearance in their phy-
fical condition. As the parents are not exhausted
or over-fatigued with hard labour, they suppose
that their children are born vigorous and found;
They imagine, that in the liberty of savage life,
the human body, naked and unconfiried from its
earliest age, preserves its natural form; and that
all its limbs and members acquire a juster propor-
tion, than when fettered with artificial restraints,
which flint its growth, and distort its shape m"
Something, without doubt, may be ascribed to the.
operation of there causes; but the true reasons of
this apparent advantage, which is common to all
savage nations, lie deeperj and are closely inter-
woven with the nature and genius of that state.
The infancy of man is so long and so heIplefs4 that
it is extremely difficult to rear children among rude
hations; Their means of fubfifience are not only
scanty, but precarious. Such as live by hunting,
must range over extensive countries, and shift often
from place to place, The care of children, as well-
as every other laborious taflk, is devolved upon the
women. The diitreffes and hardships of the savage
life, which are often such as can hardly be support-
ed by persons in full vigour, must be fatal to those
of more tender age. Afraid of undertaking a talk
so laborious, and of such long duration, the wo-
men, in some parts of America, extinguish the
first sparks of that life which they are unable to
cherish, and by the use of certain herbs procure
frequent abortions n. Sensible that only stout and

n Pifo, p. 6.
n Ellis's Voyage to Hudson's Bay, r98. Herrera, dec. 7.
lib, ix. c. 4.

E 2 welF-

0 0 oK well-formed children have force of conflitution to
Iv. struggle through such an hard infancy, other na-
'^'^' tions abandon or destroy such of their progeny as

appear feeble or defective, as unworthy of atten-
tion °. Even. when they endeavour to rear all their
children without difiin-ion, so great a proportion
of the whole number perishes under the rigorous
treatment which must be their lot in the savage
slate, that few of those who laboured under any
original frailty attain the age of manhood P. Thus,
in polished societies, where the means of fiubfifience
are secured with certainty, and acquired with ease;
where the talents of the mind are often of more im-
portance than the powers of the body; children are
preserved notwithstanding their defeets or deformi-
ty, and grow up to be useful citizens.. In rude na-
tions, such persons are either cut off as soon as they
are born, or becoming a burden to themselves and
to the community, cannot long protrac their lives,
But in those provinces of the New World where, by
the establishment of the Europeans, more regular
provision has been made for the subsistence of its
inhabitants, and they are restrained from laying
violent hands on their children, the Americans are
.so far from being eminent for any superior perfec-
tion in their form, that one should rather fufpet
some peculiar imbecillity in the race, from the ex-
traordinary number of individuals who are deform-
ed, dwarfifh, mutilated, blind, or deaf q.

Uniformiry HOW EVER feeble the constitution of the Ameri-
pfathrae.a cans may be, it is remarkable, that there is lets va-

riety in the human form throughout the New World,
than in the ancient continent. When Columbus and

o Gumilla Hist. ii. 234. Techo's Hill. of Paraguay, &c.
Churchill's ColleEt. vi. o18.

P Creuxii Hill. Canad. p. 57.
q Voyage de Ulloa, i. 232.

whe

the other discoverers first visited the different coun- B o0 K
.tries of America which lie within the torrid zone, IV.
they naturally expected to find people of the fame

r

complexion with those in the corresponding regions
of the other hemisphere. To their amazement,
however, they discovered that America contained no
negroes r; and the cause of this singular appearance
became as much the objec of curiosity, as the fact
itself was of wonder. In what part or membrane
of the body that humour resides which tinges the
complexion of the negro with a deep black, it is the
business of anatomitfs to inquire and describe. The
powerful operation of heat appears manifestly to be
the cause which produces this firiking variety in the
human species. All Europe, almost the whole of
Asia, and the temperate parts of Africa, are occu-
pied by men of a fair complexion. All the torrid
zone in Afiica, some of the warmer regions adjacent
to it, and a few countries in Asia, are filled with
people of a deep black colour. If we trace the na-
tions of our continent, making our progress from
cold and temperate countries towards those parts
which are exposed to the influence of vehement and
unremitting heat, we shall find, that the extreme
whiteness of their ikin soon begins to diminish; that
its colour deepens gradually as we advance; and
after passing through all the successive gradations of
shade, terminates in an uniform unvarying black.
But in America, where the agency of heat is check-
ed and abated by various causes, which I have
already explained, the climate seems to be destitute
of that force which produces such wonderful effe&ts
on the human frame. The colour of the natives of
the torrid zone, in America, can hardly be said to
be of a deeper hue than that of the people in the
mnore temperate parts of their continent. Accurate

P.. Martyr, dec. p. 71.

observers,

B 0 0 K observers, who had an opportunity of viewing the

1y¥ Americans in very different climates, and in coun-
.t.. tries far removed from each other, have been

truck with the amazing similarity of their figure
and aspec t.

BUT though the hand of Nature has deviated so

little from one fiandard in fashioning the human
form in America, the creation of fancy hath been
various and extravagant. The fame fables that
were current in the ancient continent, have been
revived with refpeE to the New World, and Ame-
rica too has been peopled with human beings of
monstrous and fantastic appearance. The inhabit-
ants of certain provinces were described to be pig-
mies of three feet high; those of others to be giants
of an enormous size. Some travellers published
accounts of people with only one eye, others pre-
tended to have discovered men without heads,
whose eyes and mouths were planted in their breasts.
The variety of Nature in her productions is, indeed,
so great, that it is presumptuous to set bounds to
her fertility, and to reject indiscriminately every
relation that is not perfetly consonant to our own
limited observation and experience. But the other
extreme, of yielding an hatty assent, on the flightetl
evidence, to whatever has the appearance of being
firange and marvellous, is no less unbecoming a
philosophical inquirer, as, in every period, men are
mnore apt to be betrayed into error, by their weak-
ness in believing too much, than by their arrogance
in believing too little. In proportion as science
extends, and nature is examined with a discerning
eye, the wonders that amused ages of ignorance
disappear. The tales of credulous travellers con-
cerning America are forgotten; the monsters which
they describe have been searched for in vain; and

s See NOTE XIX.

those

those provinces where they pretend to have found B o O K
inhabitants of singular forms, are now known to Iv-
be possessed by people no wife different from the VJ
·other Americans t

THOUGH these relations may, without difcuflion,

be rejeced as fabulous, there are other accounts of
such varieties in the human species in some parts of
the New World, which reft upon better evidence,
and merit more attentive examination. This va-
xiety has been particularly observed in three differ-
ent diftrias. The firfl of there is- situated in the
'ifhmus of Darien, near the centre of America.
Lionel Wafer, a traveller possessed of more curio-
fity and intelligence than we should have expected
to find in an aflbciate of Buccaneers, discovered
there a frall, but singular race of men. They are
of low flature, according to his description, of a
feeble make, incapable of enduring fatigue. . Their
colour is a dead milk white; not resembling that of
fair people among Europeans, but without any
tinture of a blush or sanguine complexion. Their
kin is covered with a fine hairy down of a chalky
white, the hair of their heads, their eye-brows, and
.eye-lashes, are of the fame hue. Their eyes are of
a singular form, and so weak, that they can hardly
bear the light of the fun; but they fee clearly by
moon-light, and are most a&tive and gay in the
night u. No race similar to this has been discovered
in any other part of America. Cortes, indeed, found
some perforis exactly resembling. the white people
of Darien, among the rare and monfirous animals
which Montezuma had colleted w. But as the
power of the Mexican empire extended to the pro-
vinces bordering on the isthmus of Darien, they

t See NOTE XX.
u Wafer Defcript. of flh. ap. Dampier, iii. p. 346.
W Cortes ap. Ramufi iii. p. 24z, E.

were

BOOK were probably brought from thence. Singular as

IV. the appearance of those people may be, they cannot
'..,,, be confidered as coniitiuting a diftin&t species. A-

mong the negroes of Africa, as well as the natives
of the Indian islands, nature sometimes produces a
small number of individuals, with all the charader-
iftic features and qualities of the white people of
Darien. The former are called Albinos by the Por-
tuguefe, the latter Kackerlakes by the Dutch. In
Darien the parents of those Whites are of the fame
colour with the other natives of the country; and
this observation applies equally to the anomalous
progeny of the negroes and Indians. The fame
mother who produces some children of a colour that
does not belong to the race, brings forth the reft of
the complexion peculiar to her country x. One con-
clufion may then be formed with refpet to the peo-
ple described by Wafer, the Albinos and the Kacker-
mtkes; they are a degenerated breed, not a separate
class of men ; and from iome disease or defect of
their parents, the peculiar colour and debility which
mark their degradation is trantmitted to them. As
a decisive proof of this, it has been observed, that
neither the white people of Darien, nor the Albinos
of Africa, propagate their race: their children are
of the colour and temperament peculiar to the na-
tives of their refpetive countries Y.

THEP second difiriat that is occupied by inhabit-

ants differing in appearance fiom the other people
of America, is situated in a high northern latitude,
extending from the coast of Labrador towards the
pole, as far as the country is habitable. The peo-
ple scattered over those dreary regions, are known
to the Europeans by the name of Efquimaux. They

x Margrav. Hill. Rer. Nat. Bras. lib. viii. c. 4.
Y Wafer, p. 348. Demanet. Hist. de 1'Afrique, ii. 234.
Jecherch. Philoi. fur les Amer. ii. I, &c.

themselves,

themselves, with that idea of their own superiority, 0 0O K
which consoles the rudest and most wretched nati- IV.
ons, assume the name of Keralit or Men. They "'-
are of a middle size and robust, with heads of a
disproportioned bulk, and feet as remarkably small.
Their complexion, though swarthy, by being con-
tinually exposed to the rigour of a cold climate, in-
clines to the European white, rather than to the
copper colour of America, and the men have beards
which are sometimes bushy and long z. From these
marks of diitinscion, as well as from one still less
equivocal, the affinity of their language to that of
the Greenlanders, which I have already mentioned,
we may conclude, with some degree of confidence,
that the Efquimaux are a race different from the reft
of the Americans.

WE cannot decide with equal certainty concern-

ing the inhabitants of the third diltrit, situated at
the southern extremity of America. These are the
famous Patagonians, who, during two centuries and
a half, have afforded a subjeCt of controversy to the
learned, and an objeEt of wonder to the vulgar.
They are supposed to be one of the wandering
tribes, which occupy that vast, but least known re-
gion of America, which extends from the river De
la Plata to the Straits of Magellan. Their proper
lation is in that part of the interior country, which
lies on the banks of the river Negro; but in the
hunting season they often roam as far as the straits
which separate Terra del Fuego from the main-land.
The firfd accounts of this people were brought to
Europe by the companions of Magellan a, who de-
fcribed them as a gigantic race, above eight feet

z Ellis Voy. to Hudf. Bay, p. 13 i. I 39. De la Potherie,

tom. i. p. 79. Wales' Jour. of a Voy. to Churchill River.
Phil. Tranf. vol. Ix. 109.

Falkner's Description of Patagonia, p. io2.

high,

B 0 0 K high, and of strength in proportion to their enor-

V_. mous size. Among several tribes of animals, a

disparity in bulk, as considerable, may be obferv-
ed. Some large breeds of horses and dogs exceed
the more diminutive races in fiature and firength,
as far as the Patagonian is supposed to rife above
the usual fiandard of the human body. But ani-
mals attain the highest perfection of their species,
only in mild climates, or where they find the most
nutritive food in greatest abundance. It is not then
in the uncultivated waste of the Magellanic regi-
ons, and among a tribe of unprovident savages,
that we should expect to find man, poffefling the
highest honours of his race, and distinguished by a
superiority of size and vigour, far beyond what he
has reached in any other part of the earth. The
most explicit and unexceptionable evidence is re-
quifite, in order to establish a fad, repugnant to
those general principles and laws, which seem to
affect the human frame in every other instance,
and to decide with refpet to its nature and quali-
ties. Such evidence has not hitherto been produc-
ed. Though several persons, to whose testimony
great refped is due, have visited this part of Ame-
rica since the time of Magellan, and have had in-
terviews with the natives; though some have as-
firmed, that such as they saw were of gigantic fta-
ture, and others have formed the fame conclusion
from measuring their footsteps, or the skeletons of
their dead; yet their accounts vary from each other
in so many essential points, and are mingled with
so many circumstances manifetly false or fabulous,
as detract much from their credit. b On the other
hand, some navigators, and those among the most
eminent of their order for discernment and accu-
racy,' have asserted that the natives of Patagonia,

b See NOTE XXI.

with

with whom they had intercourse, though stout and B O O K
well made, are not of such extraordinary size as to IV.
be distinguished from the reft of the human species.
The existence of this gigantic race of men, seems,
then, to be one of those points in natural hifiory,
with refpec to which a cautious inquirer will hefi
tate, and will chufe to suspend his assent until more
complete evidence ihall decide, whether he ought
to admit a fad, Seemingly inconsistent with what
reason and experience have discovered concerning
the ftruture and condition of man, in all the vari-
ous situations in which he has been observed.

IN order to form a complete idea with refped Their fate

to the constitution of the inhabitants of this and of health.
the other hemisphere, we should attend not only
to the make and vigour .of their bodies, but confi-
der what degree of health they enjoy, and to what
period of longevity they usually arrive. In the
simplicity of the savage slate, when man is not op-
pressed with labour, or enervated by luxury, or
disquieted with care, we are apt to imagine that
his life will flow on almost untroubled by disease or
suffering, until his days be terminated, in extreme
old age, by the gradual decays of nature. We
find, accordingly, among the Americans, as well
as among other rude people, persons, whole decre-
pid and shrivelled form seems to indicate an extra-
ordinary length of life. But as most of them are
unacquainted with the art of numbering, and all
of them as forgetful of what is palt, as they are
improvident for what is to come, it is impoflible
to acfertain their age with any degree of precifi-
on b. It is evident, that the period of their longe-
vity mult vary considerably, according to the di-

b Ulloa Notic. Americ. 323. Bancroft Nat. Hilt. of Gui-
F9a, 334.

versity

B O OK verfity of climates, and their different modes of

IV. subsistence. They seem, however, to be every
'V'J' where exempt from many of the distempers which

afflit polished nations. None of the maladies,
which are the immediate offspring of luxury, or
sloth, ever visited them; and they have no names
in their languages by which to dillinguifh this nu-
merous train of adventitious evils.
Difeaf,. BUT, whatever be the situation in which man

is placed, he is born to susser and his diseases, in
the savage state, though fewer in number, are, like
those of the animals whom he nearly resembles in
his mode of life, more violent, and more fatal. If
luxury engenders and nourishes distempers of one
species, the rigour and diftrelfes of savage life
bring on those of another. As men, in this state,
are wonderfully improvident, and their means of
subsistence precarious, they often pass from ex-
treme want to exuberant plenty, according to the
vicissitudes of fortune in the chace, or to the va-
riety in the productions of the seasons. Their in-
considerate gluttony in the one situation, and their
severe abstinence in the other, are equally pernici-
ous. For, though the human conflitution may be
accustomed by habit, like that of animals of prey,
to tolerate long famine, and then to gorge vora-
cioufly, it is not a little affected by such sudden
and violent transitions. The strength and vigour
of savages are, at some seasons, impaired by what
they susser from scarcity of food; at others, they
are affli&ed with disorders arising from indigefti-
on and a superfluity of gross aliment. These last
are so common, that they may be confidered as
the unavoidable consequence of their mode of sub-
sifting, and cut off considerable numbers in the
prime of life. They are likewise extremely sub-

jed

jet to consumptions, to pleuretic, asthmatic, and B O O K
paralytic disorders c, brought on by the immo- IV.
derate hardihips and fatigue which they endure "
in hunting and in war; or owing to the incle-
mency of the seasons to which they are continu-
ally exposed. In the savage state, hardships and
fatigue violently assault the constitution. In po-
lifhed Societies, intemperance undermines it. It
is not easy to determine which of them operates
with most fatal effet, or tends most to abridge
human life. The influence of the former is cer-
tainly most extensive. The pernicious confe-
quences of luxury reach only a few members in
any community, the difireffes of savage life are
felt by all. As far as I can judge, after very mi-
nute inquiry, the general period of human life is
ihorter among savages, than in well-regulated and
industrious societies.

ONE dreadful malady, the severest scourge, with

which, in this life, offended Heaven chastens the
indulgence of criminal desire, seems to have been
peculiar to the Americans. By communicating
it to their conquerors, they have not only amply-
avenged their own wrongs, but by adding this
calamity to those which formerly embittered hu-
man life, they have, perhaps, more than counter-
balanced all the benefits which Europe has deriv-
ed from the discovery of the New World. This
distemper, from the country in which it first raged,
or from the people by whom it was supposed to
have been spread over Europe, has been some-
times called the Neapolitan, and Sometimes the
French disease. At its first appearance, the in-

C Charlev. N. Fr. iii. 364. Lafitau, ii. 360. De la Po-
therie, ii. 37.

fetion

B 0 O K fetion was so malignant, its symptoms so violent.

Iv- . its operation so rapid and fatal, as to baffle all the

efforts of medical skill. Astonishment and terror
accompanied this unknown afflicion in its pro-
grefs, and men began to dread the extintion of
the human race by such a cruel visitation. Expe-
rience, and the ingenuity of physicians gradually
discovered remedies of such virtue as to cure or mi-
tigate the evil. During the course of two centuries
and a half, its virulence seems to have abated con-
fiderably. At length in the fame manner with the
leprosy, which raged in Europe for rome centu-
ries, it may waste its force and disappear: and in
some happier age, this western infection, like that
from the East, may be known only by defcripti-
onc

Power and II. AFTER confidering what appears to be pe-
and qua li-
ties of hCuiar in the bodily conflitution of the Americans,
minds, our attention is naturally turned towards the pow-

ers and qualities of their minds. As the indi-
vidual advances from the ignorance and imbecil-
lity of the infant slate, to vigour and maturity of
underfianding, something similar to this may be
observed in the progress of the species. With
refpedt to it, too, there is a period of infancy,
during which several powers of the mind are'
not unfolded, and all are feeble and defective in
their operation. In the early ages of society,
while the condition of man is simple and rude, his
reason is but little exercised, and his desires move,
within a very narrow sphere. Hence arise two
remarkable charateriftics of the human mind, in
this slate. Its intellectual powers are extremely li-
mited: its emotions and efforts are few and lan-

See NOTE XXII.

guid,

guid. Both there diftintions are conspicuous among B 0 0 I
the rudest and molt unimproved of the American IV.
tribes, and constitute a firiking part in their defcrip-
tion.

WHAT, among polished nations, is called fpecu-intelleaual

lative reasoning or research, is altogether unknown faculties
in the rude slate of society, and never becomes theed.
occupation or amusement of the human faculties,
until man be so far improved as to have secured,
with certainty, the means of subsistence, as well
as the pofleffion of leisure and tranquillity. The
thoughts and attention of a savage are confined
within the small circle of obje&ts, immediately con-
ducive to his prefervatiorr or enjoyment. Every
thing beyond that, escapes his observation, or is
perfectly indifferent to him. Like a mere animal,
what is before his eyes interests and affects him;
what is out of fight, or at a distance, makes no im-
pression r. There are several people in America
whose limited understandings seem not to be capa-
ble of forming an arrangement for futurity; nei-
ther their solicitude nor their foresight extend so far.
They follow blindly the impulse of the appetite
which they feel, but are entirely regardless of distant
consequences, and even of those removed in the least
degree from immediate apprehension. While they
highly prize such things as serve present use, or mi-
nifter to present enjoyment, they set no value upon
those which are not the object of some immediate
want s. When, on the approach of the evening, a
Caribbee feels himself disposed to go to reft, no
consideration will tempt him to fell his hammoc.
But, in the morning, when he is rallying out to the
business or pastime of the day, he will part with it

rUlloa Noticias Americ. 222.
S Venegas Hist. of Calif. i. 66. Sepp. Church Coll. v. 693.
Borde Defcr. des Caraibes, p. 16. Ellis Voy. 194.

for

B 0 0 K for the flightet toy that catches his fancy t. At the

1V. close of winter, while the impression of what he has
Y S~fuffered from the rigour of the climate is fresh in

the mind of the North American, he sets himself
with vigour to prepare materials for ereAting a com-
sortable hut to proteEt him againfi the inclemency
of the succeeding season; but as soon as the weather
becomes mild, he forgets what is pait, abandons his
work, and never thinks of it more, until the return
of cold compels him, when too late, to resume it u.

IF in concerns the most interefling, and seem-

ingly the most simple, the reason of man, while rude
and deititute of culture, differs so little from the
thoughtless levity of children, or the improvident
instinCt of animals, its exertions in other directions
cannot be very considerable. The objects towards
which reason turns, and the disquisitions in which it
engages, muff depend upon the slate in which man
is placed, and are suggested by his neceflities and
desires. Disquisitions, which appear the most necef-
fary and important to men in one Rate of society,
never occur to those in another. Among civilized
nations, arithmetic, or the art of numbering, is
deemed an essential and elementary science, and in
our continent, the invention and use of it reaches
back to a period so remote as is beyond the know-
ledge of history. But among savages, who have no
property to estimate, no hoarded treasures to count,
no variety of objeEts or multiplicity of ideas to enu-
merate, arithmetic is a fiuperfluous and useless art.
Accordingly, among ofme tribes in America it seems
to be quite unknown. There are many who cannot
reckon farther than three; and have no denomina-
tion to distinguish any number above it x. Several

t Labat Voyages, ii. 114, i lg. Tertre, ii. 385.
u Adair Hill. of Amer. Indians, 417.
x Condam, p. 67. Stadius ap. de Bry, ix. xz8. Lery.
ibid. 251. Biet. 362. Lettr. Edif. 23. 314.

can

can proceed as far as ten, others to twenty. When B o o K
they would convey an idea of any number beyond Iv.
these, they point to the hair of their head, intimat-
ing that it is equal to them, or with wonder declare
it to be so great that it cannot be reckoned Y. Not
only the Americans, but all nations, while ex-
tremely rude, seem to be unacquainted with the art
of computation Z. As soon, however, as they ac-
quire such acquaintance or connection with a variety
of objecs, that there is frequent occasion to com.
bine or divide them, their knowledge of numbers
increases, so that the fiate of this art among any
people may be confidered as one flandard, by
which to estimate the degree of their improvement.
The Iroquois, in North America, as they are much
more civilized than the rude inhabitants of Brasil,
Paraguay, or Guiana, have likewise made greater
advances in this refped ; though even their arith-
metic does not extend beyond a thousand, as in
their petty tranfadions they have no occasion for
any higher number a. The Cherokee, a less con-
fiderable nation on the fame continent, can reckon
only as far as a hundred, and to that extent have
names for the several numbers; the smaller tribes
in their neighbourhood can rife no higher than
ten b.

IN other refpe&s, the exercise of the underfiand- No abflraf

ing among rude nations is still more limited. The ideas
first ideas of every human being must be such as he
receives by the senses. But, in the mind of man,
while in the savage fate, there seem to be hardly

y Dumont Louis. i. 187. Herrera, dec. i. lib. iii. . 3.
Biet. 396. Borde 6.

z This is the cafe with the Greenlanders, Crantz. i. 225.
and with Kamchatkadales, M. 1'Abb6 Chappe, iii. 17.

a ( harlev Nouv. France, iii. 402.
b Adair Hifl. of Amer. Indians, 77. See NOTE XXIIL

VOL. II. F any

B 0 0K any ideas but what enter by this avenue. The

IV. objets arou'nd him are presented to his eye. Such
^""vas may be subservient to his use, or can gratify any

of his appetites, attract his notice; he views the
reet without curiosity or attention. Satisfied with
confidering them under that simple mode, in which
they appear to him, as separate and detached, he
neither combines them so as to form general classes,
nor contemplates their qualities apart, nor bestows
a thought upon the operations of his own mind con-
cerning them. Thus, he is unacquainted with all
the ideas which have been denominated univefal,
or abftrat, or of reflettion. The range of his under-
fianding mull, of course, be very confined, and his
reasoning powers be employed merely on what is
sensible. This is so remarkably the cafe with the
ruder nations of America, that their languages, (as
we hall afterwards find) have not a word to express
any thing but what is material or corporeal. Time,
space, jfbftance, and a thousand other terms which
represent abfiraa and universal ideas, are altoge-
ther unknown to them '. A naked savage, cower-
ing near the fire in his miserable cabbin, or firetched
under a few branches which afford him a temporary
felter, has as little inclination as capacity for useless
Speculation. His thoughts extend not beyond what
relates to animal life; and when they are not direct-
ed towards some of its concerns, his mind is totally
inative. In situations where no extraordinary es-
fort, either of ingenuity or labour is requisite, in
order to satisfy the simple demands of nature, the
powers of the mind are so seldom routed to any ex-
ertion, that the rational faculties continue almost
dormant and unexercifed, The numerous tribes
scattered over the rich plains of South America, the
inhabitants of some of the islands, and of several

C Condam, p. 54.

fertile

fertile plains on the continent, corrn under this Bo 0 E
description. Their vacant countenance, their ilar- IYr
ing unexpressive eye, their lifeless inattention, and A")
total ignorance of fubjeas, which seem to be the
first which should occupy the thoughts of rational
beings, made such impression upon the Spaniards,
when they first beheld those rude people, that they
confidered them as animals of an inferior order, and
could not believe that they belonged to the human
species j. It required the authority of a papal bull
to counteract this opinion, and to convince then
that the Americans were capable of the functions,
and intitled to the privileges, of humanity e. Since
that time, persons more enlightened and impartial
than the discoverers or conquerors of America, have
had an opportunity of contemplating the molt fa-
vage of its inhabitants, and they have been astonish-
ed and humbled, with observing how nearly man,
in this condition, approaches to the brute creation,
But in feverer climates, where subsistence cannot be
procured with the fame ease, where men must unite
more closely, and act with greater concert, neceflity
calls forth their talents, and iharpens their inven-
tion, so that the intelligent powers are more exer-
cifed and improved. The North-Americans and
natives of Chili, who inhabit the temperate regions
in the two great distriCts of America, are people of
cultivated and enlarged underfiandings, when view-
ed in comparison with: some of those feated in the
islands, or on the banks of the Maragnon and Ori-
noco. Their occupations are more various, their
system of policy, as well as of war, more complex,
their arts more numerous. But, even among them,
the intelletual powers are extremely limited in their

d Herrera, dec. 2. lib. ii. c. 15.

Torquem. Mon. Ind. iii. 198;

F 2 operations,

B OOK operations, and unless when turned directly t

VI. those objets which interest a savage, are held inr

no eflimation. Both the North-Americans and
Chilefe, when not engaged in some of the func-
tiQns belonging to a warrior or hunter,. loiter away
their time in thoughtless indolence, unacqurainted
with any other subje&t worthy of their attention,
or capable of occupying their mindss. If even,
among them, reason is foe much circumscribed in
its exertions, and never arrives, irr its highest
attainments, at the knowledge of those general
principles and maxims, which serve as the foun-
dation of science, we may conclude, that the in-
telledual powers of man in the savage itate are
deffitute of their proper object, and cannot ac-
quire any considerable degree of vigour and en-
largement.

Oitsvfc FROM the fame causes, the active efforts of
srts of the
mind few the mind are few, and, on most occasions, lan-

dlanguid. guid. If we examine into the motives which

rouze men to a6civity in civilized life, and prompt
them to persevere in fatiguing exertions of their
ingenuity or strength, we ihall find that they arise
chiefly from acquired wants and appetites. These
are numerous and importunate, they keep the
mind in perpetual agitation, and, in order to gra-
tify them, invention must be always on the
ftKetch, and industry must be inceifantly em-
ployed. But the desires of simple nature are
few, and where a favourable climate yields al-
most spontaneously what fufices them,, they scarce-
ly fir the foul, or excite any violent emotion.
Hence the people of feverat tribes in America
wvafte their life in a listless indolence. To be

f Lafitau, ii. z.

free

tree from occupation, seems to be all the en- o 0K
joyment towards which they aspire. They will 1V.
continue whole days firetched out in t.heir ham- ."'
mocs, or feated on the earth, in perfec idleness;
without changing their poiture, or raising their eyes
from the ground, or uttering a tingle word g.

SUCHI is their aversion to labour, that neither mprovi-

the hope of future good, nor the apprehenfiof' dent
future evil, can surmount it. They appear .equal-
ly indifferent to both, discovering little solicitude,
and taking no precautions to avoid the one, or to
secure the other. The cravings of hunger ,may
route them; but as they devour, with little diflinc-
tion, whatever will appease its inflin&ive demands.,
the exertions which there occasion are of short ddura-
tion. Dellitute of ardour, as well as variety, of
desire, they feel not the force .of those povwerfful
springs which give vigour to the movements. of
the mind, and urge the patient hand of indufiry
to persevere 'in its efforts. Man, in some parts of
America, appears in a form so rude, that we can
'discover .no effects of his activity, and the principle
of understanding which mhould diret it, seems
hardly to be unfolded. Like the other animals, he
has no fixed residence; he has erected no habita-
tion to shelter him from the inclemency of the
weather; he has taken no measures for securing
a certain subsistence; he neither sows nor reaps;
but roams about as led in search of the plants and
fruits which the earth brings forth in filcceflion;
and in quest of the game which he kills in the so-
refts, or of the fish which he catches in the rivers.

THIS description, however, applies only to lome Some vaie-

tribes. Man cannot continue long in this slate of tyith all'
feeble and uninformed infancy. He was made for these.

Z Bouguer Voy. au Perou, 102. Borde, I5.

ind utlr'y

B O O Kinduftry and acion, and the powers of his nature,

IV. as well as the necessity of his condition, urge him

to fulfil his destiny. Accordingly, among most of
the American nations, especially those feated in ri-
gorous climates, some efforts are employed, and
some previous precautions are taken, for securing
fubfitlence. The career of regular indullry is be-
gun, and the laborious arm has made the first es-
fays of its power. Still, however, the improvident
and slothful genius of the savage state predomi-
nates. Even among those more improved tribes,
labour is deemed ignominious and degrading. It
is only to work of a certain kind that a man will
deign to put his hand. The greater part is de-
volved entirely upon the women. One half of the
community remains inactive, while the other is op-
prefled with the multitude and variety of its occu-
pations. Thus their induitry is partial, and the
foresight which regulates it, is no less limited. A
remarkable infiance of this occurs in the chief ar-
rangement with refpet to their manner of living.
They depend for their fubfifience, during one part
of tle year, on fishing; during another, on hunt-
ing; during a third, on the produce of their agri-
culture. Though experience has taught them to fore-
fee the return of those various seasons, and to make
some provision for their refpetive exigencies, they
either want sagacity to proportion this provision to
their consumption, or are so incapable of any com-
mand over their appetites, that, from their inconfi-
derate waste, they often feel the calamities-of famine
as severely as the rudest of the savage tribes. What
they susser one year does not augment their indus-
try, or render them more provident to prevent
similar difireffes h. This inconsiderate thoughtless-
ness about futurity, the effect of ignorance and the

h Charlev. N. Fr. iii. 338. Lettr. Edif. 23. 298. Def-

cript. of N. France, Osborn's Collet. ii. 880. De la Pothe-
ie, ii. 63.

cause

cause of sloth, accompanies and characterizes manB 00 K
in every stage of savage life'; and by a capricious IV.
fiugularity in his operations, he is then least folici- `r
tous about supplying his wants, when the means of
satisfying them are most precarious, and procured
with the greatest difficulty k.

III. AFTER viewing the bodily conflitution ofTheir faci

the Americans, and contemplating the powers ofa
their minds, we are led, in the natural order of in-
quiry, to confider them as united together in foci-
ety. Hitherto our researches have been confined
to the operations of underfianding respecting them-
selves, as individuals, now they will extend to the
degree of their sensibility and affection towards their
species.

THE domestic lRate is the firfi and moit fimpleDo.menlc

form of human association. , The union of the sex-
es, among different animals, is of longer or shorter
duration in proportion to the ease or difficulty of
rearing their offspring. Among those tribes where
the season of infancy is short, and the young soon
acquire vigour or agility, no permanent union
is formed. Nature commits the care of training
up the offspring to the mother alone, and her ten-
dernefs, without any other aflifiance, is equal to the
talk. But where the slate of infancy is long and
helpless, and the joint assiduity of both parents is
requisite in tending their feeble brood, there a more
intimate connetion takes place, and continues un-
til the purpose of nature be accomplished, and the
new race grow up to full maturity. As the infanT
cy of man is more feeble and helpless than that of
any other animal, and he is dependent, during a
much longer period, on the care and foresight of
his parents, the union between husband and wife

. Bancrofts Nat. Hilt. of Guiana, 326. 333.
g See NOTE XXIV.

came

B O OK came early to be confidered, not only as a solemn,

IV. but as a permanent contract. A general slate of
'l Ppromifcuous intercourse between the sexes never

existed but in the imagination of poets. In the in-
fancy of society, when men, destitute of arts and
induitry, lead a hard precarious life, the rearing of
their progeny demands the attention and efforts of
both parents; and if their union had not been form-
ed and continued with this view, the race could not
have been preserved. Accordingly, in America,
even among the rudest tribes, a regular union be-
tween husband and wife was universal, and the
rights of marriage were underflood and recognized.
In those ditridts where fubfitence was scanty, and
the difficulty of maintaining a family was great, the
man confined himself to one wife. In warmer or
more fertile provinces, the facility of procuring food
concurred with the influence of climate, in induc-
ing the inhabitants to increase the number of their
wives I. In some countries the marriage union sub-
sifted during life; in others, the impatience of the
Americans under refiraint of any species, together
with their natural levity and caprice, prompted them
to dissolve it on very flight pretexts, and often with-
out afligning any cause.
Condition BUT whether they confidered the obligation of

this contrat as perpetual, or only temporary, the
condition of women was equally humiliating and
miserable. Whether man has been improved by
the progress of arts and civilization in society, is a
question, which, in the wantonness of disputation,
has been agitated among philosophers. That wo-
men are indebted to the refinements of polished

Lettr. Edif. 23. 3I8. Lafitau Moeurs, i. 554. Lerv ap
de Bry, iii. 234. Journal de Grillet et Bechamel, p. 88.

m Lafitau, i. 580. Joutel Journ. Hiftor. 345. Lozano Defcr.
del Gran Chaco. 70. Hennepin Moeurs des Sauvages, p. 3o. 33.

manners

manners for a happy change in their slate, is a B o o K
point which can admit of no doubt. To despise IV.
and to degrade the female sex, is the characteristic "
of the savage state in every part of the globe. Man,
proud of excelling in strength and in courage, the
chief marks of pre-eminence among rude people,
treats woman, as an inferior, with disdain. The
Americans, perhaps from that coldness and insen-
fibility which has been confidered as peculiar to
their constitution, add neglect and harshness to con-
tempt. The molt intelligent travellers have been
firuck with this inattention of the Americans to
their women. It is not, as I have already obferv-
ed, by a itudied display of tenderness and. attach-
ment, that the American endeavours to gain the
heart of the woman whom he wishes to marry.
Marriage itself, instead of being an union of assec-
tion and interest between equals, becomes, among
them, the unnatural conjunction of a master with
his slave. It is the observation of an author, whose
opinions are deservedly of great weight, that wher-
ever wives are purchased, their condition is extreme-
ly depressed". They become the property and
the slaves of those who buy them. In whatever
part of the globe this custom prevails, the obferva-
tion holds. In countries where refinement has
made some progress, women, excluded from focie-
ty, and thut up in sequestered apartments, are kept
under the vigilant guard of their mailers. In ru-
der nations, they are degraded to the meanelt func-
tions. Among many people of America the mar-
riage-contra& is properly a purchase. The man
buys his wife of her parents. Though unacquaint-
ed with the use of money, or with such commercial
tranfations as take place in more improved focie-
ty, he knows how to give an equivalent for any
objet which he desires to poisess. In some places

n Sketches of His. of Man, i. 184.

the

B 0 0 K the suitor devotes his service for a certain time to

IV. the parents of the maid whom he courts; in others,
u..'. he hunts for them occasionally, or assists in cultivat-

ing their fields, and forming their canoes; in others,
he offers presents of such things as are deemed molt
valuable on account of their usefulness or rarity °.
in return for these, he receives his wife: and this
circumfiance, added to the low eflimation of wo-
men among savages, leads him to confider her as a
female servant whom he has acquired, and whom
he has a title to treat as an inferior. In all unpo-
lifhed nations, it is true, the functions in domelic
ceconomy, which fall naturally to the share of wo-
men, are so many, that they are fubje&ed to hard
labour, and must bear more than their full portion
of the common burden. But in America their con-
dition is so peculiarly grievous, and their depreflion
so complete, that servitude is a name too mild to
describe their wretched slate. A wife, among most
tribes, is no better than a beast of burden, destined
to every office of labour and fatigue. While the
men loiter out the day in sloth, or spend it in amuse--
ment, the women are condemned to incessant toil.
Tasks are imposed upon them without pity, and
services are received without complacence or grati-
tude P. Every circumstance reminds women of
this mortifying inferiority. They must approach
their lords with reverence; they mull regard them
as more exalted beings, and are not permitted to
eat in their pretence q. There are difirits in Ame-
rica where this dominion is so grievous, and so fen-
sibly felt, that some women, in a wild emotion of
maternal tenderness, have destroyed their female

o Lafitau Moeurs, &c. i. 560, &c. Charlev. iii. 285, &c.
Herrera, dec. 4. lib. iv. c. 7. Dumont, ii. 156.

P Tertre, ii. 382. Borde Relat. des Moeurs des Caraibes,
p. 21. Bier, 357. Condamine, p. ilo. Fermin. i. 79.

q Gumilla, i. 153. Barrere, 164. Labat. Voy. ii. 78.
Chanvalon, 51. Tertre, ii. 390.

children

children in their infancy, in order to deliver them B O O K
from that intolerable bondage to which they knew IV.
they were doomed r. Thus the first institution of ~-^
social life is perverted. That state of domeltic uni-
on towards which nature leads the human species,
in order to soften the heart to gentleness and huma-
nity, is rendered so unequal, as to eliablifh a cruel
distinction between the sexes, which forms the one
to be harsh and unfeeling, and humbles the other
to servility and fubjetion.

IT is owing, perhaps, in some measure, to this Thei wo-

men not

fRate of depression, that women in rude nations areprolif
far from being prolific s. The vigour of their con-
ftitution is exhausted by excessive fatigue, and the
wants and diltreffes of savage life are so numerous,
as to force them to take various precautions in or-
der to prevent too rapid an increase of their proge-
ny. Among wandering tribes, or such as depend
chiefly upon hunting for subsistence, the mother
cannot attempt to rear a second child, until the
first has attained such a degree of vigour as to be
in some measure independent of her care. From
this motive, it is the universal practice of the Ame-
rican women to nurse their children during several
years t; and as they seldom marry early, the peri-
od of their fertility is over, before they can finish
the long but necessary attendance upon two or
three successive children u. Among some of the least
polished tribes, whose industry and foresight does not
extend so far as to make any regular provision for
their own fubfifience, it is a maxim not to burden
themselves with rearing more than two children x;

r Gumilla, ii. 233. 238. Herrera, dec. 7. lib. ix. c. 4.
S Lafitau, i. 59o. Charlevoix, iii. 304. t Herrera,

dec. 6. lib. i. c. 4. u Charlev. iii. 303. Dumont
Mem. fur Louifiane, ii. 270. Denys Hist. Natur. de FAme-
rique, &c. ii. 365. Charlev. Hit. de Parag. ii. 422.

x Techo's Account of Paraguay, &c. Church. Colle&. vi.
!o8. Lett. Edif. a4. zoo. Lozano Defcr. 92.

and

B O O K and no such numerous families, as are frequent in

IV. civilized society, are to be found among men in
"V this slate Y. When twins are born, one of them

commonly is abandoned, because the mother is not
equal to the talk of educating both z. When a
mother dies while she is nursing a child, all hope
of preserving its life fails, and it is buried together
with her in the fame grave a. As the parents are
frequently exposed to want by their own improvi-
dent indolence, the difficulty of futlaining their chil-
dren becomes so great, that it is not uncommon to
abandon or defiroy them b. Thus their experi-
ence of the difficulty of training up an infant to
maturity, amidit the hardships of savage life, often
stifles the voice of nature among the Americans,
and suppresses the strong emotions of parental ten-
dernefs,

Parental as- BUT, though necessity compels the inhabitants
filen and of America thus to set bounds to the increase of

their families, they are not deficient in affection
and attachment to their offspring. They feel the
power of this inflina in its full force, and as long
as their progeny continue feeble and helpless, no
people exceed them in tenderness and care c. But
in rude nations, the dependence of children upon
their parents is of shorter continuance than in po-
lifhed societies. When men must be trained to
the various functions of civil life by previous dif-
cipline and education, when the knowledge of ab-
itrufe sciences must be taught, and dexterity in in-
tricate arts must be acquired, before a young man
is prepared to begin his career of action, the atten-
tive feelings of a parent are not confined to the

Y Maccleur's Journal, 63. z Lett. Edif. x. 200.

See NO TE XXV. a Charlev. iii. 368. Lett.
Edif. x. 2oo. - P. Melch. Hernandez Memor. de Cheriqui.
Colbert, Collea. Orig. Pap. i. b Venegas Hil. of
Californ. i. 8. ' Gumilla, i. z2 . Biet. 390.

year4

years of infancy, but extend to the establishment B OO K
of his child in the world. Even then, his solicitude IV.
does not terminate. His protection may fill be
requisite, and his wisdom and experience still prove
useful guides. Thus a permanent connection is
formed; parental tenderness is exercised, and fili-
al refped returned, throughout the whole course of
life. But in the simplicity of the savage state, the
affection of parents, like the instinctive fondness of
animals, ceases almost entirely as soon as their off-
spring attain maturity. Little inftrution fits them
for that mode of life to which they are defiined.
The parents, as if their duty were accomplished,
when they have conducted their children through
the helpless years of infancy, leave them afterwards
at entire liberty. They seldom advise or admo-
nifh, they never chide or chaffife them. They sus-
ser them to be absolute masters of their own aCti-
onsb. In an American hut, a father, a mother,
and their pofierity, live together like persons as-
fembled by accident, without teeming to feel the
obligation of the duties mutually arising from this
connection c. As filial love is not cherilhed by the
continuance of attention or good offices, the recol-
lection of benefits received in early infancy is too
faint to excite it. Conscious of their own liberty,
and impatient of restraint, the youth of America
are accustomed to act as if they were totally inde-
pendent. Their parents are not objects of greater
regard than other persons. They treat them al-
ways with neglect, and often with such harshness
and insolence, as to fill those who have been wit-

b Charlev. iii. 272. Biet. 390. Gumilla, i. 212. Lafi-

tau, i. 602. Creuxii, Hist. Canad. p. 71. Fernandez. Re-
lac. Hift.'de los Chequit. 33.

Charlev. Hist. N. Fr. iii. 273.

nefles

B OO K neffes of their conduct with horror d Thus the

, ideas which seem to be natural to man in his fa-

vage slate, as they result from his circumfiances
and condition in that period of his progress, affect
the two capital relations in domestic life. They
render the union between husband and wife une-
qual. They ihorten the duration, and weaken the
force, of the connection between parents and chil-
dren.
Politicaln- IV. FROM the domestic fiate of the Americans,

the transition is natural to the consideration of their
civil government and political institutions. In eve-
ry inquiry concerning the operations of men when
united together in society, the first object of atten-
tion lhould be their mode of subsistence. Accord-
ingly as that varies, their laws and policy must be
different. The inffitutions suited to the ideas and
exigencies of tribes, which filbfift chiefly by fishing
or hunting, and which have hardly formed a con-
ception of any species of property, will be much
more simple than those which must take place when
the earth is cultivated with regular indufiry, and a
right of property, not only in its productions, but
in the foil itself, is completely ascertained.
Mode ofc ALL the people of America, now under review,

belong to the former class. But though they may all
be comprehended under the general denomination
of savage, the advances which they had made in
the art of procuring to themselves a certain and
plentiful subsistence, were very unequal. On the
vast plains of South-America, man appears in one

d Gumillai i. 212. Tertre, ii. 376. Charlev. Hilt. de N.

France, iii. 309. Charlev. HiRf. de Parag, i. 15. Lezano,
Defcrip. del Gran Chaco, p. 68. ioo. zo1. Fernand. Relac.
HifRor. de los Chiquit. 426.

of

of the rudest flates in which he has been ever ob-B O O K
served, or, perhaps, can exist. Several tribes de- lV.
pend entirely upon the bounty of nature for sub-
fiftence. They discover no solicitude, they em-
ploy little foresight, they scarcely exert any indus-
try, to secure what is necessary for their support.
The Ilopayers of Brasil, the Guaxeros of Tierra-
Firme, the Caiguas, the Moxos, and several other
people of Paraguay, are unacquainted with every
species of cultivation. They neither sow nor plant.
Even the culture of the manioc, of which caffada
bread is made, is an art too intricate for their inge-
nuity, or too fatiguing to their indolence. The
roots which the earth produces spontaneously, the
fruits, the berries, and feeds, which they gather in
the woods, together with lizards and other reptiles,
which the heat engenders in. a fat foil, moiltened
by frequent rains, supply them with food during
some part of the year e. At other times they sub- Byfiling.
sift by filhing; and nature seems to have indulg-
ed the laziness of the people, by the liberality with
which (he ministers, in this way, to their wants.
The vast rivers of South-America abound with an
infinite variety of the most delicate fish. The
lakes and marshes, formed by the annual overflow-
ing of the waters, are filled with all the different
Ipecies, where they remain shut up, as in natural
reservoirs, for the use of the inhabitants. They
swarm in such shoals, that in some places they are
catched without art or industrys. In others, the
natives have discovered a method of infeating the
water with the juice of certain plants, by which
the fish are so intoxicated, that they float on the

e Nicuhoff Hist. of Brasil. Church Coil. ii. 134. Simon,

Conquifta de Tierra-Firme, p. 166. Techo, Account of Pa-
raguay, &c. Church. vi. 78. Lettr Edif. 23. 384. Io. 190.
Lozano, Defcrip. del Gran Chaco, p. 81. Ribas, HiRor. de
los triumfos, &c. p. 7. f See NOT E XXVI.

surface,

BOO K surface, and are taken with the hand g. Some

IV. tribes have ingenuity enough to preserve them

without salt, by drying or fmoaking them upon
hurdles over a flow fire h. The prolific quality of
the rivers in South-America induces many of the
natives to retort to their banks, and to depend al-
molt entirely for nourishment on what their waters
supply with such profusion i. In this part of the
globe, hunting seems not to have been the first
employment of men, or the firit effort of their in-
vention and labour to obtain food. They were
fishers before they became hunters; and as the
occupations of the former do not call for equal
exertions of activity, or talents, with those of the
latter, people in that state appear to possess neither
the fame degree of enterprise, nor of ingenuity.
The petty nations, adjacent to the Maragnon and
Orinoco, are manifefily the most inactive and least
intelligent of all the Americans.
By hunting. NONE but tribes contiguous to great rivers can

sustain themselves in this manner. The greater
part of the American nations, dispersed over the
forests with which their country is covered, do not
procure subsistence with the fame facility. For al-
though these forests, especially in the southern con-
tinent of America, are itored plentifully with game k,
considerable efforts of activity and ingenuity are
requisite in pursuit of it. Necessity incited them to
the one, and taught them the other. Hunting became
their principal occupation; and as it called forth
firenuous exertions of courage, of force, and of in-

g See NO TE XXVII.
h Condam, 159. Gumiilla, ii. 37. Lettr, Edif. 14. 199.
23. 328. Acugna, Relat. dela Riv. des Amaz. 138.

i Barrere, Relat. de Fr. Equin. p. 155.
nk P. Martyr, Decad. p. 324. Gumilla, ii. 4, &c. Acug-
ua, i. 156.

vention,

vention, it was deemed a funciobi no less honoiuri- i o t0
able than necessary. This was peculiar to the men. Iv
They were trained to it from their earliest youth:
A bold and dextrous hunter ranked next in fame
to the diflinguifhed warrior, and an alliance with
the former is often courted in preference to one
with the latter '. Hardly any device, which the in-
genuity of man has discovered for ensnaring or de-
stroying wild animals, was unknown to the Ameri-
cans. While engaged in this favourite exercise,
they shake off the indolence peculiar to their na-
ture, the latent powers and vigour of their minds
are routed, and they become ative, persevering;
and indefatigable. Their sagacity in finding their
prey, and their address in killing it, are equal;
Their reason and their senses, being conflantly di-'
reted towards this one objet, the former displays
fich fertility of invention, and the latter acquire
such a degree of acuteness, as appear almost incre-
dible. They discern the footsteps of a wild beast,
which escape every other eye, and can follow them
with certainty through the pathless forest. If they
attack their game openly, their arrow seldom errs
from the mark m; if they endeavour to circumvent
it by art, it is almost impossible to avoid their toils.
Among several tribes, their young men were not
permitted to marry, until they had given such
proofs of their skill in hunting as put it beyond
doubt that they were capable of providing for a
family. Their ingenuity always on the stretch,
and sharpened by emulation, as well as necessity,
has struck out many inventions, which greatly fa-
cilitate success in the chafe. The most singular of
these is the discovery of a poison in which they dip
the arrows employed in hunting. The slightest

l Charlev. Hiftuire de la N. France, iii. 1i.
l Biet Voy. de France Equin. 357. Davies' Difcov. of
the River of Amaz. Purchaf. iv. p. 1287.

VOL. II. G wound

B O O K wound with those envenomed ihafts is mortal. If

IV. they only pierce the skin, the blood fixes and con-
"'Cg ageals in a moment, and the strongest animal falls

motionless to the ground. Nor does this poison,
notwithstanding its violence and subtlety, inset the
flesh of the animal which it kills. That may be
eaten with perfect safety, and retains its native re-
Iifh and qualities. All the nations along the Ma-
ragnon and Orinoco are acquainted with this com-
position, the chief ingredient in which is the juice
extracted from the root of the curare, a species of
withe n. In other parts of America, they employ
the juice of the manchenille for the fame purpose,
and it operates with a no less fatal activity. To
people poifelled of those secrets, the bow is a more
deitrutive weapon than the musket, and, in their
flilful hands, does great execution among the birds
and beasts which abound in the forests of America.
By agricul- BUT the life of a hunter gradually leads man

to a slate more advanced. The chafe, even where
prey is abundant, and the dexterity of the hunter
much improved, affords but an uncertain mainte-
nance, and at orme seasons it must be suspended
altogether. If a savage trusts to his bow alone for
food, he and his family will be often reduced to
extreme distress 0. Hardly any region of the earth
furnishes man spontaneously with what his wants
require. In the mildest climates, and most fertile
foils, his own induitry and foresight must be exert-
ed, in some degree, to secure a regular filpply of
food. Their experience of this surmounts the ab-
horrence of labour natural to savage nations, and
compels them to have recourse to culture, as sub-
fidiary to hunting. In particular situations, some

n Gumilla, ii. i. &c. Condam. zo8. Recherch. Philof.
ii. 239. Bancroft Nat. Hilt. of Guiana, 281, &c.

o See N O T E XXVITI.

small

small tribes may subsist by fishing, independent of.B 0 O K
any production of the earth, raised by their own .v .
industry. But throughout all America, we scarce-'
ly meet with any nation of hunters, which does
not praftife some species of cultivation.

THEIR agriculture, however, is neither exten-The various

five nor laborious. As game and fish are theirftheiri'
principal food, all they aim at by cultivation, is to ture
supply any occasional defeat of these. In the south-
ern continent of America, the natives confined their
industry to rearing a few plants, which, in a rich
foil and warm climate, were easily trained to ma-
turity. The chief of there is Maize, well known
in Europe by the name of Turkey or Indian wheat,
a grain extremely prolific, of simple culture, agree-
able to the taste, and affording a firong hearty
nourilhment. The second is the manioc, .which
grows to the fizeof a large shrub, or finall tree, and
produces roots somewhat resembling parsnips. As-
ter carefully squeezing out the juice, these roots are
grated down to a fine powder, and formed into
thin cakes, called Caffada bread, which, though in-
sipid to the taste, proves no contemptible food r.
As the juice of the manioc is a deadly poison, some
authors have celebrated the ingenuity of the Ame-
ricans, in converting a noxious plant into whole-
some nourishment. But it ihould rather be confl-
dered as one of the desperate expedients for pro-
curing subsistence, to which necefiity reduces rude
nations; or, perhaps, men were led to the use of
it by a progress, in which there is nothing marvel-
lous. One species of manioc is altogether free of
any poisonous quality, and may be eaten without
any preparation but that of roaRing it in the em-

P Sloane Hist. of Jam. Introd. p. I8. Labat. i. 394. A-

costa Hill. Ind. Occid. Natur. lib. iv. c. 17. Ulloa, i. 6z.
Aublet Mem. fur le Magnioc. Hist. de Plantes, tom. ii. p.
65, &c.

G 2 ber&

B o O K bers. This, it is probable, was first used by tlie

Iv
. ,Americans as food; and necessity having gradual-

ly taught them the art of separating its pernicious
juice from the other species, they have by experi-
ence found it to be the most prolific as well as the
most nourishing. plant of the two q. The third is
the plantain, which though it rites to the height of a
tree, is of such quick growth, that in lefs.than a year
it rewards the induitry of the cultivator with its
fruit. This, when roasted, supplies the place of
bread, and is both palatable and nourishing r. The
fourth is the potatoe,. whose culture and qualities are
too well known to need any description. The fifth
is pimento, a small: tree, yielding, a strong aromatic
spice. The Americans, who, like other inhabitants
of warm climates, delight in whatever is hot and of
poignant flavour,, deem this seasoning a necessary
of life, and mingle it copiously with every kind of
food they take s.

Sucr are the various produ&ions, which were

the chief objet of culture among the hunting tribes
on the continent of America, and with a moderate
exertion of active and provident industry, these
might have yielded a full supply to the wants of
a numerous people. But men, accustomed to the
free and; vagrant life of hunters, are incapable of
regular application- to labour; and confider agricul-
ture as a secondary and inferior occupation. Ac-
cordingly, the provision for subsistence, arising from
cultivation, was so. limited and scanty among the
Americans, that, upon any accidental failure of
their ufualt success in hunting, they were often re-
duced to extreme distress.

q Martyr Decad. 301. Labat. i. 411. Gumilla, iii. 19z
Machuca Milic Indiana,. 16. See- N O T E XXIX.

*See NOTE XXX.
' Gumilla, iii. i1z4 AcoRfa, lib. iv. c, o0.

I~i~

IN the islands, the mode of fubfiting was con- B o 0 K

fiderably different. None of the large animals IV.
which abound ,on the .continent vwere .known there.
Only four species of quadrupeds, besides a kind of
small dumb dog, exified in the islands,. the biggest
of which did not exceed the size of a rabbit u. To
hunt such diminutive prey, was an occupation which
required no effort either of activity or courage.
The chief employment ds a hunter in the isles was
to kill kirds, which on the continent are deemed
ignoble game, and left chiefly to the purfait of
'boys x. This want of animals, as well as their pe-
culiar situation, led the islanders to depend princi-
pally upon fishing for their subsistence Y. Their
:rivers, and 'the sea with which they are surrounded,
supplied them with this species of food. At some
particular seasons, turtle, crabs, and other shell-fish,
·abounded in such numbers, that they could support
dthemfelves with a facility in which their indolence
delighted z. At other times, they ate lizards, :and
various reptiles of odious forms a. To fishing, the
inhabitants of the islands added some degree of
-agriculture. Maize be manioc, and other plants,
were cultivated in the fame manner as on the con-
tinert. But all the fruits of their indufiry, together Their agri.
with what their foil and climate produced fponta- culture vety

-

- limited.

neoufly, afforded them but a scanty maintenance.
Though their demands for food were very sparing,
they hardly raised what was sufficient for their own
consumption. If a few Spaniards fettled in any
diftri6t, such a small addition of supernumerary
mouths soon exhausted -their scanty stores, and
brought on a famine.

u Oviedo, lib. xii in proem. X Ribas Hilt de los

*triumph. p. 13. De la Potherie, ii. 33. iii. 20. x Oviedo,
lib. xiii. c. i. Gomara Hilt. Gener. c. 28. G Gomara
Hilt. Gener. c. 9 Labat, ii. 22, &c. a Oviedo, lib.
xiii c. 3. ' b See N OT E XXI.

'Tw

B o o K Two circumfiances, common to all the savages

Iv. nations of America, concurred with those which I

·--v e have already mentioned, not only in rendering
Two caufles . '.·
ofits imper-their agriculture imperfect, but in circumscribing
faion. their power in all their operations. They had no

tame animals; and they were unacquainted with
the use of metals.

The oan,.f IN other parts of the globe, man, in his rudest
tame ani-
;pals. state, appears as lord of the creation, giving law to

various tribes of animals, which he has tamed and
reduced to fubjedion. The Tartar follows his
prey on the horse which he has reared; or tends his
numerous herds, which furnish him both with food
and cloathing; the Arab has rendered the camel
docile, and avails himself of its persevering strength;
the Laplander has formed the rein-deer to be sub-
servient to his will; and even the people of Kam-
chatka have trained their dogs to labour. This
command over the inferior creatures is one of the
noblest prerogatives of man, and among the great-
eft efforts of his wisdom and power. Without
this, his dominion is incomplete. He is a monarch,
who has no fubjeets; a master, without servants,
and mufl perform every operation by the strength
of his own arm. Such was the condition of all the
rude nations in America. Their reason was so lit-
tle improved, or their union so incomplete, that
they seem notto have been conscious of the fuperio-
rity of their nature, and suffered all the animal cre-
ation to retain its liberty, without establishing their
own authority over any one species. Most of the
animals, indeed, which have been rendered do-
mreftic in our continent, do not exist in the New
World; but those peculiar to it are- neither so
fierce, nor so formidable, as to have exempted them
from servitude. There are some animals of the
fame species in both continents. But the'rein-deer,

which

which has been tamed and broken to the yoke in B 0 0 K
the one hemisphere, runs wild in the other. The IV.
b/in of America is manifestly of the fame species
with the horned cattle of the other hemisphere c.
These, even among the rudelt nations in our con-
tinent, have been rendered domeflic; and in con-
sequence of his dominion over them, man can ac-
complifh works of labour with greater facility, and
has made a vast addition to his means of fubfiii-
ence. The inhabitants of many regions in the
New World, where the bison abounds, might have
derived the fame advantages from it. It is not of
a nature so indocile, but that it might have been
trained to be as subservient to man as our cattle d.
But a savage, in that uncultivated state wherein
the Americans were discovered, is the enemy of
the other animals, not their superior. He waftes
and destroys, but knows not how to multiply or
to govern them e.

THIS, perhaps, is the most notable diftinftion

between the inhabitants of the Ancient and New
Worlds, and a high pre-eminence of civilized men
above such as continue rude. The greatest opera-
tions of man in changing and improving the face
of nature, as well as his most considerable efforts
in cultivating the earth, are accomplifhied by means
of the aid which he receives from the animals whom
he has tamed and employs in labour. It is by their
strength that he subdues the stubborn foil, and
converts the desert or marsh into a fruitful field.
But man, in his civilized state, is so accustomed to
the service of the domestic animals, that he seldom
reflets upon the vail benefits which he derives
from it. If we were to suppose him, even when

C Buffon, Artic. Bison.
A Nouv. Decouverte par Hennepin, p. 192. Kalm. i. 207.
" Buffon Hilt. Nat. ix. 85. Hist. Philof et Polit. des Eta-
bliffeni. des Europ. dans les deux Indes, vi. 364.

motR

P Q 0 K mos improved, to be deprived of their useful mi-

lv. niltry, his empire over nature must in some mea-
""v sure cease, and he would remain a feeble animal,

at a loss how to subsist, and incapable of attempt-
ing such arduous undertakings as their afliftance
enables him to execute with ease.

Want9ofthe IT is a doubtful point, whether the dominion of
ls 'ne man over the animal creation, or his acquiring

the use of metals, has contributed most to extend
his power. The xra of this important disco-
very is unknown, and in our hemisphere very
remote. It is only by tradition, or by digging up
some rude infiruments of our forefathers, that we
learn that mankind were originally unacquainted
with the use of metals, and endeavoured to supply
the want of them by emiploying flints, shells, bones,
and other hard substances, for the fame purposes
which metals serve among poliflled nations. Na-
ture completes the formation of rome metals.
Gold, silver, and copper, are found in. their perfect
state, in the clefts of rocks, in the.,tides of moun-
tains, or the channels of rivers. There were ac-
cordingly the metals first known, and first applied
to use. But iron, the most serviceable of all, and to
which man is most indebted, is never discovered
in its perfec form; its gross and fiubborn ore
muff feel twice the force of fire, and go through
two laborious processes, before it become fit for use.
Man was long acquainted with the other metals, be-
fore he acquired the art of fabricating iron, or at-
tained such ingenuity as to perfect an invention, to
which he is indebted for those infiruments where-
with he subdues the earth, and commands all its
inhabitants. But in this, as well as in many o-
ther refpeas, the inferiority of the Americans was
conspicuous. All the savage tribes, scattered over
the continent and islands, were totally unacquainted

with

with the metals which the foil produces in great B 00 K
abundance, if we except some trifling quantity of IV.
gold, which they picked up in the torrents that ~
descended from their mountains, and formed into
ornaments. Their devices, to supply this want of
the serviceable metals, were extremely rude and
aukward. The moit simple operation was to them
aht undertaking of immense difficulty and labour.
To fell a tree with no other instruments than
hatchets of stone, was employment for a month f.
To form a canoe into shape, and to hollow it,
consumed years; and it frequently began to rot
before they were able to finish it . Their opera-
tions in agriculture were equally flow and defec-
tive. In a country covered with woods of the hard-
eit timber, the clearing of a small field destined for
culture required the united efforts of a tribe, and
was a work of much time and great toil. This
was the business of the men, and their indolence
Wvas satisfied with performing it in a very slovenly
manner. The labour of cultivation was left to the
women, who after digging, or rather stirring the
field, with wooden mattocks, and stakes hardened
in the fire, sowed or planted it; but were more in-
debted. for the increase to the fertility of the foil,
than to their own rude industry h

AGRICULTURE, even when the strength of man

is seconded by that of the animals which he has sub-
jeated to the yoke, and his power augmented by
the use of the various instruments with which the
discovery of metals has furnished him, is 'fill a work
of great labour; and it is with the sweat of-his
brow that he renders the earth fertile. It is not
wonderful, then, that people destitute of both

f Gumilla, iii. 196.
g Borde Relat. des Caraibes, p. 22.

u Gumilla, iii. 166, &c. Lettr. Edif. xii. Io.

these

B O o K these advantages should have made so little progress

IV. in cultivation, that they must be'confidered as de-
-.-- pending for subsistence on fishing and hunting,

rather than on the fruits of their own labour.

Political in FROM this description of the mode of subsisting
rising from among the rude American tribes, the form and
this state. genius of their political institutions may be deduc-

ed, and we are enabled to trace various circumitan-
ces of diftintion between them and more civilized
nations.

Divided I. THEY were divided into small independent
into small communities. While hunting is the chief source of
communi-
tics. subsistence, a valt extent of territory is requisite for

supporting a small number of people. In propor-
tion as men multiply and unite, the wild animals,
on which they prey, diminish, or fly at a greater
distance from the haunts of their enemy. The in-
crease of a society in this slate is limited by its own
nature, and the members of it must either disperse,
like the game which they pursue, or fall upon some
better method of procuring food, than by hunting.
Beasts of prey are by nature solitary and unsocial,
they go not forth to the chafe in herds, but delight
in those recesses of the forest where they can roam
and destroy undisturbed. A nation of hunters re-
fembles them, both in occupation and in genius.
They cannot form into large communities, because
it would be impossible to find subsistence, and they
must drive to a distance every rival who may en-
croach on those domains, which they confider as
their own. This was the state of all the Ame-
rican tribes, the numbers in each were small,
though scattered over vail countries; they were
far removed from one another, and engaged in
perpetual hostilities or rivalfhip i. In America, the

i Lozano, Defcrip. del Gran Chaco, 59. 6z. Fernandez,
Relac. Hist. de los Chiquit. 162,

word

word nation is not- of the fame import as in other B O O K
parts of the globe. It is applied to frnall societies, Iv.
not exceeding, perhaps, two or three hundred per-
sons, but occupying provinces larger than some
kingdoms in Europe. The country of Guiana,
though of larger extent than the kingdom of
France, and divided among a great number of
nations, did not contain above twenty-five thou-
sand inhabitants k. In the provinces which border
on the Orinoco, one may travel several hundred
miles in different directions, without finding a fin-
gle hut, or observing the footsteps of a human
creature 1. In North America, where the climate
is more rigorous, and the foil less fertile, the defo-
lation is still greater. There, vast journeys of some
hundred leagues have been made through uninha-
bited plains and forests m. As long as hunting
continues to be the chief employment of man to
which he trusts for subsistence, he can hardly be
said to have occupied the earth n.

2. NATIONS which depend upon hunting areunac-

firangers to the idea of property. As the animals quwit
on which the hunter feeds are not bred under his idea of pro-
infpetion, nor nourished by his care, he can claim perty
no right to them, while they run wild in the foreit.
Where game is so plentiful that it may be catched
with little trouble, men never dream of appropriat-
ing what is of small value, or of easy acquisition.
Where it is so rare, that the labour or danger of the
chafe requires the united efforts of a tribe, or vil-
lage, what is killed is a common flock, belonging

k Voyages de Marchais, iv. 353.
I Gumilla, ii. o01.
m M. Fabry, quoted by Buffon, iii. 488. Lafitau, ii. 179.

Boffl, Travels through Louisiana, i. ill. See NO TE
XXX1f.

P See N (-T E XXXII.

equally

B O K equally to all, who, by their ikill or their courage,

IV. have contributed to the success of the excursion.
J ~The forest, or hunting-grounds, are deemed the

property of the tribe, from which it has a title to
exclude every rival nation. But no individual ar-
rogates a right to any diftri& of these, in prefer-
ence to his fellow-citizens. They belong alike to
all; and thither, as to a general and undivided
store, all repair in quest of fullenance. The fame
principles, by which they regulate their chief oc-
cupation, extend to that which is subordinate. Even
agriculture has not introduced among them a com-
plete idea of property. As the men hunt, the wo-
men labour together, and after they have shared
the toils of the seed-time, they enjoy the harvest in
common °. Among some tribes, the increase of
their cultivated lands is deposited in a public gra-
nary, and divided among them, at stated times,
according to their wants P. Among others, though
they lay up separate ilores, they do not acquire such
an exclusive right of property, that they can enjoy
superfluity, while those around them susser want q.
Thus the diftinaions arising from the inequality of
possessions are unknown. The terms rich or poor
enter not into their language, and being firangers
to property, they are unacquainted with that, which
is the great objeEt of laws and policy, as well as the
chief motive which induced mankind to establish
the various arrangements of-regular government r

Hig fene 3. 3PEOPLE in this slate retain a high sense of
fnd sq equality and independence. Wherever the idea of
pendence. property is not established, there can be no diftinc,

o Dr. Ferguson's Essay, 125.
P Gumilla, i. 265. Brickell, Hist. of N. Carol. 327.
See N OTE XXXIV.

a Denys, Hilt. Natur. ii. 392, 393.
r P. Martyr, Decad, p. 45. Veneg. Hilt. of Californ. i.
66. Lery, Navig. in Brasil, c. 17.

tion

tion among men, but what arises from personal B O O K
qualities. These can be conspicuous only on such '1V
occasions as call them forth into exertion. In times
of danger, or in affairs of intricacy, the wisdom and
experience of age are consulted, and prescribe the
measures which ought to be pursued. When they
take the field against the enemies of their country,
the warrior of most approved courage leads the
youth to the combat s. If they go forth in a body
to the chafe, the most expert and adventurous
hunter is foremost, and direcs their motions. But
during seasons of tranquillity and inaction, when
there is no occasion to display those talents, all pre-
eminence ceases. Every circumstance indicates,
that all the members of the community are on a
level. They are clothed in the fame simple garb.
They feed on the fame plain fare. Their houses
and furniture are exatly similar. No distinction
can arise from the inequality of possessions. What-
ever forms dependence on one part, or constitutes
superiority on the other, is unknown. All are free-
men, all feel themselves to be such, and assert with
firmness the rights which belong to that condition t
This sentiment of independence is imprinted so
deeply in their nature, that no change of condition
can eradicate it and bend their minds to servitude.
Accustomed to be absolute masters of their own
condut, they disdain to execute the orders of ano-
ther, and, having never known control, will not
submit to correction U. Many of the Americans,
when they found that they were treated as slaves by
Spaniards, died of grief; many destroyed them-
selves in despair x.

' Acofta, Hist. lib.vi. c. 19. Stadius, Hist. Brasil, lib. ii.
c. 13. DeBry, iii. p. no. Biet, 361.

t Labat, vi. 12z4 Brickell, Hilt. of Carol. 310.
u See NOTE XXXV.
x Oviedo, lib. iii. c. 6. p. 97. Vega, Conquift. de la

Florida, i. 30. ii. 416. Labat. ii. 138. Benzo, Hit. Nov.
Orb. lb, iv. C. 25.

4. AMONG

B O O K 4. AMONG people in this slate, government can

IV. assume little authority, and the sense of civil fubor-

scf dination must remain very imperfect. While the
fubordina- idea of property is unknown, or incompletely con-
tion imper- ceived, and the spontaneous productions of the
fe¢.

earth, as well as the fruits of indufiry, are confider-
ed as belonging to the public flock, there can
hardly be any such subjet of difference or difcuflion
among the members of the fame community, as
will require the hand of authority to interpose in
order to adjust it. Where the right of separate and
exclusive poieflion is not introduced, the great ob-
jet of law and jurisdiction does not exist. When
called into the field, either in their own defence,
or to invade the territories of their enemies, when
engaged in the toil and dangers of the chafe, the
members of a tribe perceive that they are part of a
political body. They are conscious of their own
connection with the companions in conjunction
with whom they at ; and they follow and reverence
such as excel in conduct and valour. But, during
the intervals between such common efforts, they
are scarcely conscious of the ties of political union x.
No visible form of government is established. The
names of mrzgiftrate andfubjet are not in use. Every
one seems to enjoy his natural independence almost
entire. If a scheme of public utility be proposed,
the members of the community are left at liberty to
chufe whether they will aflif or not in carrying it
into execution. No flatute imposes any service as
a duty, no compulsory laws oblige them to per-
form it. All their resolutions are voluntary, and
flow from the impulse of their own minds Y. The
firfi ftep towards establishing a public jurifdition

x Lozano, Defcr. del Gran Chaco, 93. Melendez Tefo-
ros Verdaderos, ii. 23. See NOTE XXXVI.

r Charley. Hilt. Nov. France, iii. 266. 268.

has

has not been taken in those rude societies. The B-o O K
right of revenge is left in private hands ". If vio- IV.
lence is committed, or blood is shed, the commu- I''
nity does not assume the power either of inflicting
or of moderating the punishment. It belongs to
the family and friends of the person injured or slain
to avenge the wrong, or to accept of the reparation
offered by the aggressor. If the elders interpose,
it is to advise, not to decide, and it is seldom their
counsels are listened to; for as it is deemed pufil-
lanimous to susser an offender to escape with impu-
nity, resentment is implacable and everlasting a
The object of government among savages is rather
foreign than domestic. They do not aim at main-
taining interior order and police by public regula-
tions, or the exertions of any permanent authority,
but labour to preserve such union among the mem-
bers of their tribe, that they may watch the motions
of their enemies, and act againfi them with concert
and vigour.

SUCH was the form of political order eftablifhedTo what

among the greater part of the American nations. people tioho
In this state were most of the tribes, spread over the apply.
vast provinces extending eastward of the Miflifippi,
from the mouth of the St. Laurence to the confines
of Florida. In a similar condition were the people
of Brasil, the inhabitants of Chili, and several tribes
in Paraguay and Guiana, and in the countries
which stretch from the mouth of the Orinoco to the
peninsula of Yucatan. Among such an infinite
number of petty associations, there may be pecu-
liarities which conflitute a distinction, and mark the

* Herrera, dec. 8. lib. iv. c. 8.
a Charlev. Hist. N. France, iii. 271, 272. Lafit. i. 486.
Caflani Hist. de Nuevo Reyno de Granada, zz6.

various

B OO K various degrees of their civilization and improve-

IV. ment. But an attempt to trace and enumerate

' these would be vain, as they have not been obferv-

ed by persons, capable of discerning the minute
and delicate circumfiances, which serve to difcrimi-
nate nations resembling one another in their gene-
ral character and features. The description which
I have given will apply, with little variation, to the
policy of every people in America, which to fishing
and hunting had added some degree of agriculture.

RUDE and imperfect as those inflitutions may

appear, several tribes were not so far advanced in
their political progress. Among all those petty na-
tions which trusted for subsistence entirely to fish-
ing and hunting without any species of cultivation,
the union was so incomplete, and thel sense of
mutual dependence so feeble, that hardly any ap.
pearance of government or order can be discerned
in their proceedings. Their wants are few, their
objects of pursuit simple, they form into separate
tribes, and at together, from inflint, habit, or
conveniency, rather than from any formal concert
and association. To this class belong the Califor-
nians, several of the small nations in the extensive
country of Paraguay, some of the people on the
banks of the Orinoco, and on the river St. Magda-
lene, in the new kingdom of Granada b

Someirre- BUT though among there lait-mentioned tribes
gulrnsp. there was hardly any shadow of regular govern-

ment, and even among those which I first de-
fcribed, its authority is slender and confined with-
in narrow bounds, there were some places in Ame-

b Venegas. i. 68. Lettr. Edif. ii. 176. Techo. Hilt. of
Parag. Churchill, vi. 78. Hist. Gen, des Voyages, xiv. 74.

rica

rica where it was carried far beyond the degreeB o o K
which seems natural to rude nations. In surveying IV.
the political operations of man, either in his savage '-~'
or civilized state, we discover singular and excen-
tric inflitutions, which flart-.as it: were from their
liation, and fly off so wide that we labour in vain
to bring them within the. general flaws of any sys-
tem, or to account for them by those principles
which influence other.communities in a similar si-
tuation. Some instances. of this occur among those
people of America, whom I have. included under
the common denomination of savage' These are
so curious and important that I shall describe them,
and attempt to explain their origin.

IN the New World, as well as in others parts of Particulay

O in some of

the globe, cold or temperate countries appear tothe warmer
be the favourite feat of freedom and independence. regios.
There the mind, like the body, is firm and vigor-
ous. Conscious of their own dignity, and ciapable
of the greatest efforts in asserting it, men aspire
to independence, and their stubborn spirits sloop
with relutance to the yoke of servitude. In warm-
er climates, by whose influence the whole frame is'
so much enervated, that present pleasure is the fu-
preme felicity, and mere repose is enjoyment, men
acquiesce, almoi without a firuggle, in the domi-
nion of a superior. Accordingly, if we proceed
from north to south along the continent of Ameri-
ca, we shall find the power of those veiled with au-
thority gradually increasing, and the spirit of the
people becoming more tame and paflive. In Flo-
rida, the authority of the sachems, caziques, or
chiefs, was not only permanent, but hereditary.
They were distinguished by peculiar ornaments,
they enjoyed prerogatives of various kinds, and
were treated by their fubjeats with that reve-
rence, which people accultomed to fubjedion, pay

VOL. II. H to

B O O K to a matler c. Among the nation of the Natchez,

IV. situated on the banks of the Miflifippi, a difference'
oh^ of rank took place, with which the northern tribes
Among the
Natchez. were altogether unacquainted. Some families were

reputed noble, and enjoyed hereditary dignity.
The body cf the people was confidered as vile,
and formed only for fubjetion. This difiination
was marked by appellations which intimated the
high elevation of the one itate, and the ignomini-
ous depreflion of the other. The former were call-
ed Refpetable; the latter, the Stinkards. The great
Chief, in whom the supreme authority was vested,
is reputed to be a being of superior nature, the
brother of the Sun, the sole objet of their wor-
ship. They approach him with religious venera-
tion, and honour him as the representative of their
deity. His will is a law, to which all submit with
implicit obedience. The lives of his fubjets are
so absolutely at his disposal, that if any one has in-
curred his displeasure, he comes with profound hu-
mility and offers him his head. Nor does their do-
minion end with their lives; their principal officers,
their favourite wives, together with many domes-
tics of inferior rank, are sacrificed at their tombs,
they they may be attended- in the next world by
the fame persons who served them in this; and
such is the reverence in which they are held, that
those viaims welcome death with exultation, deem-
ing it a recompence of their fidelity and a mark of
diltinetion, to be feleted to accompany their de-
ceased mafterd. Thus a perfet despotism, with
its full train of superstition, arrogance, and cruelty,
is eftablified among the Natchez, and by a singular

c Cardenas y Cano Enfuyo Chrinol. a la Hill. de Florida,

p, 46. Le Moyne de Morgues Jeones Floridae. Ap. de Bry.
p. i. 4, &c. Charlev. Hilt. N. France, iii. 467, 468.

d luumonr Memoir Hill. fur Louifiane, i. 175. Charlev.
Hist. N. France, iii. 4i9, &c. Lettr. Edif. 2o. io6. I i.

fatality,

fatality, that people has tafted of the worse calami- B O O K
ties incident to polished nations, though they them- IV.
selves are not far advanced beyond the tribes a-'-"-
round them in civility and improvement. In Hif-In the if-
paniola, Cuba, and the larger islands, their caziqueslands.
or chiefs polleffed extensive power. The dignity
was transmitted by hereditary right from father to
son. Its honours and prerogatives were confider-
able. Their subjects paid great refpea to the ca-
ziques, and executed their orders without hefitati'
on or reserve e. They were dillinguifhed by pe-
culiar ornaments, and in order to preserve or aug-
ment the veneration of the people, they had the
address to call in the aid of fuperition to uphold
their authority. They delivered their mandates as
the oracles of heaven, and pretended to possess the
power of regulating the seasons, and of dispensing
rain or sun-shine, according as their fubjeas flood
in need of them.

IN some parts of the continent, the power of thein Bogota,

caziques seems to have been as extensive as in the
isles. In Bogota, which is now a province of the
New kingdom of Granada, there was fettled a na-
tion, more considerable in number and more im-
proved in the various arts of life, than any people
in America except the Mexicans and Peruvians.
They fubfifled chiefly by agriculture. The idea
of property was introduced among them, and its
rights secured by laws, handed down by tradition,
and observed with great care f They lived in
large towns. They were clothed in a decent man-
ner, and their houses may be termed commodi-
ous, when compared with those of the people

c Herrera, dec. I. lib. i. c. x6. lib. iii. c. 44. p. 88. Life of

Columb. ch. 32. f Fiedrahita Hist. de las conquift
del N. reyno de Gran, p. 46.

H 2 . around

B O O K around them. The effects of this uncommon ci-

IV. vilization were conspicuous. Government had as-

i ifumed a regular form. A jurifdiaion was efta-
blifhfed, which took cognizance of different crimes,
and punished them with rigour. A diftindion of
ranks was known; their chief, to whom the Spa-
niards gave the title of monarch, and who me-
rited that name on account of his splendor as well
as power, reigned with absolute authority. He
was attended by officers of various conditions; he
never appeared in public without a numerous reti-
nue; he was carried in a fort of palanquin with
much pomp, and harbingers went before him to
sweep the road and firew it with flowers. This
uncommon pomp was supported by presents or
taxes received from his subjects, to whom their
prince was such an objea of veneration, that none
of them presumed to look him directly in the face,
or ever approached him but with an averted coun-
tenance g. There were other tribes on the fame
continent, among which, though far less advanced
than the people of Bogota in their progress towards
refinement, the freedom and independence, natu-
ral to man in his savage slate, was much abridged,
and their caziques had assumed extensive authori-
ty.

Causes of IT is not easy to point out the circumfiances, or
ar appear- to discover the causes which contributed to intro-
antes. duce and establish among each of those people a

form of government so different from that of the
tribes around them, and so repugnant to the ge-
nius of rude nations. If the persons who had an
opportunity of observing them, in their original
itate, had been more attentive and more discern-

g Herrera, dec. 6. lib. i.c. z. lib. v. c. 56. Piedrahita, c.
S. p. 25, &c. Gomara Hist. c. 72.

ing,

/

ing, we might have received information from B 0 Q K
them sufficient to guide us in this inquiry. If the IV.
tranfations of people, unacquainted with the use "
of letters, were not involved in impenetrable ob-
fcurity, we might have derived some information
from that source. But as nothing fatisfaAoory can
be gathered, either from the accounts of the Spa-
niards, or from their own traditions, we must have
recourse to conjectures, in order to explain the ir-
regular appearances in the political slate of the peo-
ple whom I have mentioned. As all those tribes
which had loft their native liberty and independ-
ence were feated in the Torrid Zone, or in coun-
tries approaching to it, the climate may be sup-
posed to have had some influence in forming their
minds to that servitude, which seems to be the
defliny of man in those regions of the globe. But
though the influence of climate, more powerful
than that of any other natural cause, is not to be
overlooked; that alone cannot be admitted as a
solution of the point in question. The operations
of men are so complex, that we must not attribute
the form which they assume, to the force of a tingle
principle or cause. Although despotism be con-
fined in America to the Torrid Zone, and to the
warm regions bordering upon it, I have already
observed that these countries contain various tribes,
some of which poltefs an high degree of freedom,
and others are altogether unacquainted with the
refiraints of government. The indolence and ti-
midity peculiar to the inhabitants of the islands,
rendered them so incapable of the sentiments or
efforts necessary for maintaining independence, that
there is no occasion to search for any other cause
of their tame submission to the will of a superior.
The fubjetion of the Natchez, and of the people
of Bogota, seems to have been the consequence of

a difference

B 0 0 Ka difference in their state from that of the other

IV. Americans. They were fettled nations, residing

^
" constantly in one place. Hunting was not the

chief occupation of the former, and the latter seem
hardly to have trufied to it for any part of their
fibfitbience. Both had made such progress in agri-
culture and arts, that the idea of property was in-
troduced in some degree in the one community,
and fully established in the other. Among people
in this slate, avarice and ambition have acquired
objects, and have begun to exert their power;
views of interest allure the selfish; the desire of
pre-eminence excites the enterprising; dominion
is courted by both; and passions unknown to man
in his savage slate prompt the interested and am-
bitious to encroach on the rights of their fellow-ci-
tizens. Motives, with which rude nations are
equally unacquainted, induce the people to ftib-
mit tamely to the usurped authority of their fupe-
riors. But even among nations in this state, the
spirit of fubjeds could not have been rendered so
obsequious, or the power of rulers so unbounded,
without the intervention of fupertlition. By its fatal
influence, the human mind, in every stage of its
progress, is depressed, and its native vigour and
independence subdued. Whoever can acquire the
direction of this formidable engine, is secure of do-
minion over his species. Unfortunately for the
people whose institutions are the subje&t of inquiry,
this power was in the hands of their chiefs. The
caziques of the isles could put what responses they
pleated into the mouths of their Cemis or gods; and
it was by their interposition, and in their name, that
they imposed any tribute or burden on their peo-
pleh. The great chief of the Natchez was the
principal minister as well as the representative of the

h Herrera, dec. I. lib. iii. c. 3.

Sun,

Sun, their deity. The refpet which the people ofBO 0 KO
SBogota paid to their monarchs, was inspired by re- IV.
ligion, and the heir apparent of the kingdom was
educated in the innermost recess of their principal
temple, under such austere discipline, and with
such peculiar rites, as tended to fill his fubjeats with
high sentiments concerning the fandity of his cha-
rater, and the dignity of his Itationi'. Thus fu-
perifition, which, in the rudest period of society, is
either altogether unknown, or waftes its force in
childish unmeaning practices, had acquired such an
ascendant over those people of America, who had
made some little progress towards refinement, that
it became the chief infirument of bending their
minds to an untimely servitude, and fubjeted
them, in the beginning of their political career, to
a despotism hardly less rigorous, than that which
awaits nations in the last stage of their corruption
and decline.

V. AFT ER examining the political inffitutions ofTher art of

the rude nations in America, the next objet ofwar'
attention is their art of war, or their provision for
public security and defence. The-fmall tribes dif-
perfed over America are not only independent and
unconne&ted, but engaged in perpetual hoffilities
with one another k. Though firangers to the idea
of separate property vested in any individual, the
rudest of the American nations are well acquainted
with the rights of each community to its own do-
mains. This right they hold to be perfea and ex-
clufive, entitling the possessor to oppose the en-
croachment of neighbouring tribes. As it is of the
utmost consequence to prevent them f.om destroy-
ing or disturbing the game in their hunting grounds,
they guard this national property with a jealous a-'

1 Piedrahita, p. 27.
a Ribas Hist. de los triump. p. 9.

tention,

B O O K tention. But as their territories are extensive, and

V_. the boundaries of them not exactly ascertained, in-

numerable subje&s of dispute arise, which seldom
terminate without bloodshed. Even in this simple
and primitive state of society, interest is a source of
discord, and often prompts savage tribes to take
arms, in order to repel or punish such as encroach
on the forests or plains, to which they trult for sub-
filfence.

Their mo- BUT interest is not either the most frequent or
tgigv oien- the most powerful motive of the incessant hostilities
war. among rude nations. These mufi be imputed to

the passion of revenge, which rages with such vio-
lence in the breast of savages, that eagerness to
gratify it may be confidered as the distinguishing
charaderisic of men, in their uncivilized slate.
Circumstances of powerful influence, both in the
interior government of rude tribes, and in their ex-
ternal operations againfi foreign enemies, concur
in cherishing and adding tlrength to a pafion fatal
to the general tranquillity. When the right of re-
dressing his own wrongs is left in the hands of eve-
ry individual, injuries are felt with exquisite fenfi-
bility, and vengeance exercised with unrelenting
rancour. No time can obliterate the memory of
-an offence, and it is seldom that it can be expiat-

From ti ed but by the blood of the offender. In carrying
spirit of
vengeance. on their public wars, savage nations are influenced

by the fame ideas, and animated with the fame
spirit, as in prosecuting private vengeance. In
small communities, every man is touched with the
injury or affront offered to the body of which he
is a member, as if it were a personal attack up-
on his own honour or safety. The desire of re-
venge is communicated from breast to breast,
and soon kindles into rage. As feeble societies can
take the field only in small parties, each warri-
or is conscious of the importance of his own

arm,

arm, and feels that to it is committed a confider- B o o K
able-portion of the public vegeance. War, which lv.
between -extensive kingdoms is carried on with
little animosity, is prosecuted by small tribes with all
the rancour of a; private quarrel. The resentment
of nations is as implacable as that of individuals. It Hence the
may be dissembled or suppressed, but is never ex- thir'war,
tinquifhed; and often, when least expected or
dreaded, it bursts out with redoubled fury 1. When
polifled nations have obtained the glory of victory,
or'have acquired an addition of territory, they may
terminate a war with honour. But savages are not
satisfied until they extirpate the community, which
is the objec of 'their rage. They fight not to con-
quer, but to destroy. If they engage in hostilities,
it is with a resolution never to fee the face of the
enemy in peace, but to prosecute the quarrel with
immortal enmity m. The desire of vengeance is the
first, and almost the only principle, which a savage
inflils into the minds of his children ". This grows
up with him as he advances in life; and as his'at-
tention is direted to few objeats, it acquires a de-
gree of force unknown among men whose passions
are dissipated and weakened by the variety of their
occupations and pursuits. The desire of venge-
:ance, which takes poffefion of the heart of savages,
resembles the inftintive rage of an animal, rather
than the passion of a man. It turns, with undif-
cerning fury, even against inanimate ohjects. If
hurt accidentally by a stone, they often seize it in a
-transport of anger, and endeavour to wreak their

t Boucher Hill. Nat. de N. France, p. 93. Charlev. Hil.'

de N. France, iii. 215. 251. Lery ap De Bry, iii. 204.
Creux. Hilt. Canad. p. 72. Lozano Defcr. del Gran Chaco,
95. Hennep. Moeursdes Sauv. 40.

m Charlev. Hilt. N. Fr. iii. 251. Colden, i. oS.- ii. 126.
Barrere, p. 170. 173.

n Charlev. N Fr. iii. 326. Lery ap De Bry, iii. 236.
Lozano Hilt. de Parag. i. 144.

vengeance

B o K vengeance upon it °. If itruck with an arrow in

IV. battle, they will tear it from the wound, break and
C-"^" bite it with their teeth, and dash it on the ground P.

With refpet to their enemies, the rage of venge-
ance knows no bounds. When under the domi-
nion of this paflion, man becomes the most cruel
of all animals. He neither pities, nor forgives, nor
spares.

THE force of this passion is so well underfiood

by the Americans themselves, that they always
apply to it, in order to excite their people to take
arms. If the elders of any tribe attempt to rouze
their youth from sloth, if a chief wishes to allure a
band of warriors to follow him in invading an ene-
my's country, the most persuasive topics of their
martial eloquence are drawn from revenge. " The
bones of our countrymen," fay they, " lie unco-
vered; their bloody bed has not been waffed clean.
Their spirits cry against us; they must be appeaf-
ed. Let us go and devour the people by whom
they were slain. Sit no longer inactive upon your
mats; lift the hatchet, console the spirits of the
dead, and tell them that they shall be avenged V"

and their ANIMATED with such exhortations, the youth
perpetuity. snatch their arms in a transport of fury, raise the

song of war, and burn with impatience to. embrue
their hands in the blood of their enemies. Private
chiefs often assemble small parties, and invade a
hostile tribe, without consulting the rulers of the
community, A single warrior, prompted by ca-
price or revenge, will take the field alone, and
march several hundred miles, to surprise and cut off
a firaggling enemy r. The exploits of a noted

* Lery ap De Bry, iii. 190.
P Lery apDe Bry, iii. 208. Herrera, dec. i. lib. vi. c. 8.
q Charlev. Hist. N. Fr. iii. 216, 217. Lery ap De Bry,
ii. 204.

See NOTE XXXVII.

warrior,

warrior, in such solitary excursions, often form the B. 0 o K
chief part of the history of an American campaign s; IV.
and their elders connive at such irregular sallies, as
they tend to cherish a martial spirit, and accustom
their people to enterprise and danger t. But when
a war is national, and undertaken by public au-
thority, the deliberations are formal and flow. The
elders aifemble, they deliver their opinions in so-
lemn speeches, they weigh with maturity the nature
of the enterprise, and balance its beneficial or dif-
advantageous consequences with no inconsiderable
portion of political discernment and sagacity. Their
priests and soothsayers are consulted, and sometimes
they ask the advice even of their women u. If the
determination be for war, they prepare for it with
much ceremony. A leader offers to conduCt the
expedition, and is accepted. But no man is con-
strained to follow him; the resolution of the com-
munity to commence hostilities imposes no obliga-
tion upon any member to take part in the war.
Each individual is Itill malter of his own conduCt,
and his engagement in the service is perfectly vo-
luntary x,

THE maxims by which they regulate their mili-Mode of

tary operations, though extremely different from carry
those which take place among more civilized and
populous nations, are well suited to their own po-
litical fiate, and the nature of the country in which
they at. They never take the field in numerous
bodies, as it would require a greater effort of fore-
fight and indufiry, than is usual among savages, to
provide for their subsistence, during a march of
some hundred miles through dreary forests, or dur-

s See NOTE XXXVIII.
t Boffu, i. 14o. Lery ap De Bry. 215. Hennepin Moeurs
des Sauv. A.. Lafitau, ii. 169.

U Charlev. Hilt. N. Fr. iii. 215. 268. Biet, 367. 380.
x Charlev. His. N. Fr. 217, zi8.

ing

BOO King a long voyage upon their lakes and rivers.

IV.. Their armies are not encumbered with baggage or
'^" military fiores. Each warrior, betides his arms,

carries a mat and a small bag of pounded maize,
and with there is completely equipped for any ser-
vice. While at a distance from the enemies fron-
tier, they disperse through the woods, and support
themselves with the game which they kill, or the
fish which they catch. As they approach nearer to
the territories of the nation, which they intend to
attack, they collet their troops, and advance with
greater caution. Even then they proceed wholly
by itratagem and ambuscade. They place not
their glory in attacking their enemies with open
force. To surprise and destroy is the greatest me-
rit of a commander, and the highest pride of his
followers. War and hunting are their only occu-
pations, and they conduct both with the fame spirit
and the fame arts. They follow the track of their
enemies through the forest. They endeavour to dif-
cover their haunts, they lurk in some thicket near
to there, and with the patience of a sportsman
lying in wait for game, will continue in. their fia-
tion day after day, until they can rush upon their
prey when molt secure, and least able to refill
them. If they meet no straggling party of the
enemy, they advance towards their villages, but
with such solicitude to conceal their approach, that
they often creep on their hands and feet through
the woods, and paint their skins of the fame colour
with the withered leaves, in order to avoid detec-
tion y. If so fortunate as to remain unobserved,
they set on fire their huts in the dead of night, and
massacre the inhabitants, as they fly naked and de-
fenceless from the flames. If they hope to effect a
retreat without being pursued, they carry off some

Y Char!ev. Hill. N. Fr. iii. 237, 238. Hennip. Moeurs des
oauv. p. 59.

prisoners,

prisoners, whom they reserve for a more dreadful B 0 0 K
fate. But if, notwithftartding all their;addrefs and IV.
precautions, they find that their motions are disco-
vered, that the enemy has taken the alarm, and is
prepared to oppose them, they' ufially deem it
most prudent to retire. They regard it as extreme
folly to meet an enemy who ison his guard, upon
equal terms, or to give battle in an open field. The
most distinguished success ist a disgrace to a leader,
if ptirchafed with any considerable lofs-of his fol-
lowers z; and they never boast of' a vitory if
stained with the blood of their own countrymen a,
To fall in battle, instead of being reckoned an ho-
nourable death, is a misfortune which subje&s the
memory of a warrior to the imputation of rashness
or imprudence b.

THIS system of war was universal in America, Notowing

and the small uncivilized tribes, dispersed through ,Yf o
all its different regions and climates, display more courag
craft than boldness in carrying on their hofilities.
Struck with this condut, so opposite to the ideas
and maxims of Europeans, several authors contend
that it flows from a feeble and dastardly spirit pe-
culiar to the Americans, which is incapable of any
generous or manly exertion c. But when we reflet
that many of these tribes, on occasions which call
for extraordinary efforts, not only defend them,
selves with obstinate resolution, but attack their ene-
mies with the most daring courage, and that they
possess fortitude of mind superior to the sense of
danger or the fear of death; we must ascribe their
habitual caution to some other cause than conftitu-

· See N O T E XXXIX.
a Charlev. Hilt. N. Fr. iii. 238. 307. Biet. 381. Lafitau
Moeurs des Sauv. ii. 248.

b Charlev. iii. 376 See NO T E XL.
c Recherches Philof fur les Americ. i. Ils. Voyage de
March, iv. 41o.

.
i

B 0 OKtional timidity d. The number of men in eachi

IV. tribe is so small, the difficulty of rearing new mem-
.''e" bers, amidst the hardships and dangers of savage

life, To great, that the life of a citizen is extremely
precious, and the preservation of it becomes a capi-
tal object in their policy. Had the point of honour
been the fame among the feeble American tribes,
as among the powerful nations of Europe, had they
been taught, in contempt of danger and death, to
court fame or vitory, they mull have been ruined
by maxims, so ill adapted to their condition. But
wherever their communities are more populous, so
that they can adt with considerable force, and can
fuflain the loss of several of their members, with-
out being sensibly weakened, the military operati-
ons of the Americans more nearly resemble those of
other nations. The Erafilians, as well as the tribes
situated upon the banks of the river de la Plata,
often take the field in such numerous bodies, as
deserve the name of armies e. They defy their ene-
mies to the combat, engage in regular battles, and
maintain the conflic with that desperate ferocity,
which is natural to men, who have no idea of war
but that of exterminating their enemies, and who
never give or take quarter . In the powerful em-
pires of Mexico and Peru, great armies were as-
fembled, frequent battles were fought, and the
theory as well as practice of war were different
from what took place in those petty societies which
assume the name of nations.

Incapable of EUT though vigilance and attention are the qua-
order or di.- lities chiefly requisite, where the object of war is to
cipliae.

deceive and to filrprie ; and though the Americans,
when ating singly, display an amazing degree of

d Lafitau Moeurs des Sauv. ii. 248, 249. Charlev. N. Fr,
ii. 307.

e Fabri Veriff. Defcrip. Indiax ap de Bry, vii. p. 42.
'See NOT E XLI.

address

address in concealing their own motions, and disco- B o o K
vering those of an enemy, yet it is remarkable that, IV.
when they take the field in parties, they can seldom
be brought to observe the precautions moit essential
to their own security. Such is the difficulty of ac-
cufloming savages to subordination, or to ad in
concert; such is their impatience under refiraint,
and such their caprice and presumption, that it is
rarely they can be brought to conform themselves
to the counsels and directions of their leaders. They
never itation centinels around the place where they
reft at night, and after marching some hundred
miles to surprise an enemy, are often surprised
themselves, and cut off; while funk in as profound
sleep as if they were not within reach of danger g.

IF notwithstanding this negligence and security,

which often frustrate their most artful schemes, they
catch the enemy unprepared, they rush upon them
with the utmost ferocity, and tearing off the scalps
of all those who fall victims to their rage h, they
carry home those strange trophies in triumph. These
they preserve as monuments, not only of their own
prowess, but of the vengeance which their arm has
infliced upon the people who were objects of pub-
lic resentment . They are fill more solicitous to
seize prisoners. During their retreat, if they hope
to effet it unmolested, there are commonly exempt
from any insult, and treated with some degree of
humanity, though guarded with the most stria at-
tention.

BuT after this temporary suspension, their rage Treatment

rekindles with new fury. As soon as they approach of prion-
their own frontier, some of their number are dif-
patched to inform their countrymen with refpet. to

g Charlev. N. Fr. iii. 236, 237. Lettr. Edif. 17. 308. 20.
130. Lafit. Moeurs, ii. 247. Lahontan, ii. 176.

h See NOTE XLII.
i Lafitau Moeurs, ii. 256.

the

B O O Kthe success of the expedition. Then the prisoners

Iv. begin to feel the wretchedness of their condition.
-t^^ The women of the village, together with the youth

who have not attained to the age of bearing arms,
assemble, and forming themselves into two lines,.
through which the prisoners must pass, beat and
bruise them with flicks or flones in a cruel man-
ner k. After this first gratification of their rage
against their enemies, follow lamentations for the
lois of such of their own countrymen as have fallen
in the service, accompanied with words and ations
which seem to express the utmost anguish of grief.
But, in a moment, upon a signal given, their tears
cease, they pass, with a sudden and unaccountable
transition, from the depths of sorrow to tranf-
ports of joy, and begin to celebrate their viEtory
-with all the wild exultation of a barbarous triumph 1.
The fate of the prisoners remains still undecided.
The old men deliberate concerning it. Some are
destined to be tortured to death, in order to satiate
the revenge of the conquerors; some to replace the
members which the community has loft in that or
former wars. They who are reserved for this
milder fate, are led to the huts ofthofe whose friends
have been killed. The women meet them at the
door, and if they receive them, their sufferings are
at an end. They are adopted into the family, and,
according to their phrase, are feated upon the mat of
the deceased. They assume his name, they hold
the fame rank, are treated thenceforward with all the
tenderness due to a father, a brother, a husband, or
a friend. But if, either from caprice, or an unre-
lenting desire of revenge, the women of any family
refuse to accept of the prisoner who is offered to
them, his doom is fixed. No power can then save
him from torture and death.

k Lahontan, ii. 184.
:Charlcv. Hit. N. Fr. iii. z41. Lafitau Moeurs, ii. 264.

W\HILE

WHILE their lot is in suspense, the prisoners them-B o o K

selves appear altogether unconcerned about what IV.
may befall them. They talk, they eat, they sleep, Teii in-
as if they were perfectly at ease, and no danger im- difference
pending. When the fatal sentence is intimated toeir fate"
them, they receive it with an unaltered countenance,
raise their death-fong, and prepare to susser like
men. Their conquerors assemble as to a folemnand forti-
festival, resolved to put their courage to the utmofit: ture
proof. A scene ensues, the bare description of which
is enough to chill the heart with horrors wherever
men have been accustomed, by milder institutions,
to refpet their species, and to melt into tenderness
at the fight of human sufferings, The prisoners are
tied naked to a stake, but so as to be at liberty to
move around it. All who are present, men, wo-
men, and children, rush upon them like furies;
Every species of torture is applied Chat the rancour
of revenge can invent. Some burn their limbs
with red-hot irons, rome mangle their bodies with
knives, others tear their flesh fiom their' ones,
pluck out their nails by the roots, and rend and
twist their sinews. They vie with one another in
refinements of torture. Nothing sets bounds to
their rage, but the .dread of abridging the duration
of their vengeance by hatiening the death of the
sufferers; and such is their cruel ingenuity in tor-
mrenting, that by. avoiding industriously to hurt any
vital part, they often prolong this scene of anguish
for several days. In spite of all that they susser, the
victims continue to chant their death-fong with a
firm voice, they boast of their own exploits, they
insult their tormentors for their want of Ikill in
avenging' their friends and relations. they warn
them of the vengeance which awaits them, on ac-
count of their death, and excite their ferocity by the
modt provoking reproaches and .threats. To dif-
play undaunted fortitude in such dreadful situations

VOL. II. I is

B 0 0 Kis the noblest triumph of a warrior. To avoid the.

IV. trial by a voluntary death, or to shrink under it, is

deemed infamous and cowardly. If any one betray
symptoms of timidity, they often dispatch him at
once with contempt, as unworthy of being treated
like a man m. Animated with those ideas, they en-
dure, without a groan, what it seems almost im-I
polfible that human nature Ihould sustain. They
appear to be not only insensible of pain, but to;
court it. " Forbear," said an aged chief of the Iro-
quois, when his insults had provoked one of his tor-
mentors to wound him with a knife, " forbear these
stabs of your knife, and rather let me die by fire,
that those dogs, your allies, from beyond the sea,
may learn by my example to susser like men n."
This magnanimity, of which there are frequent in-.
fiances among the American warriors, instead of
exciting admiration, or calling forth sympathy, ex-
abrates the fierce spirits of their torturers to fresh

[Ets of cruelty °. Weary at length of contending

with men, whose constancy of mind they cannot
vanquish, some chief in a rage puts a period to their
flfferings, by dispatching them with his dagger or.
club P.

Sometimes THIS barbarous scene is often succeeded by one
eat their
prisoners. I Ie ls shocking. As it is impoflible to appease the

feH spirit of revenge which rages in the heart of a
savage, this frequently prompts the Americans to
devour those unhappy persons, who have been the
victims of their cruelty. In the ancient world, tra-
dition has preserved the memory of barbarous na-

m De la Potherie, ii. 237; iii. 48.
" Colden, Hist. of Five Nations, i. 200.
o Voyages de Lahont. i. 236.
P Charlev. Hist. N. Fr. iii. 243, &c. 385. Lafitau, Moeurs,

ii. 265. Creuxij, Hist. Canad. p. 73. Hennep. Moeurs des
Sauv. p. 64, &c. Lahont. i. z33, &c. Tertre, ii. 405. De
ti Potherie, ii. zz, &c.

tions

lions of cannibals, who fed on human flesh. But B O O K
in every part of the New World, there were people IV.
to whom this custom was familiar. It prevailed in G
the southern continent q, in several of the islands
and in various diftrits of North America s. Even
in those parts, where circumstances, with which we
are unacquainted, had in a great measure abolished
this practice, it seems to have been so well known,
that it is incorporated into the idiom of their lan-
guage. Among the Iroquois, the phrase by which
they express their resolution of making war against
an enemy is, "' Let us go and eat that nation." If
they solicit the aid of a neighbouring tribe, they
invite it to "- eat broth made of the flesh of their
enemies t." Nor was the practice peculiar to rude
unpolifhed tribes; the principle from which it took
rife, is so deeply rooted in the minds of the Ameri-
cans, that it subsisted in Mexico, one of the civilized
empires in the New World, and relics of it may be
discovered among the more mild inhabitants of Peru.
It was not scarcity of food, as some authors imagine,
and the importunate cravings of hunger, that forced
the Americans to those horrid repasts on their fel-
low-creatures. Human flesh was never used as
common food in any country, and the various rela-
tions concerning people, who reckoned it among
the stated means of fubfifience, flow from the cre-
dulity and mistakes of travellers. The rancour of
revenge first prompted men to this barbarous ati-
on u. The fiercest tribes devoured none but pri-

q Stadius apDeBry, iii. 123. Lery, ibid. 21o. Biet.384.

Lettr. Edif. 23. 341. Pifo, 8. Condam. 84. 97. Ribas,
Hist. de los Triumph. 473.

r Life of Columb. 529. Mart. Dec. p. 18. Tertre, ii. 405.
s Dumont, Mem. i. 254. Charlev. Hillt. N. Fr. i. 259. ii.
14. iii. 21. De la Potherie, iii. 50.

1 Charlev. Hilt. N. Fr. iii. 208, 209. Lettr. Edif. 23.
p. 277. De la Potherie, ii. 298. See NO T 4 XLI1I.

u Biet, 383. Blanco, Conversion de Piritu, p. 28. Ban-
croft, Nat. Hilt. of Guiana, p. z59, &c.

I X foners

B O K foners taken in war, or such as they regarded as

IV. enemies x. Women and children who were not the
^"V objects of enmity, if not cut off in the fury of their

firfi inroad into an hostile country, seldom suffered
by the deliberate effects of their revenge Y.

THE people of South America gratify their re-

venge in a manner somewhat different, but with
no less unrelenting rancour. Their prisoners, after
meeting at their first entrance, with the fame rough
reception as among the North Americans z, are not
only exempt from injury, but treated with the
greatest kindness. They are feasted and carefled,
and some beautiful young women are appointed to
attend and solace them. It is not easy to account
for this part of their conduct, unless we impute it
to a refinement in cruelty. For, while they seem
fludious to attach their prisoners tolife, by supply-
ing them with every enjoyment that can render it
agreeable, their doom is irrevocably fixed. On a
day appointed, the vidcorious tribe assembles, the
captive is brought forth with great solemnity, he
views the preparations for the sacrifice with as much
indifference, as if he himself were not the victim,
and meeting his fate with undaunted firmness, is
dispatched with a tingle blow. The moment he
falls, the women seize the body, and dress it for the
feast. They besmear their children with the blood,
in order to kindle in their bosoms a hatred of their
enemies, which is never extinguished, 'and all join
in feeding upon the flesh with amazing greediness
and exultation a. To devour the body of a flaugh-
tered enemy, they deem the most complete and
exquisite gratification of revenge. Wherever this

x See NOTE XLIV.
Y Biet, 382. Bandini, Vita di Americo, 84. Tertre, 405.
Fermin, Defcrip. de Surin. i. 54.

z Stadius ap de Bry, iii. p. 40. 123.
a Stadius ap de Bry, iii. 128, &c. Lery, ibid. 210.

practice

practice prevails, captives never escape death, but B O O K
they are' not tortured with the fame cruelty as Iv.
among the tribes which are less accustomed to such
horrid feasts b.

As the confiancy of every American warrior may

be put to such severe proof, the great objec of edu-
cation and discipline in the New World is to form
the mind to sustain it. When nations carry on war
with open force, defy their enemies to the combat,
and vanquish them by the superiority of their. kill
or courage, soldiers are trained to be active, vigor-
ous, and enterprising. But in America, where. the
genius and maxims of war are extremely different,
passive fortitude is the quality in highei estimation.
Accordingly, it is early the study of the Americans
to acquire a talent, which will enable them to be-
have like men, when their resolution ihall be put to
the proof. As the youth of other nations exercise
themselves in feats of activity and force, those of.
America vie with one another in exhibitions of their
patience under sufferings. They harden'their nerves
by those voluntary trials, and gradually accufiom
themselves to endure the sharpest pain, without
complaining. A boy and girl will bind their naked
arms together, and place a burning coal between
them, in order to try who first discovers such impa-
tience as to shake it off c. All the trials, customary
in America, when a youth is admitted into the class
of warriors, or when a warrior is promoted to the
dignity of captain or chief, are accommodated to
this idea of manliness. They are not displays of
valour, but of patience; they are not exhibitions of
their ability to offend, but of their capacity to sus-
ser. Among the tribes on the banks of the Ori.
noco, if a warrior aspires to the rank of captain,

b See N O T E XLV. c Charlev. Hit. N. Fr, iii. 307.

his

B o oK his probation begins with a long fast, more rigid

IV. than any ever observed by the most abfiemious
^" hermit. At the close of this, the chiefs affenble,

each gives him three lathes with a large whip, ap-
plied so vigorously, that his body is almost flayed,
and if he betrays the least symptom of impatience
or even sensibility, he is disgraced for ever, and re-
jected as unworthy of the honour. After some in-
terval, the constancy of the candidate is proved by
a more excruciating trial. He is laid in a hammoc
with his hands bound fast, an innumerable multi-
tude of venomous ants, whose bite occasions exqui-
site pain, and produces a violent inflammation, are
thrown upon him. The judges of his merit fland
around the hammoc, and, while these cruel infects
fasten upon the most sensible parts of his body, a
sigh, a groan, an involuntary motion expressive of
what he suffers, would exclude him from the dignity
which he is ambitious to obtain. Even after this
evidence of his fortitude, it is not deemed to be
completely ascertained, but must stand another test
more dreadful than any he has hitherto undergone.
He is again suspended in his hammoc, and covered
with leaves of the palmetto. A fire of stinking
herbs is kindled underneath, so as he may feel its
heat, and be involved in smoke. Though scorch-
ed and almost suffocated, he must continue to en-
dure with the 'fame patient infeasibility. Many
pcrifh in this rude efay of their firmness and cou-
rage, but such as go through it with applause, re-
ceive the ensigns of their new dignity with much
solemnity, and are ever after regarded as leaders
of approved resolution, whose behaviour, in the
most trying situations, will do honour to their coun-
try d. In North America, the previous trial of a

Gumilla, ii. 286, &c. Biet, 376, &c.

warrior.

warrior is neither so formal, .nor so revere. Though B O O K
even there, before a youth is permitted to bear IV
arms, his patience and fortitude are proved by '
blows, by fire, and by insults, more intolerable to a
haughty spirit than both e.

THE amazing steadiness, with which the Ameri-

cans endure the most exquisite torments, has induc-
ed some authors to suppose that, from the peculiar
feebleness of their frame, their sensibility is not so
acute as that of other people; as women, and per-
sons of a relaxed habit, are observed to be less as-
fe&ed with pain than robust men, whose nerves are
more firmly braced. But the confiitution of the
Americans is not so different, in its texture, from
that of the reft of the human species, as to account
for this diversity in their behaviour. It flows from
a principle of honour, instilled early and cultivated
with such care, as to inspire man in his rudest state
with an heroic magnanimity, to which philosophy
hath endeavoured, in vain, to form him, when more
highly improved and polished. This invincible
constancy he has been taught to confider as the
chief diftinaion of man, and the highest attain-
ment of a warrior. The ideas which influence his
confdua, and the paflions which take poffeflion of
his heart, are few. They operate of course with
more decisive effe&, than when the mind is crowd-
ed with a multiplicity of objects, or difirated by
the variety of its pursuits; and when every motive
that operates with force on the mind of a savage,
prompts them to susser with dignity, they will bear
what might seem to be impossible for human pa-

c Charley. Hilf. N. Fr, iii. 219,

tience

B 0 o K tience to sustain. But wherever the fortitude of the

IV. Americans is not roused to exertion by their ideas
y"'" of honour, their feelings of pain are the fame with

those of the reft of mankind f. Nor is that patience
under fulfferings for which the Americans have been
so jufily celebrated an universal attainment. The
conflancy of many of the vidtims is overcome by
the agonies of torture. Their weakness and la-
mentations complete the triumph of their enemies,
and reflect disgrace upon their country g.

wased by THE perpetual hostilities carried on.among the
their era- American tribes are productive of very fatal es-

sects. As their imperfect industry does not supply
them with any superfluous store of provisions, even
in seasons of tranquillity, when the irruption of an
enemy desolates their cultivated lands, or disturbs
them in their hunting excursions, such a calamity
reduces a community, naturally unprovident and
destitute of resources, to extreme want. All the
people of the difirid that is invaded, are frequently
forced to take refuge in woods or mountains, which
can afford them no subsistence, and where many
of them perish. Notwithfianding their exceflive
caution in conduting their military operations, and
* the solicitude of every leader to preserve the lives of

his followers, as they seldom enjoy any interval of
peace, the loss of men among the Americans is con-
fiderable in proportion to the degree of population.
Thus famine and the sword combine in thinning
their numbers. All their tribes are feeble, and
many which were once powerful have gradually
wafted away and at lafi disappeared. Nothing now

See NOTE XLVI.

g Charley. Hilt. N. Fr. iii. 248. 385. pe la Potherie,
i1. 48.

remaiins

remains of several nations, which were once con- B o o K
fiderable, but the name h. V.

SENSIBLE of this continual decay, there areRecruit

tribes which endeavour to recruit their national thers y
force when exhaulted, by adopting prisoners tak- adopting
en in war, and by this expedient prevent their to- p"rones.
tal extinction. The practice, however, is not uni-
verfally received. Resentment operates more pow-
erfully among savages, than considerations of po
licy. Far the greater part of their captives was
anciently sacrificed to their vengeance, and it is
only since their numbers began to decline fast, that
they have adopted milder maxims. But such as
they do naturalize, renounce for ever their native
tribe, and assume the manners as well as paflions
of the people by whom they are adopted , so en-
tirely, that they often join them in their expediti-
ons againit their own countrymen. Such a fud-
den transition, and so repugnant to one of the
most powerful inftinds implanted by nature, would
appear firange among any people; but, among
the members of small communities, where national
enmity is violent and deep rooted, it is more un-
accountable. It seems, however, to result natu- a,
rally from the principles upon which war is carried
on in America. When nations aim at exterminat-
ing their enemies, no exchange of prisoners can
ever take-place. From the moment one is made
a prisoner, his country and his friends confidei
him as dead k. He has incurred indelible dif-
grace by suffering himself to be surprised or to be
taken by an enemy; and were he to return home,
after such a stain upon his honour, his neareit re-

h Charley. Hill. N. Fr. iii. 202, 203, 429. Gumilla, ii.

227, &c. i Charlev. Hill. N. Fr. iii. 245, &c. Lafit.
:i. 308. k See NOTE XLVII.

lations

B K lations would not receive or even acknowledge

lV. that they knew him 1. Some tribes were fRill more
~'V rigid, and if a prisoner returned, the infamy which

he had brought on his country was expiated, by
putting him inflantly to death m. As the unfortu-
nate captive is thus an outcast from his own coun-
try, and the ties which bound him to it are irrepa-
rably broken, he feels less reluctance in forming a
new connection with people, who, as an evidence
of their friendly sentiments, not only deliver him
from a. cruel death, but offer to admit him to all
the rights of a fellow-citizen. The perfeat fimila-
rity of manners among savage nations facilitates
and completes the union, and induces a captive to
transfer not only his allegiance, but his affection,
to the community into the bosom of which he is
received.

Their infe- BUT though war be the chief occupation of men
war t'po in their rude slate, and to excel in it, their highest
lifted nati- distinction and pride, their inferiority is always ma-

Os. nifeft when they engage in competition with po-

liihed nations. Destitute of that foresight which
discerns and provides for remote events, strangers
to the union and mutual confidence requisite in
forming any extensive plan of operations, and in-
capable of the subordination no less requisite in car-
rying into execution such plans, savage nations
may astonish a disciplined enemy by their valour,
but seldom prove formidable to him by their con-
duct, and whenever the contest is of long conti-
nuance, must yield to superior art n. The empires
of Peru and Mexico, though their progress in civili-
zation, when measured by the European or Asiatic

I Lahont. ii. 185, 186.
rn Herrera dec. 3. lib. iv.c. 16. p. 173.
r See N 0 T E XLVIII.

fiandards,

tfandards, was inconsiderable, acquired such an a- B 0 0 K
fcendency over the rude tribes around them, that IV.
they fubjeaed molt of them with great facility to
their power. When the people of Europe over-
ran the various provinces of America, this fuperi-
ority was ftil more conspicuous. Neither the cou-
rage nor number of the natives could repel a hand-
ful of invaders. The alienation and enmity, pre-
valent among barbarians, prevented them from
uniting in any common scheme of defence, and
while each tribe fought separately, all were sub-
dued.

VI. THE arts of rude nations unacquainted withTheirarts,

the use of metals, hardly merit any attention on
their own account, but are worthy of some notice,
as far as they serve to display the genius and man-
ners of a people. The first distress a savage must Dress and
feel, will arise from the manner in which his body orna"en .
is affected, by the heat, or cold, or moisture, of
the climate under which he lives; and his first care
will be, to provide some covering for his own de-
fence. In the warmer and more mild climates of
America, none of the rude tribes were clothed.
To most of them Nature had not even suggested
any idea of impropriety in being altogether unco-
vered d As under a mild climate there was little
need of any defence from the injuries of the air,
and their extreme indolence shunned every fpe-
cies of labour to which it was not urged by abfo-
lute necessity, all the inhabitants of the isles, and
a considerable part of the people on the continent,
remained in this state of naked simplicity. Others
were satisfied with some flight covering, such as
decency required. But though naked, they were
not unadorned. They dressed their hair in many

d Lery Navigat. ap. De Bry, iii. p. 164. Life of Colum-
bus, c. 4. 24Venegas Hilt. ofCaliforn. p. 70.

dfferent

B o K different forms. They fastened bits of gold, or

IV. shells, or shining stones, in their ears, their noses,

and cheeks e. [hey slained their skins with a great
variety of figures; and they spent much time, and
submitted to great pain, in ornamenting their per-
sons in this fantaffic manner. Vanity, however,
which finds endless occupation for its ingenuity
and invention, in nations where dress has become
a complex and intricate art, is circumscribed within
so narrow bounds, and confined to so few articles
among naked savages, that they are not satisfied
with those simple decorations, and have a wonder-
ful propensity to alter the natural form of their bo-
dies. This praatice was universal among the ru-
deft of the American tribes. Their operations for
that purpose begin as soon as an infant is born. By
comprefling the bones of the skull, while frill soft
and flexible, some flatten the crown of their heads;
some squeeze them into the shame of a cone; others
mould them as much as poflible into a square si-
gure '; and they often endanger the lives of their
pofierity by their violent and absurd efforts to de-
range the plan of Nature, or to improve upon her
designs. But in all their attempts either to adorn
or to new-model their persons, it seems to have been
less the object of the Americans to please, or to ap-
pear beautiful, than to give an air of dignity and
terror to their aspect. Their attention to dress had
more reference to war than to gallantry. The dif-
ference in rank and efiimation between the two
sexes was so great, as extinguished, in some mea-
sure, their solicitude to appear mutually amiable.
The man deemed it beneath him to adorn his per-
son, for the fake of one on whom he was accustomed

e Lery ap. De Bry, iii. 165. Lettr. Edifiantes. 20. 223.
f Oviedo Hifl. lib. iii. c. 5. Ulloa, i. 329. Voyage de

L.abat. ii. 72. Charlevoix, iii. 323. Gumilla, i. 197, &c.
Acugna Relat. de la Riv. des Amaz. ii. 83. Lawson's Voy.
tQ Carolina, p. 33.

to

to look down as a slave. It was when the warrior B 0 0 K
had in view to enter the council of his nation, or IV.
take the field against its enemies, that he alfumed -v-
his choicest ornaments, and decked his person with
the nicest care g. The decorations of the women
were few and simple; whatever was precious or
splendid was reserved for the men. In several tribes
the women were obliged to spend a confiderble part
of their time every day in adorning and painting
their husbands, and could bestow little attention up-
on ornamenting themselves. Among a race of men
so haughty as to despise, or so cold as to neglea
them, the women naturally became careless and
slovenly, and the love of finery and ihew, which
has been deemed their favourite paflion, was con-
fined chiefly to the other sex h To deck his per-
son was the diftintion of a warrior, as well as one
of his moll serious occupations'. In one part of
their dress, which, at first fight, appears the most
singular and capricious, the Americans have disco-
vered considerable sagacity in providing against the
chief inconveniencies of their climate, which is often
sultry and moist to excess. All the different tribes,
which remain unclothed, are accustomed to anoint
and rub their bodies with the grease of animals, with
viscous gums, and with oils of different kinds. By
this they check that profuse perspiration, which, in
the torrid zone, waites the vigour of the frame, and
abridges the period of human life. By this too, they
provide a defence against the extreme moisture dur-
ing the rainy season k. They likewise, at certain sea-
sons, temper paint of different colours with those
unctuous substances, and bedaub themselves plenti-
fully with that composition. Sheathed with this im-

g Wafer's Voyage, p. 142. Lery ap. de Bry, iii. 167. Charley.

Hilt. N. Fran. iii. 216, 222. h Charlev. Hilft de la Nouv.
France, iii. 278, 327. Lafitau, ii. 53. Kalm's Voyage, iii. 273.
Lery ap. de Bry,iii. I69,170. Purch. Pilgr. iv. 1287. Ribas Hist.
delostriumph.&c.47z. 'SeeNOTE XLIX. k See NOTE L.

penetrable

B O O K penetrable varnish, their skins are not only proted-

IV. ed from the penetrating heat of the fun, but, as all

the innumerable tribes of inse&s have an antipathy
to the smell or taste of that mixture, they are deli-
vered from their teazing persecution, which, amidfl
forests and marshes, especially in the warmer regi-
ons, must have been altogether intolerable in their
fate of nakedness 1.
Habitations. THE next obje& to dress that will engage the at-

tention of a savage, is to prepare some habitation
that may afford him shelter by day, and a retreat
at night. Whatever is conneded with his ideas of
personal dignity, whatever bears any reference to
his military character, the savage warrior deems an
objet of importance. Whatever relates only to
peaceable and inative life, he views with perfed
indifference. Hence, though finically attentive to
dress, he is little solicitous about the elegance or dif-
position of his habitation. Savage nations, far from
that slate of improvement, in which the mode of liv-
ing is confidered as a mark of diftintion, and un-
acquainted with those wants, which require a varie-
ty of accommodation, regulate the confirudion of
their houses according to their limited ideas of ne-
ceffity. Some of the American tribes were so ex-
tremely rude, and had advanced so little beyond
the primeval simplicity of nature, that they had no
houses at all. During the day, they take shelter from
the scorching rays of the fun under thick trees; at
night they form a shed with their branches and
leaves m. In the rainy season they retire into covers,
formed by the hand of Nature, or hollowed out by
their own indufiry ". Others, who have no fixed
abode, and roam through the forests in quest of

1 Labat, ii. 73. Gumilla, i. 190, 202. Bancroft Nat. Hist. of

Guiana, 8 . z80. " See N OTE LI. n LettresEdif. v. 273.
Venegas Hist. of Califor. i. 76. Lozana Defcrip. del Gran. Cha-
co, p. 55. LettresEdif. ii. 176. Gumilla. i. 383. Bancroft Nat.
Hill. of Guiana, 277.

game,

game, sojourn in temporary huts, which they eret B 00 o
with little labour, and .abandon without any con- IV.
cer. The inhabitants of those vast plains, which
are deluged by the overflowing of the rivers dur-
ing the heavy rains that fall periodically between
the tropics, raise houses upon piles fastened in the
ground, or place them among the boughs of trees,
and are thus safe amidfit that wide extended inun-
dation which surrounds them °. Such were the first
eflays of the rudet Americans towards providing
themselves with habitations.- But even among tribes
which were more improved, and whose residence
was become altogether fixed, 'the ftru&ture of their
houses was extremely mean and simple. They
were wretched huts, sometimes of an oblong and
Sometimes of a circular form, intended merely for
shelter, with no view to elegance, and little atten-
tion.to conveniency. The doors were so low, that'
it was. necessary to bend. or to creep on the hands
and feet in order to enter them. They were :with-
out windows, and had a large hole in the.middle
of the roof, to convey out the smoke. To follow
travellers in other mintte circumstances of their
description; is' iot only beneath. the dignity of his-
tbry, but would be foreign to the object of my
researches. One circumfianCe merits attention, as
it is singular, and illustrates the charater of the
people.' Some of their:hou.'es were so large as to
cohtain-acc6nmmodation for foiirfcore or a hundred
persons. 'These were :btilt :for the reception 'of dif-
ferent families, which dvelt. 'geti'er under the'fanie,
roof P and often around a c'bmn' n fire, without fe-
parate-.apartments, or any ki'idsf creen or partition.
between- the spaces which-they tefpecively occupi-
ed. As soon as men have acquired distinCt ideas of
pirperty; or' when they. are f6 much attached to

0 Gumilla, i. 225. Herrera, dec.. i.lib. ix. c. 6. Oviedo
Sommar,p. 5$, C. P See NOTE LlI.

their

B OO K their females, as to watch them with care and jea-
j__. lousy; families of course divide and fettle in separate

houses, where they can secure and guard whatever
they wish to preserve. This singular mode of habi-
tation may therefore be confidered not only as the
effect of that community of goods which subsisted
among the several people in America, but as a proof
of inattention and indifference towards their women.
If they had not been accultomed to perfet equality,
such an arrangement could not have taken place. If
their sensibility had been apt to have taken alarm,
they would not have trusted the virtue of their wo-w
men amidst the temptations and opportunities of
such a promiscuous intercourse. At the fame time,
the perpetual concord, which reigns in habitations
where so many families are crowded together, is fur-
prifing, and affords a striking evidence that they
must be people of either a very gentle, or of a very
phlegmatic temper, who, in such a situation, are un-
acquainted with animosity, brawling, and difcordq.
Their arms. AFTER making some provision for his dress and

habitation, a savage will perceive the necefity of
preparing.proper arms with which to assault or re-
pel an enemy. This, accordingly, has early ex-
ercifed the ingenuity and invention of all rude na-
tions. The firit offensive weapons were doubtless
such as chance presented, and the first efforts of
art to improve upon these,, were extremely auk-
ward and fimpl. 'Clubs made of some heavy
wood, fakes hardened in the fire, lances whose
heads were armed 'with flint or the bones of some a-
nimal, are weapons knlpw;n t the rudest nations. All
these, however, were of use oinly in close encounter.

q Journ. de Grillet & Becha mel dans la Goyane, p. 65.

Lafirau Moeurs, ii. 4. Torquem.Mon.arq. i. 247. Journal
Hist. de Joutel, 217. Lery Hilt. Brasil, ap. de Bry, iii. 238.
Lozano, Defcr. del Gran Chaco. 67.

....- . - But

But men wished to annoy their enemies while at a B o O K
distance, and the bow and arrow is the mofl early IV.
invention for this purpose. This weapon is in the C
hands of people, whose advances in improvement
are extremely inconsiderable, and is familiar to the
inhabitants of every quarter of the globe. It is re-
markable, however, that some tribes in America
were so deflitute of art and ingenuity, that they had
not attained to the discovery of this simple inven-
tion °, and seem to have been unacquainted with
the use of any missive weapon. The fling, though
in its confirudion not more complex than the bow,
and among many nations of equal antiquity, was
little known to the people of North America P or
the islands, but appears to have been used by a few
tribes in the southern continent q. The people in
some provinces of Chili, and those of Patagonia,
towards the southern extremity of America, use a
weapon peculiar to themselves. They fatten siones
about the size of a sift to each end of a leather
thong of eight feet in length, and swinging these
round their heads, throw them with such dexterity
that they seldom miss the object at which they aim r

AMONG people who had hardly any occupation Theirdo-

but war or hunting, the chief exertions of their in- utens.
vention S, as well as induftrv, were natur.lly di-
reted towards there objets. With refpeat to every
thing else, their wants and desires were so limited,
that their invention was not upon the ftre.ch. As
their food and habitations were perfectly simple,
their domestic utensils were few and rude. Some
of the southern tribes had discovered the art of

9 Piedrahita Conq. del Nuevo Reyno, 9. 12.
P Naufr. de Alv. Nun Cabeca de vaca, c. x. p. I z.
q Piedrah. p. I6. See NOTE LIII.
r Ovalle's Relation of Chili. Church. Colle&t. iii. 82z
Falkner's Defcrip. of Patagon. p. 130.

' See NOTE LIV.

VOL. II. K forming

B O O Kforming vessels of earthen ware, and baking them

IV. in the fun, so as they could endure the fire. In

Drefing North America, they hollowed a piece of hard
theirfood. wood into the form of a kettle, and filling it with

water, brought it to boil by throwing red-hot flones
into it t. These vessels they used in preparing part
of their provisions; and this may be confidered as
a tep towards refinement and luxury, for men in
their rudest state were not acquainted with any
method of dressing their victuals, but by roalting
them on the fire; and among several tribes in A-
merica, this is the only species of cookery yet

Conftruai.- known u. But the malter-piece of art, among the
onofthei' savages of America, is the confiruCtion of their ca-

noes. An Efkimaux, shut up in his boat of whale-
bone, covered with the skins of feals, can brave that
ilormy ocean, on which the barrenness of his coun-
try compels him to depend for the chief part of his
subsistence x. The people of Canada venture upon
their rivers and lakes, in boats made of the bark of
trees, and so light that two, men can carry them,
wherever shallows or cataracts obftruEt the naviga-
tion y. In these frail vessels they undertake and
accomplish long voyages z. The inhabitants of the
isles and of the southern continent form their canoes
by hollowing the trunk of a large tree, with infinite
labour, and though in appearance extremely auk-
ward and unwieldy, they paddle and steer them
with such dexterity, that Europeans, well acquaint-
ed with all the improvements in the science of na-
vigation, have been aflonilhed at the rapidity of
their motion, and the quickness of their evolutions.
Their piragues, or war-boats, are so large as to carry

t Charlev. Hill. of N. Fr. iii. 332z

See NOTE LV.

x EllisVoy. 133.
Y See NOTE LVI.
X Lafitau Moeurs, &c. ii, 21 .

forty

forty or fifty men; their canoes employed in fish- B o o K
ing and in short voyages are less capacious b. The IV.
form as well as materials of all these various species ''
of vessels is well adapted to the service for which
they are defined; and the more minutely they are
examined, the mechanism of their ftru&ure, as
well as neatness of their fabric, will appear the more
admirable.

BUT, in every attempt towards indufiry among Lifllefinel
the Americans, one firiking quality in their charac- with which

they apply

ter is conspicuous. They apply to work without to labour.
ardour, carry it on with little activity, and, like
children, are easily diverted from it. Even in ope-
rations which seem the most interesting, and where,
the most powerful motives urge them to vigorous
exertions, they labour with a languid listlessness.
Their work advances under their hand with such
slowness, that an eye-witness compares it to the im-
perceptible progress of vegetation c. They will
spend so many years in forming a canoe, that it
often begins to rot with age before they finish it.
They will susser one part of a roof to decay and
perish, before they complete the other d. The
slightest manual operation consumes a vast length
of time, and what in polished nations would hardly
be an effort of industry, is among savages an ardu-
ous undertaking. This slowness of the Americans
in executing works of every kind- may be imputed
to various causes. Among savages, who do not
depend for subsistence upon the efforts of regular
industry, time is of so little importance, that they
set no value upon it; and provided they can finish
a design, they never regard how long they are em-
ployed about it. The tools which they employ are

b Labat Voyages, ii. 91, &c. 131.
c Gumilla, ii. 297.
d Borde Relat. des Caraibes, p. 22.

Kz so

B O O K so aukward and defective, that every work in which.

IV. they engage must necessarily be tedious. The hand
'^r of the most indufirious and skilful artist, were it fur-

nifhed with no better instrument than a flone
hatchet, a shell, or the bone of some animal, could
hardly perfet the moit simple work. It is by
length of labour, that he must endeavour to supply
his defeat of power. But, above all, the cold
phlegmatic temper peculiar to the Americans ren-
ders their operations languid. It is almost impoffi-
ble to rouze them from that habitual indolence in
which they are funk; and unless when engaged in
war or hunting, they seem incapable of exerting
any vigorous effort. Their ardour of application is
not so great as to call forth that inventive spirit
which fuggefis expedients for facilitating and abridg-
ing labour. They will return to a talk day after
day, but all their methods of executing it are tedi-
ous and operose e. Even since the Europeans have
communicated to them the knowledge of their in-
firuments, and taught them to imitate their arts,
the peculiar genius of the Americans is conspicuous
in all their attempts.. They may be patient and
afiduous in labour, they can copy with a servile
and minute accuracy, but discover little invention,
and no talents for dispatch. In spite of inftruftion
and example, the spirit of the race predominates;
their motions are naturally tardy, and it is vain to
urge them to quicken their pace. Among the Spa-
niards in America, the work of an Indian is a phrase
by which they describe any thing, in the execution
of which an immense time has been employed, and
much labour waited f.

Their reli- VII. No circumfiance refpeaing rude nations has
gion. been the object of greater curiosity than their reli-

e See NOTE LVII.
f Voyage de Ulloa, i. $35. Lettr. Edif. &c. 15. 348.

glous

gious tenets and rites; and none, perhaps, has beenB 0 0 K
so imperfetly understood, or represented with so IV.
little fidelity. Priefis and missionaries are the persons p '--
who have had the best opportunities of carrying ondifficulties
this inquiry, among the most uncivilized 'of thein thi,
American tribes. Their minds, engrossed by the
doatrines of their own religion, and habituated to
its inflitutions, are apt to discover something that
resembles those objects of their veneration, in the
opinions and rites of every people. Whatever they
contemplate, they view through one medium, and
draw and accommodate it to their own fyilem.
They fludy to reconcile the intfitutions, which fall
under their observation, to their own creed, not to
explain them according to the rude notions of the
people themselves. They ascribe to them ideas
which they are incapable of forming, and suppose
them to be acquainted with principles and fa&s,
which it is impossible that they should know. Hence,
even among the most barbarous nations in America,
some miflionaries have been induced to believe, that
they had discovered traces, no less diftin& than
amazing, of their acquaintance with the sublime
myfieries and peculiar institutions of Christianity.
From their own interpretation of certain expressions
and ceremonies, they concluded that these people
had some knowledge of the doctrine of the Trinity,
of the incarnation of the Son of God, of hiis expia-
tory sacrifice, of the virtue of the cross, and of the
efficacy of the sacraments g In such unintelligent
and credulous guides as there, we can place little
confidence.

BUT, even when we make our choice of conduc-

tors with the greatest care, we mutl not follow
,them with implicit faith. An inquiry into the reli-
gious notions of rude nations is involved in peculiar

£ Venegas,i. 88. 92. Torquemada, ii. 44g. Garcia Ori-
gen. 22. Herrsra, dec. 4. lib. ix. c. 7. dec. 5. lib. iv. c. 7.

intricacies,

B O O Kintricacies, and we must often pause in order to fe-

IV. parate the fats which our informers relate, from the
^ ' reasonings with which they are accompanied, or

the theories which they build upon them. Several
pious writers, more attentive to the importance of
the subjet than to the condition of the people
whose sentiments they were endeavouring to disco-
ver, have bestowed much unprofitable labour in re-
searches of this nature h.

Confined to THERE are two fundamental doctrines, upon
Co arti- which the whole system of religion, as far as it can

be discovered by the light of nature, is established.
The one refpets the being of a God, the other the
immortality of the foul. To discover the ideas of
the uncultivated nations under our review with re-
gard to these important points, is not only an ob-
jeet of curiosity, but may afford inftruEtion. To
these two articles I shall confine my researches,
leaving subordinate opinions, and the detail of local

The being fuperititions, to more minute inquirers. Whoever
of God, has had any opportunity of examining into the reli-

gious opinions of persons in the inferior ranks of
life, even in the most enlightened and civilized nati-
ons, will find that their fyfiem of belief is derived
from initrudion, not discovered by inquiry. That
numerous part of the human species whose lot is la-
bour, whose principal and almost sole occupation is
to secure subsistence, views the arrangement and
operations of nature with little refletion, and has
neither leisure nor capacity for entering into that
path of refined and intricate speculation which' con-
duts to the knowledge of the principles of natural
religion. In the early and mol; rude periods of fa-
vage life, such disquisitions are altogether unknown.
When the intelletual powers are just beginning to
unfold, and their firit feeble exertions are directed
towards a few objeds of primary neceflity and use;

h See NOTE LVIII.

when

when the faculties of the mind are so limited, as not B O O K
to have formed abftra& or general ideas; when IV.
language is so barren, as to be deflitute of names to
difiinguifh any thing that is not perceived by some
of the senses; it is preposterous to expet that man
should be capable of tracing with accuracy the re-
lation between cause and effe&t; or to suppose that
he should rife from the contemplation of the one to
the knowledge of the other, and form just concepti-
ons of a Deky, as the Creator and Governorof the
universe. The idea of creation is so familiar, where-
*,ever the mind is enlarged by science, and illuminat-
ed with revelation, that we seldom reflect how.pro-
found and abitrufe this idea is, or confider what
progress man mufl have made in observation and
research, before he could arrive at any knowledge
of this elementary principle in religion. Accord-
ingly, several tribes have been discovered in Ame-
rica, which have no idea whatever of a Supreme
Being, and no rites of religious worship. Inatten-
tive to that magnificent fpetacle of beauty and
order presented to their view, unaccustomed to re-
flet either upon -what they themselves are, or to in-
quire who is the author of their existence, men, in
their savage state, pass their days, like the animals
around them, without knowledge or veneration of
any superior power. They have not in their lan-
guages any name for the Deity, nor have the most
accurate observers been able to discover any prac-
tice or institution which seemed to imply that they
recognized his authority, or were solicitous to ob-
tain his favour i. It is only among men in the most

uncultivated

i Biet, 539. Lery ap De Bry, iii. 221. Nieuhoff. Church.

Coll. ii. 132. Lettr. Edif. 2. 177. Id. z1. 13. Venegas,i.
87. Lozano Defcript. del Gran Chaco, 59. Fernand. Mif-
sion. de Chiquit. 39. Gumilla, ii. I56. Rochefort Hiss. des
Antilles, p. 468. Margrave Hist. in Append. de Chilienfibus,
286. Ulloa Notic. Americ. 335, &c. Barrere, 218, 219.
Harcourt Voy. to Guiana. Purch. Pilgr. iv. p. 1273. Ac-

count

B O O K uncultivated fiate of nature, and while their intellec-

IV. tual faculties are so feeble and limited as hardly to
i"V ' elevate them above the irrational creation, that we

discover this total insensibility to the impressions of
any invisible power. But the human mind, formed
for religion, soon opens to the reception of ideas,
which are defined, when correted and refined, to
be the great source of consolation amidit the calami-
ties of life. Among some of the American tribes,
itill in the infancy of improvement, we discern ap-
prehensions of some invisible and powerful beings.
These apprehensions are originally indiftina and
perplexed, and seem to be fuggefied rather by the
dread of impending evils, than to flow from grati-
tude for bleflings received. While Nature holds on
her course with uniform and undisturbed regularity,
men enjoy the benefits resulting from it, without in-
quiring concerning its cause. But every deviation
fiom this regular course rouzes and astonishes them.
When they behold events to which they are not ac-
cuflomed, they search for the reasons of them with
eager curiosity. Their understanding is unable to
penetrate into these.; but imagination, a more for-
ward and ardent faculty of the mind, decides with-
out hesitation. It ascribes the extraordinary occur-
rences in nature to the influence of invisible beings,
and supposes that the thunder, the hurricane, and the
earthquake, are effets of their interposition. Some
such conf-used notion of spiritual or invisible power, fu-
perintending over those natural calamities which fre-
quently desolate the earth, and terrify its inhabitants,
may be traced among many rude nations k. But
besides this, the difafiers and dangers of savage life
are so many, and men often find themselves in fitua-
tions so formidable, that the mind, sensible of its own
weakness, has no resource but in the guidance and

count of Brasil, by a Portuguese. Ibid. p. Iz29. Jones's
Journal, p. 9. See NO T E LIX.

k See NOT E LX.

proteAtin

protection of wisdom and power superior to what:B 0 0 A
is human. Dejected with calamities which oppress IV
him, and exposed to dangers which he cannot re-
pel, the savage no longer relies upon himself; he
feels his own impotence, and fees no profpet of
being extricated, but by the interposition of some
invisible arm. Hence, in all unenlightened nati-
ons, the firfi rites or practices which bear any re-
ferblance to aas of religion, have it for their ob-
jet to avert evils which men susser or dread. The
Manitous or Okkis of the North-Americans were
amulets or charms, which they imagined to be of
such virtue, as to preserve the persons who reposed
confidence in them from every disastrous event, or
they were confidered as tutelary spirits, whose aid
they might implore in circumstances of distress i.
The Cemis of the islanders were reputed by them
the authors of every calamity that afflits the hu-
man race; they were represented under the most
frightful forms, and religious homage was paid to
them with no other view than to appease these fu-
rious deities m. Even among those tribes whose re-
ligious fytlem was more enlarged, and who had
formed some conception of benevolent beings, de-
lighted with conferring benefits, as well as of ma-
licious powers prone to infli&t evil; superstition still
appears as the offspring of fear, and al1 its efforts
were employed to avert calamities. They were
persuaded that their good deities, prompted by the
beneficence of their nature, would bestow every
blessing in their power, without solicitation or ac-
knowledgment; and their only anxiety was to
soothe and deprecate the wrath of the powers whom
they regarded as the enemies of mankind n.

1 Charlev. N. Fr. iii. 343, &c. Creuxii Hill. Canad. p.,82,

&c. m Oviedo. lib. iii. c. i. p. I I . P. Martyr, decad. p.
102, &c. n Tertre, ii. 365. Borde, p. 14. State of Virginia,
by a Native, book iii. p. 32, 33. Dumont, i. 165. Bancroft
,Nat. Hit. of Guiana, 309.

SUCH

BOOK SUCH were the imperfect conceptions of the

1n , greater part of the Americans with refpet to the

interpositions of invisible agents, and such, almost
universally, was the mean and illiberal object of
their superstitions. Were we to trace back the
ideas of other nations to that rude slate in which
history first presents them to our view, we ihould
discover a surprising resemblance in their tenets and
practices; and should be convinced, that, in fimi-
lar circumfiances, the faculties of the human mind
hold nearly the fame course in their progress, and
arrive at almost the fame conclusions. -The impref-
sions of fear are conspicuous in all the systems of fu-
perfiition formed in this situation. And the most
exalted notions of men rife no higher than to a per-
plexed apprehension of certain beings, whose power,
though supernatural, is limited as well as partial.

Remarka- BUT, among other tribes, which have been long-
ble oiverfi er united, or have made greater progress in im-
in their re-
ligious no- provement, we discern some feeble pointing to-
tions. wards more just and adequate conceptions of the

power that presides in nature, They seem to per-
ceive that there must be some universal cause to
whom all things are indebted for their being. If
we may judge by some of their expreflions, they
appear to acknowledge a divine power as the mak-
er of the world, and the disposer of all events. They
denominate him the Great Spirit o. But there ideas
are faint and confused, and when they attempt to
explain them, it is manifest, that among them the
word spirit has a meaning very different from that
in which we employ it, and that they have no con-
ception of any deity but what is corporeal. They
believe their gods to be of the human form, though
of a nature more excellent than man, and retail
such wild incoherent fables concerning their func-

o Charley. N. Fr. iii. 343. Sagard, Voy. du Pays des Hurons,
226.

tion$

tions and operations, as are altogether unworthy B o o K
of a place in history. Even among these tribes, IV.
there is no established form of public worship; '
there are no temples erected in honour of their de-
ities; and no minillers peculiarly consecrated to'
their service. They have the knowledge, how-
ever, of several superstitious ceremonies and prac-
tices handed down to them by tradition, and to
these they have recourse with a childish credulity,
when rouzed by any emergence from their usual
insensibility, and excited to acknowledge the pow-
er, and to implore the protection of superior be-
ings P.

THE tribe of the Natchez, and the people ofsyftemof

Bogota had advanced beyond the other unculti- hez.a
vated nations of America in their ideas of religion,
as well as in their political inflitutions; and it is
no less difficult to explain the cause of this diftinc-
tion than of that which we have already confidered.
The Sun was the chief object of religious worship
among the Natchez. In their temples, which
were conftruted with some magnificence, and de-
corated with various ornaments, according to their
mode of architecture, they preserved a perpetual
fire, as the purest emblem of their divinity. Mi-
nifiers were appointed to watch and feed this fa-
cred flame. The firIt function of the great chief
of the nation, every morning, was an act of obey-
fance to the fun; and festivals returned at fated
seasons which were celebrated by the whole com-
munity with solemn but unbloody rites q. This is
the most refined species of superstition known in

P Charlev. N. Fr. iii. 345. Colden, i. 17.
q Dumont, i. 158, &c. Charlev. N. Fr. iii. 417, &c. 429.
tafitau, i. 167.

America,

B O KAmerica, and, perhaps, one of the most natura

IV. as well as moit seducing. The fun is the appa-
'"-'"'rent source of the joy, fertility, and life, diffused

through nature, and while the human mind, in its
early essays towards inquiry, contemplates and ad-
mires his universal and animating energy, its ad-
miration is apt to flop short at what is visible,
without reaching to the unseen cause; and pays
that adoration to the most glorious and beneficial
work of God, which is due only to him who form-
ed it. As fire is the purest and molt ative of the
elements, and in some of its qualities and effects
resembles the fun, it was, not improperly, chosen
to be the emblem of his powerful operation. The
ancient Persians, a people far superior, in every
refpet, to that rude tribe whose rites I am de-
scribing, founded their religious system on similar
principles, and established a form of public wor-
ship, less gross and exceptionable than that of any
people destitute of guidance from revelation. This
surprising co-incidence in sentiment between two
nations, in such different itates of improvement,
is one of the many singular and unaccountable
circumstances which occur in the history of human
affairs.

AMONG the people of Bogota, the fun and moon

were, likewise, the chief objeas of veneration.
Their system of religion was more regular and
complete, though less pure, than that of the Nat-
*chez. They had temples, altars, priefis, sacrifices,
and that long train of ceremonies, which fuperfli-
tion introduces wherever she has fully established
her dominion over the minds of men. But the
rites of their worship were cruel and bloody. They
offered human vicims to their deities, and many of
their practiccs nearly resembled the barbarous infli-
rutions of the Mexicans, the genius of which we

hall

shall have an opportunity of confidering more at- B OK
tentively in its proper place r IV.

WITH refpet to the other great dotrine of re-Their idea
ligion, concerning the immortality of the foul, the c"nce'ing

, the immor-

sentiments of the Americans were more united:talityof the
the human mind, even when least improved andu',
invigorated by culture, shrinks from the thoughts
of dissolution, and looks forward with hope and ex-
petation to a slate of future existence. This fen-
timent, resulting from a secret consciousness of its
own dignity, from an inftinEtive longing after im-
mortality, is universal, and may be deemed natu-
ral. Upon this, are founded the moil exalted
hopes of man in his highest slate of improvement;
nor has nature with-held from him this soothing
consolation, in the most early and rude period of
his progress. We can trace this opinion from one
extremity of America to the other. In some regi-
ons more faint and obscure, in others more per-
fetly developed, but no where unknown. The
most uncivilized of its savage tribes do not appre-
hend death as the extinction of being. All hope
for a future and more happy slate, where they
ihall be for ever exempt from the calamities which
embitter human life in its present condition. This
they figure as a delightful country, bleired with
perpetual spring, whose forefis abound with game,
whose rivers swarm with fish, where famine is ne-
ver felt, and uninterrupted plenty shall be enjoyed
without labour or toil. But as men, in forming
their first imperfect ideas concerning the invisible
world, suppose that there they shall continue to feel
the fame desires, and to be engaged in the fame
occupations; they naturally ascribe eminence and
diftintion, in that slate, to the fame qualities and

rPiedrahita, Conq. del N. Reyno, p. 17, &c. Herrera,
dec. 6. lib. v. c. 6.

talents

B o O K talents which are here the object of their efteemr,

IV. The Americans, accordingly, allotted the highest

place, in their country of spirits, to the skilful
hunter, to the adventurous and successful warrior,
to such as had surprised and slain the greatest num-
ber of enemies, who had tortured many of their

inducethemcaptives, and devoured their flesh ,. These noti-
at busc. ons were so prevalent, that they gave rife to an
with the universal custom, which is, at once, the strongest
dead. evidence that the Americans believe in a future

slate, and the best illufiration of what they expect
there. As they imagine, that the dead- begin their
career anew in the world whither they are gone,
that they may not enter upon it defenceless and
unprovided, they bury with them their bow, their
arrows, and other weapons used in hunting or war;
they depofite in their tombs the skins or fluffs of
which they make garments, Indian corn, manioc,
venison, domestic utensils, and whatever is reckon-
ed among the necessaries in their simple mode of
life t. In some provinces, upon the decease of a
cazique or chief, a certain number of his wives, of
his favourites, and of his slaves, were put to death,
and interred together with him, that he might ap-
pear with the fame dignity in his future flation,
and be waited upon by the fame attendants u.
This persuasion is so deep-rooted, that many of
their retainers offer themselves as voluntary vic-

s Lery apDe Bry, iii. 222. Charlev. N. Fr. iii. 351, &c.

De la Potherie, ii. 45, &c. iii. 5. t Chronica de
Cieca de Leon, c. 28. Sagard, 288. Creux. Hist. Canad. p.
9I. Rochefort, Hilt. des Antilles, 568. Biet, 39. De la
Potherie, ii. 44. iii. 8. Blanco, Converf. de Peritu, p. 35.

u Dumont, Louifiane, i. 208, &c. Oviedo, lib. v. c. 3.

Gomara, Hilf, Gen. c. 28. P. Mart. decad. 304. Charlev.
N. Fr. iii. 421. Herrera, dec. i. lib. iii. c. 3. P, Melchior
Hernandez, Memor. de Chiriqui. Coll. Orig. Papers, i.
Chron. de Cieca de Leon, c. 33.

tims,

tims, and court the privilege of accompanyingBOOK
their departed mailer, as an high difiintion. It lV.
has been found difficult, on some occasions, to set
bounds to this enthusiasm of affectionate duty, and
to reduce the train of a favourite leader to such a
number as the tribe could afford to spare x.

AMONG the Americans, as well as other unci-Superfition

conne&.ed

vilized nations, many of the rites and observances ith deo.
which bear some resemblance to ats of religion,tion.
have no connection with devotion, but proceed
from a fond desire of prying into futurity. The
human mind is most apt to feel, and to discover
this vain curiosity, when its own powers are most
feeble and uninformed. Astonished with occur-
rences, of which it is unable to comprehend the
cause, it naturally fancies that there is some
thing mysterious and wonderful in their origin.
Alarmed at events, of which it cannot discern the
issue or the consequences, it has recourse to other
means of discovering them, than the exercise of
its own sagacity. Wherever fuperilition is so es-
tablifhed as to form a regular system, this desire
of penetrating into the secrets of futurity is con-
nected with it. Divination becomes a religious
act. Priefis, as the-minifters of Heaven, pretend
to deliver its oracles to men. They are the only
soothsayers, augurs, and magicians, who possess the
sacred and important art of disclosing what is hid
from other eyes.

BUT, among rude nations, who pay no vene-Thisdepar;-

ration to any superintending power, and who have 'to 1

"e1ir

no established rites or ministers of religion, their pbyficians,
curiosity to discover what is future and unknown
is cherished by a different principle, and derives
firength from another alliance. As the diseases of

x See NOTE LXI.

men,

B O O K men, in the savage slate, are like those of the ani-

Iv. mal creation, few but extremely violent, their im-

patience under what they susser, and solicitude for
the recovery of health, soon inspired them with
extraordinary reverence for such as pretended to
understand the nature of their maladies, or to pre-
serve them from their sudden and fatal effects.
These ignorant pretenders, however, were such ut-
ter firangers to the firuature of the human frame,
as to be equally unacquainted with the causes of
its disorders, and the manner in which they will
terminate. Enthusiasm, mingled frequently with
some portion of craft, supplied what they wanted
in science. They imputed the origin of diseases to
supernatural influence, and prescribed or perform-
ed a variety of mysterious rites, which they gave
out to be of power sufficient to remove them. The
credulity and love of the marvellous, natural to
uninformed men, favoured the deception, and pre-
pared them to be the dupes of their imposture.
Among savages, their firit physicians are a kind
of conjurers or wizards, who boast that they know
what is pai, and can foretell what is to come.
Incantations, sorcery, and mummeries of diverse
kinds, no less firange than frivolous, are the means
which they employ to expel the imaginary causes of
malignityY; and, relying upon the efficacy of there,
they predid with confidence what will be the fate
of their deluded patients. Thus fuperilition in its
earliest form flowed from the solicitude of man
to be delivered from present ditrefs, not from
his dread of evils awaiting him in a future life,
and was originally ingrafted on medicine, not on
religion. One of the first, and moit intelligent
historians of America was firuck with this alliance

Y P. Melch. Hernandez, Memorial de Cheriqui. Collet,
Orig. Pap. i.

between

between the art of divination and that of physic, B 0 IK
among the people of Hispaniola z. But this was not IV.
peculiar to them. The Alexis, the Piayas, the Aut- .y.
moins, or whatever was the diftinguilhing name of
their diviners and charmers in other parts of Ame-
rica, were all the physicians of their refpeetive tribes,
in the fame manner as the Buhitos of Hispaniola.
As their function led them to apply to the human
mind when enfeebled by sickness, and as they found
it, in that season of dejetion, prone to be alarmed
with imaginary fears, or amused with vain hopes,
they easily induced it to rely with implicit confi-
dence on the virtue of their spells, and the certainty
of their predictions a.

WHENEVER men acknowledge the reality of fu- Gradually

pernatural power and discernment in one inflance, extend'
they have a propensity to admit it in others. The
Americans did not long suppose the efficacy of con-
juration to be confined to one subjea. They had
recourse to it in every situation of danger or difirefs,
When the events of war were peculiarly disastrous,
when they met with unforeseen disappointments in
hunting, when inundations or drought threatened
their crops-with defirution, they called upon their
conjurers to begin their incantations, in order to
discover the causes of those calamities, or to foretell
what would be their issue b Their confidence in
this delusive art gradually increased, and manifeit-
ed itself in all the occurrences of life. When in-
volved in any difficulty, or about to enter upon

z Oviedo, lib. v. c. i.
a Herrera, dec. i. lib. iii. c. 4. OQborne, Coll.ii. 86o.

Dumont, i. 169, &c. Charlev. N. Fr. iii. 36I. 364, &c.
Lawson, N. Carol. 214. Ribas, Triumph. p. 17. Biet, 386.
De la Potherie, ii. 35, &c.

b Charlev. N. Fr. iii. 3. Dumot, i. 173. Fernand. Re-
lac. de los Chiquit. p. 40. Lozano, 84. Margrave, 279.

VOL, I. . L any

B O O K any tranfation of moment, every individual regw-

IV. larly consulted the forcerer, depended upon his in-
~'" ftruaions toextricate him from the former, and top

diret his conduct in the latter. Even among the
rudest tribes in America, superstition appears in this
form, and divination is an art in high esteem. Long
before man had acquired such knowledge of a Deity
as inspires reverence and leads to adoration, we ob-
serve him firetching out a presumptuous hand to
draw aside that veil' with which Providence kindly
conceals its purposes from human knowledge; and
we find him labouring, with fruitless anxiety, to
penetrate into the mysteries of the divine admini-
firation. To discern, and to worship a superintend-
ing power,, is an evidence of the enlargement and
maturity of the human underflanding; a vain desire
of prying into futurity, is the error of its infancy,.
and a proof of its weakness.

FROM this weakness proceeded, likewise, the

faith of the Americans in dreams, their observation
of omens, their attention to the chirping of birds
and the cries of animals, all' which they suppose to
be indications of future events,, and if any one of
these prognostics is deemed unfavourable, they in-
ftantly abandon the pursuit of those measures on'
which they are most eagerly bent c.

Detached VIII. BUT if we would form a complete idea of
ufloms. the uncultivated nations of America, we must not

pass unobserved some singular customs, which,
though universal and charateriftic, could not be re-
duced, with propriety, to any of the articles into
which I have divided my inquiry concerning-their
manners.

c Charlev. N. Fr. iii. 262. 353. Stadius, ap de Bry, iii.

12o. Creuxij, Hist. Canad. 84. Techo, Hilft of Parago
Church Coll. vi. 37. De la Potherie, iii, 6.

AMONG

AMONG savages, in every part of the globe, the B 0 0 K

love of dancing is a favourite paflion. As a great Iv.
part of their time languishes away in listless indo- LTf

Love of

lence, without any occupation to rouze or interest dancing.
them, they delight universally in a paitime which
calls forth the acive powers of their nature into ex-
ercife. The Spaniards, when they first visited A-
merica, were aitonifhed at the fondness of the na-
tives for dancing, and beheld with wonder a peo-
ple, cold and unanimated in most of their other
pursuits, kindle into life, and exert themselves with
ardour, as often as this favourite amusement recur-
red. Among them, indeed, dancing ought not to
be denominated an amusement. It is a serious and
important occupation, which mingles in every oc-
currence of public or private life. If any intercourse
be necessary between two American tribes, the am-
baffadors of the one approach in a fblemn dance,
and present the calumet or emblem of peace; the
sachems of the other receive it with the fame cere-
mony a. If war is denounced against an enemy, it
is by a dance, expreflive of the resentment which
they feel, and of the vengeance which they medi-
tate b. If the wrath of their gods is to be appeared,
or their beneficence to be celebrated; if they re-
joice at the birth of a child, or mourn the death of
a friend ', they have dances appropriated to each
of these situations, and suited to the different senti-
ments with which they are then animated. If a
person is indisposed, a dance is prescribed as the
most effectual means of restoring him to health;
and if he himself cannot endure the fatigue of such
an exercise, the physician or conjurer performs it in

a De la Potherie Hilt. ii. 17, &c. Charlev. N. Fr. iii. 2 i.
297. La Hontan. i. 100. 137. Hennepin. Decou. x49, &C.

b Charlev. N. Fr. iii. 298. Lafitau, i. 523.
c Joutel, 343. Gomara, Hilt. Gen. c. 196.

L 2. bis

B O K his name, as if the virtue of his activity could be

IV. transferred to his patient d

ALL their dances are imitations of some action;

and though the music by which they are regulated,
is extremely simple and tiresome to the ear by its
dull monotony, some of their dances appear won-
derfully expressive and animated. The war-dance
is, perhaps, the motl firiking. It is the reprefenta-
tion of a complete American campaign. The de-
parture of the warriors from their village, their
march into the enemy's country, the caution with
which they encamp, the address with which they
station some of their party in ambush, the manner
of surprising the enemy, the noise and ferocity of
the combat, the scalping of those who are slain, the
seizing of prisoners, the triumphant return of the
conquerors, and the torture of the vi&tims, are fuc-
ceffively exhibited. The performers enter with
such enthusiastic ardour into their several parts, their
gestures, their countenance, their voice are so wild
and so well adapted to their various situations, that
Europeans can hardly believe it to be a mimic
scene, or view it without emotions of fear and
horror e.

BUT however expressive some of the American

dances may be, there is one circumstance in them
remarkable, and connected with the character of the
race. The songs, the dances, the amusements of
other nations, expressive of the sentiments which
animate their hearts, are often adapted to display
or excite that sensibility which mutually attaches
the sexes. Among some people, such is the ardour

d Denys Hist. Nat. I89. Brickell, 372. De la Potherie,
ii. 36.

De la Potherie, ii. 116. Charley. N. Fr. iii. 297. La-
itau, i. 523.

of

of this passion, that love is almost the sole objec of B 0 0 K
festivity and joy; and as rude nations are firangers IV.
to delicacy, and unaccustomed to disguise any """
emotion of their minds, their dances are often ex-
tremely wanton and indecent. Such is the Calenda,
of which the natives of Africa are so paflionately
fond e; and such the feats of the dancing girls,
which the Asiatics contemplate with so much avi-
dity of desire. But, among the Americans, more
cold and indifferent to their females, from causes
which I have already explained, this pafilon min-
gles but little with their fetiivals and paiimes.
Their songs and dances are mostly solemn and
martial, they are connected with some of the serious
and important affairs of life f, and having no rela-
tion to love or gallantry, are seldom common to
the two sexes, but executed by the men and wo-
men apart g. If, on some occasions, the women
are permitted to join in the festival, the character
of the entertainment is fiill the fame, and no move-
ment or gesture is expressive of attachment, or en-
courages familiarity h.

AN immoderate love of play, especially at games Pallion for

of hazard, which seems to be natural to all people gaming
unaccutfomed to the occupations of regular indus-
try, is likewise universal among the Americans.
The fame causes, which so often prompt persons
at their ease in civilized life to.have recourse to this

c Adanfon, Voy. to Senegal, p. iii. 287. Labat, Voyages,:

iv. 463. Sloane, His. Nat. of Jam. Introd. p. 48. Fermin,
Defcript. de Surin. i. p. 139.

f Defcrip. of N. France. Osborne, Coll. ii. 883. Char-
lev. N. Fr. iii. 84.

r Wafer's Account of Isthmus, &c. 169. Lery ap de Bry,

iii. 177. Lozano, Hist. deParag . i. 49. Herrera, dec. 2.
lib. vii. c. 8. dec. 4. lib. x. c. 4. See N 0 T E LXII.

h Barrere, Fr. Equin. p. 191.

pastime,

B O O K pastime, render it the delight of the savage. The

v-. former are independent of labour, the latter do not
"" ' feel the neceflity of it, and as both are unemploy-

ed, they run with transport to whatever is of power
to stir and agitate their minds. Hence the Ameri-
cans, who at other times are so indifferent, so
phlegmatic, so silent, and so disinterested, as soon
as they engage in play become rapacious, impa-
tient, noisy, and almost frantic with eagerness.
Their furs, their domestic utensils, their clothes,
their arms, are ltaked at the gaming-table, and
when all is loft, high as their sense of independence
is, in a wild emotion of despair or of hope, they
will often risk their personal liberty, upon a single
cast i. Among several tribes, such gaming parties
frequently recur, and become their molt acceptable
entertainment at every great festival. Superstition,
which is apt to take hold of those passions which
are molt vigorous, frequently lends its aid to con-
firm and strengthen this favourite inclination.
Their conjurers are accustomed to prescribe a so-
lemn match at play, as one of the most efficacious
methods of appeasing their gods, or of restoring
the sick to health k

and for FROM causes similar to those which render them
dnKi. fond of play, the Americans are extremely addicted

to drunkenness. It seems to have been one of the
firfi exertions of human ingenuity to discover some
composition of an intoxicating quality; and there
is hardly any nation of rude, or so destitute of in-
vention, as not to have succeeded in this fatal re-
search. The most barbarous of the American tribes
have been so unfortunate as to attain this art; and

i Charlev. N. Fr. iii. 261. 318. Lafitau, ii. 338, &c.
Ribas, Triumph 13. Bickell, 335.

Charlev. N. Fr. iii. 262.

eyen

,ven those who are so deficient in knowledge, as B O 0 K
to be unacquainted with the method of giving an Iv.
inebriating strength to liquors by fermentation, can
accomplish the fame end by other means. The
people of the ifiands, of North America, and of
California, used, for this purpose, the smoke of to-
bacco, drawn up with a certain initrument into the
nostrils, the fumes of which ascending to the brain,
they felt all the transports and frenzy of intoxica-
tion m. In almost every other part of the New
World, the natives possessed the art of extra&ing
an intoxicating liquor from maize .or the manioc
root, the fame :fubfiances which they convert into
bread. The operation by which they effea this,
nearly resembles the common one of brewing, but
with this difference, that in place of yelt, they use
a nauseous infusion of a certain quantity of maize
.or manioc chewed *by their women. The saliva
excites a vigorous fermentation, and in a few days
the liquor becomes fit for drinking. It is not dif-
agreeable to the tafle, and when swallowed in large
quantities, is of an intoxicating quality ". This is
the general beverage of the Americans, which they
distinguish by various names, and for which they
feel such a violent and insatiable desire, as it is not
easy either to conceive or describe. Among po-
.lifhed nations, where a fucceflion of various funti-
ons and amusements keep the mind in continual
occupation, the desire for strong drink is regulated,
in a great measure, .by the climate, and increases
or diminishes according to the variations of its tem-
perature. In warm regions, the delicate and fen-
fible frame of the inhabitants does not require the

m Oviedo Hist. ap Ramus. iii. 1I3. Venegas, i. 68.
..Naufrag. de Cabeca de Vaca, cap. 26. See NOTE LXIl,

P ,Stadius ap de Bry, iii. iI1. Lery, ibid. 175.

Rimula-tion

B 0 0 K timulation of fermented liquors. In colder coun-

IV. tries, the conflitution of the natives, more robust

and more sluggish, fiands in need of generous li-
quors to quicken and animate it. But among fa-
vages, the desire of something that is of power to
intoxicate, is in every situation the fame. All the
people of America, whether natives of the torrid
zone, or inhabitants of its more temperate regions,
or placed by a harder fate in the severe climates to-
wards its northern or southern extremity, appear
to be equally under the dominion of this appe-
tite °. Such a similarity of taste, among people in
such different situations, must be ascribed to the in-
fluence of some moral cause, and cannot be confi-
dered as the effect of any physical or conflitutional
want. While engaged in war or in the chafe, the
savage is often in the mofi interesting situations,
and all the powers of his nature are rouzed to the
most vigorous exertions. But those animating scenes
are succeeded by long intervals of repose, during
which the warrior meets with nothing that he deems
of sufficient dignity or importance to merit his at-
tention. He languishes and mopes in this season
of indolence. The polture of his body is an emblem
of the fiate of his mind. In one climate, cowering
over the fire in his cabin; in another, firetched
under the shade of some tree;-he dozes away his
time in sleep, or in an unthinking joyless inacivity,
not far removed from it. As Ifrong liquors awake
him from this torpid fiate, give a brisket motion
to his spirits, and enliven him more thoroughly
than either dancing or gaming, his love of
them is excessive. A savage, when not engag-
ed in aation, is a pensive melancholy animal;

o Gumilla, i. 257. Lozano Defcrip. de Gran Chaco, 56.

103. Ribas, 8. Ulloa, i. 249. 337. Marchais, iv. 436.
Fernandez Miflion. de las Chiquic. 35. Barrere, p. 203,
alarco Converf. de Piritu, 31.

but

but as soon as he taftes, or has a profped of taft- B O O K
ing, the intoxicating draught, he becomes gay and Iv.
frolicsome P. Whatever be the occasion, or pre-
text, on which the Americans assemble, the meet-
ing always terminates in a debauch. Many of
their festivals have no other object, and they wel-
come the return of them with transports of joy.
As they are not accustomed to restrain any appe-
tite, they set no bounds to this. The riot often
continues without intermiflion several days; and
whatever be the fatal effects of their excess, they
never cease from drinking as long as one drop of
liquor remains. The persons of greatest eminence,
the most distinguished warriors, and the chiefs
most renowned for their wisdom, have no more
command of themselves than the most obscure
member of the community. Their eagerness for
present enjoyment renders them blind to its fatal
consequences; and those very men, who in other
situations, seem to possess a force of mind more
than human, are in this instance inferior to children
in foresight, as well as consideration, and mere
slaves of brutal appetite q. When their paflions,
naturally strong, are heightened and inflamed by
drink, they are guilty of the most enormous out-
rages, and the festivity seldom concludes without
deeds of violence, or bloodshed r.

BUT, amidst this wild debauch, there is one cir-

cumftance remarkable; the women, in most of the
American tribes, are not permitted to partake of
its. Their province is to prepare the liquor, to
serve it about to the guests, and to take care of
their husbands and friends, when their reason is

P Melendez Teforos Verdad. iii. 369. q Ribas, 9.

Ulloa, i. 338. r Lettr. Edif. ii. 178. Torquemada
Mon. Ind. i. 235. 5 See N T E LXIV.

overpowered.

B o o Koverpowered. This exclusion of the women from

IV. an enjoyment so highly valued by savages, may be

jufily confidered as a mark of their inferiority, and
as an additional evidence of that contempt with
which they were treated in the New World. The
people of North-America, when firll discovered,
were not acquainted with any intoxicating drink;
but as the Europeans early found it their interest to
supply them with spirituous liquors, drunkenness
soon became as universal among them as among
their countrymen to the south; and their women
having acquired this new taste, indulge it with as
little decency and moderation as the men t.

Put to death IT were endless to enumerate all the detached
the aged and
icurable. cutfoms which have excited the wonder of travel-

lers in America; but I cannot omit one seemingly
as singular as any that has been mentioned. When
their parents and other relations become old, or la-
bour under any distemper which their slender know-
ledge of the healing art cannot remove, they cut
short their days with a violent hand, in order to be
relieved from the burden of supporting and tending
them. This practice prevailed among the ruder
tribes in every part of the continent, from Hudson's
Bay to the river De la Plata; and however shock-
ing it may be to those sentiments of tenderness and
attachment, which, in civilized life, we are apt to
confider as congenial with our frame, the condition
of man in the savage state leads and reconciles him
to it. The fame hardships and difficulty of pro-
curing subsistence, which deter savages in some ca-
fes, from rearing their children, prompt them to
defiroy the aged and infirm. The declining state of

t Hutchinson, Hilt. of Maffachuf. 469. Lafitau, ii. 125.
Sagard, 146,

the,

the one is as helpless as the infancy of the other. B o o K
The former are no less unable than the latter to IV.
perform the funtions that belong to a warrior or
hunter, or to endure those various distresses in
which savages are so often involved, by their own
want of foresight and industry. Their relations
feel this; and incapable of attending to the wants
or weaknesses of others, their impatience under an
additional burden prompts them to extinguish that
life which they find it difficult to sustain. This is
not regarded as a deed of cruelty, but as an act of
mercy. An American, broken with years and in-
firmities, conscious that he can no longer depend
on the aid of those around him, places himself con-
tentedly in his grave; and it is by the hands of his
children or nearest relations that the thong is pulled,
or the blow inflicted, which releases him for ever
from the sorrows of life .

IX. AFTER contemplating the rude AmericanGeneral es

tribes in such various lights, after taking a view ofetimate f
their customs and manners from so many different raaer.
stations, nothing remains but to form a general es-
timate of their character, compared with that of
more polished nations. A human being, as he
comes originally from the hand of nature, is every
vhere the fame. At his first appearance in the
fiate of infancy, whether it be among the rudest
savages, or in the molt civilized society, we can
discern no quality which marks any diftinAion or
superiority. The capacity of improvement seems
to be the fame; and the talents he may afterwards
acquire, as well as the virtues he may be rendered
capable of exercising, depend entirely upon the
slate of society in which he is placed. To this slate

u Caffan Hist. de N. Reyno de Gran. p. 300. Pifo, p. 6.
Ellis Voy. 91. Gumilla, i. 333.

his

B O OK his mind naturally accommodates itself, and from

\1V. it receives its discipline and culture. In proportion

to the wants which it accustoms a human being to
feel, and the furictions in which these engage him,
his intellectual powers are called forth. Accord-
ing to the connections which it establishes between
him and the reft of his species, the affetions of his
heart are exerted. It is only by attending to this
great principle, that we can discover what is the
character of man in every different period of his
progress.

inte'leaual IF we apply it to savage life, and measure the
powers. attainments of the human mind in that fiate by

this flandard, we shall find, according to an ob-
servation which I have already made, that the in-
telleatual powers of man must be extremely limit-
ed in their operations. They are confined within
the narrow sphere of what he deems necelfary for
supplying his own wants. Whatever has not some
relation to these, neither attracts his attention, nor
is the object of his inquiries. But however narrow
the bounds may be within which the knowledge of
a savage is circumscribed, he possesses thoroughly
that small portion of it which he has attained. It
was not communicated to him by formal infiruc-
tion; he does not attend to it as matter of mere
speculation and curiosity; it is the result of his
own observation, the fruit of his own experience,
and accommodated to his condition and exigen-
cies. While employed in the active occupations
of war or hunting, he often finds himself in dif-
ficult and perilous situations, from which the es-
forts of his own sagacity mutl extricate him. He
is frequently engaged in measures where every ftep
depends upon his own ability to decide, where he
mufl rely solely, upon his own penetration to dif-
cern the dangers to which he is exposed, and upon
his own wisdom in providing against them.

As

As the talents of individuals are exercised and B O O K

improved by such exertions, much political wis- IV.
dom is said to be displayed in conducting the as- Political a-
fairs of their small communities. The council oflents.
old men in an American tribe, deliberating upon
its interests, and determining with refpet to peace
or war, has been compared to the senate in more
polished republics. The proceedings of the for-
mer, we are told, are often no less formal and saga-
cious than those of the latter. Great political wis-
dom is exhibited in pondering the various mea-
fures proposed, and in balancing their probable ad-
vantages, againfi the evils of which they may be
produaive. Much address and eloquence are em-
ployed by the leaders, who aspire at acquiring such
confidence with their countrymen, as to have an
ascendant in those assemblies x. But, among fa-
vage tribes, the field for displaying political talents
cannot be extensive. Where the idea of private
property is unknown, and no criminal jurifdiaion
is established, there is hardly any function of inter-
nal government to exercise. Where there is no
commerce, and scarcely any intercourse among fe-
parate tribes; where enmity is implacable, and
hostilities are carried on almost without intermifli-
on; there will be few points of public concern to
adjust with their neighbours; and that department
of their affairs which may be denominated foreign,
cannot be so intricate as to require any refined po-
licy in conducting it. Where individuals are so
thoughtless and improvident as seldom to take es-
fedual precautions for felf-prefervation, it is vain
to expect that public measures and deliberations
will be regulated by the contemplation of remote
events. It is the genius of savages to at from the
impulse of present paflion. They have neither fore-
fight nor temper to form complicated arrange-

x Charley. N. Fr. iii. 269, &c.

ments

t

B O O K ments with refped to their future conduct. The

IV. consultations of the Americans, indeed, are so

frequent, and their negociations are so many Y,
and so long protracted, as to give their proceed-
ings an extraordinary aspea of wisdom. But this
is not owing so much to the depth of their schemes,
as to the coldness and phlegm of their temper,
which render them flow in determining z. If we
except the celebrated league, that united the Five
Nations in Canada into a federal republic, which
ihall be confidered in its proper place, we can
discern few such traces of political wisdom, among
the rude American tribes, as discovers any great
degree of foresight or extent of intellectual abili-
ties. Even among them, we shall find public
measures more frequently direEed by the impetu-
ous ferocity of their youth, than regulated by the
experience and wisdom of their old men.
1Degree of As the condition of man in the savage slate is

unfavourable to the progress of the underfiand-
ing, it has a tendency likewise, in some refpeds,
to check the exercise of affection, and to render
the heart contraated. The firongeft feeling in the
mind of a savage is a sense of his own independ-
ence. He has sacrificed so small a portion of his
natural liberty by becoming a member of society,
that he remains, in a great degree, the sole malter
of his own actions . He often takes his refolu-
tions alone, without consulting, or feeling any
conneEtion with the persons around him. In ma-
ny of his operations, he itands as much detached
from the reft of his species, as if he had formed no
union with them. Conscious how little he depends
upon other men, he is apt to view them with a

Y See NOTE LXV. *
z Charlev. N. Fr. iii. 271.
a Fernandez Mifflon. de los Chiquit. 33.

careless

careless indifference. Even the force of his mind B O 0 K
contributes to encreafe this unconcern, and as he IV.
looks not beyond himself in deliberating with re-
fpe& to the part which he should at, his solicitude
about the consequences of it seldom extends far-
ther. He pursues his own career, and indulges his
own fancy, without inquiring or regarding whe-
ther what he does be agreeable or offensive to
others, whether they may derive benefit, or re-
ceive hurt from it. Hence the ungovernable ca-
price of savages, their impatience under any fpe-
cies of refiraint, their inability to suppress or mo-
derate any inclination, the scorn or neglea with
which they receive advice, their high eflimation of
themselves, and their contempt of other men.
Among them, the pride of independence produces
almost the fame effects with intereftednefs in a
more advanced slate of society, it refers every
thing to a man himself, and renders the gratifica-
tion of his own wishes, the measure and end of
condut.

To the fame cause may be imputed the hard- Hardness of

ness of heart, and insensibility, remarkable in all heart
savage nations. Their minds, rouzed only by
firong emotions, are little susceptible of gentle,
delicate, or tender affections b. Their union is so
incomplete, that each individual afts as if he re-
tained all his natural rights entire and undiminifh-
ed. If a favour is conferred upon him, or a ser-
vice performed for his behoof, he receives it with
much fatisfation, because it contributes to his en-
joyment; but this sentiment extends not beyond
himself, it excites no sense of obligation, he neither
feels gratitude, nor thinks of making any return c.
Even, among persons the most closely conneted,
there is little correspondence or exchange of those

b Charlev. N. Fr. iii. 309.
c Oviedo Hill. lib. xvi. c. 2. See N O T E LXVI.

good

BOOK good offices which firengthen attachment, moI-

IV. lify the heart, and sweeten the intercourse of life.

^
" Their high ideas of independence nourish a fullen

reserve, which keeps them at a distance from each
other. The nearest relations are mutually afraid
to make any demand, or to solicit any serviced, left
it ihould be confidered by the other as imposing a
burden, or laying a refiraint upon his will.
nfenfibili- I H A v E already remarked the influence of this

ZY hard unfeeling temper upon domestic life, with

refpet to the connection between husband and
wife, as well as that between parents and children,
Its effeAs are no less conspicuous, in the perform-
ance of those mutual offices of tenderness which
the infirmities of our nature frequently exat. A-
mong some tribes, when any of their number are
seized with a distemper, they are generally aban-
doned by all around them, who, careless of their
recovery, fly in the utmost consternation from the
supposed danger of infectione. But even where
they are not thus deserted, the cold indifference
with which they are attended can afford them little
consolation. No look of sympathy, no soothing ex-
pressions, no officious services contribute to alle-
viate or to make them forget their sufferingss.
Their nearest relations will often refuse to sub-
mit to the smallest inconveniency, or to part with
the leat trifle, however much it may tend to
their accommodation or reliefs. So little is the
breast of a savage susceptible of those Sentiments
which prompt men to that feeling attention which
mitigates distress, that, in some provinces of Ame-
rica, the Spaniards have found it necessary to

d De la Potherie, iii. 28. e Lettre de P. Cataneo ap Mu-

ratori Chriltian, i. 309. Tertre, ii. 410. Lozano, ioo. Her-
rera, dec. 4. lib. viii. c. 5. dec. 5. lib. iv. c. 2. Falkner's De-
script. of Patagonia, 98. f Gumilla, i. 329. Lozano, ioo.

g Garica Origen, &c. 9®. Herrera, dec. 4. lib. viii. c. 5.

inforce

inforce the common duties of humanity by positive B o o g
laws, and to oblige husbands and wives, parents IV.
and children, under severe penalties, to take care
of each other during their sickness h. The fame
harshness of temper is. fill more conspicuous in their
treatment of the animal creation. Prior to their
intercourse with the people of Europe, the North
Americans had some tame dogs, which accompa-
nied them in their hunting excursions, and served
them with all the ardour and fidelity peculiar to
their species. But, instead of that fond attachment,
which the hunter naturally feels towards those use-
ful companions of his toils, they requite their ser-
vices with neglect, seldom feed, and never caress
them i. In other provinces, the Americans have
become acquainted with the domestic animals of
Europe, and avail themselves of their service; but
it is universally observed that they always treat
them harshly k, and never employ any method
either for breaking or managing them, but force
and cruelty. In every part of the deportment of
man in his savage state, whether towards his equals
of the human species, or towards the animals be-
low him, we recognize the fame charaters and
trace the operations of a mind, intent on its own
gratifications, and regulated by its own caprice,
without much attention or sensibility to the senti-
ments and feelings of the beings around him.

AFTER explaining how unfavourable the savage Tacitur-

slate is to the cultivation of the understanding, and nty.
to the improvement of the heart, I should not have
thought it necessary to mention what may be deem-
ed its lesser defects, if the character of nations as

h Cogulludo Hilt. de Yucathan. p. 300.
i Charlev. N. Fr. iii. 119 337.
k Ulloa Notic. American. 312.
VOL. II. M well

B 0 0 K well as individuals, were not often more diftin&ly

IV. marked by circumfRances apparently trivial, than
'J by those of greater moment. A savage, frequently,

placed in situations of danger and diltrefs, depend-
ing on himself alone, and wrapt up in his own
thoughts and' schemes, is a serious melancholy ani-
mal. His attention to others is small. The range
of his own ideas is narrow. Hence that taciturnity
which is so difguiting to men accufiomed to the
open irtercourfe of social conversation. When not
engaged in ation, the Americans often fit whole
days in one posture, without opening their lips 1.
When they go forth to war, or to the chace, they
.usually march in a line at some distance from one
another, and without exchanging a word. The
fame profound silence is observed when they row
together in a canoe m. It is only when they are
animated by intoxicating liquors, or rouzed by the
jollity of the feflival and dance, that they become
gay and converfible.
Conning. To the fame causes may be imputed the refined

cunning with which they form and execute their
schemes. Men, who are not habituated to a liberal
communication of their own sentiments and withes,
are apt to be so diitruftful, as to place little confi-
dence in others, and to have recourse to an insidious
craft, in accomplishing their own purposes. In ci-
vilized life, those persons, who, by their situation,
have but a few objects of pursuit on which their
minds incessantly dwell, are most remarkable for
low artifice in carrying on their little projeets.
Among savages, whose views are equally confined,
and their attention no less persevering, those cir-
cumfiances mull operate still more powerfully, and
gradually accustom them to a disingenuous subtlety

i Voyage de Bouguer, xoz. ' Charlev. iii. 340,

in

in all their tranfations. The force of this is in- B 0 0 K
created by habits which they acquire in carrying Iv.
on the two most interesting operations wherein they
are engaged. With them war is a system of craft,
in which they trust for success to firatagem more
than to open force, and have their invention con-
tinually on the firetch to circumvent and surprise
their enemies. As hunters, it is their contfant ob-
jeet to ensnare, in order that they may destroy.
Accordingly, art and cunning have been univer-
sally observed as distinguishing charaaeriflics of all
savages. The people of the rude tribes of America
are remarkable for their address and duplicity. Im-
penetrably secret in forming their measures, they
pursue them with a patient undeviating attention,
and there is no refinement of dissimulation which
they cannot employ, in order to insure their success.
The natives of Peru were engaged above thirty
years, in concerting the plan of their insurrection,
under the vice-royalty of the marquis de Villa-
Garcia, and though communicated to a great num-
ber of all different ranks, no indication of it ever
transpired during that long period; no man betray-
ed his trust, or by an unguarded look, or rafll
word, gave rife to any suspicion of what was in-
tended n. The dissimulation and craft of individu-
als is no less remarkable than that of nations. When
set upon deceiving, they wrap themselves up so ar-
tificially, that it is impoflible to penetrate into their
intentions, or to detect their designs °.

BuT if there be defects or vices peculiar to thevirtued.

savage slate, there are, likewise, virtues which it
inspires, and good qualities, to the exercise of which

" Voyage de Ulloa, ii. 309.
0 Gumilla, i. 16z. Charley. iii. 19.

M2 it

B 0 0 K it is friendly. The bonds of society fit so loose

IV. upon the members of the more rude American
ndepen tribes, that they hardly feel any refiraint. Hence
dent spirit. the spirit of independence, which is the pride of a

savage, and which he confiders as the unalienable
prerogative of man. Incapable of controul, and
disdaining to acknowledge any superior, his mind,
though limited in its powers, and erring in many
of its pursuits, acquires such elevation by the con-
fcioufnefs of its own freedom, that he ats on some
occasions with afionifhing force, and perseverance,
and dignity.
Fortitudc. As independence nourishes this high spirit among

savages, the perpetual wars in which they are en-
gaged call it forth into action. Such long intervals
of tranquillity as are frequent in polished societies,
are unknown in the ravage state. Their enmities,
as I have observed, are implacable and immortal.
The valour of the youth is never allowed to rust in
inaction. The hatchet is always in their hand,
either for attack or defence. Even in their hunting
excursions, they must be on their guard againi
surprise from the hostile tribes, by which they are
surrounded. Accustomed to continual alarms, they
grow familiar with danger, and courage becomes
an habitual virtue, resulting naturally from their
situation, and strengthened by conitant exertions.
The mode of displaying fortitude may not be the
fame in small and rude communities, as in more
powerful and civilized fates. Their system of war,
and flandard of valour may be formed upon differ-
ent principles, but in no situation does the human
mind rife more superior to the sense of danger, or
the dread of death, than in its most simple and un-
cultivated state.

ANOTHER

ANOTHER virtue remarkable among savages, is B o o K

attachment to the community of which they are IV.
members. From the nature of their political union, Alt

·

i -, ,.

. , l

i r- ii Attachment

one might expedt this tie to be extremely feeble. totheir
But there are circumfiances which render the influ-°"mmunity'
ence, even of their loose mode of association, very
powerful. The American tribes are small; com-
bined against their neighbours, in prosecution of
ancient enmities, or in avenging recent injuries,
their interests and operations are neither numerous
nor complex. These are objects, which the uncul-
tivated understanding of a savage can comprehend.
His heart is capable of forming connections, which
are so little diffused. He assents with warmth to
public measures, dictated by paflions, similar to
those which influence his own conduct. Hence the
ardour with which individuals undertake the molt
perilous service, when the community deems it ne-
ceffary. Hence their fierce and deep-rooted anti-
pathy to the public enemies. Hence their zeal for
the honour of their tribe, and that love of their
country, which prompts them to brave danger that
it may triumph, and to endure the most exquisite
torments without a groan, that it may not be dif-
graced.

THUS, in every situation where a human beingsatisraaioa

can be placed, even the most unfavourable, therewith their
are virtues that peculiarly belong to it; there aredition.
affecions which it calls forth; there is a species of
happiness which it yields. Nature, with nmot be-
neficent intention, conciliates and forms the mind
to its condition, the ideas and wishes of man ex-
tend not beyond that slate of society to which he is
habituated. What it presents as objets of con-
templation or enjoyment, fill and satisfy h: mind,
and he can hardly conceive any other mode of life
to be pleasant or even tolerable. The Tartar, ac-

cufiomed

B OO K cuitomed to roam over extensive plains, and to

IV. subsist on the produLt of his herds, imprecates

upon his enemy, as the greatest of all curses, that
he may be condemned to reside in one place, and
to be nourished with the top of a weed. The rude
Americans, fond of their own pursuits, and satis-
fled with their own lot, are equally unable to com-
prehend the intention or utility of the various ac-
commodations, which, in more polished society, are
deemed essential to the comfort of life. Far from
complaining of their own situation, or viewing that
of men in a more improved Rtate with admiration
or envy, they regard themselves as the standard of
excellence, as beings the best entitled, as well as
the most perfectly qualified, to enjoy real happi-
ness. Unaccustomed to any restraint upon their
will or their actions, they behold with amazement
the inequality of rank, and the subordination which
take place in civilized life, and confider the volun-
tary submission of one man to another, as a renun-
ciation, no less base than unaccountable, of the
firfi diftinAtion of humanity. Void of foresight, as
well as free from care themselves, and delighted
with that Rfate of indolent security, they wonder at
the anxious precautions, the unceasing indufiry,
and complicated arrangements of Europeans, in
guarding against distant evils, or providing for fu-
ture wants, and exclaim against their preposterous
folly, in thus multiplying the troubles, and increaf-
ing the labour of life °. This preference of their
own manners is conspicuous on every occasion.
Even the names, by which the various nations with
to be diflinguifhed, are assumed from this idea f
their own pre-eminence. The appellation which
the Iroquois give to themselves is, the chief of men P.
Czraibe, the original name of the fierce inhabitants

o Charlev. N. Fr. iii. 308. Lahontan, ii. 970
P Colden, i, 3,

of the windward islands, signifies the warlike people q.B 6 0 K
The Cherokee, from an idea of their own fuperi- IV.
ority, call the Europeans Nothings, 'or the accursed'
race, and assume themselves the name of The be-
loved people r. The fame principle regulated the
notions of the other Americans concerning the Eu-
ropeans; for although, at first, they were filled
with aftonihmrent at their arts, and with dread of
their power, they soon came to abate their eftima-
mation of men, whose maxims -of life were so dif-
ferent from their own. Hence they called them
the froth of the sea, men without father or mother.
They supposed, that either they had no country of
their own, and therefore invaded that which be-
longed to otherss or, that, being defiitute of the
necessaries of life at home, they were obliged to
roam over the ocean, in order to rob such as were
more amply provided.

MEN, thus satisfied with their condition, are far

from any inclination to relinquish their own habits,
or to adopt those of civilized life.. The transition is
too violent to be suddenly made. Even where en-
deavours have been used to wean a savage from his
own cufloms, and to render the accommodations
of polished society familiar to him; even where he
has been allowed to taste of those pleasures, and
has been honoured with those diftintions, which are
the chief obje&s of our desire, he droops and lan-
guilhes under the restraint of laws and forms, he
seizes the first opportunity of breaking loose from
them, and returns with transport to the forest or the
wild, where he can enjoy a careless and uncontroul-
ed freedom t

q Rochefort Hist. des Antilles, 455.

Adair, Hist. of Amer. Indians, p. 32.
' Benzon. Hit. Novi Orbis, lib. iii. c. 21z

(harlev. N. Fr. iii. 322.

rHUS

B O O K THUS I have finished a laborious delineation of

Iv. the characer and manners of the uncivilized tribes
'^^ scattered over the vait continent of America. In

this, I aspire not at rivalling the great masters who
have painted and adorned savage life, either in
boldness of design, or in the glow and beauty of
their colouring. I am satisfied with the more hum-
ble merit of having persisted with patient industry,
in viewing my subjed in many various lights, and
in collecting from the molt accurate observers such
detached and often minute features, as might en-,
able me to exhibit a portrait that resembles the ori-
ginal.

General BEFORE I close this part of my work, one obfer-
aith efpe& vation more is necessary, in order tojuitify the con-
tothisin. clufions which I have formed, or to prevent the
quiry. mistakes into which such as examine them may fall.

In contemplating the inhabitants of a country so
widely extended as America, great attention should
be paid to the diversity of climates under which
they are placed.. The influence of this I have
pointed out with refpe&t to several important parti-
culars, which have been the object of research; but
even where it has not been mentioned, it ought
not to be overlooked. The provinces of America
are of such different temperament, that this alone
is sufficient to constitute a diftindtion between their
inhabitants. In every part of the earth where man
exists, the power of climate operates, with decisive
influence, upon his condition and character. In
those countries which approach near to the extremes
of heat or cold, this influence is so conspicuous as
to firike every eye. Whether we confider man merely
as an animal, or as a being endowed with rational
powers, which fit him for ativity and speculation, we
shall find that he has uniformly attained the greatest

perfection

perfection of which his nature is capable, in the B 0 O KI
temperate regions of the globe. There his con- IV.
Rtitution is most vigorous, his organs most acute,
and his form most beautiful. There, too, he pof-
setses a superior extent of capacity, greater ferti-
lity of imagination, more enterprising courage,
and a sensibility of heart which gives birth to pas-
sions, not only ardent, but persevering. In this
favourite situation he has displayed the utmost es-
forts of his genius, in literature, in policy, in com-
merce, in war, -and in all the arts which improve
or embellish life u

THIS powerful operation of climate is felt most

sensibly by rude nations, and produces greater
effects than in societies more highly polished. The
talents of civilized men are continually exerted in
rendering their condition more comfortable; and
by their ingenuity and inventions, they can, in
a great measure, supply the defects, and guard
against the inconveniencies, of any climate. But
the improvident savage is affected by every cir-
cumftance peculiar to his situation. He takes no
precaution either to mitigate or to improve it.
Like a plant, or an animal, he is formed by the
climate under which he is placed, and feels the
full force of its influence.

IN surveying the rude nations of America, this

natural diftindion between the inhabitants of the
temperate and torrid zones is very remarkable.
They may, accordingly, be divided into two
great classes. The one comprehends all the
North-Americans, from the river St. Laurence
to the Gulf of Mexico, together with the people

u Dr. Ferguson's Essay on the Hilt. of Civil Society, part
liI. C. I,

of

B 0 0 K of Chili, and a few small tribes towards the ex-

IV. tremity of the southern continent. To the other
y'^ belong all the inhabitants of the islands, and

those fettled in the various provinces which ex-
tend from the isthmus of Darien almost to the
southern confines of Brasil, along the east fide
of the Andes. In the former, the human fpe-
cies appears manifestly to be more perfect. The
natives are more robust, more active, more in-
telligent, and more courageous. They possess,
in the most eminent degree, that force of mind,
and love of independence, which I have point-
ed out as the chief virtues of man in his savage
slate. They have defended their liberty with
persevering fortitude against the Europeans, who
subdued the other rude Nations of America with
the greatest cafe. The natives of the temperate
zone are the only people in the New World
who are indebted for their freedom to their own
valour. The North-Americans, though long en-
compassed by three formidable European powers,
fill retain part of their original possessions, and
continue to exist as independent nations. The
people of Chili, though early invaded, still main-
tain a gallant contest with the Spaniards, and have
set bounds to their encroachments; whereas, in the
warmer regions, men are more feeble in their
frame, less vigorous in the efforts of their mind,
of a gentle but dastardly spirit, more enslaved by
pleasure and funk in indolence. Accordingly, it
is in the torrid zone that the Europeans have most
completely efiablifhed their dominion over Ame-
rica; the most fertile and desirable provinces in it
are fubjeted to their yoke; and if several tribes
there fiill enjoy independence, it is either because
they have never been attacked by an enemy already
satiated with conquefi, and possessed of larger terri-
tories than he was able to occupy, or because they

have

have been saved from oppression by their remote B OO K
and inacceflible situation. IV.

CONSPICUOUS as this diftintion may appear be-

tween the inhabitants of those different regions, it
is not, however, universal. Moral and political
causes, as I have formerly observed, affect the dif-
position and character of individuals as well as na-
tions, still more powerfully than the influence of
climate. There are, accordingly, some tribes, in
various parts of the torrid zone, possessed of cou-
rage, high spirit, and the love of independence, in
a degree hardly inferior to the natives of more tem-
perate climates. We are too little acquainted with
the history of those people, to be able to trace the
several circunmtances in their progress and situation,
to which they are indebted for this remarkable pre-
eminence. The fad, nevertheless, is certain. As
early as the first voyage of Columbus, he received
information that several of the islands were inhabit-
ed by the Caribbees, a fierce race of men, nowise
resembling their feeble and timid neighbours. In
his second expedition to the New World, he found
this information to be just, and was himself a wit-
ness of their intrepid valour x. The fame charac-
ter they have maintained invariably in all fubfe-
quent contests with the people of our continent y;
and, even in our own times, we have seen them
make a gallant fland in defence of the lail territory
which the rapacity of the Europeans had left in their
possession z. Some nations in Brasil were no less
eminent for vigour of mind, and bravery in war a.
The people of the ifihmus of Darien boldly met
the Spaniards in the field, and frequently repelled

x Life of Columbus, c. 47, 48. See N O T E LXVII,
Y Rochefort Hist. des Antilles, 531,
S See NOTE LXVIII.
a Lery ap de Bry, iii. 207, &c.

those

B o o K those formidable invaders b. Other instances might

IV. be produced. It is not by attending to any tingle

^
^ cause or principle, however powerful and exten-

five its influence may appear, that we can explain
the aations, or account for the character, of men.
Even the law of climate, more universal, perhaps,
in its operation than any that affects the human
species, cannot be applied, in judging of their con-
duat, without many exceptions.

b Herrera, dec. i. lib. x. c. 15, &c.; dec. 2. paffirm

THE

# BOOK V.

THE
HISTORY

o F
AM E R I CA.

BOOK V.

W H EN Grijalva returned to Cuba, he found B O o K
the armament destined to attempt the conquest of V.
that rich country which he had discovered, almost {
complete. Not only ambition, but avarice, hadPreparati.
urged Velasquez to haften his preparationsi and lafqnsuz so
having such a profpet of gratifying both, he had invadin
advanced considerable fums out of his private for- Ne Spaii.
tune towards defraying the expence. At the fame
time, he exerted his influence as governor, in en-
gaging the most distinguished persons in the colony
to undertake the service a. At a time when the
spirit of the Spanish nation was adventurous to ex-
cess, a number of soldiers, eager to embark in any
daring enterprise, soon appeared. But it was not
so easy to find a person qualified to take the com-
mand in an expedition of so muchimportance; and
the character of Velasquez, who had the right of
nomination, greatly increased the difficulty of the

a See NOTE LXIX.

choice.

B 0 K choice. Though of mofi aspiring ambition, and

V. not destitute of talents for government, he possessed

neither such courage, nor such vigour and ativity
of mind, as to undertake in person the condut of
the armament which he was preparing. In this
embarrassing situation, he formed the chimerical
scheme not only of atchieving great exploits by a
deputy, but of securing to himself the glory of
conquefis which were to be made by another. In
the execution of this plan, he fondly aimed at re-
conciling contradictions. He was solicitous to chufe
a commander of intrepid resolution, and of fupe-
rior abilities, because he knew these to be requisite
in order to ensure success; but, at the fame time,
from the jealousy natural to little minds, he wished
him to be of a spirit so tame and obsequious, as to
be entirely dependant on his will. But when he
came to apply those ideas in forming an opinion
concerning the several officers who occurred to his
thoughts as worthy of being entrusted with the com-
mand, he soon perceived that it was impossible to
find such incompatible qualities united in one cha-
rader. Such as were diftinguifled for courage and
talents were too high-fpirited to be paflive inftru-
ments in his hand. Those who appeared more
gentle and tractable, were destitute of capacity, and
unequal to the charge. This augmented his per-
plexity and his fears. He deliberated long, and
with much solicitude, and was fRill wavering in his
choice, when Amador de Lares, the royal treasurer
in Cuba, and Andres Duero, his own secretary,
the two persons in whom he chiefly confided, were
encouraged by this irresolution to propose a new
candidate, and supported their recommendation
with such afliduity and address, that, no less fatally
for Velasquez than happily for their country, it
proved successful b.

b B. Diaz. c. 9., Gomara Cron. c. 7. Herrera, dec. 2.
lib, iii, c, I.

THa

THE man whom they pointed out to him was B o o K

Fernando Cortes. He was born at Medellin, a v.
small town in Eliremadura, in the year one thou- ' -1g
sand four hundred and eighty-five, and descended He appoints
from a family of noble blood, but of very mode- mads.
rate fortune. Being originally destined by his pa-
rents to the study of law, as the most likely me-
thod of bettering his condition, he was sent early to
the university of Salamanca, where he imbibed some
tinEture of learning. But he was soon disgusted
with an academic life, which did not suit his ardent
and restless genius, and ritired to Medellin, where
he gave himself up entirely to active sports and
martial exercises. At this period of life, he was so
impetuous, so overbearing, and so dissipated, that
his father was glad to comply with his inclination,
and sent him abroad as an adventurer in arms.
There were in that age two conspicuous theatres,
on which such of the Spanish youth as courted mi-
litary glory might display their valour; one in Ita-
ly, under the command of the Great Captain; the
other in the New World. Cortes preferred the
former, but was prevented by indisposition from
embarking with a reinforcement of troops sent to
Naples. Upon this disappointment he turned his
views towards America, whither he was allured, by
the profpet of the advantages which he might de-
rive from the patronage of Ovando c, the governor
of Hispaniola, who was his kinsman. When he
landed at St. Domingo in one thousand five hun-
dred and four, his reception was such as equalled
his most sanguine hopes, and he was employed by
the governor in several honourable and lucrative
itations. These, however, did not satisfy his ambi-
tion; and in the year one thousand five hundred
and eleven, he obtained permiflion to accompany
Diego Velasquez in his expedition to Cuba. In

c See NOTE LXX.

this

B o OK this service he distinguished himself so much, that,

V. notwithstanding some violent contests with Velaf-
1trJV quez, occasioned by trivial events, unworthy of

remembrance, he was at length taken into fa-
vour, and received an ample conceflion of lands
and of Indians, the recompence usually bellowed
upon adventurers in the New World d.

THOUGH Cortes had not hitherto acted in high

command, he had displayed such qualities in fe-
veral scenes of difficulty and danger, as raised
universal expecation, and turned the eyes of his
countrymen towards him, as one capable of per-
forming great things. The turbulence of youth,
as soon as he found objeEts and occupations suit-
ed to the ardour of his mind, gradually subsided,
and fettled into a habit of regular indefatigable
acivity. The impetuosity of his temper, when
he came to aA with his equals, insensibly abated,
by being kept under restraint, and mellowed in-
to a cordial soldierly frankness. These qualities
were accompanied with calm prudence in con-
certing his schemes, with persevering vigour in
executing them, and with what is peculiar to fu-
perior genius, the art of gaining the confidence
and governing the minds of men. To all which
were added the inferior accomplishments that itrike
the vulgar, and command their refpet; a grace-
ful person, a winning aspet, extraordinary ad-
dress in martial exercises, and a constitution of
such vigour as to be capable of enduring any fa-
tigue.

As soon as Cortes was mentioned to Velasquez

by his two confidents, he flattered himself that
he had at length found what he had hitherto
fought in vain, a man with talents for command,
but not an objea of jealousy. Neither the rank

· Gomara Cron. c. 1, 2, 3.

nor

nor the fortune of Cortes, as he imagined, were B O O K
such that he could aspire at independence. He. v.
had reason to believe, that by his own readiness s
to bury ancient animofities in oblivion, as well
as his liberality in conferring several recent fa-
vours, he had already gained the good-will of
Cortes, and hoped, by this new and unexpeAed
mark of confidence, that he might attach him for
ever to his intereit.

CORTES receiving his commiflion with the Soon be

warmest expreflions of refped and gratitude to ous ofhimn
the governor, immediately ereted his standard Oacober 3.
before his own house, appeared in a military
dress, and assumed all the ensigns of his new dig-
nity. His utmost influence and activity were ex-
erted in persuading many of his friends to engage
in the service, and in urging forward the prepa-
rations for the voyage. All his own funds, to-
gether with what money he could raise by mort-
gaging his lands and Indians, were expended in
purchasing military flores and provisions, or in
supplying the wants of fucll of his officers as were
unable to equip themselves in a manner suited to
their rank e. Inoffensive, and even laudable as
this conduct was, his disappointed competitors
were malicious enough to give it a turn to his
disadvantage: They represented him as aiming
already, with little disguise, at establishing an in-
dependent authority over his troops, and endea-
vouring to secure their refpec or love by his of-
tentatious and interested liberality. They remind-
ed Velasquez of his former dissentions with the
man in whom he now reposed so much confi-
dence, and foretold that Cortes would be more
apt to avail himself of the power, which he was

c See NO TE LXXI.
VOL. II. N inconiderately

BOOK inconsiderately putting in his hands, to avenge

v, past injuries, than to requite late obligations. These
z5L8. insinuations made such impreflion upon the fufpi-

cious mind of Velasquez, that Cortes soon obferv-
ed some symptoms of a growing alienation and
distrust in his behaviour, and was advised by his
friends, Lares and Duero, to haften his departure,
before these should become so confirmed, as to
break out with open violence. Fully sensible of
this danger, he urged forward his preparations
with such rapidity, that he set fail from St. Jago
de Cuba on the eighteenth of November, Velaf-
quez accompanying him to the shore, and taking
leave of him with an appearance of perseEt friend-
ship and confidence, though he had secretly given
it in charge to some of his officers, to keep a
watchful eye upon every part of their command-
er's condut f.

Endeavours CORTES proceeded to Trinidad, a small fettle-
co deprive
him of his ment on the fame fide of the island, where he was
commiffio,joined by several adventurers, and received a sup-

ply of provisions and military flores, of which his
flock was still very incomplete. He had hardly
left St. Jago when the jealousy which had been
working in the breast of Velasquez, grew so vio-
lent that it was impossible to suppress it. The ar-
mament was no longer under his own eye and di-
rection; and he felt that as his power over it ceaf-
ed, that of Cortes became more absolute. Imagi-
nation now aggravated, every circumfiance, which
had formerly excited suspicion: the rivals of Cortes
indufirioufly threw in refletions which increased
his fears; and with no less art than malice they
called fuperfiition to their aid, employing the pre-
di4ions of an astrologer, in order to complete the
alarm. All these, by their united operation, pro-

f Gomara Cron. c. 7. B. Diaz. c. 20.

duced

duced the desired effect. Velasquez repented bit- B o O K
terly of his own imprudence, in having commit- V.
ted a trust of so much importance to a person I$8i,
whose fidelity appeared so doubtful, and hastily
dispatched inftrueions to Trinidad, empowering
Verdugo, the chief magifirate there, to deprive
Cortes of his commission. But Cortes had already
made such progress in gaining the efleem and
confidence of his troops, that, finding officers as
well as soldiers equally zealous to support his au-
thority, he toothed or intimidated Verdugo, and
was permitted to depart from Trinidad without
molestation.

FROM Trinidad Cortes failed for Havana, inand tola

order to raise more soldiers, and to complete the hiafdet
viAualling of his fleet. There several persons of
diftindtion entered into the service, and engaged
to supply what provisions were fill wanting; but
as it was necessary to allow them some time for
performing what they had promised, Velasquez,
sensible that he ought no longer to rely on a man
of whom he had so openly discovered his difirufi,
availed himself of the interval, which this unavoid-
able delay afforded, in order to make one attempt
more to wrest the command out of the hands of
Cortes. He loudly complained of Verdugo's con-
dut, accusing him either of childifl facility, or of
manifelt treachery, in suffering Cortes to escape
from Trinidad. Anxious to guard againit a fe-
cond disappointment, he lent a person of confi-
dence to the Havana, with peremptory injunAti
ons to Pedro Barba, his lieutenant-governor in
that colony, inflantly to arrest Cortes, to fend him
prisoner to St. Jago under a strong guard, and
to countermand the departure of the armament
until he should receive farther orders; He wrote
likewise to the principal officers, requiring them

N to

B 0 K to assist Barba in executing what he had giver

V. him in charge. But before the arrival of his mef-

L fenger, a Franciscan friar of St. Jago had secret-

ly conveyed an account of this interesting tranf-
action to Bartholomew de Olmedo, a monk of the
fame order, who a6ed as chaplain to: the expedi-
tion.

Crtes des CORTES, forewarned of the danger, had time to.
schemes, take precautions for his own safety. His first ftep
nudnis' was to find omne pretext for removing from Ha-
preparati- vana Diego de Ordaz, an officer of-great merit,
"ns' but in whom, on account of his known attach-

ment to Velasquez, he could not confide in this
trying and delicate jundture. He gave him the
command of a vefel,, defiined to take on board
some provisions in a small harbour beyond Cape
Antonio, and thus made sure of his absence, with-
out teeming to fufpeft his fidelity. When he
was gone, Cortes no longer concealed the inten-
tions of Velasquez from his troops; and as officers
and soldiers were equally impatient to set out on
an expedition, in preparing for which most of
them had expended all their fortune, they ex-
pretfed their astonishment and indignation at that il-
liberaljealoufy, to which the governor was about to
sacrifice, not only the honour of their gereral, but
all their sanguine hopes of glory and weath:. With:
one voice they intreated that he would not :abandon
the important flation to which he had such a good
title. They conjured him not to deprive them
of a leader whom they followed with such well-
founded confidence, and offered to shed the last
drop of their blood in maintaining his. authority.
Cortes was easily induced to comply with what
he so ardently desired. He swore that he would
never desert soldiers who had given him such a
signal proof of their attachment, and promised in-

ftantly

fantly to conduct them to that rich country, B O K
which had been so long the object of their thoughts V.
and withes. This declaration was received with -
transports of military applause, accompanied with
threats .and imprecations against all who should
presume to call in question the jurifdidion of their
general, or to obitruE the execution of his de-
Signs.

EVERY thing was now ready for their depar- The amount.

ture: but though this expedition was the unitedf his forc-
effort of the Spanish power in Cuba; though
every settlement had contributed its quota of men
and provisions; though the governor had laid out
considerable films, and each adventurer had ex-
haulled his tlock, or strained his credit, the po-
verty of the preparations was such as must afto-
nith the present age, and bore, indeed, no refem-
blance to an armament deflined for the conquest
of a great empire. The fleet consisted of eleven
vessels; the largest of a hundred tons, which was
dignified with the name of Admiral; three of fe-
venty or eighty tons, and the reft frall open
barks. On board of these were fix hundred and
seventeen men; of which five hundred and eight
belonged to the land service, and a hundred and
nine were seamen or artificers. The soldiers were
divided into eleven companies, according to the
number of the ihips; to each of which Cortes
appointed a captain, and committed to him the
command of the veflel while at sea, and of the
men when on shore g. As the use of fire arms
among the nations of Europe was hitherto con-
fined to a few battalions of regularly disciplined
infantry, only thirteen soldiers were armed with
muskets, thirty-two were crofs-bow-men, and the

s See NOTE LXXTI.

reft

B O OK reft had swords and spears. Instead of the usual

V. defensive armour, which must have been cumber-
·' ' i/ some in a hot climate, they wore jackets, quilted

151. with cotton, which experience had taught the

Spaniards to be a sufficient protection against the
weapons of the Americans. They had only fix-
teen horses, ten inmall field pieces, and four falco-
nets h

1519. WITH this slender and ill-provided train did

Feb. io.
His depar- Cortes set fail, to make war upon a monarch whose
ture from dominions were more extensive than -all the king-

P. doms fubje¢ to the Spanish crown. As religious

enthusiasm always mingled with the spirit of ad-
venture in the New World, and, by a combi-
nation frill more strange, united with avarice, in
prompting the Spaniards to all their enterprises,
a large cross was displayed in their standards, with
this inscription, Let us follow the croft, for under
this ign we ball conquler.

So powerfully were Cortes and his followers

animated with both these paflions, that, no less
eager to plunder the opulent country whither they
were bound, than zealous to propagate the Chris-
tian faith among its inhabitants, they set out, not
with the solicitude natural to men going upon dan-
gerous service, but with that confidence which ari-
ies from security of success, and certainty of the di-
vine protetion.

Touches t As Cortes had determined to touch at every
Cozumel; place which Grijalva had visited, he steered direEt-

yv towards the island of Cozunel; there he had
the good fortune to redeem Jerome de Aguilar, a
Spaniard, who had been eight years a prisoner
among the Indians. This man was perfetly ac-
quainted with a dialect of their language, under-

h B. Diaz. c. 19.

itood

flood through a large extent of country, and pof-B O O K,
fefling betides a considerable (hare of prudence v.
and sagacity, proved extremely useful as an in-
terpreter. From Cozumel, Cortes proceeded toMarc5h4.
the river of Tabasco, in hopes of a reception as andat Ta-
friendly as Grijalva had met with there, and of
finding gold in the fame abundance; but the dif-
position of the natives, from some unknown cause,
was totally changed. After repeated endeavours
to conciliate their good will, he was constrained
to have recourse to violence. Though the forces
of the enemy were numerous, and advanced with
extraordinary courage, they were routed, with
great slaughter, in several successive actions. The
loss which they sustained, and still more the afto-
nifhment and terror excited by the deftruaive es-
se&t of the fire-arms, and the dreadful appearance
of the horses, humbled their fierce spirits, and in-
duced them to sue for peace. They acknowledg-
ed the king of Castile as their Sovereign, and grant-
ed Cortes a supply of provisions, with a present of
cotton garments, some gold, and twenty female
slaves .

CORTES continued his course to the westward, Arrives at

keeping as near the shore as poflible, in order to. Juuan d
observe the country; but 'could discover no pro-
per place for landing, until he arrived at St. Juan April. a,
de Uluak. As he entered this harbour, a large
canoe, full of people, among whom were two who
seemed to be persons of diftin&ion, approached his
(hip, with signs of peace and amity. They came
on board without fear or difirulf, and addressed
him in a most respectful manner, but in a language
altogether unknown to Aguilar. Cortes was in the

i See NOTE LXXII[.
k B. Diaz. c. 31-36. Gomara Cron. c. 18-23. Her-
rera, dec. z. lib. iv. c. I, &c.

utmost

B O O K utmost perplexity and distress, at an event of

V. which he instantly foresaw all the consequences,
'\ t' and already felt the hesitation and uncertainty with

which he ihould carry on the great schemes which
he meditated, if, in his tranfations with the natives,
he must depend entirely upon such an imperfe&t,
ambiguous, and conjectural mode of communica-
tion, as the use of signs. But he did not remain
long in this embarrafling situation : a fortunate ac-
cident extricated him, when his own sagacity could
have contributed little towards his relief. One of
the female slaves, whom he had received from the
cazique of Tabasco, happened to be present at the
first interview between Cortes and his new guefis.
She perceived his distress, as well as the confusion
of Aguilar; and as the perfectly understood the
Mexican language, she explained what they said in
the Yucatan tongue, with which Aguilar was ac-
quainted. This woman, known afterwards by the
name of Donna Marina, and who makes a confpi-
cuous figure in the history of the New World,
where great revolutions were brought about by
small causes and inconsiderable infiruments, was
born in one of the provinces of the Mexican em-
pire. Having been carried off a captive by some
hostile party, after a variety of adventures the fell
into the hands of the Tabafcans, and had resided
long enough among them to acquire their language,
without losing the use of her own. Though it was
both tedious and troublesome to converse by the in-
tervention of two different interpreters, Cortes was
so highly pleased with having discovered this method
of carrying on some intercourse with the people of a
country into which he was determined to penetrate,
that in the transports of his joy he confidered it as a
visible interposition of Providence in his favour !.

1 B. Diaz. c. 37, 38, 39. Gomara Cron. c. 5, 2z6. Her-
rera, dec. 2. lib. y. c. 4.

i~e

HE now learned, that the two persons whom he B 0 0 K

had received on board of his ship were deputies v-
from Pilpatoe and Teutile; the one governor of
that province under a great monarch, whom they Lands his
called Montezuma, and the other the commander troops
of his forces there, and that they were sent to in-
quire what his intentions were in visiting their
coast, and to offer him what assistance he might
need, in order to continue his voyage. Cortes,
firuck with the appearance of those people, as well
as the tenor of the menfage, assured them, in re-
fpeAful terms, that he approached their country
with most friendly sentiments, and came to pro-
pose matters of great importance to the welfare
of their prince and his kingdom, which he would
unfold more fully, in person, to the governor and
the general. Next morning, without waiting for
any answer, he landed his troops, his horses and
artillery; and having chosen proper ground, be-
gan to eret huts for his men, and to fortify his
camp. The natives, inflead of opposing the en-
trance of those fatal guests into their country, as-
sifted them in all their operations, with an ala-
crity of which they had ere long good reason to re-
pent.

NEXT day, Pilpatoe and Teutile entered the Hisfirfin-

Spanish camp with a numerous retinue, and Cortes tw.t.he
confidering them as the ministers of a great mo- Mexicans.
narch, entitled to a degree of attention very dif-
ferent from that which the Spaniards were accuf-
tomcd to pay to the petty Caziques, with whom
they had intercourse, received them with much
formal ceremony. He informed them, that he
came as ambassador from Don Carlos of Aufiria,
king of Caflile, the greatest monarch of the east,
and was intrusted with propositions of such mo-
ment, that he could impart them to none but the

emperor

B O O K emperor Montezuma himself, and therefore requir-

V. ed them to conduct him, without loss of time, into

the pretence of their master. The Mexican officers
coull not conceal their uneasiness at a request,
which they knew to be disagreeable, and which they
foie-!w might prove extremely embarrassing to
thtir sovereign, whose mind had been filled with
rrmany disquieting apprehensions, ever since the for-
mer aprlPrance of the Spaniards on his coafis. But
befloree they attempted to dissuade Cortes from infilt-
ing' c.1 this demand, they endeavoured to conciliate
his good-will, by entreating him to accept of cer-
tain presents, which, as humble slaves of Montezu-
ma, they laid at his feet. These were introduced
with great parade, and consisted of fine cotton
cloth, of plumes of various colours, and of orna-
ments of gold and silver, to a considerable value;
the workmanship of which appeared to be as curi-
ous as the materials were rich. The display of
these produced an effect very different from what-
the Mexicans intended. Instead of satisfying, it
increased the avidity of the Spaniards, and rendered
them so eager and impatient to become maiters of
a country which abounded with such precious pro-
dutions, that Cortes could hardly liiten with pa-
tience to the arguments which Pilpatoe and Teutile
employed to dissuade him from visiting the capital,
and in a haughty determined tone he insisted on his
demand, of being admitted to a personal audience
of their sovereign. During this interview, some
painters, in the train of the Mexican chiefs, had
been diligently employed in delineating upon white
cotton cloth, figures of the ships, the horses, the ar-
tillery, the soldiers, and whatever else attracted
their eyes, as singular. When Cortes observed
this, and was informed that these pictures were to
be sent to Montezuma, in order to convey to him
a more live idea of the firange and wonderful ob-
jets now presented to their view, than any words

could
/

could communicate, he resolved to render the re- B 0 0 K
presentation still more animated and interefling, V.
by exhibiting such a fpedacle as might give both I$9
them and their monarch an awful imprefion of the ,
extraordinary prowess of his followers, and the irre-
fiftible force of their arms. The trumpets, by his
order, founded an alarm; the troops, in a mo-
ment, formed in order of battle, the infantry per-
formed such martial exercises as were best suited
to display the effect of their different weapons; the
horse, in various evolutions, gave a specimen of
their agility and firength; the artillery pointed to-
wards the thick woods which surrounded the camp,
made dreadful havoc among the trees. The Mex-
icans looked on with that silent amazement, which
is natural when the mind is firuck with objets,
which are both awful and above its comprehension.
But, at the explosion of the cannon, many of them
fled, some fell to the ground, and all were so much
confounded at the fight of men whose power so
nearly resembled that of the Gods, that Cortes
found it difficult to compose and re-assure them.
The painters had now many new fubjees on which
to exercise their art, and they put their fancy on
the firetch in order to invent figures and characters
to represent the extraordinary things which they
had seen.

MESSENGERS were immediately dispatched ..toNegociati-

Montezuma with those pictures, and a fiill account owZithu
of every thing that had passed since the arrival ofma.
the Spaniards, and by them Cortes sent aprefent
of some European curiosities to Montezuma, which,
though of no great value, he believed would be
acceptable on account of their novelty. The
Mexican monarchs, in order to obtain early infor-
mation of every occurrence in all the corners of
their vast empire, had introduced a refinement in

police,

188 HISTORY OF AMERICA.
B o O K police, unknown, at that time, in Europe. They

V. had couriers pofied at proper flations along the
Sg9._ principal roads, and as these were trained to agi-

lity by a regular education, and relieved one ano-
ther at moderate distances, they conveyed intelli-
gence with surprising rapidity. Though the capi-
tal in which Montezuma resided was above a hun-
dred and eighty miles from St. Juan de Ulua,
Cortes's presents were carried thither, and an an-
fwer to his demands was received in a few days.
The fame officers who had hitherto treated with the
Spaniards, were employed to deliver this answer ;
but as they knew how repugnant the determinati-
on of their master was to all the schemes and wish-
es of the Spanish commander, they would not ven-
ture to make it known until they had previously
His pre- endeavoured to. soothe and mollify him. For this

ents purpose, they renewed the negociation by intro-

ducing a train of a hundred Indians, loaded with
presents sent to him by Montezuma. The magni-
ficence of these was such as became a great mo-
narch, and far exceeded any idea which the Spani-
ards had hitherto formed of his wealth. They
were placed upon mats spread on the ground,
in such order, as showed them to the greatest
advantage. Cortes and his officers viewed, with
admiration, the various manufactures of the coun-
try, cotton stuffs so fine, and of such delicate
texture as to resemble silk; pictures of animals,
trees, and other natural objects formed with sea-
thers of different colours, disposed and mingled
with such skill and elegance, as to rival the
works of the pencil in truth and beauty of imita-
tion. But what chiefly attracted their eyes, were
two large plates of a circular form, one of maf-
five gold representing the fun, the other of silver,
an emblem of the moon m These were accom-

m See NOTE LXXIV.

panieid

panied with bracelets, collars, rings, and other trink- B 0 0 K
ets of gold; and that nothing might be wanting v,
which could give the Spaniards a complete idea of ,9.
what the country afforded, with some boxes filled
with pearls, precious stones, and grains of gold un-
wrought, as they had been found in the mines or
rivers. Cortes received all these with an appearance
of profound veneration for the monarch by whom
they were bestowed. But when the Mexicans, ForbidsCor-
presuming upon this, informed him that their maf- to hais

proach his

ter, though he desired him to accept of what he had capital.
sent as a token of his regard for the prince whom
he represented, would not give his consent that
foreign troops ihould approach nearer to his capital,
or even allow them to continue longer in his domi-
nions, Cortes declared, in a manner more resolute
and peremptory than formerly, that he must insist
on his first demand, as he could not without difho-
nour return to his own sovereign, until he was ad-
mitted into the presence of the prince whom he was
appointed to visit in his name. The Mexicans,
astonished at feeing any man dare to oppose that
will, which they were accustomed to confider as
supreme and irresistible, yet afraid of precipitating
their country into an open rupture with such formi- ^
dable enemies, prevailed with Cortes to promise,
that he would not move from his present camp, un-
til the return of a messenger, whom they sent to
Montezuma for farther inftru&tions "

THE firmness with which Cortes adhered to his'Stateofthe
original proposal should, naturally, have brought Mexican

empire at

the negociation between him and Montezuma to a thatperiod.
speedy issue, as it seemed to leave the Mexican mo-
narch no choice, but either to receive him with

B. Diaz. c. 39. Gomara Cron. c. 27. Herrera, dec. 2.
lib. v. c. 5, 6.

confidence

B O O K confidence as a friend, or to oppose him openly as

v. an enemy. The latter was what might have been

expected from a haughty prince in possession of ex-
tensive power. The Mexican empire at this pe-
riod, was at a pitch of grandeur to which no focie-
ty ever attained in so short a period. Though it
had subsisted only a hundred and thirty years, its
dominion extended from the North to the South
Sea, over territories itretching above five hundred
leagues from east to weft, and more than two hun-
dred from north to south, comprehending provin-
ces not inferior in fertility, population, and opu-
lence to any in the torrid zone. The people were
warlike and enterprising. The authority of the
monarch unbounded, and his revenues considerable.
If, with the forces which might have been suddenly
assembled in such an empire, Montezuma had
fallen upon the Spaniards while encamped on a bar-
ren unhealthy coast, unsupported by any ally, with-
out a place of retreat, and destitute of provisions, it
is imnpoflible, even with all the advantages of their
superior discipline and arms, that they could have
flood the shock, and they must either have perished
in such an unequal contest, or have abandoned the
J enterprise.

Charafaerof As the power of Montezuma enabled him to take
narch. this spirited part, his own dispositions seemed natu-

rally to prompt him to it. Of all the princes who
had swayed the Mexican sceptre, he was the most
haughty, the molt violent, and the most impatient
of controul. His fubjeds looked up to him with
awe, and his enemies with terror. The former he
governed with unexampled rigour, but they were
impressed with such an opinion of his capacity, as
commanded their refped; and by many victories
over the latter, he had spread far the dread of his
arms, and had added several considerable provinces
to his dominions. But though his talents might be

suited

suited to the tranfations of a state so imperfectly B O K
polished as the Mexican empire, and sufficient to v.
conduct them while in their accustomed course, 1519.
they were altogether inadequate to a conjuncture
so extraordinary, and did not qualify him either to
judge with the discernment, or to aft with the deci-
sion, requisite in such a trying emergence.

FROM the moment that the Spaniards appeared Hisperplex-

on his coall, hedifcovered symptoms of timidity and ity an te
embarrassment. Inflead-of taking such resolutions arrival of
as the consciousness of his own power, or the me-ard's
mory of his former exploits, might have inspired,
he deliberated with an anxiety and hesitation which
did not escape the notice of his meanest courtiers.
The perplexity and discomposure of Montezuma's
mind upon this occasion, as well as the general dif-
may of his fubjeds, was not owing wholly to the
impression which the Spaniards had made by the no-
velty of their appearance and the terror of their
arms. Its origin may be traced up to a more re-
mote source. There was an opinion, if we may
believe the earliest and most authentic Spanish his-
torians, almost universal among the Americans, that
some dreadful calamity was impending over their
heads, from a race of formidable invaders who
flould come from regions towards the rising fun,
to overrun and desolate their country. Whether this
disquieting apprehension flowed from the memory
of some natural calamity which had afficted that part
of the globe, and- impressed the minds of the inha-
bitants with fuperftiious fears and forebodings, or
whether it was an imagination accidentally suggest-
ed by the astonishment which the first fight of a
new race of men occasioned, it is impollible to de-
termine. But as the Mexicans were more prone to
fuperiition than any people in the New World,
they were more deeply affected with the appearance

of

B o OKof the Spaniards, whom their credulity inflantly

V. represented as the infiruments defined to bring

9J ' about that fatal revolution which they dreaded.

Under those circumstances, it ceases to be incredi-
ble that a handful of adventurers should alarm the
monarch of a great empire and all his fubjeas °.
Continues NOTWITHSTANDING the influence of this im-

te. preflion, when the messenger arrived from the Spa-

nifh camp with an account that Cortes, adhering to
his original demand, refused to obey the order en-
joining him to leave the country, Montezuma as-
fumed fame degree of resolution, and in a transport
of rage natural to a fierce prince, unaccustomed to
meet with any opposition to his will, he threatened
to sacrifice those presumptuous firangers to his gods.
But his doubts and fears quickly returned, and in-
Rtead of issuing orders to carry his threats into exe-
cution, he again called his ministers to confer and
offer their advice. Feeble and temporizing mea-
fures will always be the result when men afiemble
to deliberate in a situation where they ought to aft.
The Mexican council took no effectual measure for
expelling such troublesome intruders, and were
satisfied with issuing a more positive injunction, re-
quiring them to leave the country; but this they
preposterously accompanied with a present of such
value, as proved a fresh inducement to remain
there.

Anxiety and MEANWHILE, the Spaniards were not without
sions of the solicitude or a variety of sentiments, in deliberating
Spaniards. concerning their own future conduEt. From

what they had already seen, many of them formed

o Cortes Relatione Seconda, ap. Ramus. iii. 234, 235.

Herrera, dec. 2. lib. iii. c. i. lib. v. c. 11. lib. vii. c. 6.
Gomara Cron. c. 66. 92. 144.

such

such extravagant ideas concerning the opulence of B 0 0 K
the country, that, despising danger or hardships, v.
when they had in view treasures which appeared to 519,
be inexhaustible, they were eager to attempt the con-
quest. Others, estimating the power of the Mexi-
can empire by its wealth, and enumerating the va-
rious proofs which had occurred of its being under a
well regulated administration, contended that it
would be an at of the wildest frenzy to attack such
a slate with a small body of nen, in want of provi-
sions, unconneted with an ally, and already en-
feebled by the diseases peculiar to the climate, and
the loss of several of their number P. Cortes secret-
ly applauded the advocates for bold measures, and
cherilhed their romantic hopes, as such ideas corre-
fponded with his own, and favoured the execution of
the schemes which he had formed. From the time Schemes of
that the suspicions of Velasquez broke out with open
violence in his attempt to deprive him of the autho-
rity which he had conferred, he saw the necessity of
dissolving a conneation which would obftruEt and
embarrass all his operations, and watched for a pro-
per opportunity of coming to a final rupture with
him. Having this in view, he had laboured by eve-
ry art, to secure the esteem and affetion of his fol-
diers. With his abilities for command, it was easy
to-gain their esteem; and his followers were quick-
ly satisfied that they might rely, with perfet confi-
dence, on the conduct and courage of their leader.
Nor was it more difficult to acquire their affetion.
Among adventurers, nearly of the fame rank, and
serving at their own expence, the dignity of com-
mand did not elevate a general above mingling
with those who ated under him. Cortes availed
himself of this freedom of intercourse, to insinuate
himfelfinto their favour, and by his affable manners,

P B. Diaz. c. 40.
VOL. II. O by

B 0 o Kby well-timed ads of liberality to some, by infpir-

V. ing all with vast hopes, and by allowing them to

trade privately with the natives q, he attached the
greater part of his soldiers so firmly to himself, that
they almost forgot that the armament had been
fitted out by the authority, and at the expence, of
another.

His addref DURING those intrigues, Teutile arrived with
in carryin the present from Montezuma, and, together with it,

delivered the ultimate order of that monarch to de-
part infiantly out of his dominions; and when Cor-
tes, instead of complying, renewed his request of an
audience, the Mexican turned from him abruptly,
and quitted the camp with looks and gestures which
itrongly expressed his surprise and resentment.
Next morning, none of the natives, who used to
frequent the camp in great numbers, in order to
barter with the soldiers, and bring in provisions,
appeared. All friendly correspondence seemed
now to be at an end, and it was expected every
moment that hostilities would commence. This,
though an event that might have been foreseen, oc-
cafioned a sudden conftemation among the Spani-
ards, which emboldened the adherents of Velasquez
not only to murmur and cabal against their general,
but to appoint one of their number to remonstrate
openly againit his imprudence in attempting the
conquest of a mighty empire with such inadequate
force, and to urge the necessity of returning to
Cuba, in order to refit the fleet and augment the
army. Diego de Ordaz, one of his principal offi-
cers, whom the malcontents charged with this com-
million, delivered it with a soldiery freedom and
bluntness, assuring him that he spoke the sentiments
of the whole army. Cortes listened to him without

q See NOTE LXXV.

any

any appearance of emotion, and as he well knew B O O K
the temper and wishes of his soldiers, and foresaw v.
how they would receive a proposition fatal at once
to all the splendid hopes and schemes which they
had been forming with such complacency, he
carried his diflimulation so far as to seem to re-
linquifh his own measures in compliance with
the request of Ordaz, and iflued orders that the
army ihould be in readiness next day to reim-
bark for Cuba. As soon as this was known, the
disappointed adventurers exclaimed and threaten-
ed; the emissaries of Cortes, mingling with them,
inflamed their rage; the ferment became general;
the whole camp was almost in open mutiny; all
demanding with eagerness to fee their commander.
Cortes was not flow in appearing; when, with one
voice, they expressed their astonishment and indig-
nation at the orders which they had received. It
was unworthy, they cried, of the Castilian courage
to be daunted at the first aspet of danger, and in-
famous to fly before any enemy appeared. For
their parts, they were determined not to relinquish
an enterprise, that had hitherto been successful, and
which tended so visibly to spread the knowledge of
true religion, and to advance the glory and interest
of their country. Happy under his command, they
would follow him with alacrity through every dan-
ger, in quest of those settlements and treasures
which he had so long held out to their view ; but if
he chose rather to return to Cuba, and tamely give
up all his hopes of diftinaion and opulence to an
envious rival, they would instantly chufe another
general to condut them in that path of glory which
he had not spirit to enter.

CORTES, delighted with their ardour, took no

offence at the boldness with which it was uttered.
The sentiments were what he himself had inspired,

0 2 and

B o o Kand the warmth of exprefiion satisfied him that his

V. soldiers had imbibed them thoroughly. He affect-

ed, however, to be surprised at what he heard, de-
claring that his orders to prepare for embarking
were ilffed from a persuasion that this was agree-
able to his troops; that, from deference to what he
had been informed was their inclination, he had fa-
crificed his own private opinion, which was firmly
bent on establishing immediately a settlement on,
the sea-coast, and then on endeavouring to pene-
trate into the interior part of the country; that now
he was convinced of his error; and as he perceived
that they were animated with the generous spirit
which breathed in every true Spaniard, he would
resume, with fresh ardour, his original plan of ope-
ration, and doubted not to conduct them, in the
career of victory, to such independent fortunes as
their valour merited. Upon this declaration, shouts of
applause teflified the excess of their joy. The mea-
sure seemed to be taken with unanimous content;
such as secretly condemned it, being obliged tojoin
in the acclamations, partly to conceal their difaffec-
tion from the general, and partly to avoid the im-
putation. of cowardice from their fellow-foldiers r.

Eftabihes a WIT HOUT allowing his men time to cool or to
form of civil
overnment. reflect, Cortes set about carrying his design into

execution. In order to give a beginning to a colo-
ny, he aflembled the principal persons in his army,
and by their suffrage elected a council and magi-
firates, in whom the government was to be vested.
As men naturally transplant the institutions and
forms of the mother-country into their new fettle-
ments, this was framed upon the model of a Spa-
nlfh corporation. The magistrates were distinguish-
ed by the fame names, and ensigns of office, and

r B. Diaz. c. 40. 41, 42. Herrera,: dec. z. lib. v. c. 6, *7

were

:were to exercise a fimilarjurifdition. All the per- B o o K
sons chosen were most firmly devoted to Cortes, v.
·and the infirument of their ele6tion was framed in
the king's name, without any mention of their de- s
pendance on Velasquez. The two principles of
,avarice and enthusiasm, which prompted the Spa-
niards to all their enterprises in the New World,
seem to have concurred in fuggeffing the name
which Cortes bellowed on his intended settlement.
He called ikt, .illa rica de la vcra Cruz; that .is, SThe
-rich town of .the true CroJf.

THE first meeting of the new council was diftin- Resigns his

guifhed by a tranfadion of great moment. As co'""mmion
soon as it assembled, Cortes applied for leave to
enter; and approacding with many marks of pro-
,found refpe&, which added dignity to the tribunal,
and set an example of reverence for ,its authority,
he began a long harangue, in which, with much art,
and in terms extremely flattering .to persons just
entering upon their new function, he observed, that
as the supreme jurifdition-over the colony which
they had planted was now veiled in this court, he
confidered them as clothed with the authority and
representing the person of their sovereign; that ac-
cordingly he would communicate to them what he
deemed essential to the public safety, with the fame
dutiful fidelity as if he were addrefling his royal maf-
ter; that the security of a colony fettled in a great
empire, whose sovereign had already discovered his
hostile intentions, depended upon arms, and the
efficacy of these upon the subordination and difci-
pline preserved among the troops; that his right to
command was derived from a commiifion granted
by the governor of Cuba; and as that had been
long since revoked, the lawfulness of his jurifdition
might well be questioned; that he seemed to aft

upon

B 0 K upon a defective, or even a dubious title; nor

V. could they trust an army which might dispute the
-v- ,'
powers of its general, at a juncture when it ought

implicitly to obey his orders; that, moved by these
conifiderations, he now resigned all his authority to
them, that they, having both right to chute, and
power to confer full jurifdition, might appoint one,
in the king's name, to command the army in its fu-
ture operations; and as for his own part, such was
his zeal for the service in which they were engaged,
that he would most cheerfully take up a pike with
the fame hand that laid down the general's trunche-
on, and convince his fellow-foldiers, that though ac-
customed to command, he had not forgotten how
to obey. Having finished his discourse, he laid the
commifion from Velasquez upon the table, and,
after killing his truncheon, delivered it to the chief
magistrate, and withdrew.

ndi chi'- THE deliberations of the council were not long,
jufice and as Cortes had concerted this important measure with
,ln-ge-a his confidents, and had prepared the other members,

with great address, for the part which lie wished
them to take. His resignation was accepted; and
as the uninterrupted tenour of their prosperity un-
der his conduct afforded the moRt satisfying evi-
dence of his abilities for command, they, by their
unanimous fufitiage, elected him chief justice of
the colony, and captain-general of its army, and ap-
pointed his commission to be made out in the king's
name, with most ample powers, which were to
continue in force until the royal pleasure ihould be
farther known. Thai. this deed might not be
deemed the machination of a junto, the council
called together the troops, and acquainted them
with what had been resolved. The soldiers, with
eager applause, ratified their choice; the air re-

founded

founded with the name of Corte;, and all vowed B o o K
to shed their bloqd in support of his authority. v.

CORTES having now brought his intrigues to the 1519.

desired issue, and thaken off his mortifying depen- Austhist
dance on the governor of Cuba, accepted of the with vigour.
commiflion, which vested in him supreme jurifditi-
on, civil as well as military, over the colony, with
many professions of refpea to the council, and gra-
titude to the army. Together with his new com-
mand, he assumed greater dignity, and began to
exercise more extensive powers. Formerly he had
felt himself to be only the deputy of a subjet;
now he a&ted as the representative of his sovereign.
The adherents of Velasquez, fully aware of what
would be the effet of this change in his situation,
could no longer continue silent and pafiive fpeaa-
tors of his ations. They exclaimed openly against
the proceedings of the council asilllegal, and against
those of the army as mutinous. Cortes, instantly
perceiving the necessity of giving a timely check to
such fedifious discourse by fQme vigorous measure,
arreled Ordaz, Efcudero, and Velasquez de Leon,
the ringleaders of this faction, and sent them prifo-
ners aboard the fleet, loaded with chains. Their
dependants, altonifhed and overawed, remained
quiet; and Cortes, more desirous to reclaim than to
punish his prisoners, who were officers of great me-
rit, courted their friendlhip with Cuch assiduity and
address, that he .reconciliation .was perfectly cor-
dial; and on -the most trying Qccafions, neither their
conne&tin with the governor of Cuba, nor the me-
mory of the indignity with which they had been treat-
ed, tempted them to swerve from an inviolable at-
tachment to his interest . In this, as well as his

' B. Diaz. c. 42, 43. Gomara Cron. c. 3o, 31. Herrera,
dec. z. lib. v. c. 7.

other

B 0 K other negociations at this critical conjuncture,

'v- which decided with refpet to his future fame and
x,39 fortune, Cortes owed much of his success to the

Mexican gold, which he distributed with a liberal
hand both among his friends and his opponents t.

His friend- CORTES, having thus rendered the union be-
/i},p courted ,byhzo.d.tween himself and his army indissoluble by those
poallns. common acts of disobedience, thought he might

now venture to quit the camp in which he had
hitherto remained, and advance into the country,
To this he was encouraged by an event no less for-
tunate than seasonable. Some Indians having ap-
proached his camp in a mysterious manner, were
introduced into his presence. He found that they
were sent with a proffer of friendship from the ca-
zique of Zempoalla, a considerable town at no great
ditfance; and from their answers to a variety of
questions which he put to them, according to his
usual practice in every interview with the people of
the country, he gathered, that their master, though
subjea to the Mexican empire, was impatient of the
yoke, and filled with such dread and hatred of
Montezuma, that nothing could be more accepta-
ble to him than any profpedt of deliverance from
the oppreiffon under which he groaned, On hear-
ing this, a ray of light and hope broke in upon the
mind of Cortes. He saw that the great empire
which he intended to attack was not united, nor its
sovereign beloved. He concluded, that the causes
ps difaffetion could not be confined to one pro-
vince, but that in other corners there must be mal-
contents, so weary of fubjedion, or so desirous of
change, as to be ready to follow the standard of any
protedor. Full of those ideas, on which he began

B. Diaz. c. 44.

to

to form a scheme, that time, and more perfect in- B 0 0 K
formation concerning the Rate of the country, V.
enabled him to mature, he gave a most gracious -'.-'
reception to the Zempoallans, and promised soon
to visit their cazique u.

IN order to perform this promise, it was not necef- Marches to

fary to vary the route which he had already fixed for Zempoala.
his march. Some officers, whom he had employed
to survey the coast, having discovered a village
named Quiabiflan, about forty miles to the north-
ward, which, both on account of the fertility of the
foil, and commodiousness of the harbour, seemed
to be a more proper Rtation for. a settlement than
that where he was encamped, Cortes determined to
remove thither. Zempoalla lay in his way, where
the cazique received him in the manner which he
had reason to expect; with gifts and caresses, like
a man solicitous to gain his good-will; with refpet:
approaching almost to adoration, like one who look-
ed up to him as a deliverer. From him he learned
many particulars with respect to the character of
Montezuma, and the circumflances which render-
ed his dominion odious. He was a tyrant, as the
cazique told him with tears, haughty, cruel, and
suspicious; who treated his own subjects with arro-
gance, ruined the conquered provinces by excessive
exactions, and often tore their sons and daughters
from them by violence; the former, to be offered
as viCtims to his gods; the latter, to be reserved as
concubines for himself or favourites. Cortes, in re-
ply to him, artfully insinuated, that one great ob-
jeet of the Spaniards in visiting a country so remote
from their own, was to redress grievances, and to
relieve the oppressed; and having encouraged him
to hope for this interposition in due time, he con-
tinued his march to Q0iabiflan.

" , Diaz. c. 41. Gomara Cron. c. 28.

THE

B O O K THE spot which his officers had recommended as

v. a proper situation, appeared to him to be so well
K 9 chosen, that he immediately marked out ground for

J519.

Builds a a town. The houses to be ereded were only huts;
fort' but these were to be fur.ounded with fortifications,

of sufficient itrength to refill the assaults of an In-
dian army. As the finishing of those fortifications
was essential to the exifience of a colony, and of no
less importance in prosecuting the designs which the
leader and his followers meditated, both in order to
secure a place of retreat, and to preserve their com-
munication with the sea, every man in the army,
officers as well as soldiers, put his hand to the work,
Cortes himself setting them an example of activity
and perseverance in labour. The Indians of Zem-
poalla and Q(iabiflan lent their aid; and this petty
flation, the parent of so many mighty settlements,
was soon in a itate of defence x.

Concludes a WHILE engaged in this necessary work, Cortes
formal alli- had several interviews with the caziques of Zem-
feral ,a poalla and Quiabiflan; and availing himself of their
ziques. wonder and allonifhment at the new objects which

they daily beheld, he gradually inspired them with
such an high opinion of the Spaniards, as beings of
a superior order, and irrefiifible in arms, that, rely-
ing on their protection, they ventured to insult the
Mexican power, at the very name of which they
were accustomed to tremble. Some of Montezu-
ma's officers having appeared to levy the usual tri-
bute, and to demand a certain number of human
victims, as an expiation for their guilt in presuming
to hold intercourse with those firangers whom the
emperor had commanded to leave his dominions,
instead of obeying the order, they made them pri-

x B. Diaz. c. 45, 46, 48. Gomara Cron. c. 32, 33. 37.
Herrera, dec. 2. lib. v. c. 8, 9.

foners,
1h

foners, treated them with great indignity, and as B 0 0 K
their superstition was no less barbarous than that of V.
the Mexicans, they threatened to sacrifice them to
their gods. From this last danger they were deli-
vered by the interposition of Cortes, who manifest-
ed the utmost horror at the mention of such a deed.
The two caziques having now been pushed to an
at of such open rebellion, as left them no hope of
safety but in attaching themselves inviolably to the
Spaniards, they soon completed their union with
them, by formally acknowledging themselves to be
valfals of the fame monarch. Their example was
followed by the Totonaques, a fierce people who in-
habited the mountainous part of the country. They
willingly fubjeted themselves to the crown of Caf-
tile, and offered to accompany Cortes, with all their
forces, in his march towards Mexico y.

CORT-ES had now been above three months in " "ea-

fures to proo

New Spain; and though this period had not been cure a n-
difiinguifhed by martial enterprises, every momentfirmation of

.

i i ° r j

* -* » * i i .his authori-

had been employed in operations, which, though ty by the
less splendid, were more important. By his address kine.
in conducing his intrigues with his own army, as
well as his sagacity in carrying on his negociations
with the natives, he had already laid the foundati-
ons of his future success. But whatever confidence
he might place in the plan which he had formed, he
could not but perceive, that as his title to com-
mand was derived from a doubtful authority, he
held it by a precarious tenure. The injuries which
Velasquez had received, were such as would
naturally prompt him to apply for redress to
their common sovereign; and such a reprefen-
tation might be given of his condu&t, that he
had reason to apprehend, not only that he
might be degraded from his present rank, but sub-

Y B. Diaz. c. 47. Gomara Cron. 35, 36. Herrera, dec.
z. lib. v. c. 9, 10, I.

jeeed

B o o Kjeted to punishment. Before he began his march,

V. it was necessary to take the most effectual precau-
'ti tions againfi this impending danger. With this

view, he perfiaded the magifirates of his colony to
address a letter to the king, containing a long ac-
count of their own services; a pompous defcripti-
on of the country which they had discovered; its
riches, the number of its inhabitants, their civiliza-
tion and arts; a view of the progress which they
had already made, in annexing several extensive
provinces of it to the crown of Castile, and of the
schemes which they had formed, as well as the
hopes which they entertained, of reducing the whole
to subjection; and last of all, they gave a minute
detail of the motives which had induced them to
renounce all connection with Velasquez, to fettle
a colony dependant upon the crown alone, and to
vest the supreme power, civil as well as military,
in the hands of Cortes; humbly requesting their
sovereign to ratify what they had done by his roy-
al authority. Cortes himself wrote in a similar
firain; and as he knew that the Spanish court, ac-
customed to the exaggerated representations of eve-
ry new country by its discoverer, would give little
credit to their splendid accounts of New Spain, if
they were not accompanied with such a specimen
of what it contained, as would excite an high idea
of its opulence, he solicited his soldiers to relinquish
what they might claim as their part of the treasures
which had hitherto been collected, in order that the
whole might be sent to the king. Such was the as-
cendant which he had acquired over their minds,
and such their own romantic expectations of future
wealth, that an army of indigent and rapacious ad-
venturers was capable of this generous effort, and
offered to their sovereign the richest present that had
hitherto been transmitted from the New World g.

? See N 0 T E LXXV[.

Portocarrero

Portocarrero and Montejo, the chief magifirates ofB o o K
the colony, were appointed to carry this present to V.
Caflile, with express orders not to touch at Cuba in 1519.
their passage thither a.

WHILE a vessel was preparing for their depar- A confpira-

ture, an unexpected event occasioned a general a-Corte"'
larm. Some soldiers and sailors, secretly attached
to Velasquez, or intimidated at the profpea of the
dangers unavoidable in attempting to penetrate in-
to the heart of a great empire with such unequal
force, formed the design of seizing one of the bri-
gantines, and making their escape to Cuba, in or-
der to give the governor such intelligence as might
enable him to intercept the ihip which was to carry
the treasure and dispatches to Spain. This con-
fpiracy, though formed by persons of low rank,
was condu&ted with profound secrecy; but at the
moment when every thing was ready for executi-
on, they were betrayed by one of their associates.

THOUGH the good fortune of Cortes interposed He dcafroy

so seasonably on this occasion, the detection of this hi fleet.
conspiracy filled his mind with most disquieting ap-
prehensions, and prompted him to execute a scheme
which he had long revolved. He perceived that
the spirit of difaffetion still lurked among his-
troops; that though hitherto checked by the uni-
form success of his schemes, or kept down by the
hand of authority, various events might occur
which would encourage and call it forth. He ob-
served, that many of his men, weary of the fatigue
of service, longed to revisit their settlements in Cu-
ba; and that upon any appearance of extraordinary
danger, or any reverse of fortune, it would be im-
possible to refirain them from returning thither. He

a B. Diaz. c. 54. Gomara Cron. c. 40.

was

BOOKwas sensible that his, forces, already too feeble,

V. could bear no diminution, and that a very small
"' defection of his followers would oblige him to aban-

don the enterprise. After ruminating, often, and
with much solicitude, upon those particulars, he
saw no hope of success, but in cutting off all poffi-
bility of retreat, and reducing his men to the necef-
fity of adopting the fame resolution with which he
himself was animated, either to conquer or to pe-
rifh. With this view, he determined to defiroy
his fleet; but as he durst not venture to execute
such a bold resolution by his single authority, he
laboured to bring his soldiers to adopt his ideas
with refped to the propriety of this measure. His
address in accomplishing this was not inferior to
the arduous occasion in which it was employed.
He persuaded Tome, that the ships had suffered so
much by having been long at sea, as to be altoge-
ther unfit for service; to others he pointed out
what a seasonable reinforcement of strength they
would derive from the junction of an hundred men,
now unprofitably employed as sailors; and to all
he represented the necessity of fixing their eyes and
wishes upon what was before them, without al-
lowing the idea of a retreat once to enter their
thoughts. With universal content the ships were
drawn alhore, and after stripping them of their
fails, rigging, iron-works, and whatever else might
be of use, they were broke in pieces. Thus, from
an effort of magnanimity, to which there is nothing
parallel in history, five hundred men voluntarily
consented to be flint up in a hostile country, filled
with powerful and unknown nations; and having
precluded every means of escape, left themselves
without any resource but their own valour and per-
feveranceb.

b Relat. di Cortes. Ramus. iii. 225. B. Diaz. c. 57, 58.
Herrera, dec. z. lib. v. c. 14.

NOTHING

NOTHING now retarded Cortes; the alacrity of B 0 0 K

his troops and the disposition of his allies were v.
equally favourable. All the advantages, however, 11,9.
derived from the latter, though procured by much
assiduity and address, were well-nigh loft in a mo-
ment by an indiscreet sally of religious zeal, which,
on many occasions, precipitated Cortes into ati-
ons inconsistent with the prudence that diflinguifh-
es his character. Though hitherto he had neither
time nor opportunity to explain to the natives the
errors of their own fuperfiition, or to inilrud them
in the principles of the Christian faith, he com-
manded his soldiers to overturn the altars and to
defiroy the idols in the chief temple of Zempoalla,
and in their place to erect a crucifix and an image
of the Virgin Mary. The people beheld this with
astonishment and horror; the priests excited them
to arms; but such was the authority of Cortes, and
so great the ascendant which the Spaniards had ac-
quired, that the commotion was appeased without
bloodshed, and concord perfectly re-eflablifhed c.

CORTES began his march from Zempoalla on Advances

the sixteenth of August, with five hundred men,into th
fifteen horse, and fix field-pieces. The reft of
his troops, consisting chiefly of such as from age
or infirmity were less fit for active service, he left
as a garrison in Villa Rica, under the command
of Efcalante, an officer of merit, and warmly at-
tached to his interest. The cazique of Zempo-
alla supplied him with provisions, and with two
hundred of those Indians called T'amemes, whose
office, in a country where tame animals were un-
known, was to carry burdens, and perform all
servile labour. They were a great relief to the
Spanish soldiers, who hitherto had been obliged,

c B. Diaz. c. 41, 42. Herrera, dec. 2. lib. v. c. 3, 4.

not

B O O K not only to carry their own baggage, but to drag

V. along the artillery by main force.- He offered like-

' wife a considerable body of his troops, but Cortes

was satisfied with four hundred; taking care, how-
ever, to chute persons of such note as might prove
hostages for the fidelity of their mailer. Nothing
memorable happened in his progress, until he ar-
rived on the confines of Tlafcala. The inhabitants
of that province, a warlike people, were implacable
enemies of the Mexicans, and had been united in
an ancient alliance with the caziques of Zempoalla.
Though less civilized than the fubjeAs of Monte-
zuma, they were advanced in improvement far be-
yond the rude nations of America, whose manners
we have described. They had made considerable
progress in agriculture; they dwelt in large towns;
they were not firangers to some species of com-
merce; and in the imperfet accounts of their in-
flitutions and laws, transmitted to us by the early
Spanish writers, we discern traces both of diftribu-
tive justice and of criminal jurifdi&ion, in their in-
terior police. But fill, as the degree of their civi-
lization was incomplete, and as they depended for
fubfifence not on agriculture alone, but trusted for
it, in a great measure, to hunting, they retained
many of the qualities natural to men in this state.
Like them, they were fierce and revengeful; like
them, too, they were high-fpirited and independ-
ant. In consequence of the former, they were in-
volved in perpetual hostilities, and had but a flen-
der and occasional intercourse with neighbouring
fiates. The latter inspired them with such detef-
tation of servitude, that they not only refused to
stoop to a foreign yoke, and maintained an obili-
nate and successful contest in defence of their liber-
ty against the superior power of the Mexican em-
pire, but they guarded with equal solicitude a-
gainfi domeitic tyranny; and disdaining to ac-

knowledge

knowledge any master, they lived under the mild o0 K
and limited jurifdidion of a council elected by their V.,
several tribes. 1519.

CORTES, though he had received information Hihwar

concerning the martial character of this people, Tlacalanh
fattered himself that his profeflions of delivering
the oppressed from the tyranny of Montezuma,
their enmity to the Mexicans, and the ekample of
their ancient allies the Zempoallans, might induce
them to grant him a friendly reception. In order
to dispose them to this, four Zempoallans of great
eminence were sent ambassadors, to request, in
his name and in that of their cazique, that they
would permit the Spaniards to pass through the
territories of Tlafcala in their way to Mexico. But
inflead of the favourable answer which was expect-
ed, the Tlafcalans seized the ambassadors, and,
without any regard to their public character, made
preparations for sacrificing them to their gods; At
the fame time, they assembled their troops, in or-
der to oppose those unknown invaders, if they
should attempt to make their passage good by force
of arms. Various motives concurred in precipitat-i
ing the Tlafcalans into this resolution. A fierce
people, shut up within its own narrow precincts, and
little accustomed to any intercourse with foreigners,
is apt to confider every firanger as an enemy, and
is easily excited to arms, They concluded, from'
Cortes's proposal of visiting Montezuma in his ca-
pital, that, notwithstanding all his profeflions, he
courted the friendship of a monarch whom they
both hated and feared. Tle imprudent zeal of
Cortes in violating the temples in Zempoalla, fill-
ed the Tlafcalans with horror; and as they were
no less attached to their superstition than the other
nations of New Spain, they were impatient to
avenge their injured gods, and to acquire the

VOL .
II. P merit

B O O K merit of offering up to them as viaims those im-

v. pious men, who had dared to profane their altars;
'"^ the Spaniards, from the smallness of their number,

were objects of their contempt; they had not yet
measured their, own itrength with theirs, and had
no idea of the superiority which they derived from'
their arms and discipline,

Aug. 30. CORTES, after waiting some days, in vain, for
Success of
uccesot the return of his ambassadors, advanced into the

Tlafcalan territories. As the resolutions of people
who delight in war are executed with no less
promptitude than they are formed, he found troops
in the field ready to oppose him. They attacked
him with great intrepidity, and in the firit en-
counter, wounded some of the Spaniards, and
killed two horses; a loss, in their situation, of
great moment, because it was irreparable. From
this specimen of the courage of his new enemies,
Cortes saw the necessity of proceeding with cau-
tion. His army marched in close order; he chose
the liations, where he halted with attention, and
fortified 'every camp with extraordinary care.
During fourteen days he was exposed to almost
uninterrupted assaults, the Tlafcalans advancing
with numerous armies, and renewing the attack
in various forms, with a degree of valour and per-
severance to which the Spaniards had seen no-
thing parallel in the New World. The Spanish
,; historians describe those fucceflive battles with great

pomp, and enter into a minute detail of particulars,
mingling many exaggerated and incredible eir-
cumitances d with those which are real and marvel-
lous. But no power of words can render the recital
of a combat interesting, where there is no equality
of danger; and when the narrative closes with an

d See NO T E LXXVIL

account

account of thousands slain on the one fide, while not B O O K
a single person falls on the other, the most labour- v.
ed descriptions of the previous disposition of the X -
troops, or of the various viciflitudes in the engage- s19.
ment, command no attention.

THERE are some circumstances, however, inSomefingu.

this war, which are memorable and merit notice, sances'im'
as they throw light upon the chara&er both of the it.
people of New Spain, and of their conquerors.
Though the Tlafcalans brought into the field such
vail armies as appear sufficient to have overwhelm-
ed the Spaniards, they were never able to make
any impression upon their small battalion. Sin-
gular as this may seem, it is not inexplicable.
The Tlafcalans, though addiAed to war, were,
like all unpolifhed nations, firangers to military or-
der and discipline, and.loft all the advantage which
they might have derived from their numbers, and
the impetuosity of their attack, by their confiant
solicitude to carry off the dead and wounded.
This point of honour, founded on a sentiment of
tenderness natural to the human mind, and
firengthened by anxiety to preserve the bodies of
their countrymen from being devoured by their
enemies, was universal among the people of New
Spain. Attention to this pious office occupied
them, even during the heat of combat e, broke
their union, and diminished the force of the im-
pression which they might have made by a joint es-
fort.

NOT only was their superiority in number of

little avail, but the imperfection of their military
weapons rendered their valour in a great measure
inoffensive. After three battles, and many fkir-
mifhes and altaults, not one Spaniard was killed in

e B. Diaz. c. 65.

P 2 the

B O o K the field. Arrows and spears, headed with flint

V. or the bones of fishes, stakes hardened in the fire,
V--' and wooden swords, though destructive weapons

among naked Indians, were easily turned aside
by the Spanish bucklers, and could hardly pene-
trate the efcaulpiles, or quilted jackets which the
soldiers wore. The Tlafcalans advanced boldly
to the charge, and often fought hand to hand.
Many of the Spaniards were wounded, though all
slightly, which cannot be imputed to any want of
courage in their enemies, but to the defet of the
arms with which they assailed them.

NOTWITHSTANDING the fury with which the

Tlafcalans attacked the Spaniards, they seem to
have conduced their hostilities with some degree
of barbarous generosity. They gave the Spani-
ards warning of their hostile intentions, and as
they knew that they wanted provisions, and ima-
gined, perhaps, like the other Americans, that
they had left their own country because it did not
afford them fubfifience, they sent to their camp a
large supply of poultry and maize, desiring them
to eat plentifully, because they scorned to attack an
enemy enfeebled by hunger, and it would be an
affront to their Gods to offer them famished vic-
tims, as well as disagreeable to themselves to feed
on such emaciated prey f.

WHEN they were taught by the first encounter

with their new enemies, that it was not easy to
execute this threat; when they perceived, in the
subsequent engagements, that notwithstanding all
the efforts of their own valour, of which they
had a very high opinion, not one of the Spani-
ards was hain or taken, they began to conceive

f Herrera, dec. 2. lib. vi. c. 6. Gomara Cron. c. 47.

them

them to be a superior order of beings, againfi B OOK
whom human power could not avail. In this ex- V.
tremity, they had recourse to their priefis, re- -,9.
quiring them to reveal the mysterious causes of
such extraordinary events, and to declare what
new means they Ihould employ in order to re-
pulse those formidable invaders. The priefis, as-
ter many sacrifices and incantations, delivered this
response. That these firangers were the offspring
of the fun, procreated by his animating energy in
the regions of the east; that, by day, while che-
rifhed with the influence of his parental beams, they
were invincible; but by night, when his reviving
heat was withdrawn, their vigour declined and
faded like the herbs in the field, and they dwin-
dled down into mortal men g. Theories less plau-
fible have gained credit with more enlightened na-
tions, and have influenced their conduc. In con-
sequence of this, the Tlafcalans, with the implicit
confidence of men who fancy themselves to be
under the guidance of Heaven, aaed in contra-
diion to one of their moRs eifablifhed maxims in
war, and ventured to attack the enemy in the
night-time, in hopes of defiroying them when en-
feebled and surprised. But Cortes had more vigi-
lance and discernment than to be deceived by the
rude firatagems of an Indian army. The centi-
nels at his out-poits, observing some extraordinary
movement among the Tlafcalans, gave the alarm.
In a moment the troops were under arms, and fal-
lying out, dispersed the party with great slaughter,
without allowing them to approach the camp.
Convinced, by fad experience, that their priefis
had deluded them, and satisfied that they attempt-
ed in vain, either to deceive or to vanquish their
enemies, the fierceness of the Tlafcalans abated,
.and they began to incline seriously to peace,

s B. Diaz. c. 66.

THEY

B O O K THEY were at a loss, however, in what manner

V. to address the firangers, what idea to form of their
15g9. chaiater, and whether to confider them as beings

TheTlafca- of a gentle or of a malevolent nature. There
lans difpof-
etopec. were circumfiances in their condut which seemed

to favour each opinion. On the one hand, as the
Spaniards constantly dismissed the prisoners whom
they took, not only without injury, but often with
presents of European toys, and renewed their of-
sers of peace after every victory; this lenity amaz-
ed people accustomed to the exterminating system
of war known in America, and who sacrificed and
devoured without mercy all the captives taken in
battle, and disposed them to entertain favourable
sentiments of their humanity. But, on the other
hand, as Cortes had seized fifty of their country-
men who brought provisions to his camp, and sup-
posing them to be spies, had cut off their hands h;
this bloody fpedacle, added to the terror occasion-
ed by the fire-arms and horses, filled them with
dreadful impreflions of their ferocity i. According-
ly, this uncertainty was apparent in their mode of
addrefling the Spaniards. " If, said they, you are
divinities of a cruel and savage nature, we present
to you five slaves, that you may drink their blood
and eat their flesh. If you are mild deities, accept
an offering of incense and variegated plumes. If
you are men, here is meat, and bread and fruit to
nourish you k". The peace which both parties now
Concluded. desired with equal ardour, was soon concluded. The

Tlafcalans yielded themselves as vassals to the crown
of Castile, and engaged to aflift Cortes in all his fu-
ture operations, He took the republic under his
protection, and promised to defend their persons
and poffeflions from injury or violence.

h Cortes Relat. Ramus. iii. zz8. C. Gcmara Cron.c. 48.
i See NO T E LXXVIII. k B. Diaz. c. 70.
Gomara Cron. c. 47. Herrera dec. z. lib. vi. c. 7.

THIN

THIS treaty was concluded at a seasonable B 0 0 K

junaure for the Spaniards. The fatigue of service V.
among a small body of men, surrounded by such "
a multitude of enemies, was incredible. Half the Advantages
army was on duty every night, and even theyfSpni°rdhe
whose turn it was to reft, slept always upon their
arms, that they might be ready to run to their posts
on a moment's warning. Many of them were
wounded, a good number, and among these Cor-
tes himself, laboured under the distemper peculiar
to the climate, and several had died since they set
out from Vera Cruz. Notwithitanding the sup-
plies which they received from the Tlafcalans, they
were often in want of provisions, and so destitute
of the necessaries most requisite in dangerous ser-
vice, that they had no salve to dress their wounds,
but what was composed with the fat of the Indians
whom they had slain . Worn out with such into-
lerable toil and hardships, many of the soldiers be-
gan to murmur, and when they refleced on the
multitude and boldness of their enemies, more were
ready to despair. It required the utmoit exertion
of Cortes's authority and address to check this fpi-
rit of despondency in its progress, and to reanimate
his followers with their wonted sense of their own
superiority over the enemies with whom they had to
contend '. The submission of the Tlafcalans, and
their own triumphant entry into the capital city,
where they were received with the reverence paid
to beings of a superior order, banished, at once,
from the minds of the Spaniards all memory of
past sufferings, dispelled every anxious thought with
refpet to their future operations, and fully satisfied
them that there was not now any power in America
able to withstand their arms n.

l B. Diaz. c. 62. 65. m Cortes Relat. Ramus. iii.
229. B. Diaz. c. 69. Gomara Cron. c. 51.

P Cortes Relat. Ramus. iii. 230. B. Diaz. c. 72.

COR TES

B K. CORTES remained twenty days in Tlafcala, in

V., order to allow his troops a short interval of repose
1519. after such hard service. During that time, he was

Cortes foii employed in tranfations and inquiries of great
citous to '

'

gain their moment with refpet to his future schemes. In
tonfictece, his daily conferences with the Tlafcalan chiefs, he

received information concerning every particular
relative to the state of the Mexican empire, or to
the qualities of its sovereign, which could be of use
in regulating his condu&t, whether he thould be
obliged to act as a friend or as an enemy. As he
found that the antipathy of his new allies to the
Mexican nation was no less implacable than had
been represented, and perceived what benefit he
might derive from the aid of such powerful confe,
derates, he employed all his powers of insinuation
in order to gain their confidence. Nor was any
extraordinary exertion of there necessary. The
Tlafcalans, with the levity of mind natural to un-
polished men, were, of their own accord, disposed
to run from the extreme of hatred to that of fond-
ness. Every thing in the appearance and conduct
of their guefis, was to them matter of wonder °.
They gazed at whatever the Spaniards did with
admiration, and fancying them to be of heaven-
ly origin, were eager not only to comply with
their demands, but to anticipate their wishes.
They offered, accordingly, to accompany Cortes
in his march to Mexico, with all the forces of
the republic, under the command of their moit
experienced captains.

·~hich he BUT, after bestowing so much pains on
loft by his cementing this union, all the beneficial fruits
rah zeal. of it were on the point of being loft, by a

new effusion of that intemperate zeal with which

N
See NOTE LXXIX.

Cortes

Cortes was animated, no less than the other ad-B o o K
venturers of the age. They all confidered them- v.
selves as instruments employed by Heaven to pro- 1519
pagate the Christian faith, and the less they were
qualified either by their knowledge or morals for
such a function, they were more eager to discharge
it. The profound veneration of the Tlafcalans for
the Spaniards, having encouraged Cortes to explain
to some of their chiefs the doctrines of the Christian
religion, and to insist that they ihould abandon their
own fiperftitions, and embrace the faith of their
new friends, they, according to an idea universal
among barbarous nations, readily acknowledged the
truth and excellence of what he taught; but con-
tended, that the deules of Tlafcala were divinities
no less than the God in whom the Spaniards believ-
ed; and as that Being was intitled to their homage,
so they were bound to revere the fame powers
which their ancestors had worshipped. Cortes con-
tinued, nevertheless, to urge his demand in a tone
of authority, mingling threats with his arguments,
until the Tlafcalans could bear it no longer, and
conjured him never to mention this again, left the
Gods should avenge on their heads the guilt of hav-
ing listened to such a propoition. Cortes, aftonilh-
ed and enraged at their obstinacy, prepared to exe-
cute by force what he could not accomplish by per-
suasion, and was going to overturn their altars, and
cast down their idols with the fame violent hand as
at Zempoalla, if father Bartholomew de Olmedo,
chaplain to the expedition, had not checked his in-
considerate impetuosity. He represented the im-
prudence of such an attempt in a large city newly
reconciled, and filled with people no less fuperftiti-
ous than warlike; he declared that the proceeding
at Zempoalla had always appeared to him precipi-
tate and unjust; that religion was not to be propa-
gated by the sword, or infidels to be converted by

violence;

B O O K violence; that other weapons were to be employed

V. in this miniRfry, patient initrution must enlighten
---- the understanding, and pious example captivate the

heart, before men could be induced to abandon er-
ror and embrace the truth P. Amidif scenes, where
a narrow-minded bigotry appears in such close
union with oppression and cruelty, sentiments so li-
beral and humane, sooth the mind with unexpe&-
ed pleasure; and at a time, when the rights of con-
science were little understood in the Christian world,
and the idea of toleration unknown, one is astonish-
ed to find a Spanish monk of the sixteenth century
among the firit advocates againfi persecution, and
in behalf of religious liberty. The remonstrances
of an ecclefiaitic no less refpedable for wisdom than
virtue, had their proper weight with Cortes. He
left the Tlafcalans in the undiiturbed exercise of
their own rites, requiring only that they ihould de-
sift from their horrid practice of offering human vic-
tims in sacrifice.

Advances to CORTES, as soon as his troops were fit for ser-
Cholula. vice, resolved to continue his march towards Mexi-

co, notwithRanding the earnest dissuasives of the
Tlafcalans, who represented his deftrution as un-
avoidable, if he put himself in the power of a prince
so faithless and cruel as Montezuma. As he was ac-
companied by fix thousand Tlafcalans, he had now
now the command of forces which resembled a re-
ot. x3. gular army. They directed their course towards

Cholula; Montezuma, who had at length consent-
ed to admit the Spaniards into his presence, having
informed Cortes, that he had given orders for his
friendly reception there. Cholula was a confidera-
ble town, and though only five leagues.diftant from
Tlafcala, was formerly an independent lRate, but

P P. Diaz. c. 77. p. 54. c. 83. p. 6r.

had

had been lately fubjeted to the Mexican empire. B O K
This was confidered by all the people of New Spain V.
as a holy place, the fanEtuary and chief feat of their 159
gods, to which pilgrims resorted from every pro-
vince, and a greater number of human victims were
offered in its principal temple than even in that of
Mexico q. Montezuma seems to have invited the
Spaniards thither, either from some fuperflitious
hope that the gods would not susser this sacred
mansion to be defiled, without pouring down their
wrath upon those impious firangers, who ventured
to insult their power in the place of its peculiar refi-
dence, or from a belief that he himself might there
attempt to cut them off with more certain success,
under the immediate protection of his divinities.

CORTES had been warned by the Tlafcalans, Thefeveri-

before he set out on his march, to keep a watchful tyf his
eye over the Cholulans, He himself, though re-there.
ceived into the town with much teeming refpet
and cordiality, observed several circumstances in
their conduct which excited suspicion. Two of the
Tlafcalans, who were encamped at some distance
from the town, as the Cholulans refused to admit
their ancient enemies within its precints, having
found means to enter in disguise, acquainted Cortes,
that they observed the women and children of the
principal citizens retiring in great hurry every
night; and that fix children had been sacrificed in
the chief temple, a rite which indicated the execu-
tion of some warlike enterprise to be approaching.
At the fame time, Marina the interpreter received
information from an Indian woman of diftintion,
whose confidence she had gained, that the deftruc-
tion of her friends was concerted; that a body of

q Torquemada Monar. Ind. i. 281, z8z. ii. z91. Gomara
Cron. c. 61. Herrera, dec. 2. lib. vii. c. z.

Mexican

B o o K Mexican troops lay concealed near the town; that

v* some of the fireets were barricaded, and in others,
5 pits or deep trenches were dug, and slightly cover-

ed over, as traps into which the horse might fall;
that stones and miiive weapons were colleced on
the tops of the temples, with which to overwhelm.
the infantry; that the fatal hour was now at hand,
and their ruin unavoidable. Cortes, alarmed at
this concurring evidence, secretly arrested three of
the chief priests, and extorted from them a consef-
sion that confirmed the intelligence which he had
received. As not a moment was to be loft, he in-
Itantly resolved to prevent his enemies, and to in-
flit on them isuch dreadful vengeance as might
firike Montezuma and his fubjeds with terror. For
this purpose, the Spaniards and Zempoallans were
drawn up in a large court, which had been allotted
for their quarters near the centre of the town; the
Tlafcalans had orders to advance ; the magistrates,
and several of the chief citizens, were sent for under
various pretexts, and seized. On a signal given,
the troops rushed out, and fell upon the multitude,
destitute of leaders, and so much aflonifhed, that
the weapons dropped from their hands, and they
flood motionless, and incapable of defence. While
the Spaniards preired them in front, the Tlafcalans
attacked them in the rear. The streets were filled
with bloodshed and death. The temples, which
afforded a retreat to the priefis and some of the
leading men, were set on fire, and they perished in
the flames. This scene of horror continued two
days; during which, the wretched inhabitants sus-
sered all that the deftrutive rage of the Spaniards,
or the implacable revenge of their Indian allies,
could inflict. At length the carnage ceased, after
the slaughter of fix thousand Cholulans, without the
loss of a tingle Spaniard. Cortes then released the
magifirates, and reproaching them bitterly for their

intended

intended treachery, declared, that as justice was B o o K
now appeased, he forgave the offence, but required V.
them to recall the citizens who had fled, and re---
establish order in the town. Such was the ascendant 519'
which the Spaniards had acquired over this super-
flitious race of men, and so deeply were they im-
pressed with an opinion of their superior discern-
ment, as well as power, that, in obedience to this
command, the city was in a few days filled again
with people, who, amidst the ruins of their sacred
buildings, yielded refpedtful service to men whose
hands were Rained with the blood of their relations
and fellow-citizens .

FROM Cholula, Cortes advanced directly to-A i9.

- '

. , , , -' Advancea

wards Mexico, which was only twenty leagues towards
diitant. In every place through which he paifed,Mexico.
he was received as a person possessed of sufficient
power to deliver the empire from the oppression un-
der which it groaned; and the caziques or gover-
nors, with the unreserved confidence reposed in
superior beings, communicated to him all the grie-
vances which they felt under the tyrannical govern-
ment of Montezuma. When Cortes firit observed
the feeds of discontent in the remote provinces of
the empire, a ray of hope broke in upon his mind;
but when he discovered such symptoms of alienati-
on from their monarch near the feat of government,
he concluded that the vital parts of the conititution
were effeced, and conceived the molt sanguine ex-
pectations of overturning a state whose natural
itrength was thus divided and impaired. While
those reflections encouraged the general to persist in
his arduous undertaking, the soldiers were no less
animated by observations more obvious to their ca-

r Cortes Relat. Ramus. iii. 231. B. Diaz. c. 83. Gomara

Cron. c. 64. Herrera, dec. 2. lib. vii. c. i, 2. See N 0 T E
LXXX.

pacity.

B O O pacity. In descending from the mountains of ChaI-

v. co, across which the road lay, the vast plain of

'" ,5 Mexico opened gradually to their view. When
Sirs iiew of they first beheld this profpet, one of the mot ftrik-
it. ing and beautiful on the face of the earth; when

they observed fertile and cultivated fields, firetch-
ing farther than the eye could reach; when they
saw a lake resembling the sea in extent, encompass-
ed with large towns, and discovered the capital
city rising upon an island in the middle, adorned
with its temples and turrets; the scene si far ex-
ceeded their imagination, that some believed the
fanciful descriptions of romance were realized, and
that its enchanted palaces and gilded domes were
presented to their fight; others could hardly per-
fuade themselves that this wonderful fpeaacle was
any thing more than a dream s. As they advanc-
ed, their doubts were removed, but their amaze-
ment increased. They were now fully satisfied
that the country was rich beyond any conception
which they had formed of it, and flattered them-
selves, that at length they should obtain an ample
recompence for all their services and sufferings.

The irrefo- No enemy had yet appeared to oppose their pro-
lution of grefs, though several circumstances occurred which
ma. led them to fufpet that some design was formed to

surprise and cut them off. Many messengers arriv-
ed successively from Montezuma, permitting them
one day to advance, requiring them on the next to
retire, as his hopes or fears alternately prevailed;
and so wonderful was this infatuation, which seems
to be unaccountable on any supposition but that of
a superstitious dread of the Spaniards, as beings of
a superior nature, that Cortes was almost at the gates
of the capital, before the monarch had determined
whether to receive him as a friend, or to oppose him

' See NOTE LXXXI.

as
/

as an enemy. But as no sign of open hostility ap- B OO K
peared, the Spaniards, without regarding the fluc- V.
tuations of Montezuma's sentiments, continued their 15
march along the causeway which led to Mexico
through the lake, with great circumfpeation and the
ftriteft discipline, though without seeming to sus-
pea the prince whom they were about to visit.

WHEN they drew near the city, about a thou- His first in-

sand persons, who appeared to be of ditlinction, teviewwii
came forth to meet them, adorned with plumes, niards.
and clad in mantles of fine cotton. Each of these,
in his order, passed by Cortes, and saluted him ac-
cording to the mode deemed most refpe&ful and
fubmiflive in their country. They announced the
approach of Montezuma himself, and soon after his
harbingers came in fight. There appeared first
two hundred persons in an uniform dress, with
large plumes of feathers, alike in fashion, marching
two and two, in deep silence, barefooted, with their
eyes fixed on the ground. These were followed by
a company of higher rank, in their most showy ap-
parel, in the midIt of whom was Montezuma, in a
chair or litter richly ornamented with gold and sea-
thers of various colours. Four of his principal fa-
vourites carried him on their shoulders, others sup-
ported a canopy of curious workmanship over his
head. Before him marched three officers with rods
of gold in their hands, which they lifted up on high
at certain intervals, and at that signal all the peo-
ple bowed their heads, and hid their faces, as un-
worthy to look on so great a monarch. When he
drew near, Cortes dismounted, advancing towards
him with officious haste, and in a refpetful posture.
At the fame time Montezuma alighted from his
chair, and leaning on the arms of two of his near
relations, approached with a flow and fiately pace,
his attendants covering the street with cotton cloths,

that

1 0 0 K that he might not touch the ground. Cortes ac-

v. costed him with profound reverence, after the Eu-
4-^*' ropean fashion. He returned the salutation, ac-

5I9' cording to the mode of his country, by touching the

earth with his hand, and then killing it. This cere-
mony, the customary expression of reverence from
inferiors towards those who were above them in
rank, appeared such amazing condescension in a
proud monarch, who scarcely deigned to confider
the reft of mankind as of the fame species with him-
self, that all his fubjets firmly believed those per-
sons, before whom he humbled himself in this man-
ner, to be something more than human. Accord-
ingly, as they marched through the crowd, the
Spaniards frequently, and with much fatisfation,
heard themselves denominated Teules, or divinities.
Nothing material passed inthis first interview. Mon-
tezuma conduted Cortes to the quarters which he
had prepared for his reception, and immediately
took leave of him, with a politeness not unworthy
of a court more refined. " You are now," fays he,
" with your brothers, in your own house; refresh
yourselves after your fatigue, and be happy until I
return t." The place allotted to the Spaniards for
their lodging was a house built by the father of
Montezuma. It was surrounded by a fione-wall,
with towers at proper distances, which served for
defence as well as for ornament, and its apartments
and courts were so large as to accommodate both
the Spaniards and their Indian allies. The first
care of Cortes was to take precautions for his fecu-
rity, by planting the artillery so as to command the
different avenues which led to it, by appointing a
large division of his troops to be always on guard,
and by posting centinels at proper flations, with in-
junctions to observe the fame vigilant discipline as if
they were within fight of an enemy's camp.

t Cortes Relat. Ram. iii. 232-235. B. Diaz. c. 83-88.
Gomara Cron. c. 64, 65. Herrera, dec. z. lib. vii. c. 3, 4, 5.

IN

IN the evening Montezuma returned to visit hisg o O K

guests with the fame pomp as in their firfi interview, V.
and brought presents of such value, not only to '- '

I5x9.

Cortes and to his officers, but even to the privateHis ieaof
men, as proved the liberality of the monarch to bethe Spa-
suitable to the opulence of his kingdom. A long
conference ensued, in which Cortes learned what
was the opinion of Montezuma with refpeet to the
Spaniards. It was an eftablilhed tradition, he told
him, among the Mexicans, that their ancestors came
originally from a remote region, and conquered the
provinces now fubje& to his dominion; that after
they were fettled there, the great captain who con-
duted this colony returned to his own country, pro-
mifing, that at some future period his descendants
hould visit them, aifume the government, and re-
form their constitution and laws; that, from what
he had heard and seen of Cortes and his followers,
he was convinced that they were the very persons
whose appearance their traditions and prophecies
taught them to expet; that accordingly he had
received them, not as firangers, but as relations of
the fame blood and parentage, and desired that
they might confider themselves as mailers in his
dominions, for both himself and his fubjeds should
be ready to comply with their will, and even to pre-
vent their withes. Cortes made a reply in his usual
file with refpet to the dignity and power of his so-
vereign, and his intention in fending him into that
country; artfully endeavouring so to frame his dif-
course, that it might coincide as much as poflible
with the idea which Montezuma had formed con-
cerning the origin of the Spaniards. Next morn-
ing, Cortes and some of his principal attendants
were admitted to a public audience of the empe-
ror. The three subsequent days were employed in
viewing the city; the appearance of which, so far
superior in the order of its buildings and the num-

VOL. II. Q, ber

B O O K ber of its inhabitants to any place the Spaniards had

v. beheld in America, and yet so little resembling the
1.9. fitru&ure of an European city, filled them with fur-

prise and admiration.

ME x c o, fenuchtitlan as it was anciently called

by the natives, is situated in a large plain, environ-
ed by mountains of such height, that, though with-
in the torrid zone, the temperature of its climate is
mild and healthful. All the moisture which ce-
scends from the high grounds is colleEted in several
lakes, the two largef of which, of about ninety
miles in circuit, communicate with each other.
The waters of the one are fresh, -those of the others
brackish. On the banks of the latter, and on some
small islands adjoining to them, the capital of Mon-
tezuma's empire was built. The access to the city
was by artificial causeways or itreets, formed of
siones and earth, about thirty feet in breadth. As
the waters of the lake during the rainy season over-
flowed the flat country, there causeways were of
considerable length. That of Tacuba on the weft
extended a mile and a half; that of Tezeuco on the
north-west three miles; that of Cuoyacan towards
the south fix miles. On the east there was no cause-
way, and the city could be approached only by
canoes u. In each of there causeways were open-
ings at proper intervals, through which the waters
flowed; and over there beams of timber were laid,
which being covered with earth, the eaufeway or
fireet had everywhere an uniform appearance. As
the approaches to the city were singular, its con-
firudtion was remarkable. Not only the temples
of their gods, but the houses belonging to the mo-
alarch, and to persons of diftintion, were of such
dimensions, that, in comparison with any other
buildings which had been discovered in America,
they might be termed magnificent. The habitati-

u F. Torribio MS.

ons

ons of the common people were mean, resembling B OO K
the huts of other Indians. But they were all placed v.
in a regular manner, on the banks of the canals 1519.
which passed through the city, in some of its di-
ilrids, or on the fides of the fireets which interfer-
ed it in other quarters. In several places were large
openings or squares, one of which, allotted for the
great market, is said to have been To spacious, that
forty or fifty thousand persons carried on traffic
there. In this city, the pride of the New World,
and the noblest monument of the induffry and art'
of man, while. unacquainted with the use of iron,
and destitute of aid from any donmetic animal, the
Spaniards who are most moderate in their compu-
tations, reckon that there were at leafi sixty thou-
sand inhabitants x.

BUT how much soever the novelty of those ob-Their dan-

jets might amuse or astonish the Spaniards, they gerous tua-
felt the utmost solicitude with refpedt to their own
situation. From a concurrence of circumfiances,
no less unexpected than favourable to their pro-
grefs, they had been allowed to penetrate into the
heart of a powerful kingdom, and were now lodged
in its capital, without having once met with open
opposition from its monarch. The Tlafcalans,
however, had earnefily dissuaded them from plac-
ing fuich confidence in Montezuma as to enter a city
of such a peculiar situation as Mexico, where that
prince would have them at mercy, shut up as it
were in a snare, from which it was impoflible to
escape. They aflured him that the Mexican priests
Ihad, in the name of the Gods, counselled their fove-
reign to admit the Spaniards into the capital, that

x Cortes Relat. Ram. iii. 239. D. Relat. della gran citta

de Mexico, par un Gentelfnuomo del Corteie. Ram. ibid.
304. E. Herrera, dec. 2. lib. vii. c. 14, &c.

Q 2 he

B 0 0 K he might cut them off there at one blow with per-

V. feet security Y. They now perceived, too plainly,
V5-, that the apprehensions of their allies were not defti-

tute of foundation; that, by breaking the bridges
placed at certain. intervals on the causeways, or by
deitroying part of the causeways themselves, their
retreat would be rendered impracticable, and they
must remain cooped up in the centre of a hostile
city, surrounded by multitudes sufficient to over-
whelm them, and without a poflibility of receiving
aid from their allies. Montezuma had, indeed,,
received them with difiinguifhed refpeet. But
ought they to reckon upon this as real, or to con-
fider it as feigned ? Even if it were sincere, could
they promise on its continuance ? Their safety de-
pended upon the will of a monarch in whose attach-
ment they had no reason to confide; and an order
flowing from his caprice, or a word uttered by him
in paion, might decide irrevocably concerning
their fate .

Solicitude THESE reflections, so obvious as to occur tothe
and perplex-
ty of Cor- meanest soldier, did not escape the vigilant fagaci-
tes- ty of their general. Before he set out from Cho-

lula, Cortes had received advice from Villa Rica a,
that Qualpopoca, one of the Mexican generals on
the frontiers, having assembled an army in order to
attack some of the people whom the Spaniards had
encouraged to throw off the Mexican yoke, Efca-
lante had marched out with part of the garrison to
support his allies; that an engagement had ensued,
in which, though the Spaniards were victorious,
Efcalante, with seven of his men, had been mortal-
ly wounded, his horse killed, and one Spaniard had
been surrounded by the enemy and taken alive;
that the head of this unfortunate captive, after be-

Y B. Diaz. c. 85, 86. Ibid, c. 94. a CortesRelat.
Ram. iii. 235. C.

ing

ing carried in triumph to different cities, in orderB o o K
to convince the people that their invaders were not v.
immortal, had been sent to Mexico b. Cortes, 5.
though alarmed with this intelligence, as an indi-
cation of Montezuma's hostile intentions, had con-
tinued his march. But as.foon as he entered Mexi-
;co, he became sensible, that, from an excess of con-
fidence in the superior valour and discipline of his
troops, as well as from the disadvantage of having
nothing to guide him in an unknown country, but
the defecive intelligence which he received from
people with whom his mode of communication was
very imperfect he had pushed forward into a fitua-
tion, where it was difficult to continue, and from
which it was dangerous to retire. Disgrace, and
perhaps ruin, was the certain consequence of at-
tempting the latter. The success of his enterprise
depended upon supporting the high opinion which
the people of New Spain had formed with respeCt to
the irrefirible power of his arms. Upon the first
symptom of timidity on his part, their veneration
would cease, and Montezuma, whom fear alone re-
strained at present, would let loose upon him the
whole force of his empire. At the fame time, he
knew that the countenance of his own sovereign
was to be obtained only by a series of victories,
and that nothing but the merit of extraordinary
fuccefQ could screen his condua from the censure of
irregularity. From all there considerations, it was
necessary to maintain his station, and to extricate
himself out of the difficulties in which one bold ftep
had involved him, by venturing upon another fiill
bolder. The situation was trying, but his mind
was equal to it; and after revolving the matter with
-deep attention, he fixed upon a plan no less extra-
ordinary than daring. He determined to seize

" B. Diaz. c. 93,94. Herrera, dec. 2. lib viii. c. i.

M\ontezuma

B O O K Montezuma in his palace, and to carry him as a

V. prisoner to the Spaniih quarters. From the super-

'^'' liitious veneration of the Mexicans for the person of
Resolves to their monarch, as well as their implicit submission
feizeMon- to his will, he hoped, by having Montezuma in his

power, to acquire the supreme direction of their as-
fairs; or at least, with such a sacred pledge in his
hands, he made no doubt of being secure from any
effort of their violence.

His manner THIS he immediately proposed to his officers.
ixcutiPg The timid itartled at a measure so. audacious, and

raised objections. The more intelligent and refo-
lute, conscious that it was the only resource in
which there appeared any profpet of safety, warm-
ly approved of it, and brought over their compani-
ons so cordially to the fame opinion, that it was
agreed instantly to make the attempt. At his usual
hour of visiting Montezuma, Cortes' went to the
palace, accompanied by Alvarado, Sandoval, Lugo,
Velasquez de Leon, and Davila, five of his princi-
pal officers, and as many trusty soldiers. Thirty
chosen men followed, not in regular order, but
sauntering at some distance, as if they had no object
but curiosity; small parties were pofied at proper
intervals, in all the fireets leading from the Spanish
quarters to the court; and the remainder of his
troops, with the Tlafcalan allies, were under arms,
ready to sally out on the firfi alarm. Cortes and
his attendants were admitted without suspicion i the
Mexicans retiring, as usual, out of refpet. He
addressed the monarch in a tone very different from
that which he had employed in former conferences,
reproaching him bitterly as the author of the violent
assault made upon the Spaniards by one of his offi-
cers, and demanded public reparation for the loss
wmhich he had sustained by the death of some of his

companions,

companions, as well as for the insult offered to the B o o K
great prince whose servants they were. Montezu- v.
nma, confounded at this unexpected accusation, and '
changing colour either from consciousness of guilt,
or from feeling the indignity with which he was
treated, asserted his own innocence with great ear-
neftnefs, and as a proof of it, gave orders inflant-
ly to bring Qualpopoca and his accomplices prifo-
ners to Mexico. Cortes replied, with seeming corn-
plaifance, that a declaration so respectable left no
doubt remaining in his own mind, but that some-
thing more was requisite to satisfy his followers,
who would never be convinced that Montezuma
did not harbour hostile intentions against them, un-
less, as an evidence of his confidence and attach-
ment, he removed from his own palace, and took
up his residence in the Spanish quarters, where he
should be served and honoured as became a great
monarch. The firfl mention of so irange a propo-
fal bereaved Montezuma of speech, and almofi of
motion. At length, indignation gave him utter-
ance, and he haughtily answered, " That persons
of his rank were not accustomed voluntarily to give
up themselves as prisoners, and were he mean
enough to dofo, his fubjets would notpermit fuchan
affront to be offered to theirfovereign." Cortes, un-
willing to employ force, endeavoured alternately to
soothe and to intimidate him. The altercation became
warm; and having continued above three hours,
Velasquez .de Leon, an impetuous and gallant
young man, exclaimed with impatience, " Why
wafle more time in vain ? Let us either seize him
inflantly, or flab him to the heart." The threa-
tening voice and fierce gestures with which these
words were uttered, itruck Montezuma. The
Spaniards, he was sensible, had now proceeded so
far, as left him no hope that they would recede.
His own danger was imminent, the neceflity un-

avoidable.

B O O K avoidable. He saw both, and abandoning himself

v. to his fate, complied with their requelt.

'519. His officers were called. He communicated to

Montezuma
cied, to them his resolution. Though astonished and afflid-
tbe Spanish ed, they presumed not to question the will of their
quarters. maler, but carried him in silent pomp, all bathed

in tears, to the Spanish quarters. When it was
known that the firangers were conveying away the
emperor, the people broke out into the wildest tranf-
ports of grief and rage, threatening the Spaniards
with immediate deftrudion, as the punishment
juily due to their impious audacity. But as soon
as Montezuma appeared with a teeming gaiety of
countenance, and waved his hand, the tumult was
hushed, and upon his declaring it to be of his own
choice that he went to reside for some time among
his new friends, the multitude, taught to revere
every intimation of their sovereign's pleasure, quiet-
ly dispersed c.

THUS was a powerful prince seized by a few

firangers, in the midfi of his capital, at noon-day,
and carried off as a prisoner without opposition or
bloodshed. History contains no'thing parallel to
this event, either with refpedt to the temerity of
the attempt, or the success of the execution; and
were not all the circumfiances of this extraordinary
tranfadtion authenticated by the molt unqueftion-
able evidence, they would appear so wild and ex-
travagant, as to go far beyond the bounds of that
verisimilitude which must be preserved even in fiti-
tious narrations.

c B. Diaz. c. 95. Gomara Cron. c. 83. Cortes Relat.
Ram. ii. p. 235, 236. Herrera, dec. 2. lib. viii. c. 2, 3.

MONTEZUMA

MONTEZUMA was received in the Spanish quar- B 0 O K

ters with all the ceremonious refpe& which Cortes v.
had promised. He was attended by his own do- xq9
meftics, and served with his usual state. His prin- Received
cipal officers had free access to him, and he carried with ap-
on all the functions of government, as if he had
been at perfect liberty. The Spaniards, however,
watched him with all the scrupulous vigilance na-
tural in guarding such an important prize d" en-
deavouring at the fame time to soothe and reconcile
him to his situation, by every external demonitra-
tion of regard and attachment. But from captive
princes the hour of humiliation and suffering is ne-
ver far difiant. Qualpopoca, his son, and five ofSubjeaedto

cruel indig.

the principal officers who served under him, were nities.
brought prisoners to the capital, in consequence Dec. 4,
of the orders which Montezuma had issued. The
emperor gave them up to Cortes, that he might
inquire into the nature of their crime, and deter-
mine their punishment. They were formally tri-
ed by a Spanish court-martial; and though they
had acted no other part than what became loyal
fubjets and brave men, in obeying the orders of
their lawful sovereign, and in opposing the inva-
ders of their country, they were condemned to be
burnt alive. The execution of such atrocious
deeds is seldom long suspended. The unhappy
vidtims were inflantly led forth. The pile on
which they were laid was composed of the wea-
pons collected in the royal magazine for the pub-
lic defence. An innumerable multitude of Mex-
icans beheld, in silent astonishment, the double in-
fult offered to the majesty of their empire: an offi-
cer of diftintion committed to the flames by the
authority of firangers, for having done what he
owed in duty to his natural sovereign; and the

d See N OT E LXXXlI.

arms

B o o Karms provided by the foresight of their ancefiors

V. for avenging such wrongs, consumed before their

eyes.
I519.

BUT these were not the most shocking indig-

nities which they had to bear. Cortes, convinced
that Qualpopoca would not have ventured to at-
tack Efcalante without orders from his master, was
not satisfied with inflicting vengeance on the in-
iirument employed in committing that crime,
while the author of it escaped with impunity. Just
before Qualpopoca was led out to susser, Cortes
entered the apartment of Montezuma, followed by
some of his officers, and a soldier carrying a pair of
fetters; and approaching the monarch with a tern
countenance, told him, that as the persons who
were now to undergo the punishment which they
merited, had charged him as the cause of the out-
rage committed, it was necessary that he likewise
thould make atonement for that guilt; then turn-
ing away abruptly, without waiting for a reply,
commanded the soldiers to clap the fetters on his
legs. The orders were instantly executed. The
disconsolate monarch, trained up with an idea that
his person was sacred and inviolable, and confider-
ing this profanation of it as the prelude of immedi-
ate death, broke out into loud lamentations and
complaints. His attendants, speechless with hor-
ror, fell at his feet, bathing them with their tears;
and bearing up the fetters in their hands, endea-
voured with officious tenderness to lighten their
pressure. Nor did their grief and despondency
abate, until Cortes returned from the execution
with a cheerful countenance, and ordered the set-
ters to be taken off. As Montezuma's spirits had
funk with unmanly dejection, they now rose into
indecent joy; and with an unbecoming transition,
he passed at once from the anguish of despair to

transports

transports of gratitude and fondness towards hisB 0 o K
deliverers. V.

IN those tranfations, as represented by the Spa-Re~ 5,9.

nifh historians, we search in vain for the qualitiescortess
which distinguish other parts of Cortes's condud.c°ndua.
To usurp a jurifdidion which could not belong to
a firanger, who assumed no higher character than
that of an ambassador from a foreign prince, and,
under colour of it, to inflit a capital punishment
on men whose conduct entitled them to esteem,
appears an adt of barbarous cruelty. To put the
monarch of a great kingdom in irons, and after
such ignominious treatment, suddenly to release
him, seems to be a display of power no less incon-
fiderate than wanton. According to their repre-
fentation, no account can be given either of the
one action or the other, but that Cortes, intoxicat-
ed with success, and presuming on the ascendant
which he had acquired over the minds of the Mex-
icans, thought nothing too bold for him to under-
take, or too dangerous to execute. But, in one
view, these proceedings, however repugnant to jus-
tice and humanity, may have flowed from that art-
ful policy which regulated every part of Cortes's
behaviour. The Mexicans had conceived the Spa-
niards to be an order of beings superior to men.
It was of the utmost consequence to cherish this il-
lusion, and to keep up the veneration it inspired.
Cortes wished that ihedding the blood of a Spani-
ard should be deemed the most heinous of all crimes;
and nothing appeared better calculated to establish
this opinion, than to condemn the firfi Mexicans who
had ventured to commit it, to a cruel death, and to
oblige their monarch himself to submit to a morti-
fying indignity, as an expiation for being accessary
to their guilte.

e See NOTE LXXXIIL

TsE

B 00 K THE rigour with which Cortes punished the un-

V. happy persons who first presumed to lay violent
,,9. hands upon his followers, seems accordingly to

The power have made all the impreflion that he desired. The
which Cor-
tes acquir spirit of Montezuma was not only overawed, but

cd subdued. During fix months that Cortes remain-
150. in Mexico, the monarch continued in the Spanish.

quarters, with an appearance of as entire fatisfati-
on and tranquillity, as if he siad resided there not
from confiraint, but through choice. His minis-
ters and officers attended him as usual. He took
cognizance of all affairs; every order was issued
in his name. The external afpe& of government
appearing the fame, and all its ancient forms be-
ing scrupulously observed, the people were so little
sensible of any change, that they obeyed the man-
dates of their monarch with the fame fubmiflive re-
verence as ever. Such was the dread which both
Montezuma and his fubjets had of the Spaniards, or
such the veneration in which they held them, that
no attempt was made to deliver their sovereign
from confinement; and though Cortes, relying on
this ascendant which he had acquired over their
minds, permitted him not only to visit his temples,
but to make hunting excursions beyond the lake,
a guard of a few Spaniards carried with it such ter-
ror as to intimidate the multitude, and secure the
captive monarch .

THUS, by the fortunate temerity of Cortes in

seizing Montezuma, the Spaniards at once secured
to themselves more extensive authority in the Mex-
ican empire than it was poflible to have acquired
in a long course of time by open force; and they
exercised more absolute sway in the name of ano-
ther than they could have done in their own. The

f Cortes Relat. p. 236. E. B. Diaz. c. 97, 98, 99.

arts

arts of polished nations in subjeCting such as are less B 0 0 K
improved, have been nearly the fame in every pe- V.
riod. The system of screening a foreign ufurpati-'--"v
on, under the sanction of authority derived from
the natural rulers of a country, the device of em-
ploying the magifirates and forms already efta-
blifhed as infiruments to introduce a new domi-
nion, of which we are apt to boast as sublime re-
finements in policy peculiar to the present age,
were inventions of a more early period, and had
been tried with success in the Weft, long before
they were practised in the East.

CORTES availed himself to the utmost of the ufewhich

power which he polfeffed by this means. He sent he makes of
some Spaniards, whom he judged belt qualified for
such commiflions, into different parts of the em-
pire, accompanied by persons of diftindion, whom
Montezuma appointed to attend them both as
guides and protectors. They visited most of the
provinces, viewed their foil and productions, fur-
veyed with particular care the diftrits which yield-
ed gold or silver, pitched upon several places as
proper flations for future colonies, and. endeavour-
ed to prepare the minds of the people for submit-
ting to the Spanish yoke. While they were thus
employed, Cortes, in the name and by the autho-
rito of Montezuma, degraded some of the principal
officers in the empire, whose abilities or independent
spirit excited his jealousy, and substituted in their
place persons less capable or more obsequious.

ONE thing still was wanting to complete his

security. He wished to have such command of
the lake as might ensure a retreat, if, either from
levity or disgust, the Mexicans should take arms
against him, and break down the bridges or
causeways. This, too, his own address, and the
facility of Montezuma, enabled him. to accom-

plifh.

B O K plifh. Having frequently entertained his prisoner

v. with pompous accounts of the European marine
I ^ ~and art of navigation, he awakened his curiosity to

fee those moving palaces that made their way
through the water without oars. Under pretext
of gratifying this desire, Cortes persuaded him to
appoint some of his fubjeds to fetch part of the
naval flores deposited at Vera Cruz to Mexico,
and to employ others in cutting down and prepar-
ing timber. With their afliftance, the Spanish car-
penters toon completed two brigantines, which as-
forded a frivolous amusement to the monarch, and
were confidered by Cortes as a certain resource, if
he should be obliged to retire.

Montezuma ENCOURAGED by so many initances of the mo-
acknow-
ledges him- narch's tame fubmiflion to his will, Cortes ventur-
self a vanal ed to put it to a proof fill more trying. He urged

of Spain. Montezuma to acknowledge himself a vassal of the

king of Castile, to hold his crown of him as fupe-
rior, and to subjed his dominions to the payment
of an annual tribute. With this requisition, the
last and most humbling that can be made to one
possessed of sovereign authority, Montezuma was
so obsequious as to comply. He called together
the chief men of his empire, and in a solemn ha-
rangue, reminding them of the traditions and pro-
phecies which led them to expect the arrival of a
people sprung from the fame flock with themselves,
in order to take poffeflion of the ,supreme power,
he declared his belief that the Spaniards were this
promised race; that therefore he recognized the
right of their monarch to govern the Mexican em-
pire, would lay his crown at his feet, and obey
him as a tributary. While uttering these words,
Montezuma discovered how deeply he was affected
in making such a sacrifice. Tears and groans
frequently interrupted his discourse. Overawed
and broken as his spirit was, it itill retained such a

sense

sense of dignity, as to feel that pang which pierces B O O K
the heart of princes when confirained to resign in- V.
dependent power. The firfi mention of such a refo- 2
lution firuck the assembly dumb with aflonifhment.
This was followed by a fullen murmur of sorrow
mingled with indignation, which indicated some
violent eruption of rage to be near at hand. This
Cortes foresaw, and seasonably interposed to pre-
vent it, by declaring that his master had no inten-
tion to deprive Montezuma of the royal dignity,
or to make any innovation upon the conititution
and laws of the Mexican empire. This assurance,
added to their dread of the Spanish power, and to
the authority of their monarch's example, extorted a
reluctant content from the assembly g. The ad of
fubmiflion and homage was executed with all the
formalities which the Spaniards were pleated to pre-
scribe h

MONTEZUMA, at the desire of Cortes, accom-Theamount

panied this profeflion of fealty and homage with a ofrtheoea-
magnificent present to his new sovereign; and, as-ed by the
ter his example, his fubjeds brought in very liberal Spaniards.
contributions. The Spaniards now collected all the
treasure which had been either voluntarily bestowed
upon them at different times by Montezuma, or had
been extorted from his people under various pre-
texts; and having melted the gold and silver, the
value of these, without including jewels and orna-
ments of various kinds, which were preserved on
account of their curious workmanship, amounted to
fix hundred thousand pesos. The soldiers were im- Divifon of
patient to have it divided, and Cortes complied i!tandthe

_., . , .»»' / _ 1": _-

^\ r , lcontent it

with their desire. A fifth of the whole was firit fetoccafioncd.
apart as the tax due to the king. Another fifth was
allotted to Cortes, as commander in chief. The

g See N O T E LXXXIV. h Cortes Relat. 238. D.

B. Diaz. c. loi. Gomara Cron. c. 92. Herrera, dec. z. lib.

x .
c. 4.

fums

BO O K fums advanced by Velasquez, by Cortes, and by

V. some of the officers, towards defraying the ex-

pence of fitting out the armament, were then de-
duted. The remainder was divided among the
army, including the garrison of Vera Cruz, in pro-
portion to their different ranks. After so many
defalcations, the share of a private man did not
exceed a hundred pesos. This fum fell so far be-
low their sanguine expectations, that some soldiers
rejeted it with scorn, and others murmured so
loudly at this cruel disappointment of their hopes,
that it required all the address of Cortes, and no
small exertion of his liberality, to appease them.
The complaints of the army were not altogether
deflitute of foundation. As the crown had contri-
buted nothing towards the equipment or success of
the armament, it was not without regret that the
soldiers beheld it sweep away so great a proportion
of the treasure purchased by their blood and toil.
What fell to the share of their general appeared,
according to the ideas of wealth in the sixteenth
century, an enormous fum. Some of Cortes's fa-
vourites had secretly appropriated to their own use
several ornaments of gold, which neither paid the
royal fifth, nor were brought into account as part
of the common Rock. It was, however, so mani-
fefily the interest of Cortes at this period to make
a large remittance to the king, that it is highly pro-
bable those concealments were not of great confe-
quence.

Reasons THE total fum amassed by the Spaniards bears
why gold ,
was found no proportion to the ideas which might be formed,
in such either by reflecting on the descriptions given by
tim quan. hifiorians of the ancient splendour of Mexico, or by

confidering the productions of its mines in modern
times. But among the ancient Mexicans, gold
and silver were not the flandards by which the

worth

worth of other commodities was estimated; and B O O K
destitute of the artificial value derived from this cir- V.
cumftance, were no farther in request than as they 20
furnished materials for ornaments and trinkets.
These were either consecrated to the gods in their'
temples, or were worn as marks of diftintion by
their princes and some of their most eminent chiefs:
As the consumption of the precious metals was in-
considerable, the demand for them was not such as
to put either the ingenuity or industry of the Mexi-
cans on the firetch, in order to augment their store.
They were altogether unacquainted with the art of
working the rich mines with which their country
abounded. What gold they had was gathered in
the beds of rivers, native, and ripened into a pure
metallic slate i. The utmost effort of their labour
in search of it was to wadh the earth carried down by
torrents from the mountains, and to pick out the
grains of gold which subsided; and even this fim-
ple operation, according to the report of the persons
whom Cortes appointed to survey the provinces
where there was a profpet of finding mines, they
performed very unfkilfully k, From all those
causes, the whose mass of gold in possession of the
Mexicans was not great. As silver is rarely found
pure, and their art was too rude to conduc the
process for refining it in a proper manner, the quan-
tity of this metal was still less considerable . Thus,
though the Spaniards had exerted all the power
which they poifeffed in Mexico, and often with in-
decent rapacity, in order to gratify their predomi-
nant paflion, and thoughMontezuma had fondly ex-
haufted his stores, in hopes'of satiating their thirit
for gold, the product of both, which probably in-
cluded a great part of the bullion in the enmpire, did
not rife in value above what has been mentioned m

i Cortes Relat, p. 236. F. B. Diazi c. 102, io3. Go-
mara Cron. c. 9o.

k B. Diaz. c. 103. 1 Herrera, dec. z. lib. ix. c. 4.
" See NOTE LXXXV.
VOL. II. R BUT

BOO K BUT however pliant Montezuma might be irf

V. other matters, with refpe& to one point he:was in-
i$o flexible. Though Cortes often urged him, with the

Montezuma importunate zeal of a mifilonary, to renounce his
winth re, false gods, and to embrace the Christian faith, he al-
tereligion. ways rejeated the proposition- with horror. Super-

flition, among the Mexicans, was formed into such
a regular and complete system, that its. institutions
naturally took fast hold of the mind; and while the
rude tribes in other parts of America were easily
induced to relinquish a few notions and rites, so
loose and arbitrary as hardly to merit the name of
a public religion, the Mexicans adhered tenacious-
ly to their mode of worship, which, however bar-
barous, was accompanied with such order and so-
lemnity as to render it the objeAt of veneration.
Cortes, finding all his attempts ineffectual to shake
the constancy of Montezuma, was so much enrag-
ed at his obstinacy, that in a transport of zeal he
led out his soldiers to throw down the idols in the
great temple by force. But the priefis taking
arms in defence of their altars, and the people
crowding with great ardour to support them, Cor-
tes's prudence overruled his zeal, and induced
him to defit from his rash attempt, after diflodg-
ing the idols from one of the shrines, and plac-
ing in their stead an image of the Virgin
Mary n.

Schemes of FROM that moment the Mexicans, who had per-
hs ode- mitted the imprisonment of their sovereign, and
firoy the suffered the exatiorrsof firangers without a struggle,
Spaniards. began to meditate how they might expel or destroy

the Spaniards, and thought themselves called upon
to avenge their insulted deities. The priests and
leading men held frequent consultations with Mon-

n See NO T E LXXXVI.

tezuma

tezuma for this purpose. But as. it might prove B 0 0 K
fatal to the captive rnonarchto.oattempt either the v.
one or the other by violence; he was willing to try 52o.
more gentle means. Having called Cortes into his
pretence, he' obterved that now, 'as all thep urpofes
of his embaffv were fully accomplished, the gods
had declared itheir will, and; the- people signified
their desire that he and his followers should inllant-
ly depart out of.the empire. With this he required
them to comply, or unavoidable defiruation would
fall suddenly ontheir heads, The tenor of this un-
expected requisition, as well as the determined tone
in which it was uttered, left Cortes no room to
doubt that it. was the result of forme deep scheme
concerted between Montezuma and his fubjeEts
He quickly perceived that he might derive more
advantage from a feemng .compliance with the mo-
narch's inclination, than from an 'ill-timed attempt
to change or to oppose it, and replied, with great
composure, - that he had already begun to' prepare
for returning to his own country; but as he, had de
Itroyed the, veifels in which .he arrived, f me time
was requisite for building other' 'hips. 'This ap-
peared reasonable. A number of Mexican' -were
sent to Vera Cruz to cut down timber, ahd.-fome
Spanish carpenters were appointed to superintend
the work. Cortes flattered himself that during this
interval, he might either find means to aver tthe
threatened danger, or receive such reinforcements
as would'enable him to defpie 'it. ' '

ALMOST nine months were elapsed since Porto- Anxiety and

carrero and Montejo, had failed with'his difpatcheso$r. of
to Spain; and he daily expe&ed their return with
a confirmation of his authority from the' king,
Without this,.' his condition was insecure and preca-
rious, and after all the great things which he had
done, it might be his doom to bear the name and

R 2 susser

B o o K susser the punishment of a traitor. Rapid and ex-

V. tensive as his progress had been, he could not hope
^^^ to complete the redution of a great empire with so

small a body of men, which by this time the dif-
eases of the climate had considerably thinned; nor
could he apply for recruits to the Spanish fettle-
ments in the islands until he received the royal ap-
probation of his proceedings.

The arrival WHILE lie remained in this cruel fituatioir, an-
ofa new ar -xious about what was past, uncertain with refpet

to the future, and, by the late declaration of Mon-
tezuma, oppressed with a new addition of cares, a
Mexican courier arrived with an account of some
ships having appeared on the coast. Cortes, with
fond credulity, imagining that his messengers were
returned from Spain, and that the completion of all
his withes and hopes was at hand, imparted the
glad tidings to his companions, who received them
with transports of mutual gratulation. Their joy
was not of long continuance. A courier from San-
doval, whom Cortes had appointed to succeed Es-
calante in command at Vera Cruz, brought certain
information that the armament was fitted out by
Velasquez, governor of Cuba, and instead of bring-
ing the aid which they expected, threatened them
with immediate defRrution,

Pitted out THE motives which prompted Velasquez to this
by Velaf- violent measure are obvious. From the circum-

fances of Cortes's departure, it was impofiible not
to fufpec his intention of throwing off all depen-
dence upon him. His neglecting to transmit any
account of his operations to Cuba, strengthened this
fiufpicion, which was at last confirmed, beyond
doubt, by the indiscretion of the officers whom Cor-
tes sent to Spain. They, from some motive, which
is not clearly explained by the contemporary hiftori-

ans,

ans, touched at the island of Cuba, contrary to the B 0 0 K
peremptory orders of their general °. By this means V.
Velasquez not only learned that Cortes and his fol- So
lowers, after formally renouncing all connection
with him, had eftablihed an independent colony
in New Spain, and were soliciting the king to con-
firm their proceedings by his authority; but he ob-
tained particular information concerning the opu-
lence of the country, the valuable presents which
Cortes had received, and the inviting profpefts of
success that opened to his view. Every pafion
which can agitate an ambitious mind; shame, at
having been so grossly overreached; indignation,
at being betrayed by the man whom he had felet-
ed as the objet of his favour and confidence;
grief, for having walled his fortune to aggrandize
an enemy; and despair of recovering so fair an op-
portunity of eitablifhing his fame and extending his
power, now raged in the bosom of Velasquez. All
these, with united force, excited him to make an ex-
traordinary effort in order to be avenged on the au-
thor of his wrongs, and to wrest from him his usurp-
ed authority and conquests. Nor did he want the
appearance of a good title tojuftify such an attempt.
The agent whom he sent to Spain with an account
of Grijalva's voyage, had met with a most favoura-
ble reception; and from the specimens which he
produced, such high expectations were formed con-
cerning the opulence of New Spain, that Velasquez
was authorised to prosecute the discovery of the
country, and appointed governor of it during life,
with more extensive power and privileges than had
been granted to any adventurer from the time of
ColumbusP. Elated by this distinguishing mark
of favour, and warranted to confider Cortes not
only as intruding upon his jurifdition, but as difo-

o B. Diaz. c. 54, 55. Herrera, dec. 2. lib. v. c. 14. Go-
znara Cron. c. 96.

P Herrera, dec. 2. lib. iii. c. 1 .

bedient

B O O Kbedient to the royal mandate, he determined to

V. vindicate his own rights and-the honour of his fove-
1520 reign by force of arms r. His ardour in carrying

Under the on his preparations was such as might have been ex-
cOpnd speded from the violence of the passions with which

he was animated; and in a ihort time an armament
was completed, confifing of eighteen ships, which
had on board fourscore horse-men, eight hundred
foot soldiers, of which eighty were musketeers, and
a hundred and twenty cross-bow men, together
with a train of twelve pieces of cannon. As Velaf-
quez's experience of the fatal consequence of com-
mitting to another what he ought to have executed
himself, had not rendered him more enterprising,
he vefied the command of this formidable body,
which, in the infancy of the Spanish power in Ame-
rica, merits the appellation of an army, in Pam-
philo de Narvaez, with infiructions to seize Cortes
and his principal officers,. to fend them prisoners to
him, and then to complete the discovery and con-
quest of the country in his name.

The pro- AFTER a prosperous voyage, Narvaez, landed his
edingsS. men without opposition near St. Juan de Ullua.
April. Three soldiers, whom Cortes had lent to search for

mines in that difiric, immediately joined him. By
this accident, he not only received information con-
cerning the progress and situation of Cortes, but as
these soldiers had made some progress in the know-
ledge of the Mexican language, he acquired inter-
preters, by whose means he was enabled to hold
some intercourse with the people of the country.
But, according to the low cunning of deserters,
they framed their intelligence with more attention
to what they thought would be agreeable, than to
what they knew to be true; and represented the

r See N 0 T E LXXXVII.

ft. uaton

situation of Cortes. to be so desperate, and the dif-B o o K
affeaion of his followers to be so general, as in- V.
creased the natural. presumption and confidence of 'J
Narvaez. His first operation, however, might have
taught him not to rely on their partial accounts.
Having sent to summon the governor of Vera Cruz
to surrender, Guevara, a .priest whom he employed
in that service, made the requisition with such info-
lence, that Sandoval, an officer of high spirit, and
zealously attached to Cortes, inflead of complying
with his. demands, seized him and his attendants,
and sent them in chains to Mexico.

CORTES received them not like enemies, but asortes deep-

friends, and condemning the severity of Sandoval,ly alarmed'
set them immediately at liberty. By this well-tim-
ed clemency, seconded by caresses and presents,
he gained their confidence, and drew from them
such particulars concerning the force and intentions
of Narvaez, as gave him a view of the impending
danger in its full extent He had not to contend
now with half-naked Indians, no match for him in
war, and fill more inferior in the arts of policy, but
to take the field against an army in courage. and
martial discipline equal to his own, in number far
superior, acting under the fandion of royal autho-
rity, and commanded by an officer of known brave-
ry. He was informed that Narvaez, more folici-
tous to gratify the resentment of Velasquez, than at-
tentive to the honour or interest of his country, had
begun his intercourse with the natives, by repre-
senting him and his followers as fugitives and out-
laws, guilty of rebellion againfi their own fove-
reign, and of injustice in invading the Mexican em-
pire, and had declared to them that his sole object
in visiting the country was to punish the Spaniards,
;an to rescue them from oppreiflon. He soon per-

ceived

B O O K ceived that the fame unfavourable representations

v. had been conveyed to Montezuma, and that Nar-

vaez had found means to assure him, that as the
' condu&t of those who kept him under restraint was

highly displeasing to the king his mailer, he had it in
charge not only to rescue an injured monarch from
confinement, but to reinflate him in the possession
of his ancient power and independence. Animat-
ed with this profpedt of being set free from fubjedti-
on to firangers, the provinces began openly to re-
volt from Cortes, and to regard Narvaez as a deli-
verer no less able than willing to save them. Mon-
tezuma himself kept up a secret intercourse with the
new commander, and seemed to court him as a
person superior in power and dignity to those Spa-
niards whom he had hitherto revered as the first of
men s.

is ldelibe- SUCH were the various afpeds of danger and
rations con- ° r rri tmsvs
cerninghis difficulty which presented themselves to the view of
Own con- Cortes. No situation can be conceived more try-

ing to the capacity and firmness of a general, or
where the choice of the plan which ought to be
adopted was more difficult. If he should wait the
approach of Narvaez in Mexico, deftrution seem-
ed to be unavoidable; for while the Spaniards
pressed him from without, the inhabitants, whose
turbulent spirit he could hardly restrain with all his
authority and attention, would eagerly lay hold on
such a favourable opportunity of avenging all their
wrongs. If he should abandon the capital, set the
captive monarch at liberty, and march out to meet
the enemy; he must at once forego the fruits
of all his toils and victories, and relinquish
advantages which could not be recovered with-
out extraordinary efforts, and infinite danger.
If, inflead of employing force, he should have

S See NO T E LXXXVIII.

recourse

recourse to conciliating measures, and attempt an B o o K
accommodation with Narvaez; the natural haugh- V.
tiness of that officer, augmented by consciousness of --
his present superiority, sorbad him to cherish any
sanguine hope of success. After revolving every
scheme with deep attention, Cortes fixed upon that
which, in execution was most hazardous, but, if
successful, would prove molt beneficial to his coun-
try; and with the decisive intrepidity, suited to de-
fperate situations, determined to make one bold es-
fort for victory under every disadvantage, rather
than sacrifice his own conquests and the Spanish in-
terest in Mexico.

BUT though he foresaw that the contest must be His negoci.

terminated finally by arms, it would have beenth, follow-
not only indecent, but criminal, to have marched ersofNar-
against his countrymen, without attempting to ad- vaez.
just matters by an amicable negociation. In this
service he employed Olmedo, his chaplain, to
whose character the function was well suited, and
who possessed, betides, such prudence and address
as qualified him to carry on the secret intrigues in
which Cortes placed his chief confidence. Narva-
ez rejeted, with scorn, every scheme of accommo-
dation that Olmedo proposed, and was with diffi-
culty restrained from laying violent hands on him
and his attendants. He met, however, with a
more favourable reception among his followers,
to many of whom he delivered letters, either from
Cortes or his officers, their ancient friends and
companions. Cortes artfully accompanied there
with present of rings, chains of gold, and other
trinkets of value, which inspired those needy ad-
venturers with high ideas of the wealth that he had
acquired, and with envy of their good fortune
who were engaged in his service. Some, from
hopes of becoming sharers in those rich spoils, de-

clared

B o o K dared for an immediate accommodation with Cor.

V. tes. Others, from public spirit, laboured to pre-
i;7c ^ vent a civil war, which, whatever party Ihould

prevail, must shake, and perhaps subvert the Spa-
nifh power, in a country where it was so imper-
sealy established. Narvaez disregarded both, and
by a public proclamation denounced Cortes and
his adherents rebels and enemies to their country.
Cortes, it is probable, was not much surprised at
the untratable arrogance of Narvaez; and, after
having given such a proof of his own pacific difpo-
fition as might justify his recourse to other means,
he determined to advance towards an enemy whom
he had laboured in vain to appease.

Marchcs a HH left a hundred and fifty men in the capital,
gainit him.

May. under the command of Pedro de Alvarado, an of-

sicer of distinguished courage, for whom the Mex-
icans had conceived a singular degree of refpet.
To the custody of this ilender garrison he commit-
ted a great city, with all the wealth he had amass-
ed, and, what was itill of greater importance, the
person of the imprisoned monarch. His utmost
art was employed in concealing from Montezuma
the real cause of his march. He laboured to per-
fuade him, that the firangers who had lately arriv-
ed were his friends and fellow-fubjedts; and that,
after a short interview with them, they would de-
part together, and return to their own country.
The captive prince, unable to comprehend the
designs of the Spaniards, or to reconcile what he
now heard with the declarations of Narvaez, and
afraid to discover any symptom of suspicion or
distrust of Cortes, promised to remain quietly in
the Spanish quarters, and to cultivate the fame
friendship with Alvarado which he had uniformly
maintained with him. Cortes, with feemimg con-
fidence in this promise, but relying principally up-
on the injunctions which he had given Alvarado

to

to guard his prisoner with the molt scrupulous vi- B o K
gilance, set out from Mexico. V.

His strength, even after it was reinforced by the Ns5o.

junction of Sandoval and the garrison of Vera Cruz, his troops.
did not exceed two hundred and fifty men. As
he hoped for fuccefs'chiefly from the rapidity of his
motions, his troops were not encumbered either
with baggage or 'artillery. But as 'he dreaded ex-
tremely 'the' impression which the enemy' might
make with their cavalry, he had 'provided againit
this danger with the foresight and sagacity which
diftingufih a great commander. 'Having observed
that the Indians in the province of Chinantla used
spears of extraordinary length and force, he arm-
ed his soldiers with these, and accustomed them to
that deep and compat arrangement which the use
of this formidable weapon, the belt perhaps that
ever was invented for defence, enabled them to
assume.

WITH this small but 'firm battalion, Cortes ad- Continues

vanced towards Zempoalla, of which Narvaez had ast egociat
taken possession. During his march, he made re- vanced.
peated attempts towards some accommodation with
his opponent. But Narvaez requiring that Cortes
and his followers should intfantly recognize his title
to be governor of New Spain, in virtue of the
powers which he derived'from Velasquez, and Cor-
tes refuting to submit to any authority which was
not founded on a commiflion from the emperor
himself, under whose immediate protetion he and
his adherents had placed their infant colony, all
these attempts proved' fruitless. The intercourse,
however, which this occasioned between the two
parties, proved of no small advantage to Cortes, as
it afforded him an opportunity of gaining some of
Narvaez's officers by liberal presents, of softening
others by a semblance of moderation, and of daz-

zling

B O O Kzling all by the appearance of wealth among his

v- troops, most of his soldiers having converted their
v52. share of the Mexican gold into chains, bracelets,

and other ornaments, which they displayed with
military ostentation. Narvaez and a little junto of
his creatures excepted, all the army leaned towards
an accommodation with their countrymen. This
discovery of their inclination irritated his violent
temper almost to madness. In a transport of rage,
he set a price upon the head of Cortes, and of his
principal officers; and having learned that he was
now advanced within a league of Zempoalla with
his small body of men, he confidered this as an in-
fult which merited immediate chastisement, and
marched out with all his troops to offer him battle.

Attacks BUT Cortes was a leader of greater abilities and
Narvaez in
the night, experience than to fight an enemy so far superior

in number, and so much better appointed, on
equal ground. Having taken his fiation on the
opposite bank of the river de Canoas, where he
knew that he could not be attacked, he beheld the
approach of the enemy without concern, and dif-
regarded this vain bravade, It was then the be-
ginning of the wet season t, and the rain had pour-
ed down, during a great part of the day, with the
violence peculiar to the torrid zone. The follow,
ers of Narvaez, unaccuitomed to the hardships of
military service, murmured so much at being thus
fruitlessly exposed, that, from their unfoldier-like
impatience, as well as his own contempt of his ad-
verfary, their general permitted them to retire to
Zempoalla. The very circumfiance which induc-
ed them to quit the field, encouraged Cortes to
form a scheme, by which he hoped at once to ter-
minate the war. He observed, that his hardy vete-

t Hackluyt. vol. iii. 467. Dc Laet Defcr. Ind. Occid. 221.

rans,

rans, though itandirig under the torrents, which B o o K
continued to fall, without a tingle tent or any v.
shelter whatsoever to cover them, were so far from ''
repining at hardships that were become familiar to
them, that they were fill fresh and alert for service.
He foresaw that the enemy would naturally give
themselves up to repose after their fatigue, and
that, judging of the conduct of others by their
own effeminacy, they would deem themselves per-
fectly secure at a season so unfit for action. He
resolved, therefore, to fall upon them in the dead
of night, when the surprise and terror of this unex-
peated attack might more than compensate the in-
feriority of his numbers. His soldiers, sensible that
no resource remained but in rome desperate effort
of courage, approved of the measure with such
warmth, that Cortes, in a military oration which
he addressed to them before they began their march,
was more solicitous to temper than to inflame their
ardour. He divided them into three parties. At
the head of the first he placed Sandoval; entrust-
ing this gallant officer with the most dangerous and
important service, that of seizing the enemy's artil-
lery, which was planted before the principal tow-
er of the temple, where Narvaez had fixed his head-
quarters. Chrifioval de Olid commanded the fe-
cond, with orders to alfault the tower, and lay hold
on the general. Cortes himself conducted the third
and fmallefi division, which was to aft as a body
of reserve, and to support the other two as there
ihould be occasion. Having passed the river de
Canoas, which was much swelled with the rains,
not without difficulty, the water reaching almost to
their chins, they advanced in profound silence,
without beat of drum, or found of any warlike
infirument; each man armed with his sword, his
dagger, and his Chinantlan spear. Narvaez, re-
miss in proportion to his security, had posted only
two centinels to watch the motions of an enemy

whom

B O O K whom he had such good cause to dread. One of

v. there was seized by the advanced guard of Cortes's
Lszo. troops, the other made his escape, and hurrying to

the town with all the precipitation of fear and zeal,
gave such timely notice of the enemy's approach,
that there was full leisure to have prepared for
their reception. But, through the arrogance and
infatuation of Narvaez, this important interval was
loft. He imputed this alarm to the cowardice of
the centinel, and treated with derision the idea of
being attacked by forces so unequal to his own.
The hfouts of Cortes's soldiers, rushing on to the
assault, convinced him at last, that the danger
which he despised was real. The rapidity with
which they advanced was such, that only one can-
non could be fired, before Sandoval's party closed
with the enemy, drove them from their guns, and
began to force their way up the fleps of the tower.
Narvaez, no less brave in action than prefumptu-
ous in conduct, armed himself in haste, and by his
voice and example animated his men to the' com-
bat. Olid advanced to fuifain his companions;
and Cortes himself, rushing to the front, conducted
and added new vigour to the attack. The compaA
order in which this small body pressed on, and the
impenetrable front which they presented with their
long spears, bore down all opposition before it.
and over They had now reached the gate, and were struggling

to burfi it open, when a soldier having set fire to the
reeds with which the tower was covered,- compelled
Narvaez to rally out. In the first encounter he was
wounded in the eye with a spear, and falling to the
ground, was dragged down the steps, and in a mo-
ment clapt in fetters. The cry of victory resounded
among the troops of Cortes. Those who had sallied
out with their leader now maintained the conflit fee-
bly, or began to surrender. Among the remainder of
his soldiers, Rationed in two smaller towers of the

temple,

temple,. terror and confusion prevailed. The dark- B OO K
ness was so great, that they could not distinguish V.
between: their.friends and foes. Theirown artillery .
was pointed against them.. Wherever they turned
their. eyes, they beheld lights gleaming. through the
obscurity of night, which, though proceeding only
from a variety of shining infects, that: abound. in
moist and'.fultry climates, their- affrighted imagina-
tions represented as numerous bands of musketeers
advancing with kindled matches to the attack. As-
ter a short resistance, the soldiers compelled their
officers to capitulate, and before morning all laid
down their arms, and submitted quietly to their con-
querors.

THIs. complete vitory proved more acceptable, The cffca-

as it was.gained almolt without bloodshed, only ofthis viL-
two soldiers being killed on: the fide. of Cortes,. and
two officers, with fifteen. private men, of :the ad-
verse fadion.. Cortes treated the vanquished not
like enemies, but as countrymen and friends, and
offeredeither to fend- thiem back diredtly to Cuba,
or. to take :them. into his service, as partners in his
fortune, on equal terms -with his own soldiers. This
latter proposition, seconded by a seasonable difiti-
bution of some presents from Cortes, and. liberal
promises of more, opened profpe&s so agreeable to
the romantic expetations- which had induced them
to engage in this service, that all, a few partizans
of.Narvaez excepted, closed with it, and vied-with
each other in profefions of fidelity and attachtment
to a general whose recent success had given them
such a firiking proofof his abilities for command.
Thus, by a series of events no less fortunate than
uncommon, Cortes not only escaped from perdition
which seemed inevitable, but, when he had least
reason to expect it, was placed at the head of a
thousand Spaniards, ready to: follow wherever he
should lead them. Whoever reflecs- upon the fa-

cility

BO oK cility with which this victory was obtained, or

V. confiders with what sudden and unanimous tranfiti-
^" on the followers of Narvaez ranged themselves un-

'5 der the standard of his rival, will be apt to ascribe

both events as much to the intrigues as to the arms
of Cortes, and cannot but fufpea that the ruin of
Narvaez was occasioned, no less by the treachery
of his own followers, than by the valour of his
enemy u.

The Mexi- BUT, in one point, the prudent conduEt and
rms againftgood fortune of Cortes were equally conspicuous.
the Spa. If, by the rapidity of his operations after he began

his march, he had not brought matters to such a
speedy issue, even this decisive viAory would have
come too late to have saved his companions whom
he left in Mexico. A few days after the difcomfi-
ture of Narvaez, a courier arrived with an account
that the Mexicans had taken arms, and having feiz-
ed and destroyed the two brigantines, which he had
built in order to secure the command of the lake,
had attacked the Spaniards in their quarters, had
killed several of them and wounded more, had re-
duced to ashes their magazine of provisions, and
carried on hostilities with such fury, that, though
Alvarado and his men defended themselves with
undaunted resolution, they must either be soon cut
off by famine, or fink under the multitude of their
enemies. This revolt was excited by motives
which rendered it fiill more alarming. On the de-
parture of Cortes for Zempoalla, the Mexicans flat-
tered themselves, that the long-expeted opportuni-
ty of restoring their sovereign to liberty, and of vin-
dicating their country from the odious dominion of
firangers, was at length arrived ; that while the for-
ces of their oppressors were divided, and the arms

u Cortes Relat. 242. D. B. Diaz. c. Ilo.-125. Herrera,
dec. 2, lib. ix. c. 18, &c. Gomara Cron. c. 97, &c.

of

of one party turned against the other, they might B 0 o i
triumph with greater facility over both. Confulta- V.
tions were held, and schemes formed with this in- -.
tention. The Spaniards in Mexico, conscious of
their own feebleness, fufpeded and dreaded those
machinations. Alvarado, though a gallant officer,
possessed neither that extent of capacity, nor digni-
ty of manners, by which Cortes had acquired such
an ascendant over the minds of the Mexicans, as
never allowed them to form a just estimate of his
weakness or of their own fitrength. Alvarado knew
no mode of supporting his authority but force. In-
flead of employing address to disconcert the plans
or to soothe the spirits of the Mexicans, he waited the
return of one of their solemn festivals, when the
principal persons in the empire were dancing, ac-
cording to custom, in the court of the great temple;
he seized all the avenues which led to it, and, allur-
ed partly by the rich ornaments which they wore in
honour of their gods, and -partly by the facility of
cutting off at once the authors of that confpiiacy
which he dreaded, he fell upon them, unarmed and
unfufpicious of any danger, and massacred a great
number, none escaping but such as made their way
over the battlements of the temple. An action so
cruel and treacherous filled not only the city, but
the whole empire, with indignation and rage. All
called aloud for vengeance; and regardless of the
safety of their monarch, whose life was at the mer-
cy of the Spaniards, or of their own danger in as-
faulting an enemy who had been so long the object
of their terror, they committed all those acts of
violence of which Cortes received an account.

To him the danger appeared so imminent, as to me marches

admit neither of deliberation nor delay. He set out bak to the
instantly with all his forces, and returned fromcaitl
Zempoalla with no less rapidity than he had advanc-

VOL. II. S ed

B O O K ed thither. At Tlafcala he wasjoined by two thou..

v. sand chosen warriors. On entering the Mexican
'^^ territories, he found that difaffetion to the Spa-

niards was not confined to the capital. The prin-
cipal inhabitants had deserted the towns through
which he passed; no person of note appearing to
meet him with the usual refped; no provision was
made for the subsistence of his troops; and though
he was permitted to advance without opposition,
the solitude and silence which reigned in every
place, and the horror with which the people avoid-
ed all intercourse with him, discovered a deep-root-
ed antipathy, that excited the most just alarm. But,
implacable as the enmity of the Mexicans was, they
were so unacquainted with the science of war, that
they knew not how to take the proper measures,
either for their own safety or the deftrution of the
Spaniards. Uninitruaed by their former error in
admitting a formidable enemy into their capital,
infead of breaking down the causeways and
bridges, by which they might have inclosed. Alva-
rado and his party, and have effecually ftopt the
fne 14. career of Cortes, they again suffered him to march

into the city without molestation, and to take quite
poffeflion of his ancient itation.

improper THE transports of joy with which Alvarado and
Cordtes of his soldiers received their companions cannot be ex-

pressed. Both parties were so much elated, the one
with their seasonable deliverance, and the other with
the great exploits which they had atchieved, that
this intoxication of success seems to have so far
reached Cortes himself that he behaved on this oc-
cafion neither with his usual sagacity nor attention,
He not only neglected to visit Montezuma, but em-
bittered the insult by expreflions full of contempt
for that unfortunate prince and his people. The

forces

forces of which he had now the command, ap- B o K
peared to him so irreflitible, that he might as- V.
fume an higher tone, and lay aside the mask of 1` J
moderation, under which he had hitherto concealed 5
his designs. Some Mexicans who understood the
Spanish language, heard the contemptuous words
which Cortes uttered, and reporting them to their
countrymen, kindled their rage anew. They were
now convinced that the intentions of the general
were equally bloody with those of Alvarado, and
that his original purpose in visiting their country,
had not been, as he pretended, to court the alli-
ance of their sovereign, but to attempt the con-
quest of his dominions. They refurned their arms The violent
with the additional fury which this discovery infpir- h°eity of
ed, attacked a considerable body of Spaniards who can.
were marching towards the great square in which
the public market was held, and compelled them
to retire with some loss. Emboldened by this fuc-
cess, and delighted to find that their oppressors
were not invincible, they advanced next day With
extraordinary martial pomp to assault the Spaniards
in their quarters. Their number was formidable,
and their undaunted courage still more so. Though
the artillery pointed against their numerous batta-
lions, crouded together in narrow streets, swept off
multitudes at every discharge; though every blow
of the Spanish weapons fell with mortal effect upon
their naked bodies, the impetuosity of the afiault
did not abate. Fresh men rushed forward to occu-
py the places of the slain, and meeting with the
fame fate, were succeeded by others no less intre-
pid and eager on vengeance. The utmost efforts
of Cortes's abilities and experience, seconded by
the disciplined valour of his troops, were hardly
sufficient to defend their fortifications, into which
the enemy were more than once on the point of
forcing their way.

S 2 CORTES

B OO K CORTES beheld, with wonder, the implacable fe-

V. rocity of a people, who seemed at firIt to submit
'so0. tamely to the yoke, and had continued so long pas-
Difrtrfs of five under it. The soldiers of Narvaez, who fond-
the Spa. Iy imagined that they followed Cortes to share in

the spoils of a conquered empire, were astonished to
find that they were involved in a dangerous war,
with an enemy whose vigour was frill unbroken,
and loudly execrated their own weakness, in giving
such easy credit to the delusive promises of their
new leader x. But surprise and complaints were of
no avail. Some immediate and extraordinary es-
fort was requisite to extricate themselves out of their
present situation. As soon as the approach of even-
ing induced the Mexicans to retire, in compliance
with their national custom of ceasing from hostilities
with the setting fun, Cortes began to prepare for a
sally, with such a considerable force, as might either
drive the enemy out of the city, or compel them to
liften to terms of accommodation.

Cortes a- HE conduted, in person, the troops destined
withoutfuUc for this important service. Every invention known
·cr. in the European art of war, as well as every pre-

caution, suggested by his long acquaintance with
the Indian mode of fighting, were employed to en-
sure success. But he found an enemy prepared and
determined to oppose him. The force of the
Mexicans was greatly augmented by fresh troops,
which poured in continually from the country, and
their animosity was in no degree abated. They
were led by their nobles, inflamed by the exhortati-
ons of their priests, and fought in defence of their
temples and families, under the eye of their gods,
and in pretence of their wives and children. Not-

x B. Diaz. c. 2z6.

withfianding

withstanding their numbers, and enthusiastic con-B o o K
tempt of danger and death, wherever the Spaniards V.
could close with them, the superiority of their dif- ZO
cipline and arms obliged them to give way. But
in narrow fireets, and where many of the bridges
of communication were broken down, they could
seldom come to a fair rencounter, and the Spa-
niards, as they advanced, were exposed to showers
of arrows and siones from the tops ofthe houses. As-
ter a day of inceifant exertion, though vail numbers
of the Mexicans fell, and part of the city was
burnt, the Spaniards, weary with the slaughter,
and harassed by multitudes which fucceflively re-
lieved each other, were obliged at length to retire,
with the mortification of having accomplished no-
thing so decisive as to compensate the unusual cala-
mity of twelve soldiers killed, and above sixty
wounded. Another sally, made with greater force,
was not more effectual, and in it the general him-
self was wounded in the hand.

CORTES now perceived, too late, the fatal error Montezuma

into which he had been betrayed by his own con-
tempt of the Mexicans, and was satisfied that he
could neither maintain his present ltation in the
centre of an hostile city, nor retire from it without
the most imminent danger. One resource still re-
mained, to try what effet the interposition of Mon-
tezuma might have to soothe or overawe his fubjeats.
When the Mexicans approached next morning to
renew the assault, that unfortunate prince, at the
mercy of the Spaniards, and reduced to the fad ne-
ceffity of becoming the infirument of his own dif-
grace, and of the slavery of his people y, advanced
to the battlements in his royal robes, and with all

Y See N 0 T E LXXXIX,

the

B O o K the pomp in which he used to appear on solemn

v occasions. At fight of their sovereign, whom
-""- ' they had long been accustomed to honour and al-

moit to revere as a god, the weapons dropt from
their hands, every tongue was silent, all bowed
their heads, and many prostrated themselves on the
ground. Montezuma addressed them with every
argument that could mitigate their rage, or per-
fuade them to cease from hostilities. When he end-
ed his discourse, a fullen murmur of disapprobation
run through the croud; to this succeeded reproach-
es and threats; and their fury rising in a moment
above every restraint of decency or refpeEt, flights
of arrows and volleys of siones poured in so violent-
ly upon the ramparts, that before the Spanish fol-
diers, appointed to cover Montezuma with their
bucklers, had time to lift them in his defence, two
arrows wounded the unhappy monarch, and the
blow of a stone on his temple struck him to the
ground. On feeing him fall, the Mexicans were
to much astonished, that, with a transition not un-
common in popular tumults, they pafled in a mo-
ment from one extreme to the other, remorse fuc-
ceeded to insult, and they fled with horror, as if the
vengeance of Heaven were pursuing the crime
which they had committed. The Spaniards, with-
out molestation, carried Montezuma to his apart-
ments, and Cortes hastened thither to console him
under his misfortune. But the unhappy monarch
now perceived how low he was funk, and the
haughty spirit which seemed to have been so long
extina, returning, he scorned to survive this last
humiliation, and to protrat an ignominiouslife,
not only as the prisoner and tool of his enemies, but
as the object of contempt or detestation among his
fubjedts. In a transport of rage he tore the ban-
dages from his wounds, and refused, with such ob-
itinacy, to take any nourishment, that he soon end-

ed

ed his wretched days, rejeting with disdain all the B 0 o K
solicitations of the Spaniards to embrace the Chris- V.
tian faith.

UPON the death of Montezuma, Cortes having New con-

loft all hope of bringing the Mexicans to any ac-sia0s
commodation, saw no profpet of safety but in at-
tempting a retreat, and began to prepare for it.
But a sudden motion of the Mexicans engaged him
in new conflics. They took possession of a high
tower in the great temple which overlooked the
Spanifhquarters, and placing there a garrison of their
principal warriors, not a Spaniard could stir with-
out being exposed to their misfile weapons. From
this post it was necellary to dislodge them at any
risk, and Juan de Efcobar, with a numerous de-
tachment of chosen soldiers, was ordered to make
the attack. But Efcobar, though a gallant officer,
and at the head of troops accustomed to conquer,
and who now fought under the eyes of their coun-
trymen, was thrice repulsed. Cortes, sensible that
not only the reputation but the safety of his army
depended on the success of this assault, ordered a
buckler to be tied to his arm, as he could not ma,
nage it with his wounded hand, and rushed with
his drawn sword into the thickest of the combatants,
Encouraged by the presence of their general, the
Spaniards returned to the charge with such vigour,
that they gradually forced their way up the lteps,
and drove the Mexicans to the platform at the top
of the tower. There a dreadful carnage began,
when two young Mexicans of high rank, observing
Cortes as he animated his soldiers by his voice and
example, resolved to sacrifice their own lives in or-
der to cut off the author of all the calamities which
desolated their country. They approached him in
a supplicant posture, as if they had intended to lay
down their arms, and seizing him in a moment, hur-

ried

B o o K ried him towards the battlements, over which they

V. threw themselves headlong, in hopes of dragging
'-' him along to be dashed in pieces by the fame fall.
}520' But Cortes, by his strength and agility, broke loose

from their grasp, and the gallant youths perished in
this generous, though unsuccessful, attempt to save
their country. As soon as the Spaniards became
maiters of the tower, they set fire to it, and with-
out farther molefiation, continued the preparations
for their retreat.

The Spa- THIS became the more necessary, as the Mexi-
--:ards aban cans were so much astonished at the last efforts of
dQ thclity.the Spanish valour, that they began to change

their whole system of hostility, and instead of in-
ceffant attacks, endeavoured, by barricading the
treets, and breaking down the causeways, to cut
off the communication of the Spaniards with the
continent, and thus to starve an enemy whom
they could not subdue. The firit point to be de-
termined, was whether they should march out open-
ly in the face of day, when they could discern eve-
ry danger, and fee how to regulate their own moti-
ons, as well as how to refit the assaults of the ene-
my; or whether they should endeavour to retire
secretly in the night. The latter was preferred,
partly from hopes that their national superstition
would restrain the Mexicans from venturing to at-
tack them in the night, and partly from their own
fond belief in the predictions of a private soldier,
who having acquired universal credit by a smatter-
ing of learning, and his pretensions to afirology,
boldly afflred them of success, if they made their
retreat in this manner. They began to move to-
wards midnight, in three divisions. Sandoval led
the van; Pedro Alvarado, and Velasquez de Leon,
had the conduc of the rear; and Cortes command-
ed in the centre, where he placed the prisoners,

among

among whom were a son and two daughters of B O O
Montezuma, together with several Mexicans of dif- V.
tintion, the artillery, the baggage, and a portable ^
bridge of timber, intended to be laid over the
breaches in the causeway. They marched in pro-
found silence along the causeway which led to Ta-
cuba, because it was shorter than any of the reft,
and, lying most remote from the road towards
Tlafcala and the sea coast, had been left more en-
tire by the Mexicans. They reached the first breach
in it without molestation, hoping that their retreat
was undiscovered.

BUT the Mexicans, unperceived, had not only Attacked by

watched all their motions with attention, but hadcthe Mi-
made proper dispositions for a most formidable at-
tack. While the Spaniards were intent upon plac-
ing their bridge in the breach, and occupied in con-
duaing their horses and artillery along it, they were
suddenly alarmed with the tremendous found of
warlike infiruments, and a general shout from an
innumerable multitude of enemies; the lake was
covered with canoes; flights of arrows, and show-
ers of siones poured in upon them from every quar-
ter; the Mexicans rushing forward to the charge
with fearless impetuosity, as if they hoped in that
moment to be avenged for all their wrongs. Un-
fortunately the wooden-bridge, by the weight of the
artillery, was wedged so fart into the ilones and
mud, that it was impoflible to remove it. Dismay-
ed at this accident, the Spaniards advanced with
precipitation towards the second breach. The Mexi-
cans hemmed them in on every fide, and though
they defended themselves with their usual courage,
yet crouded together as they were on a narrow
causeway, their discipline and military skill were of
little avail, nor did the obscurity of the night per-
mit them to derive great advantage from their fire-
arms, or the superiority of their other weapons. All

Mexico

B O O K Mexico was now in arms, and so eager were the

V. people on the destruction of their oppressors, that

O-" they who were not near enough to annoy them in
5o person, impatient of the delay, pressed forward with

such ardour, as drove on their countrymen in the
front with irresistible violence. Fresh warriors in-
ftantly filled the place of such as fell. The Spani-
ards, weary with slaughter, and unable to fuflain
the weight of the torrent that poured in upon them,
began to give way. In a moment the confusion
was universal; horse and fdot, officers and soldiers,
friends and enemies, were mingled together; and
while all fought, and many fell, they could hardly
distinguish from what hand the blow came.

Their dif- CORTES, with about a hundred foot soldiers and
aiers, a few horse, forced his way over the two remaining

breaches in the causeway, the bodies of the dead
serving to fill up the charms, and reached the main
land. Having formed them as soon as they arriv-
ed, he returned with such as were yet capable of
service, to assist his friends in their retreat, and to
encourage them, by his pretence and example, to
persevere in the efforts requisite to effect it. He
met with part of his soldiers, who had broke through
the enemy, but found many more overwhelmed by
the multitude of their aggressors, or perishing in the
lake; and heard the piteous lamentations of others,
whom the Mexicans, having taken alive, were car-
rying off in triumph to be sacrificed to the god of
war. Before day, all who had escaped assembled
at Tacuba. But when the morning dawned, and
discovered to the view of Cortes his shattered bat-
talion, reduced to less than half its number, the fur-
vivors dejeced, and most of them covered with
wounds, the thoughts of what they had suffered,
and the remembrance of so many faithful friends

and

and gallant followers who had fallen in that night of B O K
sorrow , pierced hisfoul with such anguish, that while v.
he was forming their ranks, and issuing some necef- 15o.
fary orders, his soldiers observed the tears trickling
from his eyes, and remarked, with much fatisfadti-
on, that while attentive to the duties of a general,
he was not insensible to the feelings of a man.

IN this fatal retreat many officers of diftintionandlofs.

perifheda, and among thefeVelafquez deLeon, who
having forsaken the party of his kinsman, the go-
vernor of Cuba, to follow the fortune of his com-
panions, was, on that account, as well as for his
superior merit, refpeAed by them as the second
person in the army. All the artillery, ammuniti-
on, and baggage, were lolt; the greater part of
the horses, and above two thousand Tlafcalans,
were killed, and only a very small portionr of the
treasure which they had amalfed was saved. This,
which had been always their chief object, proved
now a great cause of their calamity; for many of
the soldiers having so overloaded themselves with
bars of gold as rendered them unfit for ation, and
retarded their flight, fell, ignominiously, (the victims
of their own inconsiderate avarice. Amidst so ma-
ny disasters, it was some consolation to find that
Aguilar and Marina, whose funEtion as interpreters
was of such essential importance, had made their
escape b

THE first care of Cortes was to find some fhel-Difficultre-

ter for his wearied troops; for as the Mexicans in- tat fthe
felled them on every fide, and the people of Tacu-
ba began to take arms, he could not continue in his

NToche Trifle is the name by which it is flill distinguished
in New Spain. a See N T E XC.

b Cortes Relat. p. 248. B. Diaz. c. 128. Gomara Cron.
c. 109. Herrera, dec. z. lib. x. c. 1 , iz.

present

B o o K present station. He directed his march towards the

V. rising ground, and having fortunately discovered a

temple situated on an eminence, took possession of
it. There he found not only the shelter for which
he wished, but, what was no less wanted, some
provisions to refresh his men ; and though the ene-
my did not intermit their attacks throughout the day,
they were with little difficulty prevented from mak-
ing any impression. During this time Cortes was
engaged in deep consultation with his officers, con-
cerning the route which they ought to take in their
retreat. They were now on the weft fide of the
lake. Tlafcala, the only place where they could
hope for a friendly reception, lay about fixty-four
miles to the east of Mexico c; so that they were
obliged to go round the north end of the lake be-
fore they could fall into the road which led thither.
A Tlafcalan soldier undertook to be their guide,
and conducted them through a country in some
places marshy, in others mountainous, in all ill-
cultivated and thinly peopled. They marched for
fix days with little respite, and under continual
alarms, numerous bodies of the Mexicans hovering
around them, sometimes harassing them at a distance
with their miflileweapons, and Sometimes attacking
them closely in front, in rear, in flank, with great
boldness, as they now knew that they were not in-
vincible. Nor were the fatigue and danger of
those incessant confliAs the worst evils to which
they were exposed. As the barren country through
which they passed afforded hardly any provisions,
they were reduced to feed on berries, roots, and the
stalks of green maize; and at the very time that
famine was depressing their spirits and wafting their
firength, their situation required the most vigorous
and unremitting exertions of courage and activity.
Amidst those complicated distresses, one circum-

c Villa Segnor Teatro Americano, lib. ii. c. xl.

fiance

fiance supported and animated the Spaniards. BO K
Their commander sustained this fad reverse of for- v.
tune with unshaken magnanimity. His presence of '
mind never forsook him; his sagacity foresaw eve-
ry event, and his vigilance provided for it. He
was foremost in every danger, and endured every
hardship with cheerfulness. The difficulties with
which he was surrounded seemed to call forth new
talents; and his soldiers, though despairing them-
selves, continued to follow him with increasing
confidence in his abilities.

ON the sixth day they reached Otumba, not farBattleof

from the road between Mexico and Tlafcala. Otumba'
Early next morning they began to advance towards
it, flying parties of the enemy fiill hanging on their
rear; and amidst the insults with which they ac-
companied their hostilities, Marina remarked that
they often exclaimed with exultation, " Go on,
robbers; go to the place where you shall quickly
meet the vengeance due to your crimes." The
meaning of this threat the Spaniards did not com-
prehend, until they reached the summit of an emi-
nence before them. There a spacious valley open-
ed to their view, covered with a vaR army, extend-
ing as far as the eye could reach. The Mexicans,
while with one body of their troops they harassed
the Spaniards in their retreat, had aflEmbled their
principal force on the other fide of the lake; and
marching along the road which led directly to Tlaf-
cala, poRed it in the plain of Otumba, through
which they knew Cortes must pass. At the fight
of this incredible multitude, which they could fur-
vey at once from the rising ground, the Spaniards
were astonished, and even the boldet began to de-
fpair. But Cortes, without allowing leisure for their
fears to acquire strength by reflection, after warn-
ing them briefly that no alternative now remained

but

B O O Kbut to conquer or to die, led them inflantly to the

V. charge. The Mexicans waited their approach with
so, unusual fortitude. Such, however, was the fuperi-

ority of the Spanish discipline and arms, that the
impression of this small body was irresistible; and
whichever way its force was directed, it penetrated
and dispersed the most numerous battalions. But
while these gave way in one quarter, new comba-
tants advanced from another, and the Spaniards,
though successful in every attack, were ready to
fink under those repeated efforts, without feeing
any end of their toil, or any hope of victory. At
that time Cortes observed the great standard of the
empire, which was carried before the Mexican ge-
neral, advancing; and fortunately recollecting to
have heard, that on the fate of it depended the
event of every battle, he assembled a few of his
bravest officers, whose horses were still capable of
service, and placing himself at their head, pushed
forward towards the standard with an impetuosity
which bore down every thing before it. A chosen
body of nobles, who guarded the standard, made
some resistance, but were soon broken. Cortes,
with a stroke of his lance, wounded the Mexican
general, and threw him to the ground. One of
his followers alighting, put an end to his life, and
laid hold of the imperial standard. The moment
that their leader fell, and the standard, towards
which all directed their eyes, disappeared, an uni-
versal panic firuck the Mexicans, and, as if the
bond which held them together had been dissolved,
every ensign was lowered, each soldier threw away
his weapons, and all fled with precipitation to the
mountains. The Spaniards, unable to pursue them
far, returned to colleEt the spoils of the field, which
were so valuable as to be Come compensation for the
wealth which they had loft in Mexico; for in the ene-
my's army were most of their principalwarriors dress-

ed

ed out in their richeit ornaments, as if they had been B o o K
marching to assured viaory. Next day, to their V.
great joy, they entered the Tlafcalan territories d.

July 8.

BUT, amidst their fatisfa&ion in having got Reception

beyond the precincts of an hostile country, theyofthe Spa-
could not look forward without solicitude, as they Tlafcla.
were still uncertain what reception they might
meet with from allies, to whom they returned in
a condition very different from that in which they
had lately set out from their dominions. Happily,
for them, the enmity of the Tlafcalans to the
Mexican name was so inveterate, their desire to
avenge the death of their countrymen so vehe-
ment, and the ascendant which Cortes had ac-
quired over the chiefs of the republic so complete,
that, far from entertaining a thought of taking any
advantage of the difireffed situation in which they
beheld the Spaniards, they received them with a
tenderness and cordiality which quickly dissipated
all their suspicions.

SOME interval of tranquillity and indulgence was New delibe-

now absolutely necessary; not only that the Spa-rationsof
niards might give attention to the cure of their
wounds, which had been too long neglected, but
in order to recruit their itrength, exhausted by such
a long fucceflion of fatigue and hardihips. Dur-
ing this, Cortes learned that he and his compani-
ons were not the only Spaniards who had felt the
effets of the Mexican enmity. A considerable
detachment, which was marching from Zempoalla
towards the capital, had been cut off by the people
of Tepeaca. A smaller party, returning from
Tlafcala to Vera Cruz, with the share of the

d Cortes Relat. p. 219. B. Diaz. c. 128. Gomara Cron.
c. io. Herrera, dec. a. lib. x. c. 12, 13.

Mexican

B 0 K Mexican gold allotted to the garrison, had been

V. surprised and destroyed in the mountains. At a

. junaure when the life of every Spaniard was of

importance, such losses were deeply felt. The
schemes which Cortes was meditating rendered
them peculiarly afflictive to him. While his ene-
mies, and even many of his own followers, con-
fidered the disasters which had befallen him as fatal
to the progress of his arms, and imagined that no-
thing now remained but speedily to abandon a
country which he had invaded with unequal force,
his mind, as eminent for perseverance as for enter-
prise, was itill bent on accomplishing his original
purpose, of fubjeaing the Mexican empire to the
crown of Castile. Severe and unexpected as the
check was which he had received, it did not ap-
pear to him a sufficient reason for relinquishing the
conquests which he had already made, or against
resuming his operations with better hopes of success.
The colony at Vera Cruz was not only safe, but
had remained unmolested. The people of Zem-
poalla and the adjacent diftrias had discovered no
symptoms of defection. The Tlafcalans continu-
ed faithful to their alliance. On their martial spirit,
easily rouzed to arms, and inflamed with implaca-
ble hatred of the Mexicans, he depended for pow-
erful aid. He had fill the command of a body of
Spaniards, equal in number to that with which he
had opened his way into the centre of the empire,
and had taken poffeflon of the capital; so that
with the benefit of greater experience, as well as
more perfelt knowledge of the country, he did not
despair of quickly recovering all that he had been
deprived of by untoward events.

The mea- F LL of this idea, he courted the Tlafcalan chiefs
fures ie with such attention, and difiributed among them

so

so liberally the rich spoils of Otumba, that he wasB 0 0 K
secure of obtaining whatever he should require of V.
the republic. He drew a small supply of ammu-
nition, and two or three field-pieces, from his stores
at Vera Cruz. He dispatched an officer of confi-
dence with four ships of Narvaez's fleet to Hifpa-
niola and Jamaica, to engage adventurers, and to
purchase horses, gunpowder, and other military
stores. As he knew that it would be vain to at-
tempt the reduction of Mexico, unless he could fe-
cure the command of the lake, he gave orders to
prepare in the mountains of Tlafcala materials for
building twelve brigantines, so as they might be
carried thither in pieces ready to be put together,
and launched when he flood need of in their ser-
vice e.

BUT while, with provident attention, he WasMutinou

taking those necessary fleps towards the execution fprrof hi'
of his measures, an obstacle arose in a quarter
where it was least expected, but moil formidable.
The spirit of discontent and mutiny broke out in
his own army. Many of Narvaez's followers were
planters rather than soldiers, and had accompanied
him to New Spain with sanguine hopes of obtaining
Settlements, and little inclination to engage in the
hardships and dangers of war. As the fame mo-
tives had induced them to enter into their new en-
gagements with Cortes, they no sooner became ac-
quainted with the nature of the service, than they
bitterly repented of their choice. Such of them as
had the good fortune to survive the perilous adven-
tures in which their own imprudence had involved
them, happy in having made their escape, trenm-
bled at the thoughts of being exposed a second time
to similar calamities; As soon as they discovered
the intention of Cortes, they began secretly to mur-

e Cortes Relat. p. 255, E. Gbmara Cron. c. i7.
VOL. II. T mur

B O O Kmur and cabal, and waxing gradually more audact--

v. ous, they, in a body, offered a remonfirance to

their general against the imprudence of attacking a
powerful empire with his shattered forces, and for-
mally required him to lead them back diredly to
Cuba. Though Cortes, long pratifed in the arts
of command, employed arguments, entreaties, and
presents, to convince or to soothe them; though his
own soldiers, animated with the spirit of their lead-
er, warmly seconded his endeavours; he found
their fears too violent and deep-rooted to be remov-
ed, and the utmost he could effec was to prevail
with them to defer their departure for rome time,
on a promise that he would, at a more proper junc-
ture, difinifs such as should desire it.

Means he THAT the malcontents might have no leisure to
employs to
revive their brood over the causes of their difaffetion, he re-
confidence solved infiantly to call forth his troops into action.

He proposed to chastise the people of Tepeaca for
the outrage which they had committed, and as the
detachment which they had cut off happened to be
composed mostly of soldiers who had served under
Narvaez, their companions, from the desire of ven-
Auguf. geance, engaged more willingly in this war. He

took the command in person, accompanied by a
numerous body of Tlafcalans, and in the space of
a few weeks, after various encounters, with great
slaughter of theTepeacans, reduced that province to
fubjedion. During several months, while he wait-
ed for the supplies of men and ammunition which
he expeeted, and was carrying on his preparations
for conftrucing the brigantines, he kept his troops
conflantly employed in various expeditions against
the adjacent provinces, all of which were condut-
ed with an uniform tenor of success. By these, his
men became again accustomed to victory, and re-
flmed their wonted sense of superiority ; the Mexi-

can

can power was weakened the Tlafcalan warriors B O O K
acquired the habit of ating in conjuntion with the V.
Spaniards; and the chiefs of the republic delighted >-
to fee their country enriched with the spoils of all
the people around them, and aftoniflied every day
with fresh discoveries of the irresistible prowess of
their allies, declined no effort requisite to support
them.

ALL those preparatory arrangements, however Strengthen-

though the molt prudent and efficacious which the reinforce
situation of Cortes allowed him to make, wouldments.
have been of little avail, without a reinforcement of
Spanish soldiers. Of this he was so deeply sensible,
that it was the chief object of his thoughts and
wishes; and yet his only profped of obtaining it
from the return of the officer whom he had sent to
the isles to solicit aid, was both diflant and uncer-
tain. But what neither his own-fagacity nor power
could have procured, he owed to a series of fortu-
nate and unforeseen incidents. The governor of
Cuba, to whom the success ofNarvaez appeared an
event of infallible certainty, having sent two small
ships after him with new infirutions and a supply
of men and military stores, the officer whom Cor-
tes had appointed to command on the coafi, artful-
ly decoyed them into the harbour of Vera Cruz,
seized the vessels, and easily persuaded the boldiers
to follow the standard of a more able leader than
him whom they were destined to join f. Soon after
three fllips of more considerable force came into the
harbour separately. These belonged to an arma-
ment fitted out by Francisco de Garay, governor
of Jamaica, who, being pofifeied with the rage of
discovery and conquers which animated every Spa-
niard fettled in America, had long aimed at intrud-

t B. Diaz. c. 131.

Tz ing

B O O King into some diftria of New Spain, and dividing

v. with Cortes the glory and gain of annexing that

empire to the crown of Cafiile. They unadvisedly
made their attempt on the northern provinces, where
the country was poor and the people fierce and war-
like; and, after a cruel fucceflion of disasters, fa-
mine compelled them to venture into Vera Cruz,
and call themselves upon the mercy of their coun-
oaober is. trymen. Their fidelity was not proof against the

splendid hopes and promises which had seduced
other adventurers, and as if the spirit of revolt had
been contagious in New Spain, they likewise aban-
doned the master whom they were bound to serve,
and inlifted under Cortes g. Nor was it America
alone that furnished such unexpected aid. A ship
arrived from Spain, freighted by some private
merchants with military flores, in hopes of a profit-
able market in a country, the fame of whose opu-
lence began to spread over Europe. Cortes eager-
ly purchased a cargo which to him was invaluable,
and the crew, following the general example, join-
ed him at Tlafcala h

FROM those various quarters, the army of Cortes

was augmented with an hundred and eighty men,
and twenty horses, a reinforcement too inconfide-
rable to produce any consequences which would en-
title it to have been mentioned in the hifiory of other
parts of the globe. But in that of America, where
great revolutions were brought about by causes
which seemed to bear no proportion to their effects,
such small events rife into importance, because they
were sufficient, to decide with refpet to the fate of
kingdoms. Nor is it the least remarkable instance
of the singular felicity conspicuous on any passages

g Cortes Relat. 253. F. B.Diaz.c. 133. h Ibid. c. 136.

of
a

of Cortes's flory, that the two persons chiefly in-B OO K
sirumental in furnishing him with those seasonable v.
supplies should be an avowed enemy who aimed sI.
at his deftru(tion, and an envious rival who wished
to supplant him.

THE firit effect of the junction with his -new fol--Numberof

lowers was to enable him to dismiss such of Nar-his forcs.
vaez's soldiers as remained with reluctance in his
service. After their departure, he fill mustered five
hundred and fifty infantry, of which fourscore were
armed with muskets or cross-bows, forty horsemen,
and a train of nine field-pieces i. At the head of
these, accompanied by ten thousand Tlafcalans
and other friendly Indians, Cortes began his march
towards Mexico, on the twenty-eighth of Decem-
ber, fix months after his fatal retreat from that
city k.

NOR did he advance to attack an enemy unpre-preparaot

pared to receive him. Upon the death of Monte- of the Mei-
zuma, the Mexican chiefs, in whom the right ofthcisfd
electing the emperor wasvefted, had instantly raised fence.
his brother Quetlavaca to the throne. His avowed
and inveterate enmity to the Spaniards, would have
been sufficient to gain their suffrages, although he
had been less distinguished for courage and capaci-
ty. He had an immediate opportunity of ihewing
that he was worthy of their choice, by conducting,
in person, those fierce attacks which compelled the
Spaniards to abandon his capital; and as soon as
their retreat afforded him any respite from action,
he took measures for preventing their return to
Mexico, with prudence equal to the spirit which he
had displayed in driving them out of it. As from

i Cortes Relat. 255, E. k Relat. 256, A. B. Diaz. c. i 37.

the

B 00 K the vicinity of Tlafcala, he could not be unac-

v. quainted with the motions and intentions of Cortes,
50"""l he observed the florm that was gathering, and be-

5 gan early to provide against it. He repaired what

the Spaniards had ruined in the city, and strength-
ened it with such new fortifications as the skill of his
fubjeets was capable of ereding. Beside filling his
magazines with the uilal weapons of war, he gave
direction to make long spears headed with the
swords and daggers taken from the Spaniards, inr
order to annoy the cavalry. He summoned the
people in every province of the empire to take arms
against their oppreffirs, and as an encouragement
to exert themselves with vigour, he promised them
exemption from all the taxes which his predecessors
had imposed 1. But what he laboured with the
greatest earnestness was, to deprive the Spaniards
of the advantages which they derived from the
friendship of the Tlafcalans, by endeavouring to
persuade that people to renounce all connection
with men who were not only avowed enemies of the
gods whom they worshipped, but who would not
fail to fubjedt them at lail to the fame yoke, which
they were now inconsiderately leading their aid to
impose upon others. These representations, no less
firiking than well-founded, were urged so forcibly
by his ambassadors, that it required all the address of
Cortes to prevent their making a dangerous im-
prelion m.

EUT while Quetlavaca was arranging his plan of

defence, with a degree of foresight, uncommon in
an American, his days were cut short by the small-
pox. This distemper, which raged at that time in
New Spain with fatal malignity, was unknown in

' Cortes Relat. p. 253, E. 254, A. B. Diaz. c. 140.
rl B. Diaz. c. 9.2 Herrera, dec. . lib. x. c. 14, 19.

that

that quarter of the globe, until it was introduced B o o K
by the Europeans, and may be reckoned among V.
the greater calamities brought upon them by their ""
invaders. In his flead the Mexicans raised to the 5o
throne Guatimozin, nephew and fon-in-law of
Montezuma, a young man of such high reputati-
on for abilities and valour, 'that in this dangerous
crisis, his countrymen, with one voice, called him
to the supreme command n.

As soon as Cortes entered the enemy's territories, is%.

he discovered various preparations to obfirua his C°ntes ato
progress. But his troops forced their way with lit-wards Mexi-
tie difficulty, and took poffefion of Tezeuco, the"'
second city of the empire, situated on the banks of
the lake about twenty miles from Mexico °. Here
he determined to establish his head-quarters, as the
moss proper flation for launching his brigantines, as
well as for making his approaches to the capital.
In order to render his residence there more secure,
he deposed the cazique or chief, who was at the
head of that comrr.anity, under pretext of some de-
se6t in his title, and substituted in his place a person
whom a faction of the nobles pointed out as the
right heir of that dignity. Attached to him by this
benefit, the new cazique and his adherents served'
the Spaniards with inviolable fidelity P.

As the confirudtion of the brigantines advanced H;s opera-

slowly under the unskilful hands of soldiers and In-andcauti-
dians, whom Cortes was obliged to employ in af-ous.
sifting three or four carpenters who happened for-
tunately to be in his service, and as he had not yet
received the reinforcement which he expeEted from

" B. Diaz. . 130. o Villa Senor Theatro Americano,

i. 156. P Cortes Relat. 256, &c. B. Diaz. c. 137.
Gomara Cron. c. z12. Herrera, dec. 3. c. i.

Hispaniola,

B O O KHifpaniola, he was not in a condition to turn his

v arms directly against the capital. To have attack-
.... ed a city fe populous, so well prepared for defence,

and in a situation of such peculiar strength, mufi
have exposed his troops to inevitable deliru&ion.
Three months elapsed before the materials for con-
ftruEting the brigantines were finished, and before
he heard any thing with refped to the success of his
negociaLion in Hispaniola. This, however, was
not a season of inaction to Cortes. He attacked
fucceliively several of the towns situated around the
lake, and though all the Mexican power was exert-
ed to obstruct his operations, he either compelled
them to submit to the Spanish crown, or reduced
them to ruins. Other towns he endeavoured to
conciliate by more gentle means, and though he
could not hold any intercourse with the inhabitants
but by the intervention of interpreters, yet, under
all the disadvantage of that,tedious and imperfect
mode of communication, he had acquired such
thorough knowledge of the state of the country, as
well as of the dispositions of the people, that he
conducted his negociations and intrigues with afto-
nifhing dexterity and success. Most of the cities
adjacent to Mexico were originally the capitals of
small independent states; and some of them having
been but lately annexed to the Mexican empire,
fiill retained the remembrance of their ancient li-
berty, and bore with impatience the rigorous yoke
of their new matters. Cortes having early observed
symptoms of their difaffeation, availed himself of
this knowledge to gain their confidence and friend-
ship. By offering, with confidence, to deliver them
from the odious dominion of the Mexicans, and by
liberal promises of more indulgent treatment, if
they would unite with him against their oppressors,
lie prevailed on the people of several considerable
diftrits not only to acknowledge the king of Cafiile

as

as their sovereign, but to supply the Spanish camp B 0 0 K
with provisions, and to strengthen his army with V.
auxiliary troops. Guatimozin, on the first ap- ,I.
pearance of defetion among his fubjees, exerted
himself with vigour to prevent or to punish their re-
volt; but in spite of his efforts, the spirit continued
to spread. The Spaniards gradually acquired new
allies, and with deep concern he beheld Cortes
arming against his empire those very hands which
ought to have been active in its defence; and ready
to advance againfi the capital at the head of a nu-
merous body of his own fubjets q.

WHILE, by those various methods, Cortes was

gradually circumscribing the Mexican power, with-
in filch narrow limits that his profpet of overturn-
ing it seemed neither to be uncertain nor remote,
all his schemes were well nigh defeated, by a con-
fpiracy no less unexpeced than dangerous. The
soldiers of Narvaez had never united perfectly with
the original companionsofCortes,nor did they enter
into his measures with the fame cordial zeal. Upon
every occasion that required any extraordinary effort
of courage or of patience, their spirits were apt to
fink; and now, on a near view of what they had
to encounter, in attempting to reduce a city so in-
acceflible as Mexico, and defended by a numerous
army, the resolution even of those among them
who had adhered to Cortes when he was deserted by
their associates, began to fail. Their fears led them
to presumptuous and unfoldier-like difcuflions con-
cerning the propriety of their general's measures,
and the improbability of their success. From these
they proceeded to censure and inveatives, and at
last began to deliberate how they might provide for

q Cortes Relat. 256-260. B. Diaz. c. 137--40. Go.
para Cron. c. 122, 123. Herrera, dec. 3. lib. i. c. i, 2.

their

B O O K their own safety, of which they deemed their com-

v mander to be totally negligent. Antonio Viliefag-

na, a private soldier, but bold, intriguing, and
ltrongly attached to Velasquez, artfully fomented
this growing spirit of disaffection. i-is quarters be-
came the rendezvous of the malcontents, where, as-
ter many consultations, they could discover no me-
thod of checking Cortes in his career, but by as-
faiinating him and his most considerable officers,
and conferring the command upon some person
who would relinquish his wild plans, and adopt
measures more confillent with the general security.
Despair inspired them with courage. The hour for
perpetrating the crime, the persons whom they
deitined as victims, the officers to succeed them in
command, were all named; and the conspirators
signed an albciation, by which they bound them-
selves with mast solemn oaths to mutual fidelity.
But on the evening before the appointed day, one
of Cortes's ancient followers, who had been seduced
into the conspiracy, touched with compunction at
the imminent danger of a man whom he had long
been accustomed to revere, or struck with horror at
his own treachery, went privately to his general,
and revealed to him all that he knew. Cortes,
though deeply alarmed, discerned at once what
conduct was proper in a situation so critical. He
repaired instantly to Villefagna's quarters, accom-
panied by -ome of his molt trusty officers. The
astonishment and confufi;,n of the man at this un-
expected visit anticipated the confeflion of his guilt.
While his attendants seized him, Cortes snatched
from his bosom a paper containing the association,
signed by the conspirators. Impatient to know how
far the defection extended, he retired to read it,
and found there names which filled him with fur-
prise and sorrow. But, aware how dangerous a
iricCt scrutiny might prove at such a junCture, he

confined

confined his judicial inquiries to Villefagna alone. B o o K
As the proofs of his guilt were manifest, he was v.
condemned after a short trial, and next morning he -"-"~
was seen hanging before the door of the house in
which he had lodged. Cortes called his troops to-
gether, and having explained to them the atrocious
purpose of the conspirators, as well as the jufice of
the punishment inflited on Villefagna, he added,
with an appearance of fatisfadion, that he was en-
tirely ignorant with refpet to all the circumfiances
of this dark tranfadion, as the traitor, when arrest-
ed, had suddenly torn and swallowed a paper,
which probably contained an account of it, and un-
der the severest tortures possessed such conitancy as
to conceal the names of his accomplices. This artful
declaration restored tranquillity to many a breadt
that was throbbing, while he spoke, with conscious-
ness of guilt and dread of deteation; and by this
prudent moderation, Cortes had the advantage of
having discovered and of being able to observe
such of his followers as were difaffeaed; while
they, flattering themselves that their past crime
was unknown, endeavoured to avert any suspicion
of it, by redoubling their ativity and zeal in his
service r.

CORTES did not allow them leisure to ruminate His singular

on what had happened; and as the molt effectual orbuidion
means of preventing the return of a mutinous spirit, brigantines.
he determined to call forth his troops immediately to
action. Fortunately, a proper occasion for this oc-
curred without his teeming to court it. He receiv-
ed intelligence, that the materials for building the
brigantines were at length completely finished, and
waited only for a body of Spaniards to conduct them
to Tezeuco. The command ofthis convoy, consist-

rCortes Relat. 283, C. B. Diaz. c. 146. Herrera, dec. 3.
ib. i, c. i.

'ing

B O O King of two hundred foot soldiers, fifteen horsemen,

V. and two field-pieces, he gave to Sandoval, who, by
I^^ Ithe vigilance, aAivity, and courage which he mani-

fested on every occasion, was growing daily in his
confidence, and in the estimation of his fellow-
soldiers. The service was no less singular than im-
portant; the beams, the planks, the masts, the
cordage, the fails, the iron-work, and all the infi-
nite variety of articles requisite for the confiru&tion
of thirteen brigantines, were to be carried sixty miles
over land, through a mountainous country, by
people who were unacquainted with the ministry of
domeltic animals, or the aid of machines to facili-
tate any work of labour. The Tlafcalans furnified
eight thousand 7Tamenes, an inferior order of men
destined for servile talks, to carry the materials on
their shoulders, and appointed fifteen thousand
warriors to accompany and defend them. Sando-
val made the disposition for their progress with great
propriety, placing the Tamenes in the centre, one
body of warriors in the front, another in the rear,
with considerable parties to cover the flanks. To
each of these he joined some Spaniards, not only to
assist them in danger, but to accustom them to re-
gularity and subordination. A body so numerous,
and so much encumbered, advanced leisurely, but
in excellent order; and in some places, where it
was confined by the woods or mountains, the line
of march extended above fix miles. Parties of
Mexicans frequently appeared hovering around
them on the high grounds; but perceiving no pro-
fpet of success in attacking an enemy continually
on his guard, and prepared to receive them, they
did not venture to molefit him; and Sandoval had
the glory of conducting safely to Tezeuco a convoy
on which all the future operations of his countrymen
depended s.

( Cortes Relat. 26o, C. E. B. Diaz. c. 140.

THEIS

THIS was followed by another event of no less B O O K

moment. Four ihips arrived at Vera Cruz from V.
Hispaniola, with two hundred soldiers, eighty hor- ---'v
fes, two battering cannon, and a considerable sup- Receives a
ply of ammunition and arms t Elevated with ob-new rein-

' J

. , ,, , .  i . i r forcement.

serving that all his preparatory schemes, either for
recruiting his own army, or impairing the force of
the enemy, had now produced their full effect,
Cortes, impatient to begin the siege in form, haften-
ed the launching of the brigantines. To facilitate
this, he had employed a vast number of Indians for
two months in deepening the small rivulet which
runs by Tezeuco into the lake, and in forming it
into a canal near two miles in length u; and though
the Mexicans, aware of his intentions, as well as of
the danger which threatened them, endeavoured
frequently to interrupt the labourers, or to burn the
brigantines, the work was at last completed x. On
the twenty-eighth of April, all the Spanish troops, The brigan-
together with auxiliary Indians were drawn up on ed."ac
the banks of the canal; and with extraordinary
military pomp, heightened and rendered more
solemn by the celebration of the most sacred rites of
religion, the brigantines, were launched. As they
fell down the canal in order, Father Olmedo blessed
them, and gave each its name. Every eye follow-
ed them with wonder and hope, until they entered
the lake, when they hoilte their fails, and bore
away before the wind. A general shout of joy was
raised; all admiring that bold inventive genius,
which, by means so extraordinary that their success
almost exceeded belief, had acquired the command
of a fleet, without the aid of which Mexico would

t Cortes Relat. 259, F. 262, D. Gomara Cron. c. 129.
u See NOTE XCI. x B. Diaz. c. 140.

have

B O K have continued to set the Spanish power and arms

V. at defiance Y.

,sl~,.i2 CORTES determined to attack the city from three
for the siege. different quarters; from Tezeuco on the east fide

of the lake, from Tacuba on the welt, and from
Cuyocan towards the south. Those towns were
situated on the principal causeways which led to the
capital, and intended for their defence. He ap-
pointed Sandoval to command in the first, Pedro de
Alvarado in the second, and Chriftoval de Olid in
the third; allotting to each a-numerous body of
Indian auxiliaries, together with an equal division
of Spaniards, who, by the junction of the troops
from Hispaniola, amounted now to eighty-fix
horsemen, and eight hundred and eighteen foot
soldiers ; of whom a hundred and eighteen were
armed with muskets or cross-bows. Their train of
artillery consisted of three battering-cannon, and
fifteen field-pieces Z. He reserved for himself, as
the fiation of greatest importance and danger, the
conduEt of the brigantines, each armed with one of
his small cannon, and manned with twenty-five
Spaniards.
M.ay 1o. As Alvarado and Olid proceeded towards the

pofls assigned them, they broke dovwn the aque-
duts which the ingenuity of the Mexicans had
erected for conveying water into the capital, and
by the distress to which this reduced the inhabitants,
gave a beginning to the calamities which they were
destined to susser a. Alvarado and Olid found the
towns of which they were ordered to take poifeflion
deserted by their inhabitants, who had fled for safe-

Y Cortes Relat. 266, C. Herrera, dec. 3. lib. i. c. 5. Go-
mara Cron. c. 129. Cortes Relat. 266, C.

a Cortes Relat. 267, B. B. Diaz. c. 5 o. Herrera, dec. 3.
lib. i. c. 13.

ty

ty to the capital, where Guatimozin had colle&ted B o o K
the chief force of his empire, as there alone he could .-
hope to make a successful fland against the formi-
dable enemies who were approaching to assault
him.

THE firfi effort of the Mexicans was to destroy Mexicans

the fleet of brigantines, the fatal effects of whose btriatin.t
operations they foresaw and dreaded. Though the
brigantines, after all the labour and merit of Cortes
in forming them, were of inconsiderable bulk,
rudely conflruaed, and manned chiefly with land-
men, hardly possessed of skill enough to condu&t
them, they must have been objects of terror to a
people unacquainted with any navigation but that of
their lake, and possessed of no vetlel larger than a
canoe. Neceflity, however, urged Guatimozin to
hazard the attack; and hoping to supply by num-
bers what he wanted in force, he assembled such a
multitude of canoes as covered the face of the lake.
They rowed on boldly to the charge, while the
brigantines, retarded by a dead calm, could scarce-
ly advance to meet them. But as the enemy drew RepuIfcn.
near, a breeze suddenly sprung up; in a moment
the fails were spread, and the brigantines, with ir-
resistible impetuosity, broke through their feeble
opponents, overset many canoes, and diflipated the
whole armament with such slaughter, as convinced
the Mexicans, that the progress of the Europeans
in knowledge and arts rendered their superiority
greater on this new element than they had hitherto
found it by land b.

FROM that time Cortes remained master of the Singular

lake, and the brigantines not only preserved a corn- dla.n f ctc
munication between the Spaniards in their different iege.

b Cortes Relat. 267, C. B. Diaz. c. 150. Gomara Cron.
c. 131. Herrera, dec. 3. lib. i. c. 17.

itations,

B O O K fations, though at considerable distance from each

V. other, but were employed to cover the causeways

on each fide, and keep off the canoes, when they
attempted to annoy the troops as they advanced to-
wards the city. He formed the brigantines in three
divisions, allotting one to each fiation, with orders
to second the operations of the officer who com-
manded there. From all the three itations he push-
ed on the attack against the city with equal vigour
but in a manner so very different from that where-
by sieges are conduced in regular war, that he
himself seems afraid that it would appear no less im-
proper than singular, to persons unacquainted with
his situation c. Each morning his troops assaulted
the barricades which the enemy had erected on the
causeways, forced their way over the trenches which
they had dug, and through the canals where the
bridges were broken down, and endeavoured to
penetrate into the heart of the city, in hopes of ob-
taining some decisive advantage, which might force
the enemy to surrender, and terminate the war at
once; but when the obYtinate valour of the Mexi-
cans rendered the efforts of the day ineffectual, the
Spaniards retired in the evening to their former
quarters. Thus their toil and danger were, in some
measure, continually renewed; the Mexicans repair-
ing in the night what the Spaniards had destroyed
through the day, and recovering the posts from
which they had driven them. But necessity pre-
icribed this flow and untoward mode of operation.
The number of his troops was so small, that Cortes
durfl not, with a handful of men, attempt to make
a lodgment in a city where he might be surrounded
and annoyed by such a multitude of enemies. The
remembrance of what he had already suffered by
the ill-judged confidence with which he had ventured

c Cortes Relat. 270, F.

into

into such a dangerous situation, was fill fresh in his B o o K
mind. The Spaniards, exhausted with fatigue, v.
were unable to guard the various posts which they "7
daily gained; and though their camp was filled
with Indian auxiliaries, they durst not devolve this
charge upon them, because they were so little ac-
customed to discipline, that no confidence could be
placed in their vigilance. Betides this, Cortes was
extremely solicitous to preserve the city as much as
possible from being destroyed, both as he defined it
to be the capital of his conquests, and wished that
it might remain as a monument of his glory. From
all there considerations, he adhered obstinately, for
a month after the siege was opened, to the fyfcem
which he had adopted. The Mexicans, in their
own defence, displayed valour which was hardly
inferior to that with which the Spaniards attacked
them. On land, on water, by night and by day,
one furious conflict succeeded to another. Seve-
ral Spaniards were killed, more wounded, and all
were ready to fink under the toils of unintermitting
service, which were rendered more intolerable by
the injuries of the season, the periodical rains being
now set in with their usual violence d

ASTONI S H ED and disconcerted with the length Endeavonrs
and difficulties of the siege, Cortes determined to "toake d

city by

make one great effort to get pofieflion of the city storm.
before he relinquiffed the plan which he had hither-
to followed, and had recourse to any other mode
of attack. With this view, he sent inftrutions to
Aivarado and Sandoval to advance with their divi-
sions to a general afTault, and took the command in
person of that potled on the causeway of Cuyo-
can. Animated by his pretence, and the expecta-
tion of some decisive event, the Spaniards puffled
forward with irresistible impetuosity. They broke

d B, Diaz. c. 1I.
VOL. I. U through

B O O K through one barricade after another, forced their

v. way over the ditches and canals, and having en-
-.. tered the city, gained ground incefiantly, in spite

of the multitude and ferocity of their opponents.
Cortes, though delighted with the rapidity of his
progress, did not forget that he might itill find it
neceflary to retreat ; and in order to secure it, ap-
pointed Julian de Alderete, a captain of chief
note in the troops which he had received from
Hispaniola, to fill up the canals and gaps in the
causeway as the main body advanced. That offi-
cer, deeming it inglorious to be thus employed,
while his companions were in the heat of action,
and the career of victory, neglected the important
charge committed to him, and hurried on incon-
fiderately to mingle with the combatants. The
Mexicans, whose military attention and ikill were
daily improving, no sooner observed this, than they
carried an account of it to their monarch.
Repulled, GU ATI MOZIN instantly discerned the confequen-

ces of the error which the Spaniards had commit-
ted, and, with admirable pretence of mind, pre-
pared to take advantage of it. He commanded
the troops posted in the front to flacken their es-
forts, in order to allure the Spaniards to push for-
ward, while he ditjatched a large body of chosen
warriors through different fireets, some by land,
and others by water, towards the great breach in
the causeway, which had been left open. On a
signal which he gave, the priefis in the principal
temple struck the great drum consecrated to the
god of war. No sooner did the Mexicans hear
its doleful solemn found, calculated to inspire them
with contempt of death, and enthusiastic ardour,
than they rushed upon the enemy with frantic
rage. The Spaniards, unable to refilt men urged
on no less by religious fury than hope of ficcefs,
began to retire, at firit leisurely, and with a good

countenance;

countenance; but as the enemy pressed on, and B o K
their own impatience to escape increased, the ter- V.
for and confusion became so general, that when -
they arrived at the gap in the causeway, Spaniards 1
and Tlafcalans, horsemen and infantry, plunged
in promiscuously, while the Mexicans ruffed upon
them fiercely from every fide, their light canoes
carrying them through hfoals which the brigan-
tines could not approach. In vain did Cortes at-
tempt to stop and rally his flying troops; fear
rendered them regardless of his entreaties or com-
mands. Finding all his endeavours to renew the
combat fruitless, his next care was to save some
of those who had thrown themselves into the wa-
ter; but while thus employed, with more atten-
tion to their situation than to his own, fix Mexican
captains suddenly laid hold of him, and were hur- deblfe i.
rying him off in triumph; and though two of
his officers rescued him at the expence of their
own lives, he received several dangerous wounds
before he could break loose. Above sixty Spani-
ards perished in the rout; and what rendered the
disaster more affliAting, forty of these fell alive
into the hands of an enemy never known to shew
mercy to a captive e.

THE approach of night, though it delivered Those who

the dejeced Spaniards from the attacks of the ene- racSficed to
my, ushered in, what was hardly less grievous, the god of
the noise of their barbarous triumph, and of the war.
horrid festival with which they celebrated their
victory. Every quarter of the city was illumi-
nated; the great temple shewn with such pe-
culiar splendour, that the Spaniards could plainly
fee the people in motion, and the priefis busy in

e Cortes Relat. p. 273. B. Diaz. c. 15z. Gomara Cron.
c. 138 Herrera, dec. iii. lib. t. c. 20.

U 2 hastening

B O O K haflening the preparations for the death of the

v. prifoneis. Through the gloom, they fancied that
,--5, they discerned their companions by the whitenefr

of their skins, as they were fiript naked and com-
pelled to dance before the image of the god to
whom they were to be offered. They heard
the fhiieks of those who were sacrificed, and
thought that they could distinguish each unhappy
vicqim, by the well-known found of his voice,
Imagination added to what they really saw or
heard, and augmented its horror. The mofl un-
feeling melted into tears of compafnion, and the
flouteft heart trembled at the dreadful fpeaacle
which they beheld f

New COR TE s, who, betides all that he felt in com-
heress nd mon with his soldiers, was oppressed with the ad-
Mexicans. ditional load of anxious reflections natural to a

general on such an unexpected calamity, could not,
like them, relieve his mind by giving vent to
its anguish. He was obliged to allume an air of
tranquillity, in order to revive the spirit and hopes
of his followers. The juncture, indeed, required
an extraordinary exertion of fortitude. The Mex-
icans, elated with their victory, rallied out next
morning to attack him in his quartels. But they
did not rely on the efforts of their own arms alone.
They sent the heads of the Spaniards whom they
had sacrificed to the leading men in the adjacent
provinces, and assured them that the god of war,
appeased by the blood of their invaders, which
had been fled so plentifully on his altars, had
declared, with an audible voice, that in eight
days time those hated enemies should be finally
defiroyed, and peace and prosperity re-established.
in the empire.

f See NOTE XCII.

A PRE-

A PREDICTION uttered with such confidence, B O O K

and in terms so void of ambiguity, gained univer- v.
fal credit among a people prone to fuperfition. IL.
The zeal of the provinces, which had already de- Cortes de-
dcared againf, the Spaniards, augmented, and fe- manyof his
veral, which had hitherto remained inactive, took Indian al-
arms with enthusiastic ardour, to execute the de- lies
crees of the gods. The Indian auxiliaries who
had joined Cortes, accustomed to venerate the
fame deities with the Mexicans, and to receive
the responses of their prieits with the fame impli-
cit faith, abandoned the Spaniards as a race of
men devoted to certain deftrufdion. Even the si-
delity of the Tlafcalans was shaken, and the Spa-
nifih troops were left almost alone in their fiations.
Cortes finding that he attempted in vain to dispel
the superstitious fears of his confederates by ar-
gument, took advantage, from the imprudence of
those who had framed the prophecy, in fixing its
accompliihment so near at hand, to give them a
firiking demonfiration of its falsity. He suspend-
ed all military operations during the period mark-
ed out by the oracle. Under cover of the brigan-
tines, which kept the enemy at a distance, his
troops lay in safety, and the fatal term expired
without any disaster g.

His allies, ashamed of their own credulity, re- He regains

turned to their station. Other tribes, judging that friend'
the gods who had now deceived the Mexicans, had
decreed finally to withdraw their proteEtion from
them, joined his flandard; and such was the levity
of a simple people, moved by every flight im-
preflion, that, in a short time after such a ge-
neral defection of his confederates, Cortes saw
himself, if we may believe his own account, at
the head of a hundred and fifty thousand Indians.

B Diaz. c, 153. Gomara Cron. c. 138.

Even

B O O K Even with such a numerous army, he found it ne-

V. ceffary to adopt a new and more wary system of
..-T- operation. Instead of renewing his attempts to

and adopts a become mapter of the city at once by such bold
ofattyem but dangerous efforts of valour as he had already

tried, he made his advances gradually, and with
every possible precaution againit exposing his men
to any calamity similar to that which they fill be-
wailed. As the Spaniards pulhed forward, the
Indians regularly repaired the causeways behind
them. As soon as they got poffeflion of any part
of the town, the houses were instantly levelled
with the ground. Day by day, the Mexicans,
forced to retire, as their enemies gained ground,
were hemmed in within more narrow limits. Gua-
timozin, though unable to flop the career of the
enemy, continued to defend his capital with obfti-
nate resolution, and disputed every inch of ground.
But the Spaniards, having not only varied their
mode of attack, but, by order of Cortes, having
changed the weapons with which they fought,
were again armed with the long Chinantlan spears,
which they had employed with such success against
Narvaez, and, by the firm array in which this en-
abled them to range themselves, they repelled,
with little danger, the loose afault of the Mexi-
cans: incredible numbers of them fell in the con-
slids which they renewed every day h. While war
wafted without, famine began to consume them
within the city. The Spanish brigantines having
the entire command of the lake, rendered it im-
poitible to receive any supply of provisions by wa-
ter. The vast number of his Indian auxiliaries
enabled Cortes to shut up the avenues to the city
by land. The stores which Guatimozin had laid
up were exhausted, by the multitudes which croutd-

h Cortes gelat, p. 273, c. 276, F. B. Diaz. c. 153.

ed into the capital, to defend their sovereign and B o o K
the temples of their gods. Not only the people, V.
but peribns of the highest rank felt the utmost "-
difireffes of want. What they suffered brought on
infetions and mortal distempers, the last calamity
that visits besieged cities, and which filled up the
measure of their woes .

Eu T, under the pressure of so many and such Courage

various evils, the spirit of Guatimozin remained and cotan.
firm and unfubdued. He rejected, with scorn, ozin.
every overture of peace from Cortes, and disdain-
ing the idea of submitting to the oppressors of his
country, determined not to survive its ruin. The
Spaniards continued their progress. At length all July a7.
the three divisions penetrated into the great square
in the centre of the city, and made a secure lodg-
ment there. Three-fourths of the city were now
reduced, and laid in ruins. The remaining quar-
ter was so closely pressed, that it could not long
withstand assailants who attacked it from-their new
station with superior advantage, and more assured
expectation of success. The Mexican nobles, so-
licitous to iave the life of a monarch whom they
revered, prevailed on Guatimozin to retire from
a place where resistance was now vain, that he
might route the more distant provinces of the em-
pire to arms, and maintain there a more successful
struggle with the public enemy. In order to faci-
litate the execution of this measure, they endea-
voured to amuse Cortes with overtures of fubmifli-
on, that, while his attention was employed in ad-
justing the articles of pacification, Guatimozin
might escape unperceived. But they made this at-
tempt upon a leader of greater sagacity and dif-
cernment than to be deceived by their arts. Cortes,
fufpeting their intention, and aware of what mo-

i Cortes Relat. 276, E. 27 7 F. B. Diaz, is. .Gom, Cron.
c. 141.

ment

B O O K ment it was to defeat it, appointed Sandoval, the of-

v. sicer on whose vigilance he could most perfectly rely,
A, -' to take the command of the brigantines, with ftri&

injunEtions to watch every motion of the enemy,
Sandoval, attentive to the charge, observing some
large canocs crouded with people rowing across
the lake with extraordinary rapidity, instantly gave
the signal to chace. Garcia Holguin, who com-
manded the fleetefi brigantine, soon overtook them,
and was preparing to fire on the foremost canoe,
which seemed to carry some person whom all the

He istakereft followed and obeyed. At once the rowers
prisoner. dropt their oars, and all on board, throwing down

their arms, conjured him with cries and tears to
forbear, as the emperor was there. Holguin ea-
gerly seized his prize, and Guatimozin, with a
dignified composure, gave himself up into his
hands, requesting only that no insult might be of-
sered to the empress or his children. When con-
dueted to Cortes, he appeared neither with the
ullen fierceness of a barbarian, nor with the de-
jecticn of a supplicant. " I have done," said he,
addrefing himielf to the Spanish general, " what
became a monarch. I have defended my people
to the last extremity. Nothing now remains but
to die. Take this dagger," laying his hand on
one which Cortes wore, "( plant it in my breast,
and put an end to a life which can no longer be
of use k."

Aug. 13. As soon as the fate of their sovereign was known,
The yrs the resistance of the Mexicans ceased; and Cortes

took pofieflion of that small part of the capital
which yet remained undeftroyed. Thus terminat-
ed the siege of Mexico, the nloft memorable event
in the conquest of America. It continued seventy-

k Cortes Rdat. 279. B. Diaz. c. 156. Gomara Cron. c.
Ia.. Heirera, dec . lib. ii. c. 7.

five

five days, hardly one of which passed without some B O O K
extraordinary effort of one party in the attack, or V.
of the other in the defence of a city, on the fate -
of which both knew that the fortune of the empire '5
depended. As the firuggle here was more obRtinate,
it was likewise more equal than any between the in-
habitants of the Old and New Worlds. The great
abilities of Guatimozin, the number of his troops,
the peculiar situation of his capital, so far counter-
balanced the superiority of the Spaniards in arms
and discipline, that they must have relinquished the
enterprise, if they had trusted for success to them-
selves alone. But Mexico was overturned by the
jealousy of neighbours who dreaded its power,
and by the revolt of subje&s impatient to shake
off its yoke. By their effectual aid, Cortes was
enabled to accomplish what, without such support,
he would hardly have ventured to attempt. How
much soever this account of the reduction of
Mexico may detract, on the one hand, from the
marvellous relations of some Spanish writers, by
ascribing that to simple and obvious causes which
they attributed to the romantic valour of their
countrymen, it adds, on the other, to the merit
and abilities of Cortes, who, under every difad-
vantage, acquired such an ascendant over unknown
nations, as to render them infrfuments towards
carrying his schemes into execution'.

THE exultation of the Spaniards, on accom- Smaninefsof

plifhing this arduous enterprise, was at firfl excef- thebooty,
five. But this was quickly damped by the cruel pointment
disappointment of those sanguine hopes, which of the Spa
had animated them amidst so many hardships and
dangers. Instead of the inexhaustible wealth
which they expeted from becoming mailers of

! See NOTE XCIIL

Montezuma's

B O O K Montezuma's treasures, and the ornaments of so

v. many temples, their rapacioufneis could colleCt only

an inconsiderable booty amidst ruins and defola-
tion 1. Guatimozin, aware of his impending fate,
had ordered what remained of the riches amafled
by his anceitors to be thrown into the lake. The
Indian auxiliaries, while the Spaniards were engaged
in conflict with the enemy, had carried off the most
valuable part of the spoil. The fum to be divided
among the conquerors was so small, that many of
them disdained to accept of the pittance which fell
to their share, and all murmured and exclaimed ;
some, against Cortes and his confidents, whom
they fufpeced of having secretly appropriated to
their own use, a large portion of the riches which
should have been brought into the common flock;
others, againfit Guatimozin, whom they accused
of obstinacy, in refuting to discover the place where
he had hidden his treasure.
Guatimo-in ARGUMENTS, entreaties, and promises were

tore employed in order to sooth them, but with so little

effect, that Cortes, from solicitude to check this
growing spirit of discontent, gave way to a deed
which stained the glory of all his great actions.
Without regarding the former dignity of Guati-
mozin, or feeling any reverence for those virtues
which he had displayed, he fubjeted the unhappy
monarch, together with his chief favourite, to tor-
ture, in order to force from them a discovery of
the royal treasures, which it was supposed they had
concealed. Guatimozin bore whatever the refined
cruelty of h.s tormentors could inflict, with the in-
vincible fortitude of an American warrior. His
fellow-fufferer, overcome by the violence of the

I The gold and silver, according to Cortes, amounted only

to 120,000 pesos, Relat. 280. A. a fum far inferior to that
which the Spaniards had formerly divided in Mexico.

anguiffi

anguish, turned a dejeaed eye towards his mailer, B O O K
which seemed to implore his permiflion to reveal all V.
that he knew. But the high-fpirited prince, dart-
ing on him a look of authority mingled with scorn,
checked his weakness by asking, " Am I now re-
posing on a bed of flowers ?" Overawed by the re-
proach, he persevered in his dutiful silence, and
expired. Cortes, ashamed of a scene so horrid,
rescued the royal viEtim from the hands of his tor-
turers, and prolonged a life reserved for new indig-
nities and sufferings m.

THE fate of the capital, as both parties had Allthe pro.

foreseen, decided that of the empire. The pro- the empire
vinces submitted one after another to the conque- submit.
rors. Small detachments of Spaniards marching
through them without interruption, penetrated in
different quarters to the great Southern Ocean,
which, according to the ideas of Columbus, they
imagined would open a short as well as easy pas-
sage to the East Indies, and secure to the crown of
Castile all the envied wealth of those fertile regi- Cortes
ons ; and the acive mind of Cortes began already schemes of
to form schemes for attempting this important dif- vee disco
covery '.

HE did not know, that during the progress of which are
his victorious arms in Mexico, the very scheme, of completed

by Magei-

which he began to form some idea, had been un- tan.
dertaken and accomplifled. As this is one of the
most splendid events in the history of the Spanish
discoveries, and has been produ&tive of effedts pe-
culiarly interesting to those extensive provinces
which Cortes had now fubjeaed to the crown of
Castile, the account of its rife and progress merits
a particular detail.

m B. Diaz. c. 57. Gomara Cron. c. 146. Herrera, dec.

3. lib. ii. c. 8. Torqueni. Mon. Ind. i. 574 n Corres
Relat. 280 D, &c. B. Diaz. c. 157. o Heireia,
dec. 3. lii. ii, c. I7. Gornara Cron. c. 149.

FERDINAND

B O K FERDINAND MAGALHAENS, or Magellan, a

V. Portuguese gentleman of honourable birth, having
c-w--~ served several years in the East Indies, with diftin-

152'. guifhed valour, under the famous Albuquerque, de-

mlanded the recompence which he thought due to
his services, with a boldness natural to a high-fpi-
rited soldier. But, for some reason which is not
explained, both his general and his sovereign re-
jeded his suit with a disdainful coldness, that was
intolerable to a man conscious of what he had done,
and of what he deserved. In a transport of resent-
ment, he formally renounced his allegiance to an
is57. ungrateful master, and fled to the court of Castile,

in hopes that there his worth would be more justly
estimated. He endeavoured to recommend him-
felfby proposing to execute a scheme, the accom-
plifhment of which, he knew, would wound the
monarch againfi whom he was exasperated, in the
most tender part. He revived Columbus's original
and favourite project, of discovering a passage to
India by a westerly course, and without encroach-
ing on that portion of the globe which was allotted
to the Portuguese by the line of demarcation. He
founded his hopes of success on the ideas of that
great navigator, confirmed by many observations,
the result of his own naval experience, as well as
that of his countrymen, in their intercourse with
the East. The undertaking, he acknowledged,
was both arduous and expensive, as it could not
be attempted but with a squadron of considerable
force, and victualled for at least two years. For-
tunately, he applied to a minister who was not apt
to be deterred, either by the boldness of a design,
or the expence of carrying it into execution. Car-
dinal Ximenes, who at that time directed the as-
fairs of Spain, discerning at once what an increase of
wealth and glory would accrue to his country by
the success of Magellan's proposal, listened to it
with a most favourable ear. Charles V. on his ar-

rival

rival in his Spanish dominions, entered into the B 0 0 K
measure with no less ardour, and orders were issued V.
for equipping a proper squadron at the public -7
charge, of which the command was given to Ma-
gellan, whom the king honoured with the habit of
St. Jago and the title of Captain General p.

ON the tenth of August one thousand five hun- His-voyage.

dred and nineteen, Magellan failed from Seville
with five ships, which, according to the ideas of
the age, were deemed to be of considerable force,
though the burden of the largest did not exceed
one hundred and twenty tons. The crews of the
whole amounted to two hundred and thirty-four
men, among whom were some of the most skilful
pilots in Spain, and several Portuguese sailors, in
whose experience, as more extensive, Magellan
placed fill greater confidence. After touching at
the Canaries, he flood directly south towards the
equinoftial line along the coast of America, but
was so long retarded by tedious calms, and spent
so much time in searching every bay and inlet for
that communication- with the Southern Ocean
which he wished to discover, that he did not reach
the river De la Plata till the twelfth of January. tsa.
That spacious opening, through which its vast
body of water pours into the Atlantic, allured him
to enter; but, after failing up it for some days, he
concluded, from the shallowness of the stream and
the freffnefs of the water, that the wifhed-for
firait was not situated there, and continued his
course towards the south. On the thirty-firft of
March he arrived at the port of St. Julian, about
forty-eight degrees south of the line, where he
resolved to winter. In this uncomfortable flation
he loft one of his squadron, and the Spaniards sus-

P Herrera, dec. 2. lib. ii. c. 19. lib. iv. c. 9. Gomara
-ift, . 9c .

fere_

B O O K sered so much from the excessive rigour of the cli-

V. mate, that the crews of three of his ffips, headed
'- -'by their officers, rose in open mutiny, and insisted
15 Z' on relinquishing the visionary projea of a defper-

ate adventurer, and returning directly to Spain.
This dangerous infurretion Magellan suppressed,
by an effort of courage no less prompt than intre-
pid, and inflited exemplary punishment on the
ringleaders. With the remainder of his followers,
overawed but not reconciled to his scheme, he con-
tinued his voyage towards the south, and at length
discovered, near the fifty-third degree of latitude,
the mouth of a firait, into which he entered, not-
withfianding the murmurs and remonstrances of
the people under his command. After failing
twenty days in that winding dangerous channel,
to which he gave his own name, and where one of
his ihips deserted him, the great Southern Ocean
opened to his view, and with tears of joy he re-
turned thanks to Heaven for having thus far crown-
ed his endeavours with success q.

BUT he was fill at a greater distance than he

imagined from the object of his withes. He failed
during three months and twenty days in an uniform
direction towards the north-west, without disco-
vering land. In this voyage, the longest that had
ever been made in the unbounded ocean, he sus-
sered incredible distress. His flock of provisions
was almost exhausted, the water became putrid,
the men were reduced to the shortest allowance
with which it was possible to sustain life, and the
scurvy, the most dreadful of all the maladies with
which seafaring people are affliEted, began to spread
among the crew. One circumfiarce alone afforded
them some consolation; they enjoyed an uninter-
rupted course of fair weather with such favourable

q Herrera, dec. 2. lib. iv. c. 1o. lib. ix. c. to, &c. Go-
mara Hist. c. 9z. Pigafetta Viagio ap Ranmul ii. p. 352, &c.

winds,

winds, that Magellan- bestowed on that ocean the B o o K
name of Pacific, whichitt fill retains. When re- V.
duced to such extremity that they must have funk v-
under-their sufferings, they fell in with a cluster of Mach 6.
inall but fertile islands, which afforded them re-
frefhments in such abundance, that their health was
soon re-established. From these isles, to which he
gave the name of De los Ladrones, he proceeded on
his voyage, and soon made a more important dif-
covery of the islands now known by the name of
the Philippines. In one of these he got into an unfor-
tunate quarrel with the natives, who attacked him
with a numerous body of troops well armed; and
while he fought at the head of his men with his
usual valour, he fell by the hands of those barba- April a6.
rians, together with several of his principal officers.

THE expedition was prosecuted under other

commanders. After visiting many of the smaller
isles scattered in the eastern part of the Indian
ocean, they touched at the great island of Borneo,
and at length landed in Tidore, one of the Mo- No. 8.
luccas, to the astonishment of the Portuguese, who
could not comprehend how the Spaniards, by hold-
ing a westerly course, had arrived at that sequester-
ed feat of their most valuable commerce, which
they themselves had discovered by failing in an op-
pofite direaion. There, and in the adjacent isles,
they found a people acquainted with the benefits of
extensive trade, and willing to open an intercourse
with a new nation. They took in a cargo of the
precious spices, which are the distinguished pro-
duaion of those islands, and with that, as well as
with specimens of the rich commodities yielded by
the other countries which they had visited, the Pic-
tory, which, of the two ships that remained of the Jan. iSZ.
squadron, was most fit for a long voyage, set fail

for

B o O K for Europe, under the command of Juan Sebafiiai

v. del Cano. He followed the course of the Portu-
~r'-^ guefe by the Cape of Good Hope, and, after many

51'- disasters and sufferings, he arrived at St. Lucar on

the seventh of September one thousand five hun-
dred and twenty-two, having failed round the
globe in the space of three years and twenty-eight
days 1.

THOU G H an untimely fate deprived Magellan

of the fatisfaaion of accomplishing this great un-
dertaking, his contemporaries, just to his memory
and talents, ascribed to him not only the glory of
having formed the plan, but of having surmounted
almost every obstacle to the completion of it; and
in the present age his name is till ranked among
the highest in the roll of eminent and successful na-
vigators. The naval glory of Spain now eclipsed
that of every other nation, and by a fmgular feli-
city she had the merit, in the course of a few
years, of discovering a new continent almost as
large as that part of the earth which was formerly
known, and of ascertaining by experience the form
and extent of the whole terraqueous globe.

THE Spaniards were not satisfied with the glory

of having sift encompassed the earth, they expet-
ed to derive great commercial advantages from this
new and boldest effort of their maritime skill. The
men of science among them contended, that the
spice islands, and several of the richest countries in
the East, were so situated as to belong of right to
the crown of Castile, in consequence of the partition
made by Alexander VI. The merchants, without
attending to this difcuflion, engaged eagerly in
that lucrative and alluring commerce, which was

q Herrera, dec. 3. lib. i. c. 3. 9. lib. iv. c. i. Gomara
Cron. c. 93, &c. Pigafetta ap. Ramus. ii. p. 361, &c.

now

now opened to them. The Portuguese, alarmed at B 0 0 K
the intrusion of such formidable rivals, remonfirated V.
and negociated in Europe, while in Asia they ob- ~
fitruted the trade of the Spaniards by force of arms.
Charles, not sufficiently inftruted with refpet to
the importance of this valuable branch of com-
merce, or diftraded by the multiplicity of his
schemes and operations, did not afford his fubjets
proper protection. At last, the low state of his
finances, exhausted by the efforts of his arms in
every part of Europe, together with the dread of
adding a new war with Portugal to those in which
he was already engaged, induced him to make over
his claim of the Moluccas to the Portuguese for three
hundred and fifty thousand ducats. He reserved,
however, to the crown of Castile the right of reviv-
ing its pretensions on repayment of that fum; but
other objects engrossed his attention and that of his
successors, and Spain was finally excluded from a
branch of commerce in which it was engaging with
sanguine expectations of profit r.

THOUGH the trade with the Moluccas was re-

linquifhed, the voyage of Magellan was followed
by commercial effects of great moment in Spain.
Philip II. in the year one thousand five hundred and
fixty-four, reduced those islands which he discover-
ed in the Eastern Ocean to fubjedtion, and establish-
ed settlements there; between which and the king-
dom of New Spain a regular intercourse, the matter
of which shall be explained in its proper place, is
carried on. I return now to the tranfations inNew
Spain.

AT the time that Cortes was acquiring such vast An order to
territories for his native country, and preparing the cuperts'

r Herrera, dec. . lib. vii. c. , &c, dec. iv. lib. v. c. 7, &c.
VoL. II. X way

B o o K way for future conquefis, it was his singular fate not

V. only to be destitute of any commiflion or authority

, from the sovereign whom he was serving with such

successful zeal, but to be regarded as an undutiful
and seditious subjed. By the influence of Fonseca,
bishop of Burgos, his condut in assuming the go-
vernment of New Spain was declared to be an irre-
gular usurpation, in contempt of the royal authori-
ty; and Chriftoval de Tapia received a commifli-
on, impowering him to supersede Cortes, to seize
his person, to confiscate his effects, to make a stria
scrutiny into his proceedings, and to transmit the
result of his inquiries to the council of the Indies, of
which the bishop of Burgos was president. A few
weeks after the redution of Mexico, Tapia landed
at Vera Cruz with the royal mandate to strip its
conqueror of his power, and to treat him as a crimi-
nal. ,But Fonseca had chosen a very improper in-
firmment to wreak his vengeance on Cortes. Tapia
had neither the reputation nor the talents that suited
the high command to which he was appointed.

which he Cortes, while he publicly expressed the most refpet-
ltudes. ful veneration for the emperor's authority, secretly

took measures to defeat the effect of his commission;
and having involved Tapia and his followers in a
multiplicity of negociations and conferences, in
which he sometimes had recourse to threats, but
more frequently employed bribes and promises, he
at length prevailed on that weak man to abandon a
province which he was unworthy of governing t.

Applies BUT notwithstanding the fortunate dexterity with
againto he which he had eluded this blow, Cortes was so fen-
court. fible of the.precarious tenure by which he held his

May 15. power, that he dispatched deputies to Spain with a

t Herrera, dec. 3. lib. iii. c. 16. dec. iv. c. i. Cort. Relat.
28i. E. B. Diaz. c. 158.

pompous

pompous account of the success of his arms, with B O O K
farther specimens of the produAions of the country, V.
and with rich presents to the emperor, as the earnest .I.
of future contributions from his new conquest; re-
quefling, in recompence for all his services, the ap-
probation of his proceedings, and that he might be
entrusted with the government of those territories,
which his condut, and the valour of his followers,
had added to the crown of Castile. The junture
in which his deputies reached the court was favour-
able. The internal commotions in Spain, which
had disquieted the beginning of Charles's reign were
just appeared u. The ministers had leisure to turn
their attention towards foreign affairs. The ac-
count of Cortes's victories filled his countrymen
with admiration. The extent and value of his con-
quefis became the obje&t of vast and interesting
hopes. Whatever stain he might have contracted,
by the irregularity of the Iteps which he took in or-
der to attain power, was so fully effaced by the
splendour' and merit of the great actions which this
had enabled him to perform, that every heart revolt-
ed at the thought of infliting any censure on a man,
whose services entitled him to the higheit marks of
dillindion. The public voice declared warmly in
favour of his pretensions, and Charles arriving in
Spain about this time, adopted the sentiments of his
fubjeas with a youthful ardour. Notwithfianding
the claims .of Velasquez, and the partial reprefenta-
tions of the bishop of Burgos, he appointed Cortes
captain-general and governor of New Spain, judg- and ioap-
ing that no person was so capable of maintaining Captain-
the royal authority, or of efiablifhing good order General an

' Governor of

both among his Spanish and Indian fubjets,. as the NTe Spain.
commander whom the forme rwould willingly obey,

u Hilt. of Charles V. vol. ii. b. iii.

X and

B O O K and the latter had long been accustomed to fear and

V. to refpet x.
·Ist. EVEN before his jurifdition received this legal

and arrange- fanaion, Cortes ventured to exercise all the powers
ments. of a governor, and, by various arrangements, en-

deavoured to render his conquest a secure and be-
neficial acquisition to his country. He determined
to establish the feat of government in its ancient fia-
tion, and to raise Mexico again from its ruins; and
having conceived high ideas concerning the future
grandeur of the slate of which he was laying the
foundation, he began to rebuild its capital on a plan
which hath gradually formed the most magnificent
city in the New World. At the fame time, he em-
ployed skilful persons to search for mines in diffe-
rent parts of the country, and opened some which
were found to be richer than any which the Spa-
niards had hitherto discovered in America. He de-
tached his principal officers into the remote provin-
ces, and encouraged them to fettle there, not only
by bestowing upon them large trats of land, but by
granting them the fame dominion over the Indians,
and the fame right to their service which the Spani-
ards had assumed in the islands.

infurrfc&i- IT was not, however, without difficulty that the
ons of the
Mexicans, Mexican empire could be entirely reduced into the
and cruelty form of a Spanish colony. Enraged and rendered
of the Spa-
niards. desperate by oppreflion, the natives often forgot the

superiority of their enemies, and run to arms in de-
fence of their liberties. In every contest, however,
the European valour and discipline prevailed. But,
fatally for the honour of their country, the Spani-
ards sullied the glory redounding from these repeat-

x Herrera, dec. 3. lib, iv. c. 3. Gomara Cron. 164, 165.
B. Diaz, 167, 168.

ed

ed victories by their mode of treating the vanquish- BO O K
ed people. After taking Guatimozin, and becom- v.
ing masters of his capital, they fupporfed that the *
king of Castile entered on poireffion of all the rights 5*
of the captive monarch, and affected to confider
every effort of the Mexicans to assert their own in-
dependence, as the rebellion of vassals against their
sovereign, or the mutiny of slaves against their
master. Under the faneion of those ill-founded
maxims, they violated every right that should be
held sacred between hostile nations. After every
infurredion, they reduced the common people in
the provinces which they subdued, to the most hu-
miliating of all conditions, that of personal fervi-
tude. Their chiefs, supposed to be more criminal,
were punished with greater severity, and put to
death in the most ignominious or the most excru-
ciating form, that the insolence or the cruelty of
their conquerors could devise. In almost every
province of the Mexican empire, the progress of the
Spanish arms is marked with blood, and with deeds
so atrocious as disgrace the enterprising valour that
conducted them to success. In the province of
Panuco, sixty caziques, or leaders, and four hundred
nobles, were burnt at one time. Nor was this
focking barbarity perpetrated in any sudden rally
of rage, or by a commander of inferior note. It
was the aa of Sandoval, an officer whose name is
entitled to the second rank in the annals of New
Spain, executed after a solemn consultation with
Cortes; and to complete the horror of the scene,
the children and relations of the wretched victims
were assembled, and compelled to be fpeaators of
their dying agonies Y. It seems hardly possible to
exceed in horror this dreadful example of severity;
but it was followed by another, which affected the

Y Cortes Relat. 291, C. Gomara Cron, c. 15s.

Mexicans

B o o K Mexicans still more sensibly, as it gave them a most

V. feeling proof of their own degradation, and of the
- £ 52.small regard that their haughty maafers retained for

the ancient dignity and splendour of their slate. On
a flight -suspicion, confirmed by very imperfect evi-
dence, that Guatimozin had formed a scheme to
shake off the yoke, and to excite his former sub-
jeEts to take arms, Cortes, without the formality
of a trial, ordered the unhappy monarch, together
with the caziques of Tezeuco and Tacuba, the two
persons of greatest eminence in the empire, to be
hanged; and the Mexicans, with astonishment and
horror, beheld this ignominious punishment inflid-
ed upon persons, to whom they were accuitomed
to look up with reverence, hardly inferior to that
which they paid to the gods themselves . The
example of Cortes and his principal officers, encou-
raged and justified persons of subordinate rank to
venture upon committing greater excesses. Nuno
de Guzman, in particular, iained an illustrious
name by deeds of peculiar enormity and rigour, in
various expeditions which he conducted a.

ONE circumstance, however, saved the Mexicans

from farther consumption, perhaps from one as
complete as that which had depopulated the islands.
Tile firit conquerors did not attempt to search for
the precious metals in the bowels of the earth. They
were neither sufficiently wealthy to carry on the ex-
pensive works, which are requisite for opening those
deep recesses where Nature has concealed the veins
of gold and silver, nor sufficiently skilful to perform
the ingenious operations by which they are feparat-
ed from their refpetive ores. They were satisfied

2 Gomara Cron. c. 170. B. Diaz. c. 177. Herrera, dec.
3. lib. viii. c. 9. See N 0 T E XCIV.

a Herrera, dec. 4 and 5. paflim.

with

with the more simple method, pradifed by the In- B O 0 K
dians, of walhing the earth carried down rivers and. v.
torrents from the mountains, and collecting the '
grains of native metal deposited there. The rich
mines of New Spain, which have poured forth their
treasures with such profusion. on every quarter of the
globe were not discovered for several years after the s55%, &c,
conquet b. By that time, a mole orderly govern-
ment and police were introduced into the colony;
experience, derived from former errors, had fug-
gested many useful and humane regulations for the
protetion and preservation of the Indians; and
though it then became necessary to encreafe the
number of those employed in the mines,. and they
were engaged in a species of labour more pernici-
ous to the human confiitution, they suffered less
hardship or diminution than from the ill-judged,
but less extensive, schemes of the firif conquerors.

THIS extraordinary mortality among the Indi-

ans, disappointed the hopes of their new maiters.
Few seem to have derived any considerable wealth
from their ill-conduted researches. According to
the usual fate of firfi settlers in new colonies, it was
their lot to encounter danger and to firuggle with
difficulties; the fruits of their victories and toils were
reserved for times of tranquillity, and reaped by
successors of greater indufiry, but of inferior merit.
The early hifiorians of America abound with ac-
counts of the sufferings and of the poverty of its
conquerors '. In New Spain, their condition was
rendered more grievous by a peculiar arrange-
ment. When Charles V. advanced Cortes to the
government of that country, he, at the fame time,
appointed certain commissioners to receive and ad-

° Herrera, dec. 8. lib. x. c. 21. c Cortes Relat. 283, F.
B. Diaz. c. zo9.

minister

B O O K minister the royal revenue there, with independent

V. jurifdition d These men, chosen from inferior
J~.' itations in various departments of public business at

Madrid, were so much elevated with their promo-
tion, that they thought they were called to aft a part
of the first consequence. But being accustomed to
the minute formalities of office, and having con-
trated the narrow ideas suited to the sphere in which
they had hitherto moved, they were astonished, on
"5'4s arriving in Mexico, at the high authority which

Cortes exercised, and could not conceive that the
mode of administration, in a country recently sub-
dued and fettled, must be different from that which
took place in one where tranquillity and regular go-
vernment had been long established. In their let-
ters, they represented Cortes as an ambitious ty-
rant, who having usurped a jurifdition superior to
law, aspired at independence, and by his exorbi-
tant wealth and extensive influence, might accom-
plifh those disloyal schemes which he apparently
meditated e. These insinuations made such deep
impression upon the Spanish ministers, molt of
whom had been formed to business under the jea-
lous and rigid adminifiration of Ferdinand, that,
unmindful of all Cortes's past services, and regard-
less of what he was then suffering in conduating that
extraordinary expedition, in which he advanced
from the lake ps Mexico to the western extremities
of Honduras f, they infused the fame suspicions in-
to the mind'of their master, and prevailed on him
to order a solemn inquest to be made into his con-
ISzS. du&, with powers to the licenciate Ponce de Leon,

entrusted with that commiflion, to seize his person,
if he fiould find that' expedient, and fend him prison
ner to Spain g.

d Herrera, dec. 3. lib. iv. c. 3. c Id. dec. 3. lib. v. c. 14.
f See NOTE XCV. g Herrera, dec. 3. lib. viii. c.
!4, I5.

THE

THE .sudden death of Ponce de Leon, a few daysB O O K

after his arrival in New Spain, prevented the exe- v
cution of this commission. But as the object of his HI
appointment was known, the mind of Cortes was 5
deeply wounded with this unexpected return for
services which far exceeded whatever any subjea of
Spain had rendered to his sovereign. He endea-
voured, however, to maintain his itation, and to
recover the confidence of the court. But every
person in office, who had arrived from Spain since
the conquest, was a spy upon his conduct, and with
malicious ingenuity gave an unfavourable repre-
fentation of all his actions. The apprehensions of
Charles and his ministers increased. A new corn- 528.
mission of inquiry was issued, with more extensive
powers, and various precautions were taken to pre-
vent or to punish him, if he should be so prefump-
tuous as to attempt what was inconfitent with the
fidelity of a subjet h. Cortes beheld the approach-
ing crisis of his fortune with all the violent emotions
natural to a haughty mind, conscious of high de-
fert, and receiving unworthy treatment. But
though some of his desperate followers urged him to
assert his own rights against his ungrateful country,
and, with a bold hand, to seize that power which
the courtiers meanly accused him of coveting i, he
retained such felf-command, or was actuated with
such Sentiments of loyalty, as to reject their danger-
ous counsels, and to chute the only course in which
he could secure his own dignity, without departing
from his duty. He resolved not to expose himself to
the ignominy of atrial, in that country whichhad been
the scene of his triumphs; but, without waiting for
the arrival of his judges, to repair diretly toCaffile,

h Herrera, dec. 3. lib. viii. c. I5. dec. 4. lib. ii. c. i. lib,
iy. c. 9, xo. B. Diaz, c. 17z, 196. Gomara Cron. c. 166.

i B. Diaz. c. 194.

and

B o O K and commit himself and his cause to the jufiice and

V. generosity of his sovereign k.
1528. CORTES appeared in his native country with the

splendour that suited the conqueror of a mighty
kingdom. He brought with him a great part of his
wealth, many jewels and ornaments of great value,
several curious productions of the country 1, and
was attended by some Mexicans of the first rank,
as well as by the moRt considerable of his own offi-
cers. His arrival in Spain removed at once every
suspicion and fear that had been entertained with
refpe& to his intentions. The emperor, having
now nothing to apprehend from the designs of Cor-
tes, received him like a person whom consciousness
of his own innocence had brought into the presence
of his master, and who was intitled, by the emi-
nence of his services, to the highest marks of dif-
tintion and refped. The order of St. Jago, the
title of Marquis del Valle de Guaxaca, the grant of
a vast territory in New Spain, were successively be-
flowed upon him; and as his manners were correct
and elegant, although he had passed the greater
part of his life among rough adventurers, the em-
peror admitted him to the fame familiar intercourse
with himself, that was enjoyed by noblemen of the
firit rank m

BUT, amidfi those external proofs of regard,

symptoms of remaining distrust appeared. Though
Cortes earnestly solicited to be reinflated in the go-
vernment of New Spain, Charles, too sagacious to
commit such an important charge to a man whom
he had once fufpefted, peremptorily refused to in-
vest him again with powers which he might find it

k Herrera, dec. 3. lib. iv. c. 8. ' See N O T E XCVI.
m Herrera, dec. 3. lib. iv. c. I. lib. vi. c. 4. B. Diaz, c.
196. Gom. Cron. c. 82z.

impoflible

impoflible to controul. Cortes, though dignified B o o K
with new titles, returned to Mexico with diminish- v.
ed authority. The military department, with pow- .530-
ers to attempt new discoveries, was left in his hands;
but the supreme direction of civil affairs was placed
in a board called T'he Audience of New Spain. At
a subsequent period, when, upon the increase of the
colony, the exertion of authority more united and
extensive become necessary, Antonio de Mendoza,
a nobleman of high rank, was sent thither as Vice-
roy, to take the government into his hands.

THis division of power in New Spain proved,

as was unavoidable, the source of perpetual dif-
fention, which embittered the life of Cortes, and
thwarted all his schemes. As he had now no op
portunity to display his aAtive talents but in attempt-
ing new discoveries, he formed various schemes for
that purpose, all of which bear impreflions of a ge-
nius that delighted in what was bold and splendid.
He early entertained an idea, that, either by steer-
ing through the gulf of Florida along the east coast
of North America, some firait would be found that
communicated with the western ocean; or that, by
examining the iflhmus of Darien, ofme passage
would be discovered between the North and South
Seas n. But having been disappointed in his expec-
tations with refpeat to both, he now confined his
views to such voyages of discovery as he could
make from the ports of New Spain in the South
Sea. There he fitted out fucceflivelyfeveral small
squadrons, which either perished in the attempt, or
returned without making any discovery of moment.
Cortes, weary of entrusting the conduct of his ope-
rations to others, took the command of a new ar- 's36.

n Cortes Relat. Ram. iii. 294, B,

mament

B O O Kmament enduring incredible hardships, and en-

V. countering dangers of every species, he discovered
36 the large peninsula of California, and surveyed the

greater part of the gulf which separates it from New
Spain. The discovery of a country of such extent
would have refleced credit on a common adventur-
er; but it could add little new honour to the name
of Cortes, nor satisfy the sanguine expectations
which he had formed °. Difguited with ill success,
to which he had not been accustomed, and weary
of contesting with adversaries to whom he confider-
.540. ed it as a disgrace to be opposed, he once more

fought for redress in his native country.

BUT his reception there was very different from

that which gratitude, and even decency, ought to
have secured for him. The merit of his ancient ex-
ploits was already, in a great measure, forgotten,
or eclipsed by the fame of recent and more valuable
conquests in another quarter of America. No ser-
vice of moment was now expected from a man of
declining years, and who began to be unfortunate.
The emperor behaved to him with cold civility; his
ministers treated him, sometimes with neglect,
Sometimes with insolence. His grievances received
no redress; his claims were urged without effect;
and after several years spent in fruitless application
to ministers and judges, an occupation the most
irksome and mortifying to a man of high spirit, who
had moved in a sphere where he was more accuf-
tomed to command than to solicit, Cortes ended
his days on the second of December one thousand
five hundred and forty-feven, in the fixty-fecond

e Herrera, dec. 5. lib. viii. c. 9, Io. dec. 8. lib. vi. c. 14;
Venegas Hist. ofCaliforn. i. z25. Lorenzana Hist. p. 322,

kc.

year

year of his age. His fate was the fame with that B o K
of all the persons who distinguished themselves in V.
the discovery or conquest of the New World. ""
Envied by his contemporaries, and ill requited by
the court which he served, he has been admired
and celebrated by succeeding ages. Which has
formed the most just estimate of his charaAer, an
impartial consideration of his ations must deter-
mine.

NOTES

# NOTES AND ILLUSTRATIONS.

NO T E S

AND
ILLUSTRATIONS.

# NOTES AND ILLUSTRATIONS.

NOTES

AND
ILLU STRATION S;

NOTE I. p. 3.

T H E height of the mos elevated point in the Pyre-
jnees is, according to M. Caflini, fix thousand fix hun-
dred and forty-fix feet. The height of the mountain
Gemmi, in the canton of Berne, is ten thousand one
hundred and ten feet. The height of the Pike of Tene-
riffe, according to the measurement of P. Feuille, is
thirteen thousand one hundred and feventy-eight feet.
The height of Chimborazo, the rmofi elevated point of
the Andes, is twenty thousand two hundred and eighty
feet. Voyage de D. Juan Ulloa, Observations Astron.
et Phyfiq. tom. ii. p. 114. The height of that part of
Chimborazo which is covered perpetually with snow, is
two thousand four hundred feet. Prevot. Hist. Gener.
des Voyages, vol. xiii. p. 636.

NOTE II. p. 3.

A S a particular description makes a Rronger impref-
sion than general assertions, I ihall give one of Rio de
la Plata by an eye-witness. P. Cattaneo, a Modenefe
jesuit, landed at Buenos Ayres in I 749, and thus repre-
sents what he felt when such new objeas were first pre-
sented to his view. " While I resided in Europe, and
read in books of history or geography that the mouth
of the river De la Plata was an hundred and fifty miles
in breadth, I confidered it as an exaggeration, because

VOL. II. Y in

in this hemisphere we have no example of such vail ri-
vers. When I approached its mouth, I had the moif
vehement desire to ascertain the truth with my own eyes,
and I have found the matter to be exaaly as it was re-
presented. This I deduce particularly from one circum-
fiance: When we took our departure from Monte-Vie-
do, a fort situated more than a hundred miles from the
mouth of the river, and where its breadth is confidera-
bly diminished, we failed a complete day before we dif-
covered the land on the opposite bank of the river; and
when we were in the middle of the channel, we could
not discern land on either fide, and saw nothing but the
sky and water, as, if we had. been in some great ocean.
Indeed, we should have taken it to be sea, if the fresh
water of the river, which was turbid like the Po, had
not satisfied us that it was a river. Moreover, at Bue-
nos Ayres, another hundred miles up the river, and where
it is still much narrower, one cannot discern the opposite
coast, which is indeed very low and flat; but one cannot
perceive the houses or the tops of the steeples in the
Portuguese settlement at Colonia on the other fide of the
river." Lettera prima, published by Muratori, II Chris-
tianefimo Felice, &c. i. p. 25 7.

NOTE III. p. 6.

NEWFOUNDLAND, part of Nova Scotia and
Canada, are the countries which lie in the fame parallel
of latitude with the kingdom of France; and in all of
them the water of the rivers is frozen during winter to
the thickness of several feet; the earth is covered with
snow as deep; almost all the birds fly, during that sea-
son, from a climate where they could not live. The
country of the Efkimaux, part of Labrador, and the
countries on the south of Hudson's Bay, are in the fame
parallel with Great Britain; and yet in all these the cold
is so intense, that even the industry of Europeans has not
attempted cultivation.

NOTE

NOTE IV. p 8.

ACOSTA is the firlt philosopher, as far as I know,
who endeavoured to account for the different degrees of
heat in the old and new continents, by the agency of the
winds which blow in each. Hist. Moral. &c. lib. ii. & iii,
M. de Buffon adopts this theory, and has not only im-
proved it by new observations, but has employed his
amazing powers of descriptive eloquence in embellishing
and placing it in the most firiking light. Some remarks
may be added, which tend to illufirate more fully a doc-
trine of much importance in every inquiry concerning the
temperature of various climates.

W HEN a cold wind blows over land, it must in its

passage rob the surface of some of its heat. By means of
this, the coldness of the wind is abated. But if it conti-l
nue to blow in the fame direcion, it will come, by de.
grees, to pass over a surface already cooled, and will sus-
ser no longer any abatement of its own keenness. Thus,
as it advances over a large tra& of land, it brings on all
the severity of intense frof.

LET the fame wind blow over an extensive and deep

sea; the superficial water muff be immediately cooled to
a certain degree, and the wind proportionally warmed.
But the superficial and colder water becoming specifically
heavier than the warmer water below it, descends;
what is warmer supplies its place, which, as it comes to
be cooled in its turn, continues to warm the air which
passes over it, or to diminish its cold. This change of
the superficial water, and successive ascent of that which
is warmer, and consequent successive abatement of cold-
ness in the air, is aided by the agitation caused in the sea
by the mechanical ation of the wind, and also by the
motion of the tides. This will go on, and the rigour of
the wind will continue to diminish until the whole water
is so far cooled, that the water on the surface is no longer
removed from the ation of the wind, fast enough to hin-
der it from being arrested by frost. Whenever the fur-

Y 2 face

face freezes, the wind is no longer warmed by the water
from below, and it goes on with undiminished cold.

FROM those principles may be explained the severity of

winter frosts in extensive continents; their mildness in
small islands ; and the superior rigour of winter in those
parts of North America with which we are belt acquaint-
ed. In the north-well parts of Europe, the severity of
winter is mitigated by the well winds, which usually
blow in the months of November, December, and part of
January.

ON the other hand, when a warm wind blows over

land, it heats the surface, which must therefore cease to
abate the fervour of the wind. But the fame wind blow-
ing over water, agitates it, brings up the colder water
from below, and thus is continually losing somewhat of.
its own heat.

BUT the great power of the sea to mitigate the heat of

the wind or air passing over it, proceeds from the follow-
ing circumstance, that on account of the transparency of
the sea, its surface cannot be.heated to a great degree by
the fun's rays; whereas the ground, fubje&ed to their in-
fluence, very soon acquires great heat. When, there-
fore, the wind blows over a torrid continent, it is soon
raised to a heat almost intolerable; but during its passage
over an extensive ocean, it is gradually cooled; so that
on its arrival at the farthest shore, it is again fit for re-
fpiration.

THOSE principles will account for the sultry heats of

large continents in the torrid zone; for the mild climate
of islands in the fame latitude; and for the superior
warmth in summer which large continents, situated in
temperate or colder zones of the earth, enjoy, when com-
pared with that of illands. The heat of a climate depends
not only upon the immediate effec of the fun's rays, but
on their continued operation, on the effe& which they
have formerly produced, and which remains for some time
in the ground. This is the reason why the day is warmest
about two in the afternoon, the summer warmest about
the middle of July, and the winter coldest about the mid-
dle of January.

THE

THE forests which cover America, and hinder the fun-

beams from heating the ground, are a great cause of the
temperate climate of the equatorial parts. The ground,
not being heated, cannot heat the air; and the leaves,
which receive the rays intercepted from the ground, have
not a mass of matter sufficient to absorb heat enough for
this purpose. Besides, it is a known faEt, that the vege-
tative power of a plant occasions a perspiration from the
leaves in proportion to the heat to which they are expos-
ed; and, from the nature of evaporation, this perspiration
produces a cold in the leaf proportional to the perspiration.
Thus the effe& of the leaf in heating the air in contat
with it, is prodigiously diminished. For those obferva-
tions, which throw much additional light on this curious
subjet, I am indebted to my ingenious friend, Mr. Ro-
bison, professor of natural philosophy in the university of
Edinburgh.

NOTE V. p. 9.

TH E climate of Brasil has been described by two emi-
nent naturalifis, Pifo and Margrave, who observed' it with
a philosophical accuracy, which we desiderate in the ac-
counts of many other provinces in America. Both re.
present it as temperate and mild, when compared with the
climate of Africa. They ascribe this chiefly to the re-
freshing wind which blows continually from the sea. The
air is not only cool, but chilly through the night, in so
much that the natives kindle fires every evening in their
huts. Pifo de Medicina Brafilienfi, lib. i. p. i, &c.
Margravius Hiflor. Rerum Natural. Brafilie, lib. viii.
c. 3. p. 264. Nieuhoff, who resided long in Brasil, con-
firms their description. Churchill's Colletion, vol. ii.
p. 26. Gumilla, who resided many years in the country,
upon the river Orinoco, gives a similar description of the
temperature of the climate there. Hist. de l'Orenoque,
tom. i. p. 26. P. Acugna felt a very considerable degree
of cold in the countries on the banks of the river Ama-
7ons. Relat. vol. ii. p. 56. M. Biet, who, lived a con-
fiderable time in Cayenne, gives a similar account of the

temperature

temperature of that climate, and ascribes it to the fame
cause. Voyage de la France, Exquinox, p. 330. No-
thing can be more different from these descriptions than
that of the burning heat of the African coast given by M.
Adanfon. Voyage to Senegal, passim.

THE mos obvious and probable cause of this superior

degree of cold, towards the southern extremity of Ame-
rica, seems to be the form of the continent there. Its
breadth gradually decreases as it firetches from St. Anto-
nio southwards, and from the bay of St. Julian to the
Straits of Magellan its dimensions are much contrated.
On the east and weft fides, it is warsed by the Atlantic
and Pacific Oceans. From its southern point it is proba-
ble that an open sea firetches to the Antartic pole. In
whichever of these diretions the wind blows, it is cooled
before it approaches the Magellanic regions, by passing
over a vast body of water, nor is the land there of such
extent that it can recover any considerable degree of heat
in its progress over it. These circumstances concur in
rendering the temperature of the air in this diftrit of A-
merica, more similar to that of an insular, than to that
of a continental climate, and hinder it from acquiring the
fame degree of summer heat, with places in Europe and
Asia, in a corresponding northern latitude. The north
wind is the only one that reaches this part of America,
after blowing over a great continent. -But from an atten-
tive survey of its position, this will be found to have a
tendency, rather to diminish than augment the degree of
heat. The southern extremity of America is properly the
termination of the immense ridge of the Andes, which
firetches nearly in a diredt line from north to south,
through the whole extent of the continent. The molf
sultry regions in South America, Guiana, Brasil, Para-
guay, and Tucuman, lie many degrees to the east of the
Magellanic regions. The level country of Peru, which
enjoys the tropical heats, is situated considerably to the
weft of them. The north wind then, though it blows
over land, does not bring to the southern extremity of
America, an increase of heat collected in its passage over
torrid regions, but before it arrives there, it must have
swept along the summits of the Andes, and come impreg-
pated with the cold of that frozen region.

N O 'T E

NOTE VI. p. io.

T W 0 French frigates were sent upon a voyage of
discovery in the year 739. In latitude 44° south, they
began to feel a considerable degree of cold. In latitude
48Q, they met with islands of floating ice. Hiifoire des
Navigations aux Terres Auitrales, tom. ii. 256, &c. Dr.
-Halley fell in with ice in latitude 59° Id. tom. i. p. 47.
Commodore Byron, when on the coast of Patagonia, la-
titude 50° 53' south, on the fifteenth of December,
which is midsummer in that part of the globe, the
twenty-firft of December being the longest day there,
compares the climate to that of England in the middle of
winter. Voyages by Hawkefworth, i. 25. Mr. Banks
having landed on Terra del Fuego in the Bay of Good
Success, latitude 550, on the sixteenth of January, which
corresponds to the month of July in our hemisphere, two
of his attendants died in one night of extreme cold, and
all the party were in the most imminent danger of perish-
ing. Id. ii. 51, 52. By the fourteenth of March, cor-
responding to September in our hemisphere, winter was
set in with rigour, and the mountains were covered with
snow. Ibid. 72.

NOTE VII. p. I2.

MI CONDAMINE is one of the latest and mofi
accurate observers of the interior state of South America.
"6 After descending from the Andes (fays he) one beholds a
vast and uniform profpet of water and verdure, and no-
thing more. One treads upon the earth, but does not fee
it; as it is so entirely covered with luxuriant plants,
weeds, and shrubs, that it would require a considerable
degree of labour to clear it, for the space of a foot. Re-
lation abrege d'un Voyage, &c. p. 48. One of the fin-
gularities in the forests is a fort of osiers, or withs, called
bejucas by the Spaniards, and lianes by the French, and

nibbees

nibbees by the Indians, which are usually employed as
ropes in America. This plant twists about the trees
which it meets with, and rising above their highest
branches, its tendrils descend perpendicularly, strike into
the ground, take root, rife up around another tree, and
thus mount and descend alternately. Other tendrils are
carried obliquely by the wind, or some accident, and form
a confusion of interwoven cordage, which resembles the
rigging of a ship. Bancroft, Nat. Hist. of Guiana, 99.
These withs are often as thick as the arm of a man. Ib.
p. 75. M. Bouguer's account of the forests in Peru per-
fedly resembles this description. Voyage au Peru, p. 16.
Oviedo gives a similar description of the forests in other
parts of America. Hilt. lib. ix. p. 44. D. The coun-
try of the Moxos is so much overflowed, that they are
obliged to reside on the summit of some rising ground dur-
ing some part of the year, and have no communication
with their countrymen at any distance. Lettres Edifiantes,
tomrn. x .

p 187. Garcia gives a full and jufi description

of the rivers, lakes, woods, and marshes in those coun-
tries of America which lie between the tropics. Origen de
los Indios, lib. ii. c. 5. § 4, 5. The incredible hardships
to which Gonzalez Pizarro was exposed in attempting to
march into the country to the east of the Andes, gives a
very firiking idea of that part of America in its original
uncultivated state. Garcil. de la Vega, Royal. Com-
ment. of Peru, part ii. book iii .
c. 2-5

NO TE VI1I. p. 14.

TH E animals of America seem not always to have
been of a size inferior to those in other quarters of the
globe. Near the banks of the Ohio, a considerable num-
ber of bones of an immense magnitude have been found.
The place where this discovery has been made lies about
one hundred and ninety miles below the junlion of the
river Scioto with the Ohio. It is about four miles distant
from the banks of the latter, on the fide of the marlh
called the Great Salt Lick. The bones lie in vast quanti,
ties about five or fix feet under ground, and the stratum

is visible in the bank on the edge of the Lick. 7ournal
of ColOnel George Croglan, MS. penes me. This spot
seems to be accurately laid down by Evans in his map.
These bones must have belonged to animals of enormous
bulk, and naturalists being acquainted with no living
creature of such size, were at first inclined to think that
they were mineral fublfances. Upon receiving a greater
number of specimens from various parts of the earth, and
after infpe&ing them more narrowly, they are now al-
lowed to be the bones of an animal. As the elephant is
the largeit known quadruped, and the tusks which were
found nearly resembled, both in form and quality, the
tusks of an elephant, it was concluded that the carcases
deposited on the Ohio were of that species. But Dr.
Hunter, one of the persons of our age best qualified to
decide with refpea to this point, having accurately exa-
mined several parcels of tusks, and grinders, and jaw-
bones, sent from the Ohio to London, gives it as his
opinion, that they did not belong to an elephant, but to
some huge carnivorous animal of an unknown species.
Phil. Tranfa&. vol. lviii. p. 34. Bones of the fame
kind, and as remarkable for their size, have been found
near the mouths of the great rivers Oby, Jenifeia, and
Lena, in Siberia. Stralhrenberg, Deicript. of north and
ealf Parts of Europe and fia, p. 402, &c. The ele-
phant seems to be confined in his range to the torrid
zone, and never multiplies beyond it. In such cold re-
gions as those bordering on the frozen sea, he could not
live. The existence of such large animals in America
might open a wide field for conjeaure. The more we
contemplate the face of nature, and confider the variety
of her produtions, the more we must be satisfied that
aftonilhing changes have been made in the terraqueous
globe by convulsions and revolutions, of which no ac-
count is preserved in history.

NOTE

NOTE IX. p. I5.

T HI S degeneracy of the domeflic European animals
in America ought to be imputed partly to each of these
causes. In the Spanish settlements, which are situated
either within the torrid zone, or in countries bordering
upon it, the increase of heat, and diversity of food, pre-
vent sheep and horned cattle from attaining the fame size
as in Europe. They seldom become so fat, and their
flesh is not so juicy, or of such delicate flavour. In
North-America, where the climate is more favourable,
and similar to that of Europe, the quality of the graifes
which spring up naturally in their pafture-grounds is not
good. Mitchell, p. 5i. Agriculture is still so much
in its infancy, that artificial food for cattle is not raised
in any quantity. During a winter, long in many pro-
vinces,, and rigorous in all, no proper care is taken of
their cattle. The general treatment of their horses and
horned cattle is injudicious and harsh in all the English
colonies. These circumfrances contribute more, perhaps,
than any thing peculiar in the quality of the climate to
the degeneracy of breed in the horses, cows, and sheep,
in moil of its provinces.

NOTE X. p. I5.

IN the year 1518, the island of Hispaniola was as.
flicLed with a dreadful visitation of those deftruaive in-
feEs, the particulars of which Herrera describes, and
mentions a singular inflance of the superstition of the
Spanish planters. After trying various methods of ex-
terminating the ants, they resolved to implore protecion
of the faints, but as the calamity was new, they were
at a loss to find out the faint who could give them the
most effecual aid. They call lots in order to discover
the patron whom they flhould invoke. The lots decided
in favour of St. Saturninus. They celebrated his feflival

with

with great solemnity, and immediately, adds the hiftori-
an, the calamity began to abate. Herrera, dec. 2. lib.
iii. . 15. p. 107.

NOTE XI. p. 17.

T H E author of Recherches Philofophiques fur les
Americains supposes this difference in heat to be equal to
twelve degrees, and that a place thirty degrees from the
equator in the old continent, is as warm as one situated
eighteen degrees from it in America. tom. i. p. II.
Dr. Mitchell, after observations carried on during thir-
ty years, contends that the difference is equal to four-
teen or fifteen degrees of latitude. Present State, &c.
P. 257.

NOTE XII p. .7.

JANUARY 3d, 1765, Mr. Bertram, near the head
of St. John's river in Eall Florida, observed a frost so
intense, that in one night, the ground was frozen an
inch thick upon the banks of the river. The limes, ci-
trons, and banana trees, at St. Augufline were destroyed.
Bertram's Journal, p. 20. Other instances of the ex-
traordinary operations of cold in the southern provinces
of North-America are collected by Dr. Mitchell. Pre-
sent State, p. 206, &c. February 7th, 1747, the frost
at Charleftown was so intense, that a person having car-
ried two quart bottles of hot water to bed, in the morning
theywere split to pieces, and the water solid lumps of ice.
In a kitchen, where there was a fire, the water in a jar,
in which there was a large live eel, was frozen to the
bottom. Almost all the orange and olive trees were
deflroyed. Description of South-Carolina, 8vo. Lond.

76I.

NOTE

NOTE XIII. p. i8.

A Remarkable instance of this occurs in Dutch Gui-
ana, a country every where level, and so low, that dur-
ing the rainy seasons, it is usually covered with water
near two feet in height. This renders the foil so rich,
that on the surface, for twelve inches in depth, it is a
stratum of perseEt manure, and as such has been tranf-
ported to Barbadoes. On the banks of the Effequebo,
thirty crops of rattoon canes have been raised successively,
whereas in Weft-Indian islands more than two is never
expeted. The expedients by which the planters endea-
vour to diminish this excessive fertility of foil are various.
Bancroft, Nat. Hist. of Guiana, p. o1, &c.

NOTE XIV. p. 28.

M U LLER seems to have believed, without fuffici-
ent evidence, that the Cape had been doubled, tom. i.
p. I , &c.; and the Imperial Academy of St. Peters-
burgh gives some countenance to it, by the manner in
which Tfchukotjkoi-nofs is laid down in their charts. But
I am assured, from undoubted authority, that no Ruffian
vessel has ever failed round that cape, and as the country
of Tfchutki is not subjet to the Russia empire, it is very
imperfectly known.

NOTE XV. p. 30.

W E R E this the place for entering into a long and
intricate geographical disquisition, many curious obferva-
tions might arise from comparing the accounts of the two
Ruffian voyages, and the charts of their respective navi-
gations. One remark is applicable to both. We cannot
rely with absolute certainty on the position which they
gffign to several of the places which they visited. The

weather

weather was so extremely foggy, that they seldom saw
the fun or stars, and the position of the islands and sup-
posed continents was commonly determined by reckoning,
not by observation. Beering and Tfchirikow proceeded
much farther towards the east than Krenitzin. The
land discovered by Beering, which he imagined to be part
of the American continent, is in the 236th degree of lon-
gitude from the first meridian in the isle of Ferro, and in
580 28" of latitude. Tfchirikow came upon the fame
coast in longit. 241°, lat. 560. Muller, i. 248, 249.
The former muff have advanced 60 degrees from the
port of Petropawlowika, from which he took his depar-
ture, and the latter 65 degrees. But from the chart of
Krenitzin's voyage, it appears that he did not fail farther
towards the east than the 280th degree, and only 32 de-
grees from Petropawlowfka. In 1741, Beering and
Tfchirikow, both in going and returning, held a course
which was mostly to the south of that chain ps islands
which they discovered, and observing the mountainous
and rugged afpe& of the head-lands which they descried
towards the north, they supposed them to be promonto-
ries belonging to some part of the American continent,
which, as they fancied, firetched as far south as the lati-
tude 56. In this manner they are laid down in the chart
published by Muller, and likewise in a manuscript chart
drawn by a mate of Beering's ship, communicated to me
by Mr. Professor Robifon. But in 1769, Krenitzin,
after wintering in the island Alaxa, flood so far towards
the north in his return, that his course lay through the
middle of what they had supposed to be a continent, which
he found to be an open sea, and that they had mistaken
rocky isles for the head-lands of a continent. It is pro-
bable, that the countries discovered in 174I, towards the
east, do not belong to the American continent, but are
only a continuation of the chain of islands. From the
extreme summer cold of all those isles, one is led to con-
jedure that no large continent lies very near to them.
The number of volcanos in this region of the globe is
remarkable. There are several in Kamfchatka, and not
one of the islands, great or small, as far as the Ruffian
navigation extends, is without them. Many are a&ually

burning,

burning, and the mountains in all bear marks of having
been once in a fiate of eruption. Were I disposed to
admit such conjectures as have found place in other in-
quiries concerning the peopling of America, I might sup-
pose that this part of the earth, having suffered violent
convulsions from earthquakes and volcanos, an ifihmus,
which may have formerly united Asia to America, has
been broken, and formed into a cluster of islands by the
shock.

IT is singular, that at the very time the Ruffian na-

vigators were attempting to make discoveries in the north-
weft of America, the Spaniards were- prosecuting the
fame design from another quarter. In I769, two small
veftels failed from Loretto in California to explore the
coasts of the country to the north of that peninsula.
They advanced no farther than the port of Monte-Rey
in latitude 36. But, in several successive expeditions
fitted out from the port of St. Bias in New Galicia, the
Spaniards have advanced as far as the latitude 58. Ga-
zeta de Madrid, March 19, and May 14, 1776. But
as the journals of those voyages have not yet been pub-
lifhed, I cannot compare their progress with that of the
Ruffians, or shew how near the navigators of the two
nations have approached to each other. It is to be hoped,
that the enlightened minister, who has now the direction
of American affairs in Spain, will not withhold this in-
formation from the public.

NOTE XVI. p. 44.

FE W travellers have had such opportunity of obferv-
ing the natives of America, in its various difirids, as
Don Antonio Ulloa. In a work lately published by him,
he thus describes the charaderiflical features of the race:
CC a very small forehead, covered with hair towards its
extremities, as far as the middle of the eye-brows; little
eyes; a thin nose, small and bending towards the upper
lip; the countenance broad; the ears large; the hair
very black, lank, and coarse ; the limbs well turned, the

feet

feet small, the body of jufl proportion; and altogether
smooth and free from hair, until old age, when they ac-
quire some beard, but never on the cheeks." Noticias
Americanas, &c. p. 307. M. le Chevalier Pinto, who
resided several years in a part of America which Ulloa
never visited, gives a sketch of the general aspea of the
Indians there. " They are all of a copper colour, with
some diversity of shade, not in proportion to their distance
from the equator, but according to the degree of eleva-
tion of the territory which they inhabit. T hose who live
in a high country are fairer than those in the marshy low
lands on the coast. Their face is round, farther removed,
perhaps, than that of any people from an oval ihape.
Their forehead is small, the extremity of their ears far
from the face, their lips thick, their nose flat, their eyes
black, or of a chefnut colour, small, but capable of dif-
cerning objects at a great ditlance. Their hair is always
thick and sleek, and without any tendency to curl. They
have no hair on any part of their body but the head. At
the firit aspe&t, a southern American appears to be mild
and innocent, but on a more attentive view, one disco-
vers in his countenance Something wild, distrustful, and
fullen." M S. penes me. The two portraits, drawn by
hands very different from those of common travellers,
have a near resemblance.

NOTE XVII. p. 44.

A M A Z I N G accounts are given of the persevering
speed of the Americans. Adair relates the adventures of
a Chikkafah warrior, who run through woods and over
mountains, three hundred computed miles in a day and a
half and two nights. Hilt. of Amer. Ind. 396.

N T E XVIII. p. 48.

MN . GODIN LE JEUNE, who resided fifteen years
among the Indians of Peru and Quito, and twenty years

in

in the French colony of Cayenne, in which there is a
constant intercourse with the Galibis and other tribes on
the Orinoco, observes, that the vigour of constitution
among the Americans is exactly in proportion to their
habits of labour. The Indians, in warm climates, such
as those on the coasts of the South Sea, on the river of
Amazons, and the river Orinoco, are not to be compared
for strength with those in cold countries; and yet, fays
he, boats daily set out from Para, a Portuguese settlement
on the river Amazons, to ascend that river against the
rapidity of the fiream, and with the fame crew they pro-
ceed to San Pablo, which is eight hundred leagues diflant.
No crew of white people, or even of negroes, would be
found equal to a talk of such persevering fatigue, as the
PortugueA have experienced, and yet the Indians, being
accustomed to this labour from their infancy, perform it.
MS. penes me.

NOTE XIX. p. 54.

DON ANTONIO ULLOA, who visited a great part
of Peru and Chili, the kingdom of New Granada, and
several of the provinces bordering on the Mexican Gulf,
while employed in the fame service with the French ma-
thematicians during the space of ten years, and who after-
wards had an opportunity of viewing the North Ameri-
cans, aiTerts, " that if we have seen one American, we
may be said to have seen them all, their colour and make
are so nearly the fame." Notic. Americanas, p. 308. A
more early observer, Pedro de Cieca de Leon, one of the
conquerors of Peru, who had likewifz traversed many
provinces of America, affirms, that the people, men and
women, although there is such a multitude of tribes or
nations as to be almost innumerable, and such diversity of
climates, appear nevertheless like the children of one fa-
ther and mother. Chronica del' Peru, parte i. c. I9.
There is, no doubt, a certain combination of features,
and peculiarity of aspet, which forms what may be call-
ed a European or Asiatic countenance. There must like-
wife be one that may be denominated American, common

to

to the whole race. This may be supposed to firike the
traveller at firit fight, while the various ihades, which
difinguifh people of different regions, escape his obfer-
vation. But when persons who had resided so long
among the Americans concur in bearing teitimony to the
similarity of their appearance in every climate, we may
conclude that it is more remarkable than that of any
other race. See likewise Garcia Origen de los Indias,
p. 54. 242. Torquemada Monarch. Indiana, ii. 57 1.

NOTE XX. p. 55.

lMe LE CHEVALIER DE PINTO observes, that in

the interior parts of Brasil, he had been informed that
some persons resembling the white people of Darien have
been found; but that the breed did not continue, and their
children became like other Americans. This race, how-
ever, is very imperfetly known. MS. penes me.

NOTE XXI. p. 58.

T H E testimonies of different travellers, concerning
the Patagonians, have been colle&ed and flated with a
considerable degree of accuracy by the author of Recher-
ches Philofophiques, &c. tom. i. 281, &c. iii. I81, &c.
Since the publication of his work, several navigators
have visited the Magellanic regions, and, like their pre-
deceffors, differ very widely in their accounts of its inha-
bitants. By Commodore Byron and his crew, who failed
through the Straits in I764, the common size of the Pa-
tagonians was eflimated to be eight feet, and many of
them much taller. Phil. TranfaEt. vol. Ivii. p. 78. By
Captains Wallis and Carteret, who atually measured
them in 1766, they were found to be from fix feet to fix
feet five and seven inches in height. Phil. Tranf. vol. Ix.
p. 22. These seem to have been the very people whose
size had been so much over-rated in the year 1 764; for
several of them had beads and red baize of the fame kind

VOL, I[. Z with

with what had been put aboard Captain Wallis's ship,
and he naturally concluded that they had got these from
Mr. Byron. Hawkefw. i. In 1767 they were again
measured by M. Bougainville, whose account agrees
neaily with that of Captain Wallis. Voy. 129. To these
I shall add a tellimony of great weight. In the year
i762, Don Bernardo Ibagnez de Echavarri accompanied
the Marquis de Valdelirios to Buenos Ayres, and resided
there several years. He is a very intelligent author, and
his reputation for veracity unimpeached among his coun-
trymen. In speaking of the country towards the southern
extremity of America, " By what Indians," fays he,

is it possessed ? Not certainly by the fabulous Patago-

nians, who are supposed to occupy this diftrit. I have
from many eye-witnesses, who have lived among those
Indians, and traded much with them, a true and accu-
rate description of their persons. They are of the fame
flature with Spaniards. I never saw one who rose in
height two varas and two or three inches," i. e. about
80 or 81.332 inches English, if Echavarri makes his
computation according to the vara of Madrid. This
agrees nearly with the measurement of Captain Wallis.
Reyno Jefuitico, 238. Mr. Falkner, who resided as a
miifionary forty years in the southern parts of America,
fays, that ' the Patagonians, or Puelches, are a
large-bodied people; but I never heard of that gigantic
race which others have mentioned, though I have seen
perfcns of all the different tribes of southern Indiansr'
Introd. p. 26.

NOTE XXII. p. 62.

ANNTONI SANCHEZ RIBEIRO, a learned and inge-
nious physician, published a dissertation in the year r 765,
in which he endeavours to 'prove, that this disease was
not introduced from America, but took its rife in Europe,
and was brought on by an epidemical and malignant dif-
order. Did I chufe to enter into a disquisition on this
subjEc, which I should not have mentioned, if it had
not been intimately connected with this part of my in-

quiries,

quiries, it would not be difficult to point out rome mif-
takes with refpe& to the facts upon which he founds, as
well as some errors in the consequences which he draws
from them. The rapid communication of this disease
from Spain over Europe, seems to resemble the progress
of an epidemic, rather than that of a disease transmitted
by infeaion. The first mention of it is in the year
1493, and before the year 1497 it had made its appear-
ance in moll countries of Europe, with such alarming
symptoms as rendered it necessary for the civil magifirate
to interpose, in order to check its career.

NOTE XXIII. p. 65.

TH E people of Otaheite have no denomination for
any number above two hundred, which is filfficient for
their tranfaaions. Voyages, by Hawkefworth, ii. 228.

NOTE XXIV. p. 71.

A S the view which I have given of rude nations is
extremely different from that exhibited by very refpet-
able authors, it may be proper to produce some of the
many authorities on which I found my description. The
manners of the savage tribes in America have never been
viewed by persons more capable of observing them with
discernment, than the philosophers employed by France
and Spain,in the year 1 735, to determine the figure of the
earth. M. Bouguer d'Antonio Ulloa, and D. George
Juan, resided long among the natives of the least civilized
provinces in Peru. M. de la Condamine had not only
this opportunity for observation, but, in his voyage down
the Maragnon, he had access to infpea the slate of the
various nations feated on its banks, in its vast course across
the continent of South America. There is a wonderful
resemblance in their representation of the charaCter of the
Americans. " They are all extremely indolent," fays
M. Bouguer, they are flupid, they pass whole days

Z 2 fitting

fitting in the fame place, without moving, or speaking a
single word. It is not easy to describe the degree of their
indifference for wealth, and all its advantages. One does
not well know what motive to propose to them, when
one would persuade them to perform any service. It is
vain to offer them money; they answer, that they are
not hungry." Voyage au Perou, p. I02. If one confi-
ders them as men, the narrowness of their understanding
seems to be incompatible with the excellence of the foul.
Their imbecillity is so visible, that one can hardly form
an idea of them different from what one has of the brutes.
Nothing disturbs the tranquillity of their fouls, equally
insensible to disasters and to prosperity. Though half-
naked, they are as contented as a monarch in his mofl
splendid array. Riches do not attra& them in the smallest
degree, and the authority or dignities to which they may
aspire, are so little the objeEts of their ambition, that an
Indian will receive with the fame indifference the office of
a judge (Alcalde) or that of a hangman, if deprived of
the former and appointed to the latter. Nothing can
move or change them. Interest has no power over them,
and they often refuse to perform a small service, though
certain of a great recompence. Fear makes no impreffi-
on upon them, and refpeC as little. Their disposition is
so singula-r, that there is no method of influencing them,
no means of rouzing them from that indifference, which
is proof against all the endeavours of the wisest persons;
no expedient that can induce them to abandon that gross
ignorance, or lay aside that careless negligence, which
disconcert the prudence and disappoint the care of such as
are attentive to their welfare. Voyage de Ulloa, tom. i.
335, 356. Of those singular qualities he produces many
extraordinary instances, p. 336-347. " Insensibility,"
savs M. de la Condamine, " is the basis of the American
characer. I leave others to determine, whether this
ihould be dignified with the name of apathy, or disgraced
with that of stupidity. It arises, without doubt, from
the small number of their ideas, which do not extend be-
yond their wants. Gluttons even to voracity, when they
have wherewithal to satisfy their appetite. Temperate,
, hen ncceflity obliges them, to such a degree that they

can

can endure want without seeming to desire any thing.
Pusillanimous and cowardly to excess, unless when they
are rendered desperate by drunkenness. Averse to labour,
indifferent to every motive of glory, honour, or grati-
tude; occupied entirely by the object that is present, and
always determined by it alone, without any solicitude
about futurity; incapable of foresight or of reflection;
abandoning themselves, when under 'no restraint, to a
puerile joy, which they express by frisking about, and
immoderate fits of laughter; without obje&c or design,
they pass their life without thinking, and grow old with-
out advancing beyond childhood, of which they retain all
the defe&s. If this description were applicable only to
the Indians in some provinces of Peru, who are slaves in
every refpea but the name, one might believe, that this
degree of degeneracy was occasioned by the servile depend-
ence to which they are reduced; the example of the
modern Greeks being proof how far servitude may de-
grade the human species. But the Indians in the mifli-
eons of the Jesuits, and the savages who still enjoy unim-
paired liberty, being as limited in their faculties, not to
fay as flupid as the other, one cannot observe, without
humiliation, that man, when abandoned to simple nature,
and deprived of the advantages resulting from education
and society, differs but little from the brute creation."
Voyage de la Riv. de Amaz. 52, 53. M. de Chanvalon,
an intelligent and philosophical observer, who visited Mar-
tinico in 75 1, and resided there fix years, gives the fol-
lowing description of the Caraibs. " It is not the red
colour of their complexion, it is not the singularity of
their features, which conffitutes the chief difference be-
tween them and us. It is their excessive simplicity; it is
the limited degree of their faculties. Their reason is not
more enlightened or more provident than the inflin& of
brutes. The reason of the most gross peasants, that of
the negroes brought up in the parts of Africa most remote
from intercourse with Europeans, is such that we discover
appearances of intelligence, which, though unfolded, is
capable of increase. But of this the underflanding of
Caraibs seems to be hardly susceptible. If found philo-
sophy and religion did not afford us their light, if we

were-

were to decide according to the first imprefion which the
view of that people makes upon the mind, we should be
disposed to believe that they do not belong to the fame
species with us. Their stupid eyes are the true mirrour
of their Fouls; it appears to be without funcions. Their
indolence is extreme; they have never the least solicitude
about the moment which is to succeed that which is pre-
sent." Voyage a la Martinique, p. 44, 45, 51. M. de
la Borde, Tertre, and Rochefort, confirm this defcripti-
on. " The charateriftics of the Californians," fays P.
Venegas, " as well as of all the other Indians, are ftupi-
dity and insensibility; want of knowledge and refletion;
inconflancy, impetuosity, and blindness of appetite; an
exceflive sloth, and abhorrence of all labour and fatigue;
al excessive love of pleasure and amusement of every
kind, however trifling or brutal; pusillanimity; and, in
fine, a moil wretched want of every thing which confti-
tutes the real man, and renders him rational, inventive,
tradtaLle, and useful to himself and society. It is not
easy for Europeans, who never were out of their own
country, to conceive an adequate idea of those people:
for, esven in the least frequented corners of the globe,
there is not a nation so stupid, of such contracted ideas,
and so weak both in body and mind, as the unhappy Cali-
fornians. Their understanding comprehends little more
than what they fee; abitrat ideas, and much less achain
of reasoning, being far beyond their power; so that they
scarce ever improve their first ideas, and these are in ge-
r.eral false, or at least inadequate. It is in vain to repre-
sent to them any future advantages which will refuit to
them from doing or abflaining from this or that particular
immediately preCent ; the relation of means and ends be-
ing beyond the firetch of their faculties. Nor have they
the least notion of pursuing such intentions as will procure
themselves some future good, or guard them against fu-
ture evils. Their will is proportional to their faculties,
and all their paflions move in a very narrow sphere. Am-
bition they have none, and are more desirous of being ac-
counted strong than valiant. The obje&cs of ambition
with us, honour, fame, reputation, titles, potls, and
difiinEtions of filperiority, are unknown among them;

so

b

so that this powerful spring of action, the cause of so
much seeming good and real evil in the world, has no
power here. This disposition of mind, as it gives them
up to an amazing languor and laflitude, their lives fleet-
ing away in a perpetual inativity and detestation of la-
bour, so it likewise induces them to be attracted by the
first object which their own fancy, or the persuasion of
another, place before them; and at the fame time ren-
ders them as prone to alter their resolutions with the fame
facility. They look with indifference upon any kindness
done them; nor is even the bare remembrance of it to be
expeted from them. In a word, the unhappy mortals
may be compared to children, in whom the developement
of reason is not completed. They may indeed be called
a nation who never arrived at manhood. Hilt. of Californ.
Engl. Tranfl. i. 64. 67. Mr. Ellis gives a similar account
of the want of foresight and inconsiderate disposition of
the people adjacent to Hudson's Bay. Voyage, p. 194,
195.

THE incapacity of the Americans is so remarkable,

that negroes from all the different provinces of Africa
are observed to be more capable of improving by inftruc-
tion. They acquire the knowledge of several particulars
which the Americans cannot comprehend. Hence the
negroes, though slaves, value themselves as a superior
order of beings, and look. down upon the Americans
with contempt, as void of capacity and of rational dif-
cernment. Ulloa Notic. Americ. 322, 323.

NOTE XXV. p. 76.

I H A V E observed, p. 51. that, for the fame rea-
son, they never attempt to rear children who are feeble,
distorted, or defective in their make. So deeply were
both those ideas imprinted in the minds of the Ameri-
cans, that the Peruvians, a civilized people, when com-
pared with the barbarous tribes whose manners I am
describing, retained them; and even their intercourse

with

with the Spaniards has not been able to root them out.
When twins are born in any family, it is still confidered
as an ominous event, and the parents have recourse to
rigorous ats of mortification, in order to avert the ca-
lamities with which they are threatened. When a child
is born with any deformity, they will not, if they can
possibly avoid it, bring it to be baptized, and it is with
difficulty they can be brought to rear it. Arriaga Ex-
tirpac. de la Idolat. del Peru, p. 32, 33.

NOTE XXVI. p. 79.

T H E number of the fish in the rivers of South-Ame.
rica is so extraordinary, as to merit particular notice.
' In the Maragnon," fays P. Acugna, " fish are so plen-
tiful, that, without any art, they may take them with
their hands." p. I38. ' In the Orinoco," fays P.
Gumilla, " besides an infinite variety of other fish, tor-
toifes or turtle abound in such numbers, that I cannot
find words to express it. I doubt not but that such as
read my account will accuse me of exaggeration: but I
can affirm, that it is as difficult to count them, as to
count the sands on the banks of that river. One may
judge of their number by the amazing consumption of
them; for all the nations contiguous to the river, and
even many who are at a diflance, flock thither at the
season of breeding, and not only find fuflenance during
that time, but carry off vast quantities both of the tur-
tles and of their eggs, &c." Hist. de l'Orenoque, ii. c.
22. p. 59. M. de la Condamine confirms their accounts,
p. 159.

NOTE XXVII. p. 80.

PISO describes two of these plants, the Cururuape,
and the Guajana-Timb,. It is remarkable, that though
they have this fatal effe& upon fifies, they are so far

from

from being noxious to the human species, they are used
in medicine with success. Pifo, lib. iv. c. 88. Bancroft
mentions another, the Hiarre, a small quantity of which
is sufficient to inebriate all the fish to a considerable dif-
tance, so that in a few minutes they float motionless on
the surface of the water, and are taken with ease. Nat.
Hist. of Guiana, p. io6.

NOTE XXVIII. p. 82.

R EMARKABLE instances occur of the calamities
which rude nations susser by famine. Alvar Nugnez
Cabecca de Vaca, one of the most gallant and virtu-
ous of the Spanish adventurers, resided almost nine years
among the savages of Florida. They were unacquaint-
ed with every species of agriculture. Their subsistence
was poor and precarious. " They live chiefly," fays
he, " upon roots of different plants, which they pro-
cure with great difficulty, wandering from place to place
in search of them. Sometimes they kill some game,
sometimes they catch fish, but in such small quantities,
that their hunger is so extreme as compels them to eat
spiders, the eggs of ants, worms, lizards, serpents, a
kind of untuous earth, and I am persuaded, that if in
this country there were any stones, they would fvwallow
these. They preserve the bones of fishes and serpents,
which they grind into powder, and eat. The only sea-
son when they do not susser much from famine, is when
a certain fruit, which he calls Tunas, is ripe. They
are sometimes obliged to travel far from their usual place
of residence, in order to find them. Naufragias, c.
xviii. p. 20, 21, 22. In another place, he observes that
they are frequently reduced to pass two or three days
without food, c. xxiv. p, 27?

NOTE

NOTE XXIX. p. 84.

MJi F I R M I N has givei an accurate description of
the two species of manioc, with an account of its cul-
ture, to which he has added some experiments, in order
to ascertain the poisonous qualities of the juice extraEted
from that species which he cal!l the bitter cassava. A-
mong the Spaniards it is known by the name of Yuca
brava. Defcr. de Surin. tom. i. p. 66.

NOTE XXX. p. 84.

TH E plantain is found in Afla and Africa, as well
as in America. Oviedo contends, that it is not an in-
digenous plant of the New World, but was introduced
into the island of Hispaniola, in th.- yea" I51i, by fa-
ther Thomas de Berlanga, and that he transplanted it
from the Canary islands, whither the original flips had
been brought from the East Indies. Oviedo, lib. viii. c.
I. But the opinion of Acolla and other naturalists, who
reckon it an American plant, seems to be better founded.
Acofla Hill. Nat. lib. iv. 2I. It was cultivated by rude
tribes in America, who had little intercourse with the
Spaniards, and who were detlitute of that ingenuity
which disposes men to borrow what is useful from foreign
nations. Gumil. iii. 18b. Wafer's Voyage, p. 87.

NOTE XXXI. p. 85.

IT is remarkable, that Acotla, one of the moRs accurate
and best informed writers concerning the Weft Indies, as-
firms, that maize, though cultivated in the continent,
was not known in the islands, the inhabitants of which
had none but caffada bread. Hist. Nat. lib. iv. c. i6.
But P. Martyr, in the firit book of his firit Decad,

which

which was written in the year 1493, upon the return of
Columbus from his first voyage, expressly mentions maize
as a plant which the islanders cultivated, and of which
they made bread, p. 7. Gomara likewise asserts, that
they were acquainted with the culture of maize. Hilt.
Gener. cap. 28. Oviedo describes maize without any
intimation of its being a plant that was not natural to His-
paniola. Lib. vii. c. i.

NOTE XXXII. p. 9I.

NEW HOLLAND, a country which formerly was
only known, has lately been visited by intelligent obfer-
vers. It lies in a region of the globe where it muff en-
joy a very favourable climate, as it flretches from the
ioth to the 38th degree of southern latitude. It is of
great extent, and from its square form must be much
more than equal to all Europe. The people who inha-
bit the various parts of it appear to be of one race. They
are evidently ruder than moss of the Americans, and
have made till less progress in improvement and the arts
of life. There is not the least appearance of cultivation
in any part of this vast region. The inhabitants are ex-
tremely few, so that the country appears almofs desolate.
Their tribes are fll more inconsiderable than those of
America. They depend for fubfilfence, almofs entirely,
on fiflhing. They do not fettle in one place, but roam
about in queff of food. Both sexes go flark-naked.
Their habitations, utensils, &c. are more simple and rude
than those of the Americans. Voyages, by Hawkef-
worth, iii. 622, &c. This, perhaps, is the country
where man has been discovered in the earliest fiage of his
progress, and it exhibits a miserable specimen of his con-
dition and powers in that uncultivated slate. If this coun-
try shall be more fully explored by future navigators, the
comparison of the manners of its inhabitants with those
of the Americans will prove an infiruaive article in the
history of the human species.

NOTE

NOTE XXXIII. p. 91.

P GABRIEL MAREST, who travelled from his fla-
tion among the Illinois to Machillimakinac, thus de-
scribes the face of the country: " We have marched
twelve days without meeting a tingle human creature.
Sometimes we found ourselves in vast meadows, of which
we could not fee the boundaries, through which there
flowed many brooks and rivers, but without any path to
conduct us. Sometimes we were obliged to open a pas-
sage across thick forests, through bushes, and underwood
filled with briars and thorns. Sometimes we had to pass
through deep marshes, in which we funk up to the mid-
dle. After being fatigued through the day, we had the
earth for our bed, or a few leaves, exposed to the wind,
the rain, and all the injuries of the air. Lettr. Edifi-
antes, ii. 360. Dr. Brickell, in an excursion from
North Carolina towards the mountains, A. D. 1730,
travelled fifteen days without meeting with a human
creature. Nat. Hilt. of North Carolina, 389. Diego
de Ordas, in attempting to make a settlement in South
America, A. D. I532, marched fifty days through a
country without one inhabitant. Herrera, dec. 5. lib. i.
C. II.

NOTE XXXIV. p. 92.

I STRONGLY fufpeEt that a community of goods, and
an undivided store, are known only among the rudest
tribes of hunters; and that as soon as any species of agri-
culture or regular industry is known, the idea of an ex-
clufive right of property to the fruits of them is intro-
duced. I am confirmed in this opinion by accounts which
1 have received concerning the fate of property among
the Indians in very different regions of America. " The
idea of the natives of Brasil concerning property is, that
if any person cultivate a field, he alone ought to enjoy

the

the produce of it, and no other has a title to pretend to
it. If an individual or a family go a-hunting or fishing,
what is caught belongs to the individual or to the family,
and they communicate no part of it to any but to their
cazique, or to such of their kindred as happen to be in-
disposed. If any person in the village come to their hut,
he may fit down freely, and eat without aiking liberty.
But this is the consequence of their general principle of
hospitality; for I never observed any partition of the in-
crease of their fields, or the produce of the chace, which
I could confider as the result of any idea concerning a
community of goods. On the contrary, they are so much
attached to what they deem to be their property, that it
would be extremely dangerous to encroach upon it. As
far as I have seen, or can learn, there is not one tribe of
Indians in South America, among whom that community
of goods which has been so highly extolled is known.
The circumstance in the government of the Jesuits, most
irksome to the Indians of Paraguay, was the community
of goods which they introduced. This was repugnant to
their original ideas. They were acquainted with the
rights of private exclusive property, and they submitted
with impatience to regulations which destroyed them. M.
le Cheval de Pinto, MS. penes me. Aeual pofleflion
(fays a miflionary who resided several years among the In-
dians of the Five Nations) gives a right to the foil, but
whenever a possessor fees fit to quit it, another has as good
right to take it as he who left it. This law, or custom,
refpeEts not only the particular spot on which he erects
his house, but also his planting ground. If a man has
prepared a particular spot of ground, on which he designs
in future to build or plant, no man has a right- o incom-
mode him, much less to the fruit of his labours, until it
appears that he voluntarily gives up his views. But I
never heard of any formal conveyance from one Indian to
another in their natural slate. The limits of every can-
ton is circumscribed; that is, they are allowed to hunt
as far as such a river on this hand, and such a mountain
on the other. This area is occupied and improved by in-
dividuals and their families. Individuals, not the com-
munity, have the use and profit of their own labours,

or

or success in hunting. MS. of Mr. Gideon Hawley,
penes me.

NOTE XXXV. p. 93.

TH I S difference of temper between the Americans
and negroes is so remarkable, that it is a proverbial fay-
ing in the French islands, " Regarder un fauvage de tra-
vers, c'eft le battre; le battre, c'eft le tuer; battre un
negre, c'eft le nourrir." Tertre ii. 490.

NOTE XXXVI. p. 94.

T HE description of the political Rate of the people
of Cinaloa, perf.ctly resembles that of the inhabitants of
North America. " They have neither laws nor kings
(fays a miflionary who resided long among them), to
punish any crime. Nor is there, among them, any
species of authority, or political government, to restrain
them in any part of their condut. It is true, that they
acknowledge certain Caziques, who are heads of their
families or villages, but their authority appears chiefly in
war, and the expeditions against their enemies. This au-
thority the Caziques obtain not by hereditary right, but
by their valour in war, or by the power and number of
their families and relations. Sometimes they owe their
pre-eminence to their eloquence in displaying their own
exploits." Ribas Hiftor. de las Triumph. &c. p. ii.
The fate of the Chiquitos in South America is nearly the
fame. " They have no regular form of government, or
civil life, but in matters of public concern they liften to
the advice of their old men, and usually follow it. The
dignity of Cazique is not hereditary, but conferred ac-
cording to merit, as the reward of valour in war. The
union among them is imperfeEt. Their society resembles
a republic without any head, in which every man is maf-
ter of himfelt, and, upon the least disgust, separates from
those with whom he seemed to be conneted." Relacion

Historical

Hiflorical de las Missiones de los Chiquitos, por P. Juan
Patr. Fernandez, p. 32, 33. Thus, under very different
climates, when nations are in a similar state of society,
their institutions and civil government assume the fame
form.

NO T E XXXVII. p. io6.

I Have known the Indians (fays a person well acquaint-
ed with their mode of life) to go a thousand miles for the
purpose of revenge, in pathless woods, over hills and
mountains, through huge cane swamps, exposed to the
extremities of heat and cold, the vicissitude of seasons,
to hunger and thirst. Such is their over-boiling revenge-
ful temper, that they utterly contemn all those things as
imaginary trifles, if they are so happy as to get the scalp
of the murderer, or enemy, to satisfy the craving ghosts
of their deceased relations." Adair's Hist. of Amer. In-
dians, p. 50.

N O T E XXXVIII. p. 107.

IN the account of the great war between the Algon-
quins and Iroquois, the alchievements of Pifkaret, a fa-
mous chief of the Algonquins, performed mostly by him-
self alone, or with one or two companions, make a capi-
tal figure. De la Potherie, i. 297, &c. Colden's Hist.
of Five Nations, I25, &c.

NOTE XXXIX. p. o09.

TH E life of an unfortunate leader is often in danger,
and he is always degraded from the rank which he had'ac-
quired by his former exploits. Adair, p. 388.

NOTE

NOTE XL. p. o19.

A S the ideas of the North Americans with refpe& to
the mode of carrying on war, are generally known; I
have founded my observations chiefly upon the testimony
of the authors who describe them. But the fame maxims
took place among other nations. A judicious miflionary
has given a view of the military operations of the people
in Gran Chaco, in South America, perfeEly similar to
those of the Iroquois. " They are much addicted to
war (fays he), which they carry on frequently among
themselves, but perpetually againfi the Spaniards. But
they may rather be called thieves than soldiers, for they
never make head against the Spaniards, unless when they
can assault them by stealth, or have guarded against any
mischance by spies, who may be called indefatigable;
they will watch the settlements of the Spaniards for one,
two, or three years, observing by night every thing that
passes with the utmost solicitude, whether they may ex-
pet refiflance or not, and until they are prefe&ly secure
of the event, they will not venture upon an attack; so
that when they do give the assault, they are certain of fuc-
cess, and free from all danger. These spies, in order
that they may not be observed, will creep on all-four like
cats in the night; but if they are discovered, make their
escape with much dexterity. But, although they never
chufe to face the Spaniards, if they be surrounded in any
place, whence they cannot escape, they will fight with
desperate valour, and fell their lives very dear." Lozano
Defcrip. del Gran Chaco, p. 78.

NOTE XLI. p. ITO.

L F. R Y, who was an eye-witness of the proceeding of
the Foupinambos, a Brafilian tribe, in a war against a
powerful nation of their enemies, describes their courage
and ferocity in very Itriking terms. Ego cum Gallo al-

tero,

tero, paulo curiofius, magno nofiro periculo (si enim ab
hoifibus capti aut lefi fuiffemus, devorationi fuiifemus
devoti), barbaros noftros in militiam euntes comitari
volui. Hi, numefo 40oo capita, cum hoflibus ad littus
decertarunit, tanta ferocitate, ut vel rabidos & furiosos
quofque fuperarent. Cum primuri hostes cbnfpexere; in
magnos atque editos ululatus perruperunt. Hec gens
adeo sera eft & truculenta, ut tantifper dum virium vel
tantillum reftat, continuo dimicent, fugamque nunquam
capeffant. Quod a natura illis inditum effe reor. Tef-
tor interea me, qui non femel, tur peditum tum equitum
copias ingentes, in aciem inftruEas hic confpexi, tanta
numquam voluptate videndis peditum legionibus armis
fulgentibus, quanta tum pugnantibus iflis perfuffum fuif-
fe. Lery Hilt. Navigat. in Brasil. ap de Bry, iii. o20,
208, 209.

NOTE XLII. p. ii.

T-H E Americans, like other fierce nations, originally
cut off the heads of the enemies whom they flew in war,
and carried them away as trophies. But, as they found
these cumbersome in their retreat, which they always
make very rapidly, and often through a vast extent of
country, they became satisfied with tearing off their
scalps, This cuflom, though most prevalent in North
America, was not unknown among the southern tribes,
Lozano, p. 79.

NOTE XLIII. p. 11S.

T H E terms of the war-fong seem to be ditated by
the fame fierce spirit of revenge. " I go to war to re-
venge the death of my brothers; I shall kill; I shall ex-
terminate; I shall burn my enemies ; I shall bring away
slaves; I (hall devour their heart, dry their flesh, drink'
their blood; I (hall tear off their scalps, and make cups

VO L. II. Aa of

of their ikulls." Boffu's Travels through Louisiana,
vol. i. p. loz. I am informed, by persons on whole
testimony I can rely, that as the number of people in the
Indian tribes has decreased so much, almoff none of their
prisoners are put to death. It is confidered as better poli-
cy to spare and to adopt them. Those dreadful scenes
which I have described occur now so rarely, that miffio-
naries and traders who have resided long among the In-
dians, never were witnefles to them.

NOTE XLIV. p. 1I6.

A L L the travellers who have visited the most uncivi-
lized of the American tribes, agree in this. It is con-
firmed by two remarkable circumflances, which occurred
in the conquefi of different provinces. In the expedition
of Narvaez into Florida in the year 1528, the Spaniards
were reduced to such extreme distress by famine, that in
order to preserve their own lives, they eat such of their
companions as happened to die. This appeared so shock-
ing to the natives, who were accustomed to devour their
prisoners, that it filled them with horror and indignation
against the Spaniards. Torquemada Monarch. Ind. ii. p.
584. Naufragios de Alv. Nugnez Cabeca de Vaca, c.
xiv. p.. I5. During the siege of Mexico, though the
Mexicans devoured with greediness the Spaniards and
Tlafcalans, whom they took prisoners, the utmoit rigour
of the famine which they suffered could not induce them
to touch the dead bodies of their own countrymen.
Bern. Diaz. del Caflillo Conquift. de la N. Efpagna,
p. 156.

N OTE XLV. p. I17.

M A N Y singular circumfiances concerning the treat-
ment of prisoners among the people of Brasil, are con-
tained in the narrative of Stadius, a German officer, in

the

the service of the Portuguese, published in the year I 556.
He was taken prisoner by the fottpinambos, and remained
in captivity nine years. He was often present at those
horrid feltivals which he describes, and was destined him-
self to the fame cruel fate with other prisoners. But he-
saved his life by extraordinary efforts of courage and ad.
dress. De Bry, iii. p. 34, &c. M. De Lery, who ac.
companied M. De Villegagnon in his expedition to Brasil,
in the year 1556, and who resided a good time in that
country, agrees with Stadius in every circumflance of
importance. He was frequently an eye-witness of the
manner in which the Brafilians treated their prisoners.
De Bry, iii. 21o. Several firiking particulars omitted by
them, are mentioned by a Portuguese author. Purch.
Pilgr. iv. Ia94, &c.

NO T E XLVI. p. I20o

TH O U G H I have followed that opinion concerning
the apathy. of the Americans, which appeared to me most
rationale and supported by the authority of the most re-
fpeEtable authors, other theories have been formed with
regard to it, by writers of great eminence. D. Ant,
Ulloa, in a late work, contends, that the texture of the
skin and bodily habit of the Americans is such, that they
are less sensible of pain than the reit of mankind. He pro-
duces several proofs of this, from the manner in which
they endure the most cruel chirurgical operations, &c.
Noticias Americanas, p. 313, 314. The fame obfer-
vation has been made by surgeons in Brasil. An Indian,
they fay, never complains under pain, and will bear the
amputation of a leg or arm without uttering a single
groan. MS. penes me.

NOTE XLVII, p.

p 21.

THI S is an idea natural to all rude nations. Among
the Romans, in the early periods of their commonwealth,

Aa 2 it

it was a maxim that a prisoner, " turn decefiiffe videtur
cum captus eft." Digest. lib. xlix. tit. 15. c. 18. and as-
terwards when the progress of refinement rendered them
more indulgent with respect to this article, they were
obliged to employ two fictions of law to secure the pro-
perty, and permit the return of a captive, the one by the
Lex Cornelia, and the otherby theJus Poftliminii. Heinec.
Elem. Jur. Civ. sec. ord. Pand. ii. p. 294. Among the
negroes the fame ideas prevail. No ransom was ever ac-
cepted for a prisoner. As soon as one is taken in war, he
is reputed to be dead; and he is so in effec to his country
and his family. Voy. du Cheval. des Marchais, i. p.
369.

NOTE XLVIII. p. 122.

TH E people of Chili, the mofi gallant and high-fpi-
rited of all the Americans, are the only exception to
this observation. They attack their enemies in the open
field; their troops are ranged in regular order; their bat-
talions advance to the charge not only with courage, but
with discipline. The North Americans, though many of
them have fubflituted the European fire-arms in place
of their own bows and arrows, fill adhere to their
ancient maxims of war, and carry it on according to their
own peculiar fyfiem. But the Chilefe nearly resemble
the warlike nations of Europe and Asia in their military
operations. Ovalle's Relation of Chili. Church's Coll.
iii. p. 7 . Lozano's Hil, Parag. i. 144, 145.

NOTE XL1X. p. I25.

H ERRERA gives a remarkable proof of this. In
Yucutan, the men are so solicitous about their dress, that
they carry about with them mirrors, probably made of
stone, like those of the Mexicans, Dec. iv. lib. iii. c. 8.
in which they delight to view themselves; but the wo-

men

men never use these. Dec. iv. lib. x. c. 3. He takes
notice, that among the fierce tribe of the Panches, in the
new kingdom of Granada, none but distinguished war-
riors were permitted either to pierce their lips, and to
wear green ifones in them, or to adorn their heads with
plumes of feathers. Dec. vii. lib. iK. c. 4. In some
provinces of Peru, though that empire had made con-
fiderable progress in civilization, the fiate of women was
little improved. All the toil of cultivation and domestic
work was devolved upon them, and they were not per-
mitted to wear bracelets, or other ornaments, with which
the men were fond of decking themselves, Zarate Hist,
,de Peru, i. p. 15, 6.

NOTE L. p. 125.

I HAVE ventured to call this mode of anointing and paint-
ing their bodies, the dress of the Americans. This is
agreeable to their own idiom. As they never stir abroad
if they are not completely anointed; they excuse them-
selves when in this situation, by faying, that they cannot
appear because they are naked. Gumilla Hilt. de POre-
noque, i. 19x.

NOTE LI. p. I26.

S OME tr bes in the province of Cinaloa, on the gulf
of California, seem to be among the rudest people
of America united in the social fate. They neither
cultivate nor sow; they have no houses in which they
reside. Those in the inland country subsist by hunting;
those on the sea-coast chiefly by fishing. Both depend
upon the spontaneous producions of the earth, fruits,
plants, and roots of various kinds. In the rainy season,
Is they have no habitations to afford them shelter, they
gather bundles of reeds, or strong grass, and binding them
together at one end, they open them at the other, and

fitting

fitting them to their heads, they are covered as with a
large cap, which like a pent-house throws off the rain,
and will keep them dry for several hours. During the
warm season, they form a ihed with the branches of
trees, which protets them from the sultry rays of the
fun. When exposed to cold they make large fires, round
which they sleep in the open air. Hiftoria de los trium-
sos de nueftra fanta fee entre gentes las mas barbaras, &c.
por P. And. Perez de Ribas, p. 7, &c.

NOTE LII. p. 127.

T H E S E houses resemble barns. We have measured
some which were a hundred and fifty paces long, and
twenty paces broad. Above a hundred persons reside in
some of them. Wilson's Account of Guiana. Purch.
Pilgr. vol. iv. p. i263. Ibid. 1291. The Indian houses,
fays M. Barrere, have a most wretched appearance, and
are a striking image of the rudeness of early times. Their
huts are commonly built on some rising ground, or on
the banks of a river, huddled Sometimes together, some-
times firaggling, and always without any order. Their
afpe& is melancholy and disagreeable. One fees nothing
but what is hideous and savage. The uncultivated fields
have no gaiety. The silence which reigns there, unless
when interrupted by the disagreeable notes of birds, or
cries of wild beasts, is extremely dismal. Relat. de 1,
France Equin. p. 146.

NOTE LIII. p. I29.

S O M E tribes in South America can fend their arrows
to a great distance, and with considerable force, without
the aid of the bow. They make use of a hollow reed,
about nine feet long, and an inch think, which is called a
Sarbacane. In it they lodge a finall arrow, with some
pnfpun cotton wound about its great end; this confines

the

the air, so that they can blow it with aftoniihing rapidity,
and a sure aim, to the difiance of above a hundred paces.
These small arrows are always poisoned. Fermin. Defcr.
de Surin. i. 55. Bancroft's Hist. of Guiana, p. 281,
&c. The Sarbacane is much used by the East Indians.

NOTE LIV. p. I29.

MI G H T produce many infiancesofthis, but shall satis-

fy myself with one, taken from the Efkimaux. " Their
greatest ingenuity (fays Mr. Ellis) is shewn in the firuc-
ture of their bows, made commonly of three pieces of
wood, each making part of the fame arch, very nicely
and exa&ly joined together. They are commonly of fir
or larch; and as this wants firength and elasticity,' they
supply both by bracing the back of thebow, with a ikini
of thread, or line, made of the sinews of their deer, 'and
the bow-firing of the.fame materials. To make.'them:
draw more fliffly, they dip them into water, which'
causes both the back of the bow and the firing to contract,
and consequently gives it the greater 'force ; and as they
pratife from their youth, they- hoot with very great
dexterity." Voyage to Hudson's Bay, p. 138.

NOTE LV. p. i30.

N ECESSITY is the great prompter and guide of
mankind in their inventions, . There is, however, such
inequality in some 'parts.of their progress, and some nati-
ons get so far the- art of others.in circumfiances nearly
similar, that-;we rufit ascribe this to foire events in their
flory, or to some peculiarity in their situation with
which we are unacquainted. The people in the island of
Otaheite, lately Jlifeovered ini the' South Sea, far excel
most of the Americans in the knowledge and pra&ice ofthe
arts of ingenuity, and yet they had not invented 'any
method of boiling water,' and having no vessel that would

..- ,; -. ' bear

bear the fire, they had no more idea that water could be
made hot, than that it could be made solid. Voyages bj
Hawkefworth, i. 466, 484.

NOTE LVI. p. 130.

O NE of these boats, which could carry nine men,
weighed only sixty pounds. Gofnol Relat. des Voy. a
la Virgin. Rec. de Voy. au Nord. tom. v. p. 403.

NOTE LVII. p. I32.

A . REMARKABLE proof of this is produced by Ulloa.
In weaving hammocks, coverlets, and the other coarse
cloaths, which they are accustomed to manufaEture, their
industry has discovered no more expeditious-method, than
to take up thread after thread, and after counting and
forting them each time, to pass the woof between them,
so that in finishing a small piece of these stuffs, they fre-
quently spend more than two years. Voyage, i. 336.
Bancroft gives the fame description of the Indians of
Guiana, p. 255. According to Adair, the ingenuity and
dispatch of the North American Indians are not greater, p.
422. From one of the engravings of the Mexican paint-
ings in Purchas, vol. iii. p. I Io6. I think it probable that
the people of Mexico were unacquainted with any better
or more expeditious mode of weaving. A loom was an
invention beyond the ingenuity of the most improved
Americans. In all their works they advance so slowly,
that one of their artists- is two months at a tobacco-pipe
with. his knife, before he finishes it. Ibid. p. 423.

!P . .

NOT E LVIII. p. 134.

-T H E article of religion in P. Lafitau's Moeprs deq
Pauvages, extends to 347 tedious pages in quarto.

NO TE

NOTE LIX. p. 136.

I HAVE referred the reader to several of the authors who
describe the most uncivilized nations in America. Their
testimony is uniform. That of P. Ribas concerning the
people of Cinaloa, coincides with the refR. ". I was ex-
tremely attentive (fays he), during the years I resided
among them, to ascertain whether they were to be con-
fidered as idolaters; and it may be affirmed with the moit
perfea exactness, that though among some of them there
may be traces of idolatry, yet others have not the least
knowledge of God, or even of any false deity, nor pay
any formal adoration to the Supreme Being, who exer-
cifes dominion over the world; nor have they any con-
ception of the providence :of a creator or governor, from
whom they expea in the next life the reward of their
good, or the punishment of their evil deeds. Neither do
they publicly join in any at of divine worship. Ribas
Triumphos, &c. p. I6.

NQTE LX. p. 136.

TH E people of Brasil were so much affrightened by
thunder, which is frequent and dreadful in their country,
as well as in other parts of the. torrid zone, that it was
not only the objet of religious reverence, but the most
expressive name in their.language for the Deity, was
Toupan, .the fame by which they distinguished thunder.
Pifo de Medec. Brasil, p. 8. Nieuhoff. Church-Coll. ii.
p. I32.

NOTE LXI. p. 143,

BY the account which M. Dumont, an eye-witness,
gives of the funeral of the great chief of the Natchez,

it

it appears, that the feelings of the perfins who suffered
on that occasion were very different. Some solicited the
honour with eagerness; others laboured to avoid their
doom, and several saved their lives by flying to the woods.
As the Indian Bramins give an intoxicating draught to
the women, who are to be burnt together with the bodies
of their husbands, which render them insensible of their
approaching fate, the Natchez obliged their victims to
swallow several large pills of tobacco, which produce a
similar effect. Mem. deLouf. i. 227.

NOTE LXII. p. I49.

O N some occasions, particularly in dances intlituted
for the recovery of persons who are indisposed, they are
extremely licentious and indecent. De la Potherie Hist.
&c. ii. p. 42. Charlev. N. F. iii. p. 319. But the na-
ture of their, dances is commonly such as I have de-
fcribed.

NOTE LXIII. p. 51.

T H E Othomacoas, a tribe feated on the banks of the
Orinoco, employ for the fame purpose a composition,
which they call rupa. It is formed of the feeds of an
unknown plant, reduced to powder, and certain ihells
burnt and pulverized. The effects of this when drawn
up into the nofirils are so violent, that they resemble mad-
ness rather than intoxication. Gumilla, i. 286.

NOTE LXIV. p. i53.

THOUGH this observation holds true among the
greater part of the southern tribes, there are some in
which the intemperance of the women is as exceflive

as

as that of the men. Bancroft's Nat. Hill. of Guiana,
p. 275.

NOTE LXV. p. I58.

E V E N in the most intelligent writers concerning the
manners of the Americans, one meets with inconfitlent
and inexplicable circumstances. P. Charlevoix, who, in
consequence of the controversy between his order and that
of the Franciscans, with refpec to the talents and abili-
ties of the North Americans, is disposed to represent both
their intellectual and moral qualities in the most favou-
rable light, asserts, that they are engaged in continual ne-
gociations with their neighbours, and condu& trhefe with
the most refined address. At the fame time, he adds,
"' that it becomes their envoys or plenipotentiaries to
exert their abilities and eloquence, for if the terms
which they offer are not accepted of, they had need to
fland on their guard. It frequently happens, that a blow
with a hatchet is the only return given to their propofiti-
ons. He is not out of danger even if he is so fortunate as
to avoid the firoke, he may expet to be pursued, and, if
taken, to be burnt." Hilt. N. Fr. iii. 25 . Men capa-
ble of such aEs of violence, seem to be unacquainted with
the first principles upon which the intercourse between na-
tions is founded; and inltead of the perpetual. negociati-
ons which Charlevoix mentions, it seems impossible that
there Ihould be any correspondence whatever among
them.

NOTE LXVI. p. 159.

I T is a remark of Tacitus concerning the Germans,
," Gaudent muneribus, fed nec data imputant, nec ac,
ceptis obligantur." C. 21. An author who had a good
opportunity of observing the principle which leads fa-
vages neither to express gratitude for favours which they

had

had received, nor to expec any return for such as they
bestowed; thus explains their ideas: ' If, fay they, you
give me this, it is because you have no need of it your-
self; and as for me, I never part with that which I
think necessary to me." Memoir fur les Galibis; Hist.
des plantes de la Guiane Francoise par M. Aublet, tom.
ii. p. I 0.

NOTE LXVII. p. 171.

AND. BERNALDES, the contemporary and friend of
Columbus, hath preserved some circumflances concerning
the bravery of the Caribbees, which are not mentioned by
Don Ferdinand Columbus, or the other hiflorians of that
period, whose works have been published. A Caribbean
canoe, with four men, two women, and a boy, fell in un-
expeEtedly with the fleet of Columbus in his second voy-
age, as it was fleering through their islands. At firit,
they were firuck almost stupid with astonishment at such a
strange fpeaacle, and hardly moved from the spot for
above an hour. A Spanish bark, with twenty-five men,
advanced towards them, and the fleet gradually surround-
ed them, so as to cut off their communication with the
shore. " When they saw that it was impossible to
escape (fays the historian), they seized their arms with
undaunted resolution, and began the attack. I use the
expreflion, with undaunted resolution, for they were few,
and beheld a vast number ready to aftault them. They
wounded several of the Spaniards, although they had
targets, as well as other defensive armour; and even as-
ter their canoe was overset, it was with no little difficul-
ty and danger, that part of them were taken, as they
continued to defend themselves, and to use their bows with
great dexterity while swimming in the sea. Hilt. de D.
Fern. y D. Yfab. MSS. c. I I9.

NOTE

NOTE LXVIII. p. I7i.

A PROBABLE conjecure may be formed with refpet
to the cause of the diftinEtion in character between the
Caribbees and the inhabitants of the larger islands. The
former appear manifestly to be a separate race. Their
language is totally different from that of their neigh-
bours in the large islands. They themselves have a tra-
dition, that their ancestors came originally from some part
of the continent, and having conquered and exterminated
the ancient inhabitants, tookl possession of their lands, and
of their women. Rochefort 384. Tertre, 360. Hence
they call themselves Banaree, which signifies a man come
from beyond sea. Labat. vi. 131. Accordingly, the
Caribbees still use two diftint languages, one peculiar to
the men, and the other to the women. Tertre, 361.
The language of the men has nothing common with that
spoken in the large islands. The dialet of the women
considerably resembles it. Labat. I29. This strongly
confirms the tradition which I have mentioned. The Ca-
ribbees themselves imagine, that they were a colony from
the Galibis, a powerful nation of Guiana, in South Ame-
rica. Tertre, 361. Rochefort, 348. But as their
fierce manners approach nearer to those of the people in
the northern continent, than to those of the natives of
South America; and as their language has likewise some
affinity to that spoken in Florida, their origin should be
deduced rather from the former than from the latter.
Labat. 128, &c. Herrera, Dec. i. lib. ix. c. 4. In
their wars, they still observe their ancient practice of de-
stroying all the males, and preserving the women either
for servitude or for breeding.

NOTE

NOTE LXIX. p. 171.

O U R knowledge of the events which happened in the
conquest of New Spain, is derived from sources of infor-
mation more original and authentic than that of any
tranfa&ion in the hiflory of America. The letters of
Cortes to the Emperor Charles V. are the mofl valuable
of there, and the first in order of time. As Cortes early
assumed a command independent of Velasquez,. it became
necessary to convey such an account of his operations to
Madrid, as might procure him the approbation of his
sovereign.

THE firfl of his dispatches has never been made pub.

lic. It was sent from Vera-Cruz, July 16, 1519. It
muff have come to the Emperor's hands while he was in
Germany, as he left Spain on the 22d of May in that
year, in order to receive the imperial crown. I have
made diligent search for a copy of this dispatch, both in
Spain and-in Germany, but without success. This, how-
ever, is of less consequence, as it could' not contain any
thing very material,. being written so soon after Cortes
arrived in New Spain. The second dispatch, dated
Otober 30th, I 520, was published at Seville, A. D.I 522,
and the third and' fourth soon after they were received.
A Latin' translation of them appeared in Germany,
A. D. i 532. Ramufio soon after made them more ge-
nerally known, by inserting them in his valuable colleti-
on. They contain a' regular and: minute history of the
expedition, with many curious particulars concerning the
policy and manners of the Mexicans. The work does
honour to Cortes; the style is simple and perspicuous;
but as it was.manifeilly his interest to represent his own
actions in the fairest light, his vicories are probably ex-
aggerated, his losses diminished, and his ats of rigour
and violence somewhat softened.

THE next in order is the Cronica de la Nueva Efpagna,
by Francisco Lopez de Gomara, published A. D. 554.

Gomara's

Gomara's hiflorical merit is considerable. His mode of
narration is clear, flowing, always agreeable, and some-
times elegant. But he is frequently inaccurate and cre-
dulous; and as he was the domeflic chaplain of Cortes
after his return from New Spain, and probably composed
his work at his desire, it is manifest that he labours to
magnify the merit of his hero, and to conceal or extenu-
ate such tranfaEtions as were unfavourable to his charac-
ter. Of this Herrera accuses him in one inflance, Dec.
ii. lib. iii. c. 2. and it is not once only that this is confpi-
cuous. He writes, however, with so much freedom
concerning several measures of the Spanish court, that the
copies both of his Hifloria de las Indias, and of his Cro-
nica, were called in by a decree of the council of the In-
dies, and they were long confidered as prohibited books
in Spain, though of late licence to print them has been
granted. Pinelo Biblioth. 589.

TH E Chronicle of Gomara induced Bernal Diazdel Caf-

tillo to compofehis HifloriaVerdadera de la Conquifta de la
NuevaEfpagna. He had beenan adventurer in each of the
expeditions to New Spain, and was the companion of Cor-
tes in all his battles and perils. When he found that
neither he himself, nor many of his fellow-foldiers were
once mentioned by Gomara, but that the fame of all their
exploits was ascribed to Cortes; the gallant old veteran
laid hold of his pen with indignation, and compored his
true history. It contains a prolix, minute, confused
narrative of all Cortes's operations, in such a rude vulgar
style as might be expeEted from an illiterate soldier. But
as he relates tranfaaions of which he was witness, and in
which he performed a considerable part, his account
bears all the marks of authenticity, and is accompanied
with such a pleasant naivete, with such interefsing details,
with such amusing vanity, and yet so pardonable in an old
soldier who had been (as he boasts) in a hundred and nine-
teen battles, as renders his book one of the mofl singular
that is to be found in any language.

PET.

PET. MARTYR ab Angleria, in a Treatise de Infuli~

nuper inventis, added to his Decades de rebus Oceanicii
& novo orbe, gives some account of Cortes's expedition.
But he proceeds no farther than to relate what happened
after his first landing. This work, which is brief and
flight, seems to contain the infotmation transmitted by
Cortes in his firif dispatches, embellished with several
particulars communicated to the author by the officers
who brought the letters from Cortes.

BUT the book to which the greater part of modern his-

torians have had recourse for information concerning the
conquest of New Spain, is Hifloria de la Conquifta de
Mexico, per D. Antonio de Solis, firpt published A. D.
1684. I know no author in any language whose literary
fame has risen so far beyond his real merit. De Solis is
reckoned by his countrymen one of the purest writers in
the Castilian tongue; and if a foreigner may venture to
give his opinion concerning a matter of which Spaniards
alone are qualified to judge, he is intitled to that praise.
But, though his language be corret, his taste in compo-
fition is far from being just. His periods are so much la-
boured as to be often fliff, and Sometimes tumid; the
figures, which he employs by way of ornament, are trite
or improper, and his observations superficial. These
blemishes, however, might easily be overlooked, if he
were not defetive with refpea to all the great qualities
of an historian. Detlitute of that patient industry in re-
search, which condu&s to the knowledge of truth; a
stranger to that impartiality which weighs evidence with
cool attention, and ever eager to eflablifh his favourite
system of exalting the characer of Cortes into that of a
perfea hero, exempt from error, and adorned with every
virtue, he is less solicitous to discover what was true,
than to relate what might appear splendid. When he at-
tempts any critical difcufflon, his reasonings are fallacious,
and founded upon an imperfec view of fats. Though
he sometimes quotes the diJpatches of Cortes, he seems not
to have consulted them; and though he sets out with
some censure on Gomara, he frequently prefers his au-
thority, the most doubtful of any, to that of the other
contemporary hiflorians,

BUT

BUT of all the Spanish writers, Herrera furnishes the

fullest and most accurate information concerning the con-
quell of Mexico, as well as every other tranfa&ion in
America. The induifry and attention withwhich he con-
fulted not only the books, but the original papers and
public records, which tended to throw any light upon
the fubje& of his enquiries, were so great, and he usual-
ly judges of the evidence before him with so much im-
partiality and candour, that his decads may be ranked
among the most judicious and useful historical colleiti-
ons. If, by attempting to relate the various occurrences
in the New World in a ftri& chronological order, the
arrangement of the events in his work had not been ren-
dered so perplexed, difconneaed, and obscure, that it is
an unpleasant talk to colleE from different parts of his
book, and piece together the detached shreds of a flory,
he might juffly have been ranked among the molt emi-
nent historians of his country. He gives an account of
the materials from which he composed his work, Dec. vi.
1ib. iii. c. I9.

NOTE LXX. p. 75.

O R T E S purposed to have gone in the train of

Ovando when he set out for his government in the year
i 502, but was detained by an accident. As he was at-
tempting in a dark night to scramble up to the window of
a lady's bed chamber, with whom he carried on an in-
trigue, an old wall, on the top of which he had mount-
ed, gave way, and he was so much bruised by the fall as
to be unfit for the voyage. Gomara, Cronica de la
Nueva Efpagna, cap. i.

VOL . I. Bb NOTE

NOTE LXXL p. I77.

CO RT ES had two thousand pesos in the hands of
Andrew Duero, and he borrowed four thousand. These
fums are about equal in value to fifteen hundred pounds
Sterling ; but as the price of every thing was extreme-
ly high in America, they made but a scanty flock when
applied in this manner. Herrera, Dec. ii. lib. iii. c. 2.
B. Diaz. c. 2o.

NOTE LXXI. p. 181.

H E names of those gallant officers which will often

occur in the subsequent fory, were Juan Velasquez de
Leon, Alonfo Hernandez Portocarrero, Francisco de
Montejo,tChriftoval de Olid, Juan de Efcalante, Fran-
cisco de MoFla, Pedro de Alvarado, Francisco de Salce-
da, Juan de Efcobar, Gines de Nortes. Cortes himself
commanded the Capitana, or Admiral. Francisco de
Orozeo, an officer formed in the wars of Italy, had the
command of the artillery. The experienced Alaminos
a&ed as chief pilot.

NOTE LXXIII. p. 183.

IN those different confliEs, the Spaniards loft only two
men, but had a considerable number wounded. Though
there be no occasion for recourse to any supernatural
cause to account either for the greatness of their viEto-
ries, or the smallness of their loss; the Spanish hiftori-
ans fail not to ascribe both to the patronage of St. Jago,
the tutelar Saint of their country, who, as they relate,
fought at the head of their countrymen, and by his
prowess gave a turn to the fate of the battle. Gomara

is

is the firit who mentions this apparition of St. James.
It is amusing to observe the embarrassment of B. Diaz de
CafRillo, occasioned by the itruggle between his super-
flition and his veracity. The former disposed him to be-
lieve this miracle, the latter restrained him from affirm-
ing it. t' I acknowledge, fays he, that all cur exploits
and vicories are owing to our Lord Jesus Christ, and
that in this battle there was such a number of Indians to
every one of us, that if each had thrown a handful of
earth they might have buried us, if by the great mercy
of God we had not been protected. It may be that the
person whom Gomara mentions as having appeared on a
mottled grey horse, was the glorious apostle Sign6r St.
Jago or Signor St. Pedro; and that I, as being a finner,
was not worthy to fee him. This I know, that I saw
Francisco de Morla on such a borfe, but as an unworthy
tranfgreffSr, did not deserve to fee any of the holy apof-
ties. It may have been the will of God, that it was so as
Gomara relates, but until I read his Chronicle I never
heard among any of the conquerors that such a thing had
happened." Cap. 34.

NOTE LXXIV. p. i88.

S E V E R A L Spanifi hifiorians relate this occurrence
in such terms, as if they wished it should be believed,
that the Indians loaded with the presents, had carried
them from the capital in the fame short space of time that
the couriers performed that journey. This is incredible,
and Gomara mentions a circumstance which hews, that
nothing extraordinary happened on this occasion. This
rich present had been prepared for Grijalva, when he
touched at the fame place some months before, and was
now ready to be delivered, as soon as Montezuma sent
lent orders for that purpose. Gomara, Cron. c. xxvii.
p. z8.

B b ACCORDING

ACCORDING to B. Diaz del Castillo, the value of the

silver plate representing the moon, was alone above
twenty thousand pesos, about five thousand pounds Ster-
ling.

NOT E LXXV. p. 194.

T H I S private traffic was directly contrary to the in-
ftruaions of Velasquez, who enjoined, that whatever
was acquired by trade should be thrown into the common
flock. But it appears, that the soldiers had each a pri-
vate aflortment of toys, and other goods proper for the
Indian trade, and Cortes gained their favour by encou-
raging this under-hand barter. B. Diaz, c. 41.

NOTE LXXVI. p. 204.

Go M A R A has published a catalogue of the various
articles of which this present confilted. Cron. c. 49. P.
Martyr ab Angleria, who saw them after they were
brought to Spain, and who seems to have examined them
with great attention, gives a description of each, which
is curious, as it conveys some idea of the progress which
the Mexicans had made in several arts of elegance.
De infulis nuper inventis liber, p. 354, &c.

NOTE LXXVII. p. 211.

TH E RE is no circumstance in the hillory of the'con-
quest of America, which is more questionable than the
account of the numerous armies brought into the field
againtf the Spaniards. As the war with the Tlafcalans,
though of Ihort duration, was one of the most confidera-
ble which they waged in America, the account given of
their forces merits some attention. The only authentic

information

information concerning this is derived from three authors*
Cortes, in his second dispatch to the emperor, dated at
Segura de la Frontera, October 30, I 520, thus estimates
the number of their troops in the first battle 6000; in
the second battle ioo,ooo; in the third battle 150,6o0.
Relat. ap. Ramus. iii. 228. Bernal Diaz del Castillo,
who was an eye-witness, and engaged in all the aCtions of
this war, thus reckons their numbers; in the first battle
3000, p. 43; in the second battle 6000, ibid. in the third
battle 5o,ooo, p. 45. Gomara, who was Cortes's chap-
lain after his return to Spain, and published his Cronica
in i552, follows the computation of Cortes, except in
the second battle, where he reckons the Tlafcalans at
80,000, p. 49. It was manifefily the interest of Cortes
to magnify his own dangers and exploits. For it was
only by the merit' of extraordinary services, that he could
hope to atone for his irregular conduct, in assuming an
independent command. Bern. Diaz, though abundantly
disposed to place his own prowess, and that of his fellow-
conquerors in the most advantageous point of light, had
not the fame temptation to exaggerate; and, it is pro-
bable, that his account of the numbers approaches nearer
to the truth. The assembling of an army of 15o,ooo
men requires many previous arrangements, and such pro-
vision for their subsistence as seems to be beyond the fore-
fight of Americans. The degree of cultivation in Tlaf-
cala does not seem to have been so great, as to have fur-
nifhed such a vast army with provisions. Though this
province was so much better cultivated than other regions
of New Spain, that it was called the country of bread;
yet the Spaniards in their march suffered such want, that
they were obliged to subsist upon Tunas, a species of
fruit which grows wild in the fields. Herrera, Dec. i.
lib. vi. c. 5. p. 182.

NOTE

NOTE LXXVIIL p. 214.

TH E S E unhappy viCtims are said to be persons of
diftinaion. It seems improbable that so great a number
as fifty should be employed as spies. So many prisoners
had been taken and dismissed, and the Tlafcalans had sent
so many messages to the Spanish quarters, that there ap-
pears to be no reason for hazarding the lives of so many
considerable people, in order to procure information
about the position and state of their camp. The barba-
rous manner in which Cortes treated a people unac-
quainted with the laws of war established among poliffed
nations, appears so shocking to the later Spaniih writers,
that they diminish the number of those whom he punished
so cruelly. Herrera fays, that he cut off the hands of
seven, and the thumbs of some more. Dec. ii. lib. ii. c.
8. De Solis relates, that the hands of fourteen or fifteen
were cut off, and the thumbs of all the refl. Lib. ii. c.
2o. But Cortes himself, Relat. p. 228, b. and after.,
him Gomara, c. 48, affirm, that the hands of all the fifty
were cut off.

NO TE LXXIX. p. 2I6.

T H E horses w.erc objects of the greatef aflonifh-
ment to all the people of New Spain. At first they
imagined the horse and his rider, like the Centaurs of the
ancients, to be some monitrous animal of a terrible form;
and supposing, that tieir food was the fare as that of men,
brought flesh and bread to nourish them. Even after they
difcovcred their mifflake, they believed the horses devoured
men in battle, and xwhen they neighed, thought that
they were demandirg their prey. It was not the interest
of the Spaniards to undeceive them. Herrera, Dec. ii.
!ib. vIc. ,i.

NO TE

NOTE LXXX. p. 221.

A C COR D ING to Bart. de las Casas, there was no
reason for this massacre, and it was an a&t of wanton cru-
elty, perpetrated merely to firike terror into the peo-
ple of New Spain. Relac. de la Deftruyc. p. I 7, &c.
But the zeal of Las Casas often leads him to exaggerate.
In opposition to him Bern.-Diaz, c. 83, asserts, that the
first miflionaries sent into New Spain by the emperor,
made a judicial inquiry into this tranfa&ion; and having
examined the priest and elders of Cholula, found that
there was a real conspiracy to cut off the Spaniards,
and that the account given by Cortes was exatly true.
As it was the objec of Cortes at that time, and manifestly
his interelt, to gain the good-will of Montezuma, it is
improbable, that he would have taken a Rsep which
tended so visibly. to alienate him from the Spaniards, if he
had not believed it to be neceflary for his own preservation.
At the fame time, the Spaniards who served in America
had such contempt for the natives, and thought them so
little entitled to the common rights of men, that Cortes
might hold the Cholulans as guilty upon flight and im-
perfet evidence. The severity of the punishment was
certainly excessive and atrocious.

NOTE LXXXI. p. 222.

T H I S description is taken almost literally from Ber-
nal Diaz del Castillo, *ho was so unacquainted with the
art of composition, as to be incapable of embellishing his
narrative. He relates in a simple and rude style what
passed in his own mind, and that of his fellow-foldiers
on that occasion; " and let it not be thought strange,
fays he, that I ihould write in this manner of what then
happened, for it ought to be confidered, that it is one
thing to relate, another to have beheld things that were
never before seen, or heard, or spoken of before among
men." Cap. 86. p. 64. b.

NOTE

NOTE LXXXII. p. 233.

B * Diaz del Cafillo gives us some idea of the fatigue
and hardships they underwent in performing this, and
other parts of duty. During the nine months, that they
remained in Mexico, every man without any diftintion
between officers and soldiers, slept on his arms, in his
quilted jacket and gorget. They lay on mats, or firaw
spread on the floor, and each was obliged to hold himself
as alert as if he had been on guard. " This, adds he,
became so habitual to me, that even now in my advanced
age, I always sleep in my cloaths, and never in any bed.
When I visit my Encomienda, I reckon it suitable to my
rank, to have a bed carried along with my other baggage,
but I never go into it; but, according to cuflom, I lie
in my cioaths, and walk frequently during the night into
the open air, to view the itars as I was wont when in
service." Cap. 0o8.

N O T E LXXXIII. p. 235.

C O RT ES himself, in his second dispatch to the
emperor, does not explain the motives which induced
him either to condemn Qualpopoca to the flames, or tq
put Montezuma in irons. Ramus. iii. 236. B. Diaz is
silent with refpea to his reasons for the former; and the
only cause he assigns for the latter was, that he might
meet with no interruption in executing the sentence pro-
nounced againfl Qualpopoca, c. xcv. p. 75. But as
Montezuma was his prisoner, and absolutely in his power,
the infuit offered to that monarch could have no effect but
to irritatehim unnecessarily. Gomara supposes, that Cortes
had no'other objet than to occupy Montezuma with his
own difirefs and fuifferings, that he might give less atten-
tion to what besel Qualpopoca. Cron. c. 89. Herrera
adopts the fame opinion; Dec. ii. lib. viii. c. 9. But it
seems an odd expedient, in order to make a person bear one

injury,

injury, to load him with another that is greater. De Solis
imagines, that Cortes had nothing else in view than to inti-
midate Montezuma, so that he might make no attempt
to rescue the vi&ims from their fate; but the spirit of
that monarch was so fubmiflive, and he had so tamely
given up the prisoners to the disposal of Cortes, tha he
had little to dread from him. If the explanatiogfwhich
I have attempted to give of Cortes's proceedings on this
occasion be not admitted, it appears to me, that they
muff be reckoned among the wanton and barbarous ads
of oppression which occur too often in the hitfory of the
conquest of America.

NOTE LXXXIV. p. 239.

/

D E Solis aflerts, lib. iv. c. 3. that the proposition of
doing homage to the King of Spain, came from Mon-
tezuma himself, and was made in order to induce the
Spaniards to depart out of his dominions. He describes
his condu6t on this occafion,.as if it had been founded
upon a scheme of profound policy, and executed with
such refined address, as to deceive Cortes himself. But
there is no hint or circumstance in the contemporary his-
torians, Cortes, Diaz, or Gomara, to justify this theory.
Montezuma, on other occasions, discovered no such ex-
tent of art and abilities. The anguish which he felt in
performing this humbling ceremony is natural, if we sup-
pose it to have been involuntary. But, according to the
theory of De Solis, it would have been preposterous and
inconsistent with his own design of deceiving the Spa-
niards.

NOTE LXXXV. p. 241.

I N several of the provinces, the Spaniards, with all
their industry and influence, could colleC no gold. In
others, they procured only a few trinkets of small value.
Montezuma assured Cortes, that the present which he

offered

offered to the King of Caflile, after doing homage, con-
sifted of all the treasure amassed by his father; and told
him, that he had already distributed the reft of his gold
and jewels among the Spaniards. B. Diaz, c. 104.
Gomara relates, that all the silver colle&ed amounted to
50o Marks. Cron. c. 93. This agrees with the ac-
count given by Cortes, that the royal fifth of silver was
0oo marks. Relat. 239. B. So that the Sum total of
silver was only 4000 ounces, at the rate of eight ounces
a mark, which demonstrates the proportion of silver to
gold to have been exceedingly small.

NOT E LXXXVI. p. 242.

D E Solis, lib. iv. c. i. calls in queflion the truth of
this tranfadion, from no better reason than that it was
inconfiifent with that prudence which diflinguifhes the
charater of Cortes. But he ought to have recolleted the
impetuosity of his zeal at Tlafcala, which was no less im-
prudent. He asserts, that the evidence for it refts upon
the testimony of B. Diaz del Castillo, of Gomara, and
of Herrera. They all concur indeed, in mentioning this
inconsiderate ftep which Cortes took, and they had good
reason to do so, for Cortes himself relates this exploit in
his second dispatch to the Emperor, and seems to glory in
it. Cort. Relat. Ramus. iii. 140. D. This is one in-
fiance among many, of De Solis's having consulted with
little attention the letters of Cortes to Charles V. from
which the most authentic information with refpec to his
operations mull be derived.

N O T E LXXXVII. p. 246.

H E R R ERA and De Solis suppose, that Velasquez
was encouraged to equip this armament against Cortes,
by the accounts which he received from Spain concerning
the reception of the agents sent by the colony of Vera

Cruz,

Cruz, and the warmth with which Fonseca bishop of
Burgos- had espoused his interest, and condemned the
proceedings of Cortes. Herrera, dec. ii. lib. ix. c. i'8.
De Solis, lib. iv. c. 5. But the chronological order of
events refutes this supposition. Portocarrero and Mon-
tejo failed from Vera Cruz, July 26, 15g9. Herrera,
dec. ii. lib. v. c. 4. They landed at St. Lucar in OEto-
ber, according to Herrera, ibid. But P. Martyr, who
attended the court at that time, and communicated every
occurrence of moment to his correspondents day by day,
mentions the arrival of these agents, for the first time in
December, and speaks of it as a recent event. Epift.
65o. All the historians agree, that the agents of Cortes
had their first audience of the emperor at Tordefillas,
when he went to that town to visit his mother in his way
to St.' Jago de Compoftella. Herrera, dec. ii. lib. v. c.
4. De Solis, lib, iv. c. 5. But the emperor set out
from Valladolid for Tordefillas, on the i ith of March

520; and P. Martyr mentions his having seen at that
time the presents made to Charles, Epifi. 665. The
-armament under Narvaez failed from Cuba in April
X520. It is manifest then, that Velasquez could not
receive any account of what passed in this interview at
Tordefillas, previous to his hofRile preparations againfi
Cortes. His real motives seem to be those which I have
mentioned. The patent appointing him Adelantado of
New Spain, with such extensive powers, bears date No-
vember 13, 1519. Herrera, dec. ii. lib. iii. c. Ii. He
might receive it about the beginning of January. Go-
mara takes notice, that as soon as this patent was delivered
to him, he began to equip a fleet and levy forces. Cron.
c. 96.

N O T E LXXXVIII. p. 248.

D E Solis contends, that as Narvaez had no interpre-
ters, he could hold no intercourse with the people of the
provinces, nor converse with them 'in any way but by
signs, and that it was equally impossible for him to carry

on

on any communication with Montezuma. Lib. iv. c.
7. But it is upon the authority of Cortes himself that I
relate all the particulars of Narvaez's correspondence,
both with Montezuma and with his fubjets in the ma-
ritime provinces. Relat. Ramus. iii. 244, A. C. Cortes
affirms, that there was a mode of intercourse between
Narvaez and the Mexicans, but does not explain how it
was carried on. Bernal Diaz supplies this defect, and
informs us, that the three deserters who joined Narvaez
aded as interpreters, having acquired a competent know-
ledge of the language, c. ixo. With his usual minute-
ness he mentions their names and characters, and relates,
in chapter . 22, how they were punished for their perfidy.
The Spaniards had now resided above a year among the
Mexicans; and it is not surprising, that several among
them should have made some proficiency in speaking their
language. This seems to have been the cafe. Herrera,
dec. ii. lib. x. c. i. Both B. Diaz, who was present,
and Herrera, the most accurate and best informed of all
the Spanish writers, agree with Cortes in his account of
the secret correspondence carried on with Montezuma.
Dec. ii. lib. ix. c. 18, I9. De Solis seems to confider it
as a discredit to Cortes, his hero, that Montezuma
should have been ready to engage in a correspondence
with Narvaez. He supposes that monarch to have con-
traaed such a wonderful affetion for the Spaniards, that
he was not felicitous to be delivered from them. After
the indignity with which he had been treated, such an
affetion is incredible; and even De Solis is obliged to
acknowledge, that it must be looked upon as one of the
miracles which God wrought to facilitate the conquest,
lib. iv. c. 7. The truth is, Montezuma, however much
overawed by his dread of the Spaniards, was extremely
impatient to recover his liberty.

N OTE LXXXIX. p. 26I.

T H E S E words I have borrowed from the anony-
mous Account of the European settlements in America,
published by Dodfley, in two volumes, 8vo. a work of

so

so much merit, that I ihould think there is hardly any
writer in the age who ought to be ahfamed of acknow-
ledging himself to be the author of it.

NOTE XC. p. 267.

T H E contemporary hitlorians differ considerably with
refpeE to the loss of the Spaniards on this occasion.
Cortes, in his second dispatch to the emperor, makes the
number only I50. Relat. ap. Ramus. iii. p. 249, A.
But it was manifestly his interest, at that juncure,to con-
ceal from the court of Spain the full extent of the loss
which he had fullained. De Solis, always fludious to
diminish every misfortune that besel his countrymen, rates
their loss at about two hundred men. Lib. iv. c. 19. B.
Diaz affirms, that they loft 870 men, and that only 440
escaped from Mexico, c. 128, p. io8. b. Palafox, bishop
of Los Angeles, who seems to have inquired into the
early tranfacions of his countrymen in New Spain, with
great attention, confirms the account of B. Diaz with re-
fpe t to the extent of their loss. Virtudes del Indio, p.
22. Gomara states their loss at 450 men. Cron. c.
o09. Some months afterwards, when Cortes had re-
ceived several reinforcements, he mustered his troops, and
found them to be only 590. Relat. ap. Ramus. iii. p.
255, E. Now, as Narvaez brought 880 men into New
Spain, and about 400 of Cortes's soldiers were then alive,
it is evident, that his loss in the retreat from Mexico must
have been much more considerable than what he menti-
ons. B. Diaz, solicitous to magnify the dangers and sus-
ferings to which he and his fellow-conquerors were ex-
posed, may have exaggerated their loss; but, in my
opinion, it cannot well be eflimated at less than 60o
men.

NOTE

NOTE XCI. p. 285.

S M E remains of this great work are fill visible,
and the spot where the brigantines were built and launch-
ed, is fill pointed out to strangers. Torquemada view-
ed them. Monarq. Indiana, vol. i. p. 53I.

NO T E XCII. p. 292.

TH E Ration of Alvarado on the causeway of Tacuba
was the nearest to the city. Cortes observes, that there
they could diftinaly observe what passed when their
countrymen were sacrificed. Relat. ap. Ramus. iii. p.
273. E. B. Diaz who belonged to Alvarado's division,
relates what he beheld with his own eyes. C. 152. p.
148, b. 149, a. Like a man whose courage was so
clear as to be above suspicion, he describes with his usual
simplicity the impreflion which this fpe&acle made upon
him. " Before, fays he, I saw the breasts of my com-
panions opened, their hearts yet fluttering, offered to an
accursed idol, and their flesh devoured by their exulting
enemies; I was accustomed to enter a battle not only
without fear, but with high spirit. But from that time
I never advanced to fight the Mexicans without a secret
horror and anxiety, my heart trembled at the thoughts
of the death which I had seen them susser." He takes
care to add, that as soon as the combat began this ter-
ror went off; and, indeed, his adventurous bravery on
every occasion is full evidence of this. B. Diaz, c. i 56.
p. 157, a.

NOTE

NOTE XCIII. p. 297.

0 N E circumflance in this siege merits particular no-
tice. The account which the Spanish writers give of
the numerous armies employed in the attack or defence
of Mexico, seems to be incredible. According to Cor-
tes himself, he had at one time X 50,0oo auxiliary Indi-
ans in his service. Relat. Ramus. iii. 275, E. Gomara
asserts, that they were above 200,000. Cron. c. 136.
Herrera, an author of higher authority, fays, theywere
about 200,000. Dec. iii. lib. i. c. I9. None of the
contemporary writers ascertain explicitly the number of
persons in Mexico during the siege. But Cortes on fe-
veral occasions mentions the number of Mexicans who
were slain, or who perilhed for want of food; and, if
we may rely on those circumstances, it is probable, that
above two hundred thousand must have been ihut up in
the town. But the quantity of provisions necelTary for
the fubfirience of such vast multitudes aflembled in one
place during three months is so great, and it requires so
much foresight and arrangement to colle& them, so as to
be certain of a regular supply, that one can hardly believe
that this could be accomplished in a country where agri-
culture was so imperfec as in the Mexican empire, where
there were no tame animals, and by a people naturally
so improvident, and so incapable of executing a compli-
cated plan as the mofi improved Americans. The Spa-
niards, with all their care and attention, fared very poor-
ly, and were often reduced to extreme distress from want
of provisions. B. Diaz, p. 142. Cortes Relat. 271, D.
Cortes on one occasion mentions slightly the subsist-
ence of his army; and after acknowledging, that they
were often in great want, adds, that they received sup-
plies from the people of the country, of fish, and of some
-fruit, which he calls the cherries of the country, Ibid.
B. Diaz fays, that they had cakes of maize, and cerafas
de la tierra; and when the season of these was over,
another fruit, which he calls Tunzas; but their mos com-

sortable

sortable subsistence was a root which the Indians use at
food, to which he gives the name of Quilites, p. I42.
The Indian auxiliaries had one means of subsistence more
than the Spaniards. They fed upon the bodies of the
Mexians whom they killed in battle. Cort. Relat. 76,
C. B. Diaz confirms his relation, and adds, that when
the Indians returned from Mexico to their own country,
they carried with them large quantities of the flesh of the
Mexicans salted or dried, as a most acceptable present to
their friends, that they might have the pleasure of feed-
ing on the bodies of their enemies in their festivals. p.
157. De Solis, who seems to confider it as-an imputa-
tion of discredit to his countrymen, that they ihould at
in concert with auxiliaries who fed upon human fleth, is
solicitous to - prove, that they endeavoured to prevent
their associates from eating the bodies of the Mexicans,
lib. v. c. 24. But he has no authority for this from the
original historians. Neither Cortes himself, nor B. Diaz,
seem to have had any such scruple; and, on many occa-
sions, mention the Indian repafis, which were become fa-
miliar to them, without any mark of abhorrence. Even
with this additional flock of food for the Indians, it was
hardly possible to procure subsistence for armies amount-
ing to such numbers as we find in the Spanish writers.
Perhaps, the bell solution of the difficulty is, to adopt
the opinion of B. Diaz del Castillo, the most artless of
all the Hioriadores primitivos. " When Gomara, fays
he, on some occasions relates, that there were so many
thousand Indians our auxiliaries, and on others, that
there were so many thousand houses in this or that town,
no regard is to be paid to his enumeration, as he has no
authority for it, the numbers not being in reality the fifth
of what he relates. If we add together the different
numbers which he mentions, that country would contain
more millions than there are in Castile." C. I29. But
though some considerable deduction should certainly be
made from the Spanish accounts of the Mexican forces;
they mutt have been very numerous, for nothing but an
immense superiority in number, could have enabled them
to withstand a body of nine hundred Spaniards, command-
ed by a general of such abilities as Cortes.

NOTE.

NOTE XCIV. p. 3IO

IN relating the oppressive and cruel proceedings of the
conquerors of New Spain, I have not followed B. de las
Casas as my guide. His account of them, Relat. de la
Deftruyc. p. i8, &c. is manifestly exaggerated. It is
from the testimony of Cortes himself and Gomara, who
wrote under his eye, that I have taken my account of
the puniihment of the Panucans, and they relate it with-
out any disapprobation. B. Diaz, contrary to his usual
custom, mentions it only in general terms, c. 62. Her-
rera, solicitous to extenuate this Barbarous a&ion of his
countrymen, though he mentions 60 caziques, and 400
men of note, as being condemned to the flames, aflerts,
that thirty only were burnt, and the reft pardoned.
Dec. iii. lib. v. c. 7. But this is contrary to the teftimo-
ny of the original historians, particularly of Gomara,
whom it appears he had consulted, as he adopts several of
his expressions in this passage. The punishment of Gua-
timozm is related by the most authentic of the Spanish
writers. Torquemada has extraced from a history of
Tezeuco, composed in the Mexican tongue, an account
of this tranfa&ion, more favourable to Guatimozin than
that of the Spanish authors. Mon. Indiana, i. 575.
According to that account, Cortes had scarcely a shadow
of evidence to justify such a wanton aE of cruelty. B.
Diaz affirms, that Guatimozin and his fellow-fufferers as-
ferted their innocence with their last breath, and that
many of the Spanish soldiers condemned this action of
Cortes as equally unnecessary and unjust, p. 200, b.
o0I, a.

VOL. II. C NOTE

NO T E XCV. p. 312.

T HE motive for undertaking this expedition was, to
punish Chrifloval de Olid, one of his officers who had
revolted against him, and aimed at eftablifling an inde-
pendent jurifdi-tion. Cortes regarded this infurretion as
of such dangerous example, and dreaded so much the
abilities and popularity of its author, that in person he led
the body of troops destined to suppress it. He marched,
according to Gomara, three thousand miles, through a
country abounding with thick forefls, rugged mountains,
deep rivers, thinly inhabited, and cultivated only in a
few places. What he suffered from famine, from the
hostility of the natives, from the climate, and from hard-
ships of every species, has nothing in hitfory parallel to
it, but what occurs in the adventures of the other disco-
verers and conquerors of the New World. Cortes was
employed in this dreadful service above two years, and
though it was not distinguished by any splendid event, he
exhibited, during the course of it, greater personal cou-
rage, more fortitude of mind, more perseverance and
patience, than in any other period or scene in his life.
Herrera, dec. iii. lib. vi. vii. viii. ix. Gomara Cron. c.
163-- 77. B.Diaz, I74-190.

NOTE XCVI. p. 314.

A C O R D I N G to Herrera, the treasure which
Cortes brought with him, confited of fifteen hun-
dred marks of wrought plate, two hundred thousand
pesos of fine gold, and ten thousand of inferior ftan-
dard, many rich jewels, one in particular worth forty
thousand pesos, and several trinkets and ornaments of
value. Dec. iv. lib. iii. c. 8. lib. iv. c. I. He after-
wards engaged to give a portion with his daughter of a
hundred thousand pesos. Gomara Cron. c. 237. The

fortune

fortune which he left his sons was very considerable.
But as we have before related, the fum divided among
the conquerors on the firit reduction of Mexico was very
small. There appears then to be some reason for sus-
peting that the accusations of Cortes's enemies were
not altogether destitute of foundation. They charged
him with having unjufily applied to his own use a dif-
proportionate share of the Mexican spoils; with having
concealed the royal treasures of Montezuma and Guati-
mozin; with defrauding the king of his fifth, and rob-
bing his followers of what was due to them. Herrera,
dec. iii. lib. viii. c. 15. dec. iv. lib. iii. c. 8. Some of
the conquerors themselves entertained suspicions of the
fame kind. B. Diaz. c. 57.

END OF THE SECOND VOLUME.
