THE

HIST RY
H[ I S T O R Y

O F
SC O T LAND

DURING THE REIGNS OF
Queen M A R Y and of King J A M E S VI.

TILL
His ACCESSION to the Crown of ENGLAND.

WITH A
REV IEW of the SCOTTISH HISTORY previous to that Period;

And an APPENDIX containing ORIGINAL PAPERS.

IN TWO VOLUMES.
By WILLIAM ROBERTSON, D.D.

Minister of LADY YESTER'S, Edinburgh.

VOLUME I.
THE SECOND EDITION.

LONDO N:
Printed for A. MILLAR, in the Strand,

MDCCLIX.

# PREFACE.

PR E F ACE.

Deliver this book to the world with all the dii-

dence and anxiety natural to an Author on publish-

ing his firfl performance. The time I have employed,
and the pains I have taken, in order to render it
worthy of the public approbation, it is, perhaps, pru-
dent to conceal, till it be known whether that appro-
bation shall ever be beflowed upon it.

BUT as I have departed, in many initances, from

former Hiflurians, as I have placed fads in a different
light, and have drawn characters with new colours, I
ought to account for this conduc to my readers; and
to produce the evidence, on which, at the distance of
two centuries, I presume to contradid the testimony of
less remote, or even of cotemporary hiflorians.

THE tranfadions in Mary's reign gave rife to two

parties, which were animated against each other with
the fiercest political hatred, embittered by religious zeal.
Each of these produced Hiflorians of considerable me-
rit, who adopted all their sentiments, and defended all
their acdions. Truth was not the sole objced of thef

A 2 Authors.

Authors. Blinded by prejudices, and heated by the
part which they themselves had aced in the scenes they
describe, they wrote an apology for a faction, rather
than the hiflory of their country. Succeeding Hifto-
rians have followed these guides almost implicitly, and
have repeated their errors and misrepresentations. But
as the fame pafions which inflamed parties in that
age have descended to their poflerity; as almost every
event in Mary's Reign has become the object of doubt
or of dispute; the eager spirit of controversy soon dif-
covered, that without some evidence more authentic and
more impartial than that of Historians, none of the
points in question could be decided with certainty.
Records have therefore been searched, original papers
have been produced, and public archives, as well as the
repositories of private men, have been ransacked by the
zeal and curiosity of writers of different parties. The
attention of Cecil to collect whatever related to that
period, in which he ated so conspicuous a part, hath
provided such an immense store of original papers for
illufirating this part of the English and Scottish history,
as are almost sufficient to satisfy the utmofl avidity of
an Antiquarian. Sir Robert Cotton (whose library is
now the property of the public) made great and valu-

able

able additions to Cecil's colledion; and from this ma-
gazine, Digges, the compilers of the Cabbala, Ander-
son, Keith, Haynes, Sorbes, have drawn most of the
papers which they have printed. No Hifory of Scot-
land, that merits any degree of attention, has appeared
since these collections were published. By consulting
them, I have been enabled, in many inrfances, to cor-
red the inaccuracies of former Hiflorians, to avoid their
mifakes, and to deted their misrepresentations.

BUT many important papers have escaped the notice

of those industrious Collectors, and after all they have
produced to light, much still remained in darkness, un-
observed or unpublished. It was my duty to search for
these, and I found this unpleasant task attended with
considerable utility.

THE library of the honourable faculty of Advocates

at Edinburgh, contains not only a large collection of
original papers relating to the affairs of Scotland, but
copies of others no less curious, which have been pre-
served by Sir Robert Cotton, or are extant in the public
offices in England. Of all these, the Curators of that
library were pleased to allow me the perusal.

THOUGH

THOUGH the British Mufseum be not yet open to

the public, Dr. Birch, whose obliging disposition is well
known, procured me access to that -noble colleAion,
which is worthy the magnificence of a great and po-
lifhed nation.

THAT vast and curious collection of papers relating

to the reign of Elizabeth, which was made by Dr. For-
bes, and of which he published only two volumes, hav-
ing been purchased, since his death, by the Lord Vis-
count Royfton, his Lordship was so good as to allow
me the use of fourteen Volumes in Quarto, containing
that part of them which is connected with my subjed-.

SIR Alexander Dick communicated to me a very va-

luable collecion of original papers, in two large Vo-
lumes. They relate chiefly to the reign of James.
Many of them are marked with Archbishop Spotfwood's
hand; and it appears from several passages in his hiflory,
that he had perused them with great attention.

MR. Calderwood, an eminent Preftbyterian Clergyman

of the last century, compiled an Hiflory ofScotland from
the beginning of the reign of James V. to the death of
James VI. in fix large Volumes; wherein lie has in-

* ^~~~8 ~fertcd

ferted many papers of consequence, which are no where
else to be found. A copy of this history, which flill re-
mains in manuscript, in the poffeflion of the Church of
Scotland, was put into my hands by my worthy friend,
the Reverend Mr. George Wifhart, principal Clerk of
the Church.

SIR David Dalrymple not only communicated to me

the papers which he has collected relating to Gowrie's
conspiracy y but by explaining to me his sentiments with
regard to that problematical passage in the Scottish his-
tory, has enabled me to place that tranfadion in a light:
which difpells much of the darkness and confusion in·
which it has been hitherto involved.

MR. Goodall, though he knew my sentiments with

regard to the cbndud and character of Queen Mary
to be extremely different from his own, communicated:
to me a Volume of manuscripts in his poflefion, which,
contains a great ntrmber of valuable papers copied from.
the originals in the Cottonian Library and Paper Office,
bythe late Reverend Mr. Crawford, Regius Profefor of
Church History in the University of Edinburgh. I like-
wife received from him the original Register of letters
kept by the Regent Lennox during his administration.

X HAVE

I HAVE consulted all these papers, as far as I thought-

they could be of any use towards illufirating that period
of which I write the hiflory. With what success I have
employed them to confirm what was already known, to
ascertain what was dubious, or to determine what -was
contraverted, the public must judge.

I MIGHT easily have drawn, from tle 'different repofi-

tories to which I had access, as many ers as would
have rendered my Appendix equal in size to the most
bulky collection of my predecessors. But I have satisfied:
myself with publishing a few of the most curious among
them, to which I found it necessary to appeal as vouch-
ers for my own veracity. None of these, as far as I
can recolle&c, ever appeared in any former colledtion.

I HAVE added to the Appendix a Critical Differta-

tion concerning the murder of King Henry, and the ge-
nuinenefs of the Quzeen's letters to Bothwell. The fads
and observations which relate to Mary's letters, I owe
to my friend Mr. John Davidson, one of the Clerks to
the Signet, who hath examined this point with his usual
acuteness and industry.

# THE HISTORY OF SCOTLAND. BOOK I. Containing a review of the SCOTCH History previous to the Death of JAMES V.

T H E

HI~STY
~SCO T~' L.1..LA N D.

BOOK I.
Containing a reeievw of the Sc o TCH HiJtory previous to

the Death of JAMES V.
H E first ages of the Scotch history are dark and fabulous. BooK I.

Nations, as well as men, arrive at maturity by degrees, -Jgino

The origin of
and the events, which happened during their infancy or nations fabu-

lous and oh.

early youth, cannot be recolleAed, and deserve not to be remem- fcul.e.
bered. The gross ignorance, which anciently covered all the North
of Europe, the continual migrations ofitsinhabitants, and the fre-
quent and delfrutive revolutions which these occasioned, render
it impossible to give any authentic account of the origin of the dif-
ferent kingdoms now eftablidfed there. Every thing beyond that
short period, to which well atterfed annals reach, is obscure; an im-
mense space is left for invention to occupy, each nation, with a va-
nity inseparable from human nature, hath filled that void with

VOL. I. B events

Booc I. events calculated to display its own antiquity, and liftre. And his

-- ~tory, which ought to record truth and to teach wisdom, often sets

out with retailing fitions and absurdities,

Oriiln of the THE Scots carry their pretensions to antiquity as high, as any of
cot's. their neighbours. Relying upon uncertain legends, and the traditions

of their bards, fil! more uncertain, they reckon up a series of kings
several ages before the birth of Christ ; and give a particular detail
of the occurrences, which happened in their reigns. But with re-
gard to the Scots, as well as the other northern nations, we receive
the earliest accounts on which we can depend, not from their own,
A. D. SI, but from the Roman authors. When the Romans, under Agricola,

first carried their arms into the northern parts of Britain, they
found it poffefled by the Caledonians, a fierce and warlike people;
and having repulsed, rather than conquered them, they ereCed a
frong wall between the firths of Forth and Clyde, and there fixed
the boundaries of their empire. Adrian, on account of the dif-
ficulty of defending such a distant frontier, contracted the limits of
A. D. ii. the Roman province in Britain, by building a second wall; which

ran between Newcastle and Carlisle. The ambition of succeeding
Emperors endeavoured to recover what Adrian had abandoned ; and
the country between the two walls was.alternately under the domi-
nion of the Romans, and the Caledonians. About the beginning
of the fifth century, the inroads of the Goths and other Barbarians
obliged the Romans, in order to defend the centre of their empire,
to recal those legions, which guarded the frontier provinces; and at
that time they quitted all their conquests in Britain.
A. D. 421. THEIR long retidcnce in the island had polifled, in tome degree,

the rude inhabitants, and the Britons were indebted to their inter-

couric

course with the Romans, for the art of writing, and the use of BooK I.
numbers, without which it is impossible long to preserve the me- "
mory of past events.

NORTH BRITAIN was, by their retreat, left under the dominion

of the Scots and Pids. The former, who are not mentioned by any
Roman author, before the end of the fourth century, were pro-
bably a colony of the Celtxa or Gauls; their affinity to whom ap-
pears from their language, their manners, and religious rites; circum-
fiances more decisive, with regard to the origin of nations, than ei-
ther fabulous traditions, or the tales of ill-informed, and credulous
Annalists. The Scots, if we may believe the common accounts,
fettled at first in Ireland; and, extending themselves by degrees,
landed at last on the coafis opposite to that island, and fixed their
habitations there. Fierce and bloody wars were, during several ages,
carried on between them and the Pids. At length, Kenneth II. the A. D. 838-
fixty-ninth King of the Scots (according to their own fabulous au-
thors) obtained a complete vidory over the Pidts, and united under
one monarchy, the Whole country, from the wall of Adrian, to the
northern ocean. And his kingdom became known by its present
name, which it derived from a people who at first fettled there as
firangers, and remained longobfcure and inconsiderable.

FROM this period the history of Scotland would merit tome Hior ons

attention, were it accompanied with any certainty. But as our re- Scuitlnly oi-
mote antiquities are involved in the fame darkness with those of "'c-c
other nations, a calamity peculiar to ourselves has thrown almost an
equal obscurity over our more recent tranfadions. This was occa-
sioned by the malicious policy of Edward I. of England. Towards
the end of the thirteenth century, this monarch called in qucftion

B 2 the

BooK I. the independence of Scotland; pretending that that kingdom was
---'- held as a fief of the crown. of England, and subjected to all the

conditions of a feudal tenure. In order to establish his claim, he
seized the public archives, he ransacked churches and monasteries,
and getting possession, by force, or fraud, of many historical rmonu-
ments, which tended to prove the antiquity or freedom of the king-
dom, he carried some of them into England, and commanded the
reft to be burned i. An universal oblivion of part tranfadions might
have been the effea of this fatal event, but some imperfedt Chro-.
nicles had escaped the rage of Edward; foreign writers had recorded.
fomre important fats relating to Scotland; and the traditions con-
cerning recent occurrences were fresh and worthy of credit. These
broken fragments,. John de Fordun, who. lived in the. fourteenth
century, collected with a pious industry, and from them picked
out materials, which he formed into a regular hiflory. His work
was received by his countrymen with applause; and, as no recourse.
could be had to more ancient records, it supplied the place of
the authentic annals of the kingdom. It was copied in many mo-
nafteries, and- the thread. of the narrative was, by different monks,
continued.through the subsequent reigns. In the beginning of the
sixteenth century, John Major and Hecor Boethius published their
histories of Scotland, the former a fuccina and dry writer, the. latter
a copious and florid one, and both equally credulous. Not many
years after, Buchanan undertook the fame work; and if his accu-
racy and impartiality had been, in any degree, equal to the elegance.
of his tafle,. and to the purity and vigour of his flyle, his hiflory
might be placed on a level with the most admired compositions of
the ancients. But, instead of rejecting the improbable tales of
Chronicle writers, he was at the utimof pains to adorn them ; and

** Innes, Efray 552.

hath,

hath cloathed' with all the beauties and graces of fi&ion, those Ie- Boorc I.
gends, which formerly had only its wildness and extravagance.

THE hiitory of Scotland may properly be divided into four pe- Four remark-

able ,eras in

riods. The first reaches from the origin of the monarchy, to the the Scotch
reign of Kenneth II. The second, from Kenneth's conquest ofhifory'
the PiEts, to the death of Alexander III. The third extends to
the death of James V. The last, from thence to the accefflon of
James VI. to the crown of England.

THE firit period is the region of pure fable and conjecure, and

ought to be totally negleeed, or be abandoned to the industry and
credulity of antiquaries. Truth begins to dawn in the second; pe-
riod, with a light, feeble at first, but gradually increasing; and the
events which then happened, may be slightly touched, but merit
no particular or laborious enquiry. In the third period, the history
of Scotland, chiefly by means of records preserved in England, be-
comes more authentic : not only are events related, but their causes
and effeds explained; the chara&ers of the astors are displayed-;
the manners of the age described; the revolutions in the conftitu-
tion pointed out: and here every Scotsman ihould begin, not to read
only, but to fludy the history of his country. During the fourth.
period, the affairs of Scotland were so mingled with those of other
nations, its situation in the political state of'Europe was so import-
ant, its influence on the operations of the neighbouring kingdoms
was so visible, that its history becomes an object of attention to So-
reigners, and without some knowledge of the various and extraor-
dinary revolutions which happened there, they cannot form a jufl
notion either of the most illuitrious events, or of the charadters of,
tie most diftinguifled personages in the sixteenth century.

TIHE

BooK I. THE following hiflory is confined to the last of these periods: To
t__i,-f give a view of the political slate of the kingdom, during that which
A review of 6 r
the third irea. immediately preceded it, is the design of this preliminary Book. The

imperfect knowledge which firangers have of the affairs of Scotland,
and the prejudices Scotsmen themselves have imbibed with regard
to the various revolutions in the government of their country, ren-
der such an introduction equally necessary to both.

THE period, from the death of Alexander III. to the death of

James V. contains upwards of two centuries and an half, from the
year 1286, to the year I542.

Rife of the IT opens with the famous controversy concerning the indepen-
Controverly
concerning dence of Scotland. Before the union of the two kingdoms, this was
the indcepen- question of much importance. If the one Crown had been confi-
land. dered not as imperial and independent, but as feudatory to the other,

a treaty of union could not have been concluded on equal terms, and
every advantage which the dependent kingdom procured, muff have
been esteemed the concession of a Sovereign to his vaifal. Accord-
ingly, about the beginning of the present century, and while a treaty
of union between the two kingdoms was on foot, this controversy
was agitated with all the heat, which national animofities naturally
inspire. What was then a subjed of serious concern, the union of
the two kingdoms hath rendered a matter of mere curiosity. But
though the objecs, which at that time warmed and interested both
nations, exist no longer, a question which appeared so momentous to
our anceltors, cannot be altogether indifferent or uninftruclive to us.

SoME of the northern counties of England were early in the hands
of the Scotch Kings, who, as far back as the feudal culolns can be

traced,

8

traced, held these possessions of the King of England, and did ho- BOOK I.
mage to them on that account. This homage due only for the ter- ----
ritories which they held in England, was in no wife derogatory from
their royal dignity. Nothing is more suitable to feudal ideas, than
that the fame person should be both a Lord and a Vassal, indepen-
dent in one capacity, and dependent in another *. The Crown of
England was without doubt imperial and independent, though the
Princes who wore it were, for many ages, the vassals of the Kings
of France; and, in consequence of their poffefflons in that kingdom,
bound to perform all the services, which a feudal Sovereign has a
title to exat. The fame was the condition of the Monarchs of Scot-
land; free and independent as Kings, but, as possessing English ter-
ritories, vassals to the King of England. The English Monarchs,
satisfied with their legal and uncontroverted rights, were neither
capable, nor had any thoughts of usurping more. England, when
conquered by the Saxons, being divided by them into many small
kingdoms, was in no condition to extend its dominion over Scot-
land, united at that time under one Monarch. And though these
petty principalities were gradually formed into one kingdom, the
reigning Princes exposed to continual invasions of the Danes, and
often fubjeded to the yoke ofthofe formidable pirates, seldom turned
their arms towards Scotland, and were utterly incapable of eftabliflh-

* A very singular proof of this occurs in the French hiflory. Arpin fold the vi.

comptc of the city Eourges to Philip I. who did homage to the Count of Sancerre for
n part of thcfe lands, which held of that Nobleman, A. D. noo. I believe that no
example, of a King's doing homage to one of his own fubjecs, is to be met with in
the historics either of England or Scotland. Philip le Bel abolihfed this pra&ice in
France A. D. I302. IHcuaut. /,-br,,g Ctbronol. Somewhat similar to this, is a char-
ter of the Abbot of Mclrofs, A. D. 153 , conflituting James V. the Bailiff or Stew-
alrd of that abbey, vefling in him all the powers which pertained to that office, and
requiring him to be aufwcrablc to the Abbot for his excrcifc of the amne, Arcbiv.
pbubl. Edil,

n 2'^

BOOK I. THE following history is confined to the last of these periods: To
Arevieof give a view of the political Rate of the kingdom, during that which
the third Ira. immediately preceded it, is the design of this preliminary Book. The

imperfect knowledge which firangers have of the affairs of Scotland,
and the prejudices Scotsmen themselves have imbibed with regard
to the various revolutions in the government of their country, ren-
der such an introduction equally necessary to both.

THE period, from the death of Alexander III. to the death of

James V. contains upwards of two centuries and an half, from the
year 1286, to the year 1542.

Rife of the IT opens with the famous controversy concerning the indepen-
colntroverlv
concerning dence of Scotland. Before the union of the two kingdoms, this was
theindepen- a question of much importance. If the one Crown had been confi-
dence of Scot-
land. dered not as imperial and independent, but as feudatory to the other,

a treaty of union could not have been concluded on equal terms, and
every advantage which the dependent kingdom procured, mufl have
been esteemed the conceftion of a Sovereign to his vassal. Accord-
ingly, about the beginning of the present century, and while a treaty
of union between the two kingdoms was on foot, this controversy
was agitated with all the heat, which national animofities naturally
inspire. What was then a subjea of serious concern, the union of
the two kingdoms hath rendered a matter of mere curiosity. But
though the objects, which at that time warmed and interested both
nations, exist no longer, a question which appeared so momentous to
our ancefiors, cannot be altogether indifferent or uninflruicLive to us.

SOME of the northern counties of England were early in the hands
of the Scotch Kings, who, as far back as the feudal curtoms can be

traced,

8

traced, held these possessions of the King of England, and did ho- BOOK I.
mage to them on that account. This homage due only for the ter- .--v-'
ritories which they held in England, was in no wife derogatory from
their royal dignity. Nothing is more suitable to feudal ideas, than
that the fame person should be both a Lord and a Vaflal, indepen-
dent in one capacity, and dependent in another %. The Crown of
England was without doubt imperial and independent, though the
Princes who wore it were, for many ages, the vassals of the Kings
of France; and, in consequence of their poffefllons in that kingdom,
bound to perform all the services, which a feudal Sovereign has a
title to exact. The fame was the condition of the Monarchs of Scot-
land; free and independent as Kings, but, as possessing English ter-
ritories, vassals to the King of England. The English Monarchs,
satisfied with their legal and uncontroverted rights, were neither
capable, nor had any thoughts of usurping more; England, when
conquered by thc Saxons, being divided by them into many small
kingdoms, was in no condition to extend its dominion over Scot-
land, united at that time under one Monarch. And though these
petty principalities were gradually formed into one kingdom, the
reigning Princes exposed to continual invasions of the Danes, and
often fubjeAded to the yoke ofthofe formidable pirates, seldom turned
their arms towards Scotland, and were utterly incapable of establish-

* A very singular proof of this occurs in the French hillory. Arpin fold the vi.

compt6 of the city Eourges to Philip I. who did homage to the Count of Sancerre for
\ part of these lands, which held of that Nobleman, A. D. rIoo. I believe that no
example, of a King's doing lhomage to one of his own futbje&s, is to be met with ill
the histories cither of England or Scotland. Philip le Bel abolinled this pracice in
France A. D. 1302. Ilenaut. /lbr,'gj Chronol. Somewhat finiilar to this, is a char-
ter of the Abbot of Mclrofs, A. D. 153 , conflituting James V. the Bailiff or Stew.
ard of that abbey, vefling in him all the powers which pertained to that office, and
requiring him to be anfwcrablc to the Abbot for his cxercifc of the Iame, trchiv.
ttbl. Edint,

in)>.

BOOK I. ilng new rights in that country. The firat Kings of the Norman race;

I-- --' busied with introducing their own laws and manners into the king-

dom which they had conquered, or with maintaining themselves on
the throne which some of them possesed by a very dubious title, were
as little solicitous to acquire new authority, or to form new pretensions
in Scotland. An unexpected calamitythat besel one of the ScotchKings
firit encouraged the English to think of bringing his kingdom under
dependence. William King of Scotland being taken prisoner at Aln-
wick, Henry II. as the price of his liberty, not only extorted from
him an exorbitant ranforn, and a promise to surrender the places of
greatet fl-rength in his dominions, but compelled him to do homage
for his whole kingdom. Richard I. a generous Prince, solemnly
renounced this claim of homage, and absolved William from the
hard conditions which Henry had imposed. Upon the death of
Alexander III. near a century after, Edward I. availing himself of the
situation of affairs in Scotland, acquired an influence in that king-
dom, which no English Monarch before him ever possessed, and imi-
tating the interef-ed policy of Henry, rather than the magnanimity
of Richard, revived the claim of sovereignty to which the former
had pretended.

reteifion of MARGARET of Norway, Grandaughter of Alexander, and heir to
Bruce and Ba- his Crown, did not long survive him. The right of succession be-
iolcmined. longed to the descendants of David Earl of Huntington, third son

of King David I. Among there, Robert Bruce, and John Baliol,
two illuitrious competitors for the Crown, appeared. Bruce was the
son of Isabel Earl David's second daughter; Baliol, the grandson
of Margaret the eldest daughter. According to the rules of fuccef-
sion which are now fetabliflhed, the right of Baliol was preferable,
and notwithflanding Bruce's pcla of being nearer in blood to Earl
David, Baliol's claim, as the reprefcntative of his mother and grand-

mother

mother would be deemed inconteftible. But, in that age, the or- BOOK 1.
der of fuccefflon was not ascertained with the fame precision. The ' '
question appeared to be no less intricate, than it was important. And
though the prejudices of the people, and perhaps the laws of the
kingdom, favoured Bruce, each of the rivals was supported by a pow-
erful faction. Arms alone, it was feared, muit terminate a dispute
too weighty for the laws to decide. But, in order to avoid the mi-
series of a civil war, Edward was chosen Umpire, and both parties
agreed to acquiesce in his decree. This had well nigh proved fatal
to the independence of Scotland; and the nation, by its eagerness to
guard against a civil war, was not only exposed to that calamity, but
almost fubjeEted to a foreign yoke. Edward was artful, brave, en-
terprifing, and commanded a powerful and martial people, at peace
with the whole world. The anarchy which prevailed in Scotland
and the ambition of competitors ready to sacrifice their country in
order to obtain even a dependent Crown, invited him firif to seize,
and then to subjeC the kingdom. The authority of an umpire, which
had been unwarily beflowed upon him, and from which the Scots
dreaded no dangerous consequences, enabled him to execute his
schemes with the greater facility. Under pretence of examining the
question with the utmost solemnity, he summoned all the Scottish
Barons to Norham, and having gained some, and intimidated others,
he prevailed on all who were present, not excepting Bruce and Ba-
liol, the competitors, to acknowledge Scotland a fief of the Englifl
Crown, and to swear fealty to him as their Sovereign or Liege Lord.
This ftep led to another still more important. As it was vain to pro-
nounce a sentence which he had not power to execute, Edward de-
manded possession of the kingdom, that he might be able to deliver
it to him whose right should be found preferable. And such was the
pusillanimity of the nobles, and the impatient ambition of the com-

VOL. I. C petitors,

BooK I. petitors, that both assented to this strange demand, and Gilbert de

Umfraville, Earl of Angus, was the only man, who refused to fur-
render the castles in his custody to the enemy of his country. Ed-
ward finding Baliol the most obsequious and the leafr formidable of
the two competitors, soon after gave judgment in his favour. Ba-
liol once more professed himself the vassal of England, and submitted
to every condition, which the Sovereign whom he had now acknow-
ledged was pleased to prescribe.

EDWARD, having thus placed a creature of his own upon the

throne of Scotland, and compelled the nobles to renounce the an-
cient liberties and independence of their country, had reason to con-
clude that his dominion was now fully established. But he began
too soon to assume the master; his new vassals, fierce and indepen-
dent, bore with impatience a yoke, to which they were not accuf-
tomed. Provoked by his haughtiness, even the paflve spirit of Ba-
liol began to mutiny. But Edward, who had no longer use for such
a pageant King, forced him to resign the Crown, and openly at-
tempted to seize it as fallen to himself, by the rebellion of his vaffalL
At that critical period, arose Sir William Wallace, a hero, to whom
the fond admiration of his countrymen hath ascribed many fabulous
a&s ofprowefs, though his real valour, as well as integrity and wis-
dom, is such, as needs not the heightenings of fiction. He, almost
tingle, ventured to take arms in defence of the kingdom, and his
boldness revived the spirit of his countrymen. At Iaft, Robert Bruce,
the grandson of him who stood in competition with Baliol, appeared
to assert his own rights, and to vindicate the honour of his country.
The nobles ashamed of their former baseness, and inraged at the
many indignities offered to the nation, crowded to his fiandard. In
order to crush him at once, the English Monarch entered Scotland,.

if at

at the head of a mighty army. Many battles were fought, and the BOOK I.
Scots, though often vanquished, were not subdued. The ardent --"
zeal with which the nobles contended for.the independence of the
kingdom, the prudent valour of Bruce, and above all a national en-
thufiafm inspired by such a cause, baffled the repeated efforts of Ed-
ward, and counterbalanced all the advantages which he derived from
the number, and wealth of his fubjeds. And though the war. con-
tinued with little intermission upwards of seventy years, Bruce and
his posterity kept possession of the throne of Scotland, and ruled
with an authority not inferior to that of its former Monarchs.

BUT while the sword, the ultimate judge of all disputes. between

contending nations, was employed to terminate this controversy, nei.
ther Edward nor the Scots seemed to distrust the jutfice of their cause;
and both appealed to history and records, and from there produced,
in their own favour, such evidence as they pretended to be unanfwer-
able. The letters and memorials addressed by each party to the Pope,
who was then reverenced as the common father, and often appealed
to as the common judge of all Christian Princes, are still extant. The
fabulous tales of the early British hiflory; the partial teflimony of ig-
norant Chroniclers; supposititious treaties and charters; are the proofs,
on which Edward founded his title to the sovereignty of Scotland;
and the homage done by the Scotch Monarchs for their lands in
England, is prepofleroufly supposed to imply the fubjeaion of their
whole kingdom --. Ill founded, however, as their right was, -the
English did not fail to revive it, in all the subsequent quarrels between
the two kingdoms; while the Scots disclaimed it with the utmost
indignation. To this, we must impute the fierce and implacable ha-
tred to each other, which long inflamed both. Their national an-

s Andcrfon's Historical Eflhy conccrning the Independency, &c.

C 2 tipathies

BooiK I. tipathies were excited, not only by the usual circumstances of freZ

.---w quent hostilities, and reciprocal injuries; but the English confidered

the Scots as vassals who had presumed to rebel, and the Scots, in
their turn regarded the English, as usurpers who aimed at enslaving
their country.

13c6. AT the time, when Robert Bruce began his reign in Scotland, the

State ofr the b
kingdom fame form of government was eftablimed in all the kingdoms of Eu-
when Bruce
began his rope. And the surprising similarity, in their confiitution and laws,
reign. demonfirates that the nations which overturned the Roman empire,

and erected these kingdoms, though divided into different tribes, and
diftinguifled by different names, were originally the fame people.
When we take a view of the feudal system of laws and policy, that
flupendous and singular fabric erected by them; the first object that
firikes us is the King. And when we are told that he is the sole
proprietor of all the lands within his dominions, that all his fubjeas
derive their pofflions from him, and in return consecrate their lives
to his service; when we hear that all marks of diftindion, and titles of
dignity, flow from him as the only fountain of honour; when we be-
hold the moit potent Peers, on their bended knees, and with folded
hands, swearing fealty at his feet, and acknowledging him to be their
Sovereign, and their Liege Lord; we are apt to pronounce him a power-
ful, nay an absolute Monarch. No conclusion, however, would be
more rash, or worse founded. The genius of the feudal government
was purely ariftocratical. With all the ensigns of royalty, and with
many appearances of despotic power, a feudal King was the moll li.
mited of all Princes.

Origin of the. BEFORE they sallied out of their own habitations to conquer the
Feudal Go-
vernment, and world, many of the northern nations seem not to have been subjea
its arillocrati-
cal genius.

to the government of kings *; and even where monarchical govern- BooK I.
ment was established, the prince poffefled but little authority. A -""
general rather than a king, his military command was extensive,
his civil jurifdi&ion almost nothing -. The army which he led
was not composed of soldiers, who could be compelled to serve,
but of such as voluntarily followed his standard . These con-
quered not for their leader, but for themselves; and being free in
their own country, renounced not their liberty when they acquired
new settlements. They did not exterminate the ancient inhabitants
of the countries, which they subdued, but seizing the greater part
of their lands, they took their persons under protection. And the
difficulty of maintaining a new conquest, as well as the danger of
being attacked by new invaders, rendering it necessary to be always
in a posture of defence, the form of government which they ella-
blifhed, was altogether military, and nearly resembled that to which
they had been accuftumed in their native country. Their general
flill continuing to be the head of the colony, part of the conquered
lands were allotted to him; the remainder, under the name of beze-
ficia orfiefs, was divided amongit his principal officers. As the com-
mon safety required that these officers hould, upon all occasions, be
ready to appear in arms, for the commo: defence, and should con-
tinue obedient to their general, they bound themselves to take the
field, when called, and to serve him with a number of men, in
proportion to the extent of their territory. These great officers,
again parcelled out their lands among their followers, and annexed
the fame condition to the grant. A feudal kingdom was properly
the encampment of a great army; military ideas predominated,
military subordination was eftablified, and the pofleflion of land was
the pay which soldiers received for their personal service. In con-

Cxf. lib. vi. c, 23. 1F- Tacit, de Mor. Germ, c. 7. 1r. 1: Clf. ibid.

sequence

BooIz I. sequence of these notions, the poffefion of land was granted dur-

ing pleasure only, and kings were elective. In other words, an
officer diiagreeable to his general was deprived of his pay, and
the person who was most capable of conducting an army, was cho-
fen to command it. Such were the firIt rudiments, or infancy of
feudal government.

BuT long before the beginning of the fourteenth century, the

feudal fyltem had undergone many changes, of which the follow-
ing were the most considerable. Kings formerly elective, were
then hereditary; and fiefs granted at first during pleasure, de-
scended from father to son, and were become perpetual. These
changes, not less advantageous to the nobles, than to the prince,
made no alteration in the ariftocratical spirit of the feudal confti-
General cau- tution, The king, who at a diflance, seemed to be inveRted with

a which li-

mired the majesty and power, appears, on a nearer view, to poifcis none of
o er ofh the tlofe advantages, which beltow on monarchs their grandeur and
teudal mo-
narchs. authority. His revenues were scanty; he had not a rlanding army;

and he enjoyed no proper jurifdition.

Their reve- AT a time when pomp and fpleidor were unknown, even in
ues elce the palaces of kings; when the officers of the crown received

little salary besides the fees and perquisites of their office; when
embafies to foreign courts were rare; when armies were com-
posed of soldiers who served without pay; it was not necessary that
a king should possess a great revenue; nor did the condition of Eu-
rope, in those ages, allow its princes to be opulent. Commerce
made little progress in the kingdoms, where the feudal government
was established. Institutions, which had no other objed- but to
infpirea martial spirit, to train men to be soldiers, and to make
arms the only honourable profession, naturally discouraged the

commer-

commercial arts. The revenues, arising from the taxes imposed on BooK I.
the different branches of commerce, were by consequence inconfi-
derable, and the prince's treasury received little supply from a source,
which, among a trading people, flows with such abundance, and
is almost inexhauflible. A fixed tax was not levied even on land;
such a burthen would have appeared intolerable to men who re-
ceived their erfates, as the reward of their valour, and who con-
fidered their service in the field as a full retribution for what they
poffeifed. The king's demesnes, or the portion of land which he
Rill retained in his own hands unalienated, furnished fubfiflence
to his court, and defrayed the ordinary expence of government *.
The only stated taxes which the feudal law obliged vassals to pay
to the king, or to those of whom they held their lands, were three ;
one when his eldest son was made a knight; another when his eldest
daughter was married; and a third in order to ransom him if he should
happen to be taken prisoner. Besides there, the king received the
feudal casualties of the ward, marriage, &c. of his own vassals.
And, on some extraordinary occasions, his fubjeas granted him
an aid, which they diftinguiffed by the name of a benevolence, in
order to declare that he received it not in consequence of any
right, but as a gift, flowing from their good-will ,. All these
added together, produced a revenue, scanty and precarious, which
far from enabling the king to attempt any thing that could excite
the jealousy or fear of the nobles, kept him in continual indigence,
anxiety, and dependence.

NOR could the king supply the defeet of his revenues, by the They had no'

terror of his arms. Mercenary troops, and landing armies were nrs."
unknown as long as the feudal government subsisted in vigour.

® Craigi de Feud. lib. x. Dicg. 14. Du Cange Glof. voc. Dominicurn.

:I: Du Cange voc. Auxilium.

Europe

BooK I. Europe was peopled with soldiers. The vassals of the king, and

- ~
. the fub-vaials of the barons were all obliged to carry arms. And

while the poverty of princes prevented them from fortifying their
frontier towns, while a campaign continued but a few weeks, and
while a fierce and impetuous courage was impatient to bring every
quarrel to the decision of a battle, an army, without pay, and with
little difeipline, was sufficient for all the purposes both of the
security and of the glory of a nation. Such an army, however,
far from being an engine at the king's disposal, was often no less
formidable to him, than to his enemies. The more warlike any
people were, the more independant they became; and the fame
persons being both soldiers and fubjeds, civil privileges and immu-
nities were the consequence of their victories, and the reward of their
martial exploits. Conquerors, whom mercenary armies, under our
present forms of government, often render the tyrants of their own
people, as well as the scourges of mankind, were commonly, under the
feudal conflitution, the mofi indulgent of all princes to their fubjeds,
because they flood most in need of their assistance. A prince whom
even war and vicories did not render the master of his own army,
pofiefled no shadow of military power during times of peace. His
disbanded soldiers mingled with his other fubjeds ; not a single man
received pay from him; many ages elapsed even before a guard
was appointed to defend his person; and destitute of that great in-
itrument of dominion a standing army, the authority of the king
continued always feeble, and was often contemptible,

Their jurif- NOR were these the only circumflances, which contributed to-
ilion was li- wards depressing the regal power. By the feudal system, the king's

judicial authority was extremely circumscribed. At first, princes
seem to have been the supreme judges of their people, and, in per-
son, heard and determined all controversies among them; The mul-

tiplicity

tiplicity ofcaufes soon made it neceffhry to appoint judges, who, BOOK I.
in the king's name decided matters, that belonged to. the royal - J
jurifdidion. But the Barbarians, who overran Europe, having
destroyed most of the great cities, and the countries which they
seized being cantoned out among powerful barons, who were
blindly followed by numerous vassals, whom, in return, they
were bound to protect from every injury; the administration of
juflice was greatly interrupted, and t'ae execution of any legal
sentence became alnorf impracticable. Theft, rapine, murder, ai:d
disorder of all kinds prevailed in every kingdom of Europe, to a
degree almost incredible, and scarce compatible with the subsistence
of civil society. Every offender sheltered himself under the pro-
tedion of some powerful chieftain, who screened him from the
pursuits of jultice. To apprehend, and to punish a criminal, of-
ten required the union and effort of half a kingdom ' In order

* A remarkable inflance of this occurs in the following history, so late as the

year I561. Mary, having appointed a court ofjuftice to be held on the borders,
the inhabitants of no less than eleven counties were summoned to guard the person,
who was to act as judge, and to enable him to enforce his decisions, p. 234. The
words of a proclamation, which afford such a convincing proof of the feebleness of
the feudal government, deserve our notice.-" And because it is necelIary for the ex-
ecution of her Highness' commandments, and fcrvice, that herjuftice be well accom-
panied, and her authority sufficiently fortified, by the concurrence of a good power
of her faithful subjeCts -Therefore commands and charges all and sundry Earls,
Lords, BaLrons, Freeholders, Landed-men, and other Gentlemen, dwelling within the
said counties, that they, and every one of them, with their kin, firiends, servants, and
houfllold men, well bodin in feir of war in the mioft fubflantious manner, [i. e.
compleatly armed and provided,] and with twenty days vi&luals, to meet and to pass
forward with him to the borrough of Jcdburgh, and there to remain during the
said space of twenty days, and to receive such dircction and commands, as shall be
given by him to them in our Sovereign Lady's name, for quietness of the country;
and to put the fame in execution under the pain of losing their life, lands and
goods." Keith's Hist. of'Scotland, 198.

VOL. . D to

BOOK I. to remedy there evils, many persons of diftinacon were entrusted

L--^-" with the administration of justice within their own territories.

But what we may presume was, at firif, only a temporary grant,
or a personal pi ivelege, the incroaching spirit of the nobles soon con-
verted into a right, and rendered hereditary. The lands of ofme
were ereded into Baronies, those of others into Regalities. The
jurifdicion of the former was extensive, that of the latter, as the
name implies, royal, and almost unbounded. All causes, whether
civil or criminal, were tried by judges, whom the lord of the re-
gality appointed; and if the king's courts called any person within
his territory before them, the lord of regality might put a stop to
their proceedings, and by the privilege of repledging, remove the
cause to his own court, and even punish his vassal, if he submitted
to a foreign jurifdidion *. Thus almost every question, in which
any person, who resided on the lands of the nobles, was interefled,
being determined by judges appointed by the nobles themselves,
their vaiTals were scarce sensible of being, in any degree, fubjeac
to the crown. A feudal kingdom was split into many small prin-
cipalities, almofl independent, and held together by a feeble and com-
monly an imperceptible bond of union. And the king was not
only firipped of the authority annexed to the person of a supreme
judge, but his revenue suffered no finall diminution, by the lotss
of those pecuniary emoluments, which were, in. that age, due to,
the person who adminifired justice.

IN the fame proportion that the king funk in power, the noblks

tofe towards independence. Not satisfied with having obtained a.
hereditary right to their fiefs, which they formerly held during plea.s

X Craig, lib. iii. Dieg. 7.:

Ilire,

sure, their ambition aimed at Something bolder, and by introducing BOOK I.
entails, endeavoured, as far as human ingenuity and invention can
reach that end, to render their pofleffions unalienable and ever-
lafling. As they had full power to add to the inheritance transmit.
ted to them from their ancestors, but none to diminish it; time
alone, by means of marriages, legacies, and other accidents, brought
continual accessions of wealth, and of dignity; a great family, like
a river, became considerable from the length of its course, and as
it rolled on, new honours and new property flowed successively
into it. Whatever influence is derived from titles of honour, the
feudal barons, likewise, possessed in an ample manner. These
marks of distinction are, in their own nature, either official or per-
fonal, and being annexed to a particular charge, or bestowed by
the admiration of mankind upon illustrious characers, ought to be
appropriated to there. But the son, however unworthy, could not
bear to be stripped of that appellation, by which his father had
been distinguished. His presumption claimed, what his virtue did
not merit; titles of honour became hereditary, and added new lustre
to nobles already in possession of too much power. Something more
audacious, and more extravagant flill remained. The supreme di-
retion of all affairs, both civil and military, being committed to the
great officers of the crown, the fame and safety of princes, as well
as of their people, depended upon the fidelity and abilities of these
officers. But such was the preposterous ambition of the nobles, and
so successful even their wildest attempts to aggrandize themselves,
that in all the kingdoms where the feudal inititutions prevailed,
most of these offices were annexed to great families, and held, like
fiefs, by hereditary right. A person whose undutiful behaviour
rendered him odious to his prince, or whose incapacity exposed him

D2 to

20 THE H ISTORY
BOOK I. to the contempt of the people, often held a place of power and trult,

'-- - of the greatest importance to both. In Scotland, the offices of Lord

Justice General, Great Chamberlain, High Steward, High Conftabie,
Earl Marshal, and High Admiral, were all hereditary ; and in many
counties, the office of Sheriff was held in the fame manner.

NOBLES, whose property was so extensive, and whose power if-

great, could not fail of being turbulent and formidable. Nor did
they want instruments for executing their boldest designs. That
portion of their lands, which they parcelled out among their fol-
lowers, supplied them with a numerous band of faithful and de-
termined vassals; while that, which they retained in their own
hands, enabled them to live with a princely splendour. The great
hall of an ambitious baron was often more crowded than the cburt
of his sovereign. The firong castles, in which they resided, as-
forded a secure retreat to the discontented and seditious. A, great
part of their revenue was spent upon multitudes of indigent, but
bold retainers. And if at any time they left their retreat, to ap-
pear in the court of their sovereign, they were accompanied, even.
in times of peace, with a vast train of armed followers. The usual
retinue of William the Sixth Earl of Douglas coififted of 2000
horse. Those of the other nobles were magnificent and formidable
in proportion. Impatient of subordination, and forgetting their pro-
per rank, there potent and haughty barons were the rivals, rather
than the subjects of their prince. They often despised his orders,.
insulted his person, and wrested from him. his crown. And the
history of Europe, during several ages, contains little else, but the
accounts of the wars and revolutions, occasioned by their exorbitant
ambition,

Bu T,

BUT, if the authority of the barons far exceeded its proper .BooK I

bounds in the other nations of Europe, we may affirm that the ower
balance which ought to be preserved between a king and his greater in

Scotland than.

nobles was intirely loft in Scotland. The Scottish nobles enjoyed, in in any other
common with those of other nations, all the means. for extending kingdom.
their authority which arise from the ariflocratical genius of the
feudal government. Besides these, they possessed advantages pe-
culiar to themselves; the accidental sources of their power were
contiderable; and singular circumifances concurred with the spirit
of the constitution to aggrandise them. To enumerate the moft-Theparticu-
remaikable ofthere; will serve both to explain the political state of.thicaufes o.
the kingdom, and to illustrate many important occurrences, in the
period now under our review.

I.. THE: nature of their country was one caufe-of the power and The natureof

independence of the Scottish nobility. Level and open countries the country,
are formed for servitude. The authority of the supreme magistrate.
reaches.with ease to the most distant corners, and when nature has.
eretedno barrier,.. and affords no retreat, the guilty. or.obnoxious;
are soon deteted, and puniohed. Mountains, and fens, and rivers.
set bounds-to despotic power, and amidst these, is the natural feat.
of freedom and independence. In such places, did the Scottish-
nobles usually fix their residence. By retiring to his own castle,.
a mutinous baron could defy the power of his sovereign .it being
impradicable.to lead an army, through a barren country, to places,,
almost inaccessible toa tingle man. The fame causes, which checked
the progress of the Roman arms, and rendered all the efforts of
Edward I. abortive, often proteted the Scottish nobles fiom the.
vengeance of their.prince ;. and they owed their personal indepen-.

deice,,

BooKI. dence, to those very mountains and marfli¢s, which saved their

country from being conquered.

The small II. THE want of great cities in Scotland contributed not a. little-
number of

a cites. to increase the power of the nobility, and to weaken that of the

Prince. Where-ever numbers of mtn affenble together, order must
be eflablifhed, and a regular form of government instituted, the
authority of the magistrate must be recognized, and his decilions
meet with prompt and full obedience. Laws and subordination
take rife in cities; and where there are few cities as in Poland, or
none as in Tartary, there are few or no traces of any fort of police,.
But under the feudal governments, commerce, the chief means of
assembling mankind, was neglected; the nobles, in order to Ltrengthen
their influence over their vassals, resided among them, and fel-
dom appeared at court, where they found a superior, or dwelt-in
cities, where they met with equals. In Scotland, the. rich coun-
ties in the south lying open to the English, no town situated there
-could rife to be great or populous amidst continual inroads, and:
alarms: the residence of our monarchs was not fixed to any, parti-
.cular place; many parts of the country were barren and unculti-
vated; and in consequence of there peculiar circumstances, added to
the general causes flowing from the nature of the feudal institutions,
the towns in Scotland were extremely few, and very inconsiderable,
The vassals of every baron occupied a diftina portion of the king-
dom, and unmingled with others, formed a separate and almost,
independent society. Instead of giving aid towards reducing to
obedience their seditious Chieftain, or any whom he took. under his
proteAtion, they were all in arms for his defence, and obftr-uded the
operations of juffice to the utmost. The prince was obliged to
connive at criminals, whom he could not reach; the nobles, con-

fcious

fcious of this advantage, were not afraid to offend; and the diflicul- BOOK I.
ty of punithing almost assured them of impunity.. ----

III. TH;:.ivifion of the country into clans had no small effect The inftttu-

in rendering the nobles considerable. The nations, which over- ran tion f Clans
Europe, were originally divided into many small tribes; and when
they came to parcel out the lands which they had conquered, it
was natural for every chieftain to beflow a portion, in the first
place, upon those of his own tribe or family. These all held
their lands of him; and as the safety of each individual depended on
the general union, these small societies clung together, and were
diftinguihed by some common appellation, either patronymical,, or
local, long before the introduction of firnames, or enjigns armorial.
But when these became common, the descendants and relations of
every Chieftain assumed the fame name and arms with him; other
vaiials were proud to imitate their example, and by degrees they
were communicated to all those who held of the fame superior.
Thus clanfhips were formed; and in a generation or two, that
consanguinity which was, at first in a great measure, imaginary,
was believed to be real. An artificial union was converted into a
natural one; men willingly followed a leader, whom they regarded
both as the superior of their lands, and the chief of their blood,
and served him. not only with the fidelity of vassals, but with the
affection of friends. In the other feudal kingdoms, we may ob-
serve such unions as we have described, imperfedly formed; but in
Scotland, whether they were the production of chance, or the es-
fe& of policy, or introduced by the Irish colony above-mentioned,
and; strengthened by carefully preserving their genealogies both ge-
nuine and fabulous, clanfhips were universal. Such a confederacy
might be overcome, it could not be broken; and no change of man-

ners,
4 '

BooK I. ners, or of government, has been able, in some parts ofthe king-
t --'" dom. to difiblve associations which are founded upon prejudices to

natural to the human mind. How formidable were nobles at the
head of followers, who, counting that cause just and: honourable
which their chief approved, were ever ready to take the field at
his command, and to sacrifice their lives in defence of his person,
or of his fame ? Against such men, a king contended with great
disadvantage, and that cold service, which money purchases, or au-
thority extorts, was not an equal match for their ardour and zeal.

The small IV. THE smallness of their number may be mentioned among the
number ofthe causes of the grandeur of the Scottish nobles. Our annals reach
nobles.

not back to the first division of property in the kingdom; but so
far as we can trace the matter, the original possessions of the nobles
eeem to have been extensive. The ancient Thanes were the
equals and the rivals of their prince. Many of the earls and
barons, who succeeded them, were mailers of territories no less
ample. France and England, countries wide and fertile, afforded
settlements to a numerous and powerful1 nobility. Scotland, a
kingdom neither extensive nor rich, could not contain many such
overgrown proprietors. But the power of an aristocracy always
dimninifles, in proportion to the increase of its numbers; feeble if di-
vided among a multitude; irresistible if centered in a few. When
nobles are numerous, their operations nearly resemble those of the
people, they are roused by what they feel only, not by what they
apprehend; and submit to many arbitrary and oppressive ads, be-
fore they take arms against their sovereign. A small body, on the
contrary, is more sensible, and more impatient; quick in discern-
ing, and prompt in repelling danger; all its motions' are as sudden,
as those of the other are flow. Hence proceeded the extreme jea-

lousy,

lousy, with which the Scottish nobles observed their monarchs, and Booe I.
the fierceness with which'they oppefed their incroachments. Even
-the virtue of a prince did not render them less vigilant, or less eager
to defend their ,rights; and Robert Bruce, notwithstanding the
iplendor of his vidories, and the glory of his name, was upon the
point of experiencing the vigour of their refitance, no less than his
unpopular descendent James III. Besides this, the near alliance of
the great families, by frequent intermarriages, was the natural con-
sequence of their small -number. And as consanguinity was, in
those ages, a powerful bond of union, all the kindred of a nobleman
interested themselves in his quarrel, as a common cause, and every
contest the king had, though with a single baron, soon drew upon
him the arms of a whole confederacy.

V. THosE natural connexions both witlh their equals, and with Their kagues

and combina-

their inferiors, the Scottiff nobles ifrengthened by a device, which t ina
,if not peculiar to themselv.es,. was at least more frequent among them,
than in a-ny other nation. 'Even in times of profound peace, theyj
formed afTociations, which when made with their equals, were called
Leagues of nmutzal defence; and when with'their inferiors, bonds of
manrent. :By the former, the contrading parties bound themselves
mutuallylto afflt each other, in all causes, and against allperfons. By
Ithe latter, protection was stipulated on the one hand, and fidelity
and personal service promised on the other . 'Self-prefervation, it
is probable, forced men at firfi into these confederacies, and while
disorder and rapine were universal, while government was unsettled,
and the authority of laws little known or regarded, near neigh-
.ours found it necessary to ;unite in this manner for their security,

F Aa. 3.. Prl,. 1424d. A 4. 43. 555.
VOL. L E .and

BooK I. and the- weak were obliged to court the patronage of the ftrongl
.-."-. By degrees, these aflociations became so many alliances offensive and

defensive against the throne; and as their obligation was held to be
more sacred than any tie whatever, they gave much umbrage to
our kings, and contributed not a little to the power and indepen-
dence of the nobility. In the reign of James II. William the eighth
earl of Douglas entered into a league of this kind with the earls
of Crawford, Ross, Murray, Ormond, the lords Hamilton, Bal-
veny, &c. and so formidable was this combination to the king, that
he had recourse to a measure no less violent than unjust, in order
to dissolve it.

The frequnt VI. The frequent wars between England and Scotland proved
wars with another cause of augmenting the power of the nobility. Nature
England.

has placed no barrier between the two kingdoms; a river, almost
every where fordable, divides them towards the eat ; on the weft
they are separated by an imaginary line. The finall revenues of
our kings prevented them from fortifying, or placing garrisons in
the towns on the frontier; nor would thejealoufy of their fubjeas
have permitted such a method of defence. The barons, whose
estates lay near the borders, confidered themselves as bound in ho-
nour and interest to repell the enemy. The wardenfyiips of the dif-
ferent marches, offices of great trust and dignity, were always be-
flowed on them. This gained them the leading of the warlike
counties in the south; and their vassals, living in a slate of perpetual
hostility, or enjoying at best an insecure peace, became more in-
ured to war than even the reft of their countrymen, and more wil-
ling to accompany their chieftain in his most hardy and dangerous
enterprizes. It was the valour, no less than the number of their
followers, that rendered the Douglases great. The nobles in the
northern and midland counties were often dutiful and obsequious to

the

the crown, but our monarchs always found it impracticable to Cub- BoorK ].
due the mutinous and ungovernable spirit of the borderers. In all --,.
our domestic quarrels, those, who could draw to their fide the
inhabitants of the fouthernmcounties, were Lure of victory; and con-
fcious of this advantage, the lords who poifeffed authority there,
were apt to forget the duty which they owed their sovereign, and to
aspire beyond the rank of fubjeds.

VII. TuIE calamities which besel our kings contributed more than The frequent

any other cause to diminish the royal authority. Never was any race winchSha.-
of monarchs so unfortunate as the Scotch. Of fix successive princes, pened in Scot-
firom Robert III. to James VI. not one died a natural death; and
the minorities, during that time, were longer, and more frequent,
than ever happened in any other kingdom. From Robert Bruce
to James VI. we reckon ten princes; and seven of there were cal-
led to the throne, while they were minors, and almost infants. Even
the most regular and belt established governments feel sensibly the
pernicious effects of a minority, and either become languid and in-
active, or are thrown into violent and unnatural convulsions. But,
under the imperfet and ill adjusted system of government in Scot-
land, these effects were still more fatal; and the fierce and muti-
nous spirit of the nobles, unrestrained by the authority of a king,
scorned all fubjetion to the delegated jurifdiEtion of aregent, or
to the feeble commands of a minor. The royal authority was
circumscribed within narrower limits than ever; the prerogatives of
the crown, naturally inconsiderable, were reduced almloft to no-
thing; and the ariffocratical power gradually rose upon the ruins
of the monarchical. Left the pcrfonal power of a regent should
enable him to ad with too much vigour, the authority annexed
to that office, was sometimes rendered inconsiderable, by being'

E 2 divided 3

B.O.O I. divided; or if a ingle regent Wtas chosen, the-greater nobles, andc
u--v--- the heads of the 'more i!luftrious families, were seldom raised to that

dignity. It was often conferred upon men, who pofleffed little
influence, and excited no jea!oufy. They, conscious of their own
weakness, were obliged'to overlook some irregularities, and to per-
mit others; and in order to support their authority, which was de-
ftitute of rel strength, they endeavoured to gain the moif power-
ful and aaive barons, by granting them pofretfions and immunities,
which raised them to fill greater power. When the king him-
se-lf came to afiume the reins of government, he found his reve-
nues wafled or alienated, the crown lands seized or given away,
and the nobles si accufomed to independence,. that- after the
firuggles of a whole reign, he was seldom able to reduce them to,
the fame dlate, in which they had been at the beginning of his mi-

Re-viev ofthe nority, or to wrest from them what they had usurped during that
vtf totheur time. If we take a view of what happened to each of our kings, who,
nobies during was so unfortunate as to be placed in this situation, the truth and im-
each minori- -

t.y. portance of this observation will fully appear..

1329., THE minority of David Il. the son of Robert Bruce; was dif--
DCavd "l turbed by the pretensions of Edward Baliol, who, relying on the

aid of England, and on the support of some difaffeded barons
among the Scots, invaded the kingdom. The success which at
firfi attended his arms, obliged the young king to retire to France
and Baliol took possession of the throne. A small body of the
nobles, however, continuing faithful to their exiled prince, drove
Baliol out of Scotland; and after an absence of nine years, David
returned from France, and took the government of the kingdom
into his own hands. But nobles, who were tlus wafting their
blood and treasure in defence of the crown, had a right to the un-

dislurbedi

ditutibed poFieflion of their ancient privileges; and even some title BOOK I.
to arrogate new ones. Jt seems to have been a maxim, in that age,
that every leader might claim as his own, theterritory which his
sword had won from, the enemy. Great acquisitions were gained
by the nobility in that way; and to these the gratitude and libera-
lity of David added, by distributing, among. such as adhered to himi
the vast polTeflions which fell to. the crown by the forfeiture of his
enemies. The family of Douglas, which began to rife a)ove the
other nobles; in the reign of his father, augmented both its power
and its property, during his minority.-

JAMES I. was seized by the English during the continuance of 1405.

a truce, and ungenerously detained a prisoner, almost nineteenJames '
years. Daring that period,. the kingdom was governed, first by
his uncle Robert Duke of Albany, and- then; by Murdo his son.
Both these noblemen aspired to the crown, and their unnatural am-
bition, if we may believe most ofour hiflorians, not only cut short
the days- of Prince David,. the King's elder brother, but prolonged
the captivity of James. They fattered themselves, that they might
Iep with less opposition into a, throne, when almost vacant; and
dreading the King's return, as the extinction of their authority, and
the end of their hopes, they carried on the negociations for ob-
taining his liberty, with extreme remissness. At the fame time,
they neglected nothing that could either sooth or bribe the nobles
to approve their fchene. They slackened the reins of government,
they allowed the. prerogative to be encroached upon; they suffered
the most irregular aAs of power, and even wanton instances of op-
pression, to pass with impunity; they dealt out the patrimony of
the crown among those whose enmity they dreaded, or whose fa-
your, they had gained; and reduced the royal authority to a state

of

PooK I. of imbecillity, from which succeeding monarchs laboured in vain to
--v-- r raifc it.

DURING the -minority of James If. the administration of affairs
Jam.s 11. and the custody of the King's person were committed to Sir Wil-

liam Crichton, and Sir Alexander Livingiton. Jealousy and dif-
cord were the effets of their conjun0: authority, and each of them,
in order to frrengthen himself, beflowed new power and privileges
upon the great men, whose aid he courted. While the young
Earl of Douglas, encouraged by their divisions, erected a fort of
indepcndent principality within the kingdom; and forbidding his
vallals to acknowledgeany authority but his own, he created Knights,
appointed a privy council, named officers civil and military, afrumed
every ensign of Royalty, but the title of King, and appeared in pub-
lic with a magnificence more than royal.

460o. EIGHT persons were chosen to govern the kingdom during the
James iI. minority of James III. Lord Boyd, however, by seizing tlie per.

son of the young King, and by the ascendant which he acquired
over him, soon engroflid the whole authority. He formed the am-
bitious projea of raising his family to the fame pitch of power and
grandeur with those of the prime nobility; and he eftected it.
While intent on this, he relaxed the vigour of government, and the
Barons became accustomed, once more, to anarchy and indepen-
dence. The power, which Boyd had been at so much pains to
acquire, was of no long continuance, and the fall of his family, ac-
cording to the fate of favourites, was sudden and defirudive;
but upon its ruins, the family of Hamilton rose, which soon at-
tained the highclf rank in the kingdom.

As

As the minority of James V. was longer, it was likewise more Book I.

turbulent than those of the preceding Kings. And the contending JamesV.
nobles, encouraged or proteced either by: the King of France, or
of England, formed themselves into more regular faaions, and dif-
regarded more than ever the restraints of order and authority. The
French had :the advantage of feeing one, devoted to their interest,
raised to be regent. This was the Duke of Albany, a native of
France, and a grandson of James II. But Alexander Lord Home,
the most eminent of all the Scottish peers, who survived the fatal
battle of Flowden, thwarted all his measures, during the sirs{ years
of his administration; and the intrigues of the Queen Dowager,
ilfter of Henry VIII. rendered the latter part of it no less feeble.
Though supported by French auxiliaries, the nobles despised his
authority, and regardless either of his threats, or his entreaties, pe-
remptorily refused, two several times, to enter England, to the bor-
ders of which kingdom he had led them. Provoked by these re-
peated instances of contempt, the regent abandoned his troublesome
fation, and retiring to France, preferred the tranquillity of a pri-
vate life' to an office destitute of real authority. Upon his retreat,
Douglas Earl of Angus became master of the King's person, and
governed the kingdom in his name. Many efforts were made to
deprive him of his usurped authority. But the numerous valails and
friends of his family adhered to him, because he divided with
them the power and emoluments of his office; the people reve-
renced and loved the name of Douglas; without the title of re-
gent, he exercised a fuller and more absolute authority than any
who had enjoyed that dignity; and the ancient, but dangerous pre-
eminence of the Douglases, seemed to be restored.

To

'BOiK I. To ihefe, and to 'many- other causes, omitted or unobreveod'by
*--- us, did the Scottish nobility owe that exorbitant and uncommon

iowcl , 0o which instances occur,- so frequently, in our history..
?Nothing however, demonstrates so fully the extent of their power,
as the length of its duration. Many years after the declension of the
.-eudal ylitems in the other kingdoms of Europe, and when the
arms or policy of Princes had, every where, shaken, or laid it in
ruins, the foundations of that ancient fabric remained firm and un,
touched in Scotland.

;::- *o*;-i. of THE powers, which the feudal institutions veiled in the nobles,
r~-. djal fobn became intolzrabl- to all the Princes of Europe, who longed

',C'.c; became
i-.!;-rb!c to to possess something more than a nominal and precarious authorityo

i .cs. Their impatience to obtain this, precipitated Henry III. of England,

Edward II. and some other weak Princes, into ra(h and premature
attempts againfl the privileges of the Barons, in which they were
ditappointed, or perified. Princes, of greater abilities, w.ere con-
tent to mitigate evils which they could not cure, they fought oc-
cupation for the turbulent spirit of their nobles, in frequent wars
and allowed their fiery courage to evaporate in foreign expeditions,
which, if they brought no other advantage, secured at least do-
meftic tranquillity. But, time and accidents ripened .the feudal go-

The attemptsvernments for deftruition. Towards the end of -the fifteenth cen-
tob h:le th'. tury, and beginning of the sixteenth, all the Princes of Europe at-
~c:. fE in tacked, as if by concert, the power of their nobles. Men of ge-
[,'r:anicc anid in
Frngl.,J.1 nius then undertook with success, wlat their unfl:.ilful predecessors

had attempted in vain. Lewis XI. of France, the mopt profound
and the mo(st adventrous genius of that age, began, and in a single
reign, almofr compleated the scheme of their deftrution. The sure
but concealed policy of IJenry VII of England produced the fame

effe a

.7

effe&. The means, indeed, employed by there monarchs. were BooK I.
very different. The blow, which Lewis struck, was sudden and-- ""
fatal. The artifices of Henry resembled those flow poisons, which
wafle the conflitution, but become not mortal till some distant pe-
riod. Nor did they produce consequences less opposite. Lewis
boldly added to the crown whatever he wrested from the nobles.
Henry undermined his Barons, by encouraging them to fell their
lands, which enriched the commons, and gave them a weight in
the legislature unknown to their predecessors. But while thele great Butthe noble

continue to

revolutions were carrying on in two kingdoms, with which Scot-gather
land was intimately conneced, no alteration happened there; the cotland.
King neither extended his own prerogative, nor enabled the com-
mons to encroach upon the aristocracy; the nobles not only retain-
ed their ancient privileges and pofieflions, but daily made new ac-
quifitions.

THaI was not owing to the inattention of our Princes, or to OurKingsen-

deavoured to

their want of ambition. They were abundantly sensible of the ex- ,etnd tile
orbitant power of the nobility, and extremely solicitous to humble royal autho-

l ty.

that order. They did not, however, possess means

m fuflicient for ac-

complifhing that end. The resources of our monarchs were few,
and the progress which they made inconsiderable. But as the num- General
her of their followers, and the extent of their jurifdition, weremeans to-

wards this

the two chief circumstances which rendered the nobles formidable ;end.
in order to counterballance the one, and to restrain the other, all
our Kings had recourse to the fame expedients.

I. AMONG nobles of a fierce courage, and of unpolifhed man-Encourage

ners, surrounded with vassals bold and licentious, whom they weredifcord alnong
bound by interest and honour to protect, the causes of discord

Vo,. I. F were

Boo-K I. were many and unavoidable. And as the contending parties could
' ~ £seldom agree in acknowledging the authority of any common fupe-

rior or judge, and their impatient spirit would seldom wait the flow
decilions of justice, their quarrels were usually terminated by the
Avord. The offended Baron assembled his vaflals, and wafted the
lands, or shed the blood of his enemy. To forgive an injury, was
mean, to forbear revenge infamous or cowardly . Hence quar-
rels were transmitted from father to son, and under the name of
deady, faeds, subsisted for many generations, with unmitigated ran-
cour. It was the interest of the crown to foment rather than to ex-
tinguifh these quarrels, and by scattering or cherishing the feeds of
discord among the nobles, that union which would have rendered the
aristocracy invincible, and which must at once have annihilated the
prerogative, was effecually prevented. To the fame cause, our
Kings were indebted for the success, with which they sometimes at-
tacked the mofl powerful chieftains. They employed private re-
venge to aid the impotence of public laws, and arming against the

* The sprit of revenge was encouraged, not only by the manners, but what is

more remarkable, by the laws of those ages. If any person thought the prose-
cution of an injury offered to his family, too troublesome, or too dangerous, the
Salique laws permitted him publickly to defilt from demanding vengeance; but the
fame laws, in order to punish his cowardice, and want of affeetion to his family, de-
prived him of the right of succession. Henaut. Abreg6 Chronol. p. 8I. Among
the Anglo-Saxons, we find a singular inflitution difinguifhed by the name off/-
daijiunm; a voluntary association, the obje& whereof was the personal security of
those who joined in it, and which the feebleness of government at that time ren-
dercd nccefTary. Among other regulations, which are contained in one of those
fill extant, the following deserves notice. " If any associate shall either eat or
drink with a person who has killed any member of the fodalititn'i, unless in the
prefcnce of the King, the Bishop, or the Count, and unlcfs he can prove that he
did not know the pcrfon, let him pay a great fine." I-iclks Difcrt. Epiftolar. apud
Tlhcsu'r. Ling. Scptcntr. v. i. p. 21.

:I person

person who had incurred their displeasure, those rival families which BooK I.
wished his fall, they rewarded their service, by sharing among
them the spoils of the vanquished. But this expedient, though it
served to humble individuals, did not weaken the body of the nobi-
lity. Those, who were now the initruments of their Prince's ven-
geance, became, in a short time, the objects of his fear. Having
acquired power and wealth by serving the crown, they, in their
turn, set up for independence; and though there might be a fluc-
tuation of power, and of property, though old families fell, and
new ones rose upon their ruins, the rights of the ariflocracy re-
mained intire, and its vigour unbroken.

II. As the administration ofjuftice is one of the most powerful ties Extend the

between a King and his subjeCts, all our monarchs were at the ut- urifdiOtion of
most pains to circumscribe the jurifdidtion of the Barons, and to courts.
extend that of the crown. The external forms of subordination,
natural to the feudal system, favoured this attempt. An appeal-lay
from the judges and courts of the Barons, to those of the King.
The right, however, of judging in the first instance, belonged to
the nobles, and they easily found means to defeat the effeat of ap-
peals, as well as of many other feudal regulations. The royal ju-
rifdition was almost confined within the narrow limits of the King's
demesnes, beyond which, his judges claimed indeed much autho-
rity, but possessed next to none. Our Kings were sensible of these
limitations, and bore them with impatience. But it was impofiible
to overturn in a moment, what was so deeply rooted; or to firip
the nobles, at once, of privileges which they had held to long, and
which were wrought almoit into the frame of the feudal conlitit.-
tion. To accomplifi this, however, was an objec of uniform and
anxious attention to all our princes. James I. led the way, here,
as well as in other inflances, towards a more regular alld pcrfcd-

F police.

BooK I. police. He made choice, among the estates of partlitiet, of a cer-
-.v--. tain number of persons, whom he distinguished by the name of

Lords of Seffon, and appointed them to hold courts for determin-
ing civil causes, three times in the year, and forty days at a
time, in whatever place he pleated to name. Their jurifdition
extended to all matters, which formerly came under the cognizance
of the King's council, and being a committee of parliament, their
decisions were final. James II. obtained a law, annexing all rega-
lities, which should be forfeited, to the crown, and declaring the
right ofjurifdition to be unalienable for the future. James III. im-
posed revere penalties upon those judges appointed by the Barons,
whose decisions should be found on a review to be unjust; and by
many other regulations, endeavoured to extend the authority of his
own court *. James IV. on pretence of remedying the inconve-
niencies arising from the short terms of the court of Seflion, ap-
pointed other judges called Lords of daily council. The Sefon
was an ambulatory court, and met seldom; the Daily council,
was fixed, and fat constantly at Edinburgh; and though not com-
posed of members of parliament, the fame powers, which the Lords
of Seflion enjoyed, were vested in it. At last, James V. erected a
new court, that fill subsists, and which he named the College of
'zlice, the judges or Senators of which were called Lords of
Council and Sefion. This court not only exercised the fame ju-
rifdition which formerly belonged to the Session and Daily Coun-
cil, but new rights were added. Privileges of great importance
were granted to its members, its forms were prescribed, its terms
fixed, and regularity, power and splendor conferred upon it. The
persons constituted judges in all there different courts, had, in

* At. 26. P. 1469. A&-. 94. P. 1493. A&. 99. P. 1487.

3 many

many refpeas, the advantage of those who presided in the courts BooK I.
of the Barons; they were more eminent for their skill in law, their
rules of proceeding were more uniform, and their decisions more
consistent. Such judicatories became the objecs of confidence,
and of veneration. Men willingly submitted their property to their
determination, and their incroachments on the jurifdiacions of the
nobles were popular, and for that reason successful. By devices of
a similar nature, the jurifdiAion of the nobles in criminal causes was
refirained, and the authority of the court of Jzfiiciary extended.
The crown, in this particular, gaining insensibly upon the nobles,
recovered more ample authority ; and the King, whose jurifdiAion
once resembled that of a Baron, rather than that of a Sovereign *,

* The molt perfec idea of the feudal system of government may be attained by

attending to the Rfate of Germany, and to the history of France. In the former,
the feudal institutions itill filbfift with great vigour; and though altogether abo-
filhed in the latter, the public records have been so carefully preserved, that the
French lawyers and antiquaries have been enabled, with more certainty and pre-
cifion, than those of any other country in Europe, to trace its rife, its progress, and
revolutions in Germany, every principality may be confidered as a fief, and all its
great Princes as vassals, holding of the Emperor. They possess all the feudal pri-
vileges; their fiefs are perpetual; their jurifditions within their own territories, fe-
parate and extensive ; and the great offices of the empire are all hereditary, and
annexed to particular families. At the fame time, the Emperor retains many cf the
prerogatives of the feudal monarchs. Like them, his claims and pretensions are
innumerable, and his power small; his jurisdiction within his own demesnes, or he-
reditary countries, is compleat; beyond the bounds of there it is almost nothing.
And so permanent are feudal principles, that although the feudal fyfiem be over-
turned in almofl. every particular fiate in Germany, and although its Princes have
all become absolute, the original feudal conflitution of the empire flill remains,
and ideas peculiar to that form of government, dire& all its operations, and de-
termine the rights of all its Princes. Our observations, with regard to the limited
ju'ifdikTion of Kings under the feudal governments, are greatly illustratcd by what

happened

B13ooI I. calme more and more to be confidered as the head of the commu-

..~-J nit. , ,and the supreme dispenser ofjuflice to his people. These ac-

quilltions of our Kings, however, though comparatively great, were
in reality inconsiderable; and notwithstanding all their efforts, ma-
ny of the separate jurifdidions pofefled by the nobles remained
in great vigour; and their final abolition was reserved to a distant
and more happy period.

Fach of our BUT besides these methods of defending their prerogative;
fg flparOeand humbling the arifiocracy, which may be confidered as com-
humbling the mon to all our Princes, we shall find, by taking a review of

oble. their reigns, that almost every one of our Kings, from Robert Bruce

to James V. had formed some particular system for deprefling the
authority of the nobles, which was the objeA both of their jea-
lousy and terror. This conduct of our monarchs, if we reft satis-
sied with the accounts of their historians, must be confidered as
flowing entirely from their resentment against particular noblemen;
and all their attempts to humble them, muff be viewed as the sallies
of private passion, not as the consequences of any general plan of
policy. But, though some of their ations may be imputed to

happened in France. The feebleness and dotage of the descendants of Charlemaigne
encouraged the Peers to usurp an independent jurifdition. Nothing remained in
the hands of the crown ; all was seized by them. When Hugh Capet ascended the
throne, A. D. 987. he kept possession of his private patrimony the Comtó of Paris,
and all thejurifdiEtion, which the Kings his ficcellors exercised for some time, was
within its territories. There were only four towns in France, where he could
efaiblilh Graii,!s Balilis, or royal judges; all the other lands, towns, and bail-
lages belonged to the nobles. The methods to which the French monarchs had
recourfc for extending their jurifdicion were cxactly similar to those cmployed by
our Princes. llenaut's Abrcgi, p. 617, &c. Dc L'Elfprit des Loixj Liv. 30.
ch. 20, c(c.

those

those pas:cns, though the different genius of the men, the temper BooK I.
of the times, and the slate of the nation necessarily occasioned great
variety in their schemes, yet, without being chargeable with ex-
ceffive refinement, we may affirm that their end was uniformly the
fame. And the project of reducing the power of the ariflocracy This proved

by a revicw of

sometimes avowed, and pursued with vigour; sometimes concealed, the events in
or seemingly suspended ; was never altogether abandoned. their egns.

No Prince was ever more indebted to his nobles than Robert Robert Bruce.

Bruce. Their valour conquered the kingdom, and placed him on
the throne. His gratitude and generosity belfowed on them the
lands of the vanquifed. Property has seldom undergone greater
or more sudden revolutions, than those to which it was subjed, at
that time, in Scotland. Edward I. having forfeited the efrates of
most of the ancient Scottish Barons, granted them to his English
fubjeds. These were expelled by the Scots, and their lands seized
by new masters. Amidfl such rapid changes, confusion was una-
voidable; and many possessed their lands by titles extremely defec-
tive. During one of those truces between the two nations, occa-
sioned rather by their being weary of war, than desirous of peace,
Robert formed a scheme for checking the growing power and wealth
of the nobles. He summoned them to appear, and to siew by
what rights they held their lands. They assembled accordingly,
and the queflion being put, they started up, at once, and drew
their swords, " By there, said they, we acquired our lands, and
with the'e we will defend them." The King, intimidated by their
boldness, prudently dropt the proiel. But so deeply did they re..
lent this attack upon their order, that notwithstanding Robert's po-
pular and iflendid virtues, it occasioned a dangerous conspiracy
againlft his life.

DA vlD

BooK I. DA ID his Con, at sirs an exile in France, afterwards a prisoner
DaVd 1I in England, and involved in continual war with Edward III. had

not leisure to attend to the internal police of his kingdom, or to
think of retrenching the privileges of the nobility.
Robert II. OUR historians have been more careful to relate the military, than

the civil tranfadtions of the reign of Robert II. Skirmishes and in-
roads of little consequence, they describe minutely, but with regard
to every thing that happened, during several years of tranquillity,
they are altogether silent.
Robert II. THE feeble administration of Robert III. muff likewise be passed

over slightly. A Prince, of a mean genius, and of a frail and
sickly conffitution, was no fit person to enter the lifts with active
and martial barons, or to attempt wresting from them any of their
rights.
James 1. THE civil tranfacions in Scotland are better known since the be.

ginning of the reign of James I. and a compleat series of our laws
supplies the defects of our historians. The English made some a-
mends for their injustice in detaining that Prince a prisoner, by their
generous care of his education. During his long residence in Eng-
land, he had an opportunity of observing the feudal system in a more
advanced state, and refined from many of the imperfections which
fiill adhered to it, in his own kingdom. He saw their nobles great,
but not independent; a King powerful, though far from absolute;
he saw a regular administration of government; wife laws enacted;
and a nation flourishing and happy, because all ranks of men were
accustomed to obey them. Full of there ideas, he returned into his
native country, which presented to him a very different scene. The

royal

royal authority, never great, was now contemptible, by being so BooKi I1
long delegated to regents. The ancient patrimony, and revenues '--'
of the crown, were almost totally alienated. During his long ab-
fence, the name of a King was little known, and less regarded. The
licence of many years had rendered the nobles independent. Uni-
versal anarchy prevailed. The weak were exposed to the rapine
and oppreflion of the fRrong. In every corner some barbarous chief-
tain ruled at pleasure, and neither feared the King, nor pitied the
people a.

JAMES was too wife a Prince to employ open force to corret

ifuch inveterate evils. Neither the men, nor the times would have
born it. He applied the gentler, and lets offensive remedy of laws
and flatutes. In a parliament held immediately after his return, he
gained the confidence of his people, by many wife laws, tending
visibly to re-eitablifh order, tranquillity and juitice in the kingdom.
But, at the fame time, that he endeavoured to secure these blessings
to his subjects, he discovered his intention to recover those posTef-
sions, of which the crown had been unjustly bereaved; and for that
purpose obtained an a(lt by which he was impowered to summon
those, who had obtained crown lands during the three last reigns,
to produce the rights by which they held them -(. As this statute
threatened the property of the nobles, another which passed in a fubfe-
quent parliament, aimed a dreadful blow at their power. By it, the

* A cotemporary Monkifi writer describcs these calamities very feelingly, in his

rude Latin. Ii diebus illis, non erat lex in Scotia, fed quilibet potentiorum junio-
rem opprcffit; ct totum regnum suit unum latrocinium; homicidia, depraedationes,
incendia, et cxetcra maleficia rcmanferunt impunita; ct juftitia relegata extra tcrmi-
nos regni exulavit. Chartular. Morav. apud Inncs El'ay, vol. i. p. 272.

t At P.

9 P424.
VoL. I. C lIagues

BooK II. leagues and combinations, which we have already described, and
\-""~ which rendered the nobles so formidable to the crown, were de-

clared unlawful ". Encouraged by this success in the beginning of
his enterprize, James's next ftep was still bolder and more decisive.
During the fitting of parliament, he seized, at once, his cousin
Murdo Duke of Albany, and his sons; the Earls of Douglas, Len-
nox, Angus, March, and above twenty other Peers'and Barons of
prime rank. To all of them, however, he was immediately recon-
ciled, except to Albany, and his sons, and Lennox. These were
tried by their Peers, and condemned; for what crime is now un-
known. Their execution struck the whole order with terror, and
their forfeiture added vast pofeflions to the crown. He seized, liken
wife, the earldoms of Buchan and Strathern, upon different pretexts;
and that of Mar fell to him by inheritance. The patience and in-
adivity of the nobles, while the King was proceeding so rapidly to-
wards aggrandizing the crown, are amazing. The only obftruco
tion he met with was from a flight infurredion headed by the
Duke of Albany's youngest son, and that was easily fuppreffedo
The splendor and presence of a King, to which the great men had
been long unaccustomed, inspired reverence: James was a Prince of
great abilities, and conduced his operations with much prudence.
Hie was in friendship with England, and closely allied with the
French King: He was adored by the people, who enjoyed un-
usual security and happiness under his administration : And all his
acquisitions, however fatal to the body of the nobles, had been gained
by attacks upon individuals; were obtained by decisions of law; and
being founded on circumstances peculiar to the persons who sus-
fcrcd, might excite murmurs and apprehensions, but afforded no
colourable pretext for a general rebellion. It was not so with the

At. 30. P, 1424.

next

next attempt which the King made. Encouraged by the facilityBooi II.
with which he had hitherto advanced, he ventured upon a measure . ,--'
that irritated the whole body of the nobility, and which the event
shews either to have been entered into with too much precipitancy,
or to have been carried on with too much violence. The father of
George Dunbar Earl of March had taken arms against Robert III.
the King's father ; but that crime had been pardoned, and his lands
reflored by Robert Duke of Albany. James, on pretext that the
regent had exceeded his power, and that it was the prerogative of
the King alone to pardon treason, or to alienate lands annexed to
the crown, obtained a sentence declaring the pardon to be void, and
depriving Dunbar of the earldom. Many of the great men held
lands by no other right than what they derived from grants of the
two Dukes of Albany. Such a decision, though they had reason
to expec it in consequence of the flatute which the King had ob-
tained, occasioned a general alarm. Though Dunbar was, at pre-
sent, the only fussierer, the precedent might be extended, and their
titles to poffeflions, which they confidered as the rewards of their
valour, might be fubjeced to the review of courts of law, whose
forms of proceeding, and jurifdidion, were in a martial age little
known, and extremely odious. Terror and discontent spread fail
upon this discovery of the King's intentions; the common danger
called on the whole order to unite, and to make one bold stand,
before they were stripped successively of their acquisitions, and reduced
to a state of poverty and insignificance. The prevalence of there fen-
timents among the nobles encouraged a few desperate men, the friends
or followers of those who had been the chief sufferers under the
King's administration, to form a conspiracy againfR his life. The firt
uncertain intelligence of this was brought him, while he lay in his
camp before Roxburgh castle. He durst not confide in nobles, to

G 2 whom

BooK II. whom he had given so many causes of disgust, but instantly difmiffedl

'bP"-^ them and their vassals, and retiring to a monastery near Perth, was

soon after murdered there, in the most cruel manner. All our his-
torians mention, with af{oniihment, this circumflance of the King's
disbanding his army, at a time, when it was so necefiary for his
preservation. A King, fay they, surrounded with his Barons, is fe-
cure fi-om secret treason, and may defy open rebellion. But thofc
very Bartons were the persons whom he chiefly dreaded; and it is
evident, from this review of his adminifiration, that he had greater
realon to appreTelnd danger, tlhanito-expet defence, from their hands.
It was the misfortune of Jamnes, that his maxims and manners were.
too refined for the age in which he lived. Happy ! had he reigned
in a kingdom more civilized; his love of peace, of juflice, and of
e-legance, would have rendered his schemes successful; and instead,
of his periihing because he had attempted too much, a grateful,
people would have applauded-and. seconded his efforts to reform and.,
to improve. them,.
Jnes I. Ci ICiiTON, the moll able man of thice, who had'tlie direc-iorr

of affairs during the minority of James II. had been the minister of-
James I. and well acquainted with h-is resolution. of humbling the.
nobility. iHe did net reiinquifi the design, and he endeavoured to
inspire his pupil with the fame fcntirnents. But what James had
attempted to effel slowly, and by legal means, his son and Crichton
pursued with the impetuosity natural to Scotfmen,.and with the
fierceness peculiar to that age. William the sixth Earl of Douglas
was the f;rfl vietim to their barbarous policy.. That young noble-
man (as we have already observed) contemning the authority of
an infant Prince, almost openly renounced his allegiance, and as-
pirod to independency. Crichton, too high-fpiritcd to bear. such.

an-nfult, but'too weak to curb or to bring. to juifice so powerful BOOK IL,
an offender, decoyed him by many promises to an interview- in the ---
cabfle of Edinburgh, and, .otwithftanding these, nmurdered-. both
him and his brother. C'ichton, lowever, gained' little by this ad
of treachery, which rendered hint universally odious. William the
eighth Earl of'Douglas Was no less powerfil, and no less fornidable
to the crown. By forming the league which we already men-
tioned with the Earl'of Crawfurd and other Barons, he had united
against his Sovereign almost one half of his kingdom. But his
credulity led' him into the fame snare, which had been fatal to the
former Earl. Relying on-the King's promises, who had now at-
tained to the years of manhood, and having obtained'a safe conduct
under the great feal, he ventured to meet him in Stifling cafile.
James urged him to difllve that dangerous confederacy into which
he had entered; the Earl obstinately refused ; c" If you will not,"
said the enraged monarch, drawing his dagger'" this flall';" and
flabbed him to the heart. An action so unworthy of a King filled
the nation with aftoniifment, and with horror.- The Earl's vassals
ran to arms with the utmost fury, and' dragging the safe conduct,
which the King had granted'and violated, at a horse's tail,' they
marched towards Stirling, burnt the town, and threatened to be-
siege the castle.. An accommodation ensued, on what terms is not
known. But the King's jealousy,. and- the' new Earl's power and
resentment, prevented it from being of long continuance. 6Bth took
the field, at the head of their armies, and met near Abercorn. That
of the. Earl, composed chiefly of borderers, was far superior to the
King',s both in number, and in valour; and a tingle battle muff,
in all probability, have decided whether the house of Stewart or of
Douglas was henceforth to possess the throne of Scotland. But,
while. his troops impatiently expected the signal to engage, the

Earl

BoowK II. Earl ordered them to retire to their camp, and Sir James Hamilton

9^<?"~J of Cadyow, the person in whom he placed the greatest confidence,

convinced of his want of genius to improve an opportunity, or of
his want of courage to seize a crown, deserted him that very night,
This example was followed by many; and the Earl, despised, or for-
faken by all, was Goon driven out of the kingdom, and obliged to
depend for his fubfillence, on the friend(hip of the King of Eng-
land. The ruin of this great family, which had so long rivalled
and overawed the crown, and the terror with which such an ex-
ample of unsuccessful ambition filled the nobles, secured the King,
for some time, from opposition; and the royal authority remained
uncontrouled and almost absolute. James did not susser this favour-
able interval to pass unimproved; he procured the content of par-
liament to laws more advantageous to the prerogative, and more
subversive of the privileges of the ariflocracy, than were ever obtain-
ed by any former or subsequent monarch of Scotland.

BY one of these, not only all the vait pofleffions of the Earl of

Douglas were annexed to the crown, but all prior and future alie-
nations of crown lands were declared to be void, and the King was
impowered to seize them at pleasure, without any process or form
of law, and oblige the poflefiors to refund whatever they had re-
ceived from them -. A dreadful instrument of opprefion in the
hands of a Prince.

ANOTHER law prohibited the wardenship of the marches to be

granted hereditarily; restrained, in several instances, the jurifdidion
of that office; and extended the authority of the King's courts '.

* AC. 4X. P. 1.45S, . Ibid. AO. 42.

]DY

By a third, it was ordained that no Regality, or exclusive right BooK IL

of adminiftring justice within' a man's own lands, should be grant-
ed in time to come,' without the content of parliament , a condi-
tion, which implied almofl an express prohibition. Those nobles
who already possessed that great privilege, would naturally be folli-
citous to prevent it from becoming common, by being bestowed on
many. Those,, who had not themselves attained it, would envy
others the acquisition of such a flattering distinction; and both would
concur in rejecing the claims of new pretenders.

BY a fourth ad, all new grants of hereditary offices were prohi-

bited, and those obtained since the death of the last King were re-
voked I.

EACH of these flatutes undermined some of the great pillars, on

which the power of the aristocracy refted. During the remainder
of his reign, this Prince pursued the plan which he had begun,
with the utmost vigour; and had not a sudden death, occasioned
by the splinter of a cannon which burst near him at the siege of
Roxburgh, prevented his progress, he wanted neither genius nor
courage to perfect it :. and Scotland might, in all probability, have
been the first kingdom in Europe, which would have seen the sub-
version of the feudal. system.

JAMES III: discovered no less eagerness than his father or grand- James rtn

father to humble the nobility; but far inferior to either of them in
abilities and address, he adopted a plan extremely impolitic, and
his reign was disastrous, as well as his end tragical. Under the feu-
dal governments, the nobles were not only the King's ministers,

* Ibid. Ad, 43. . Aft 44.

7 abend

Booc_ II. and poflsetd of all the great offices of power or of truR; they were,

likewise, his companions .and favourites, and scarce any but them
approached his person, or were entitled to his regard. But James,
who both feared and hated his nobles, kept them at an unusual
didfan.ce, and bestowed every mark of confidence and affeaion
upon a few mean person$, of profeTions so dishonourable, as ought
t) have rendered them unworthy of his presence. Shut up with
these, in his cattle of Stirling, he seldom appeared in public, and
amuled hIimfelf with architeuture, music, and other arts, which
were then little erfeemed. The nobles beheld the power and fa-
vour of these minions, with indignation. Even the sanguinary
measures of his father provoked them less than his neglect. Indi-
viduals alone suffered by the former; by the latter, every man thought
himself injured, becauIe all were contemned. Their discontent was
much heightened by the King's recalling all rights of crown lands,
hereditary offices, regalities, and every other concefion, which was
detrimental to his prerogative, and which ha.l been extorted during
his minority. Combinations among themselves, fecrct intrigues
with England, and all the usual preparatives for civil war, were the
effe&s of their relentment. Alexander Duke of Albany, and John
Earl of Mar, the King's brothers, two young men of turbulent and
ambitious spirits, and incensed againfl James, who treated thetn witl
the fame coldness as he did the other great men, entered deeply
into all their cabals. The King detected their designs, before they
were ripe for execution, and seizing -his two brothers, committed
the Duke of Albany to Edinburgh caile. The Earl of Mar having
remonnlrated with too much boldne s against the King's conduct, was
murdercd, if we may believe our historians, by his commnand. Al-
bany, apprehensive of the fame fate, made his escape out of the
castle, and fled into France. Concern for the King's honour, or in-

dignation

dignation at his measures, were perhaps the motives, which firfi BooK .
induced him to join the malecontents. But James's attachment to -
favourites rendering him every day more odious to the nobles, the
profped of the advantages which might be derived from their ge.
neral difaffetion, added to the resentment which he felt on account
of his brother's death, and his own injuries, soon inspired Albany
with more ambitious and criminal thoughts. He concluded a treaty
with Edward IV. of England, in which he assumed the name of
Alexander King of Scots, and in return for the assistance which was
promised him towards dethroning his brother, he bound himself, so
soon as he was put in possession of the kingdom, to swear fealty and
to do homage to the English monarch, to renounce the ancient alli-
ance with France, to contra& a new one with England, and to fur-
render some of the ftrongeif castles, and most valuable counties. in
Scotland %. That aid, which the Duke so barely purchased at the
price of his own honour, and the independence of his country,
was punctually granted him, and the Duke of Gloucefler with a
powerful army conducted him towards Scotland. The danger of
a foreign invasion obliged James to implore the assistance of those
nobles whom he had so long treated with contempt. Some of them
were in close confederacy with the Duke of Albany, and approved
of all his pretensions. Others were impatient for any event, which
would restore their order to its ancient pre-eminence. They took
the field, however, at the head of a powerful army of their fol-
lowers, but with a fironger disposition to redress their own grievan-
ces, than to annoy the enemy; and with a fixed resolution of pu-
nilfilng those minions, whose insolence they could no longer tolerate.
This resolution they executed, in the camp near Lawder, with a

X Abcrcr. Mart. Atch. v, ii. 443.
VOL. I. H militarV

W'

BOOK I. military ddifpatch and rigour. Having previously concerted their plan,
k--'>^" the Earls of Angus, Huntly, Lenox, followed by almost the whole

Barons of chief note in the army, forcibly entered the apartment
of their Sovereign, seized all his favourites, except one Ramsay,
whom they could not tear from the King, in whose arms he took
(helter, and without any form of trial, hanged them infdantly over
a bridge. Among the most remarkable of those who had engrossed
the King's -affetion, were Cochran a mason, Hommil a taylor,
Leonard a smith, Rogers a musician, and Torfifan a fencing-mailer.
So despicable a retinue discovers the capriciousness of James's cha-
raaer, and accounts for the indignation of the nobles, when they
beheld the favour, due to them, bestowed on such unworthy. ob-
jets.

JAMES had no reason to confide in an army so little under his

command, and dismissing it, shut himself up in the cartle of Edin-
burgh.: After various intrigues, Albany's lands and honours were
at length restored to him, and he seemed even to have regained his
brother's favour, by some important services. But their friendship
was not of long duration. James, once more, abandoned himself
to the guidance of favourites; and the fate of those who had sus-
sered at Lawder, did not deter others, from courting that dangerous
pre-eminence. Albany, on pretext that an attempt had been made
to take away his life by poison, fled from court, and retiring to
his castle of Dunbar, drew thither a greater multitude of Barons than
attended on the King himself. At the fame time, he renewed his
former confederacy with Edward, the Earl of Angus openly nego-
ciated that infamous treaty; other Barons were ready to concur with
it; and if the sudden death of Edward had not prevented Albany's
receiving any aid from England, the crown of Scotland would, pro-

3 bably,

bably have been the reward of this unworthy combination with BoOK J.
the enemies of his country. But, inflead of any hopes of reigning
in Scotland, he found, upon the death of Edward, that he could
not reside there in safety, and flying first to England, and then to
France, he seems from that time to have taken no part in the as.
fairs of h's native country. Emboldened by his retreat, the King
and his Ministers, multiplied the insults which they offered to the
nobility. A tlanding guard, a thing unknown under the feudal go-
vernments, and inconsistent with the familiarity and confidence with
which monarchs then lived amidst their nobles, was raised for the
King's defence, and the command of it given to Ramsay, lately
created Earl of Bothwell, the fame person who had so narrowly
escaped when his companions were put to death at Lawder: And, as
if this precaution had not been sufficient, a proclamation was issued
forbidding any person to appear in arms within the precincts of the
court *; which, at a time, when no man of rank left his own house
without a numerous retinue of armed followers, was, in effect, de-
barring the nobles from all access to the King. James, at the fame
time, became fonder of retirement than ever; and funk in indolence,
or superstition, or attentive only to amusements, devolved his whole
authority upon his favourites. So many injuries provoked the mofl
considerable nobles to take arms, and having persuaded or obliged
the Duke of Rothfay, the King's eldest son, a youth of fifteen,
to tet himself at their head, they openly declared their intention of
depriving James of a crown, of which he had discovered himself
to be so unworthy. Rouzed by this danger, the King quitted his
retirement, took the field, and encountred them near Bannockburn;
but the valour of the Borderers, of whom the army of the male-

Ferrcrius, 398.

IH z contcntS

BooK I. contents was chiefly composed, soon put his troops to flight, and

<-' he himself was slain in the pursuit. Suspicion, indolence, immo-

derate attachment to favourites, and all the vices of a feeble mind,
are visible in his whole condu6ct; but the charaCter of a cruel and
unrelenting tyrant seems to be unjustly affixed to him by our hifto-
rians. His neglect of the nobles irritated, but did not weaken them;
and their discontent, the immoderate ambition of his two brothers,
and their unnatural confederacies with England, were sufficient to
have disturbed a more vigorous administration, and to have rendered
unhappy a Prince of superior talents.

THE indignation, which many persons of rank exprefTed against

the conduct of the conspirators, together with the terror of the fen-
tence of excommunication which the Pope pronounced against them,
obliged them to use their victory with great moderation and huma-
nity. And being conscious how detestable the crime of imbruing their
hands in the blood of their Sovereign appeared, they endeavoured to
regain the good opinion of their countrymen, and to attone for their
treatment of the father, by their loyalty and duty towards the foi.
James IV. They placed him instantly on the throne, and the whole kingdom

soon united in acknowledging his authority.

JAMES IV. was naturally generous and brave; he felt, in an high

degree, all the passions which animate a young and noble mind.
He loved magnificence, he delighted in war, and was eager to ob-
tain fame. During his reign, the ancient and hereditary enmity
between the King and nobles seems almost entirely to have ceased.
He envied not their splendor, because it contributed to the ornament
of his court; nor did he dread their power, which he confidered
as the fccurity of his kingdom, not as an object of terror to him-

fe ls,

2

self. This confidence, on his part, met with the proper return of BooK I.
duty and affection, on theirs; and, in his war with England, he -v-
experienced how much a King, beloved by his nobles, is able to
perform. Though the ardour of his courage, and the spirit of chi-
valry, rather than the profpea of any national advantage, were the
motives of that expedition; such was the zeal of his fubjeAs for
the King's glory, that he was followed by as gallant an army, as
ever aly of his ancestors had led upon English ground. But tho
James himself formed no scheme dangerous or detrimental to the
aristocracy, his reign was distinguished by an event, extremely fatal
to it; and one accidental blow humbled it more than all the pre-
meditated attacks of preceding Kings. In the rash and unfortu-
nate battle of Flowden, a brave nobility chore rather to die, than
to desert their Sovereign. Twelve Earls, thirteen Lords, five el-
deft sons of noblemen, and an incredible number of barons fell
with the King *. The whole body of the nobles, long and fen-
sibly, felt this disaster; and if a Prince of full age had then acfended
the throne, their conflernation and feebleness would have afforded
him advantages, which no former monarch ever possessed.

BUT James V. who succeeded his father, was an infant of a yearJames v:

old; and though the office of regent was conferred on the Duke of
Albany, a man of genius and enterprize, a native of France, and
accustomed to a government where the power of the King was al-
ready great; though he ,made many bold attempts to extend the
royal authority; though he put to death Lord Home, and baniised
the Earl of Angus, the two noblemen of greatefr influence in the
kingdom, the aristocracy loft no ground under his administration.

* Aber. ii. 540.

A flran-

BsooK. L A _iranger to the manners, the laws, and the language of the
i-'--' people wholm he was called to rule, he aEed, on foine occasions,

rather like a Viceroy of the French King, than the governor of
Scotland; but the nobles asserted their own privileges, and contended
for the interest of their country, with a boldness, which convin-
ced him of their independence, and of the impotence of his own
authority. After several unsuccessful struggles, he voluntarily re-
tired to France, and the King, being then in his thirteenth year,
the nobles agreed that he should aflume the government, and that
eight persons should be appointed to attend him by turns, and to
advise and afiai him in the administration of public affairs. The
Earl of Angus, who was one of that number, did not long remain
satisfied with such divided power. He gained some of his col-
leagues, removed others, and intimidated the reft. When the term
of his attendance expired, he frill retained authority, to which all
were obliged to submit, because none of them was in a condition
to dispute it. The affection of the young King was the only thing
wanting, to fix and perpetuate his power. But an ative and high-
spirited Prince submitted, with great impatience, to the refiraint,
in which he was kept. It ill suited his years, or disposition, to be
confined as a prisoner, within his own palace; to be treated with
no refped; and to be deprived of all power. 'He could not, on some
occasions, conceal his indignation and resentment. Angus fore-
saw that he had much to dread fiom there, and as he could not
gain the King's heart, he resolved to make sure of his person. James
was continually surrounded by the Earl's spies and confidents; many
eyes watched all his motions, and observed every ftep he took. But
the King's eagerness to obtain liberty eluded all their vigilance. He
escaped from Falkland, and fled to the castle of Stirling, the refi-
dence of the Queen his mother, and the only place of firength in

the

the kingdom which was not in the hand of the Douglases. The BooK I.
nobles, of whom some were influenced by their hatred to Angus, --
and others by their refped for the King, crowded to Stirling, and
his court was soon filled with persons of the greatest diftindion.
The Earl, though astonished at this unexpeted revolution, resolved,
at first, to make one bold push for recovering his authority, by
marching to Stirling at the head of his followers; but he wanted
either courage, or ft'rngth to execute this resolution. In a parlia-
ment held soon after, he and his adherents were attainted, and as-
ter escaping from many dangers, and enduring much misery, he
was at length obliged to fly into England for refuge.

JAMES had now not only the name, but, though extremely young,

the full authority of a King. He was inferior to no Prince of that
age in gracefulness of person, or in vigour of mind. His under-
sanding was good, and his heart warm; the former capable of
great improvement, and the latter susceptible of the belt impref-
sions. But according to the usual fate of Princes who are called to
the throne in their infancy, his education had been neglected. His
private preceptors were more ready to flatter, than to inftrud him.
It was the interest of those who governed the kingdom, to prevent
him from knowing too much. And the Earl of Angus, in order
to divert him from business, gave him an early taste for such plea-
fures, as afterwards occupied and engrossed him more than be-
came a King. Accordingly, we discover in James all the features
of a great, but uncultivated spirit. On the one hand, violent pas-
sions, implacable resentment, an immoderate desire of power, and
the utmost rage at disappointment. On the other, love to his
people, zeal for the punifhmcnet of private oppressors, confidence

in

BOOK I. in his favourites, and the moR engaging openness and affability of

C'-"--'d behaviour.

WHAT he himself had suffered from the exorbitant power of the

nobles led him early to imitate his predecessors, in their attempts to
humble them. The plan he formed for that purpose was more pro-
found, more systematic, and pursued with greater constancy and
fteddinefs, than that of any of his ancestors. And the influence of
the events in his reign upon those of the subsequent period, render
it necessary to explain his conduct, at greater length, and to enter
into a more minute detail of his actions. He had penetration
enough to discover those defects in the schemes, adopted by former
Kings, which occasioned their miscarriage. The example of James I.
had taught him, that wife laws operate slowly on a rude people,
and that the fierce spirit of the feudal nobles was not to be subdued
by these alone. The effects of the violent measures of James II.
convinced him, that the oppression of one great family is apt either
to excite the suspicion and resentment of the other nobles, or to en-
rich with its spoils some new family, which would soon adopt the
fame sentiments, and become equally formidable to the crown.
He saw, from the fatal end of James III. that neglect was still more
intolerable to the nobles than oppression, and that the ministry of
new men and favourites was both dishonourable, and dangerous to
a Prince. At the fame time, he felt that the authority of the crown
was not sufficient to counterbalance the power of the aristocracy,
and that without some new accession of strength, he could expec
no better success in the struggle than his ancestors. In this extre-
mity, he applied himself to the clergy, hoping thatthey would both re-
lifh his plan, and concur, with all their influence, in enabling him to

put

put it in execution. Under the feudal government, the church being BOOK .
esteemed a third estate, had its representatives in parliament; the num-
ber of there was considerable, and they possessed great influence in
that assembly. The fuperifition of former kings, and the zeal of
an ignorant age, had bestowed upon ecclesiastics, a great proportion
of the national wealth, and the authority which they acquired bythe
reverence of the people, was superior even to that which they de-
rived from their riches. This powerful body, however, depended
entirely on the crown. The Popes, notwithstanding their attention
to extend their usurpations, had negleaed Scotland as a distant and
poor kingdom, and permitted its kings to exercise powers, which
they disputed with more considerable princes. The Scottish mo-
narchs had the sole right of nomination to vacant bifhopricks and
abbeys *; and James naturally concluded, that men who expected
preferment from his favour, would be willing to merit it, by pro-
moting his designs. Happily for him, the nobles had not yet reco-
vered the blow which fell on their order at Flowden, and if we may
judge either from their conduct, or from the character given of them
by Sir Ralph Sadler the English envoy in Scotland, they were men of
little genius, of no experience in business, and incapable of acting
either with unanimity, or with vigour. Many of the clergy, on the
other hand, were distinguished by their great abilities, and no leCs by
their ambition. Various causes of disgust had arisen between them and
the nobles, who despised their charater, and envied their power,
or their wealth. By aacing in concert with the king, they not only
gratified hin, but avenged themselves, and hoped to aggrandise their
own order, by deprefling those, who were their sole rivals. Secure

* Epift. Reg. Scot. i. 197 c, &c. A. as.5 P. 1540.
VOL.I. of

BOOK I. of so powerful a concurrence, James ventured to proceed with greater
_-,,-. boldness. . In the first heat of resentment, he had driven the Earl of

Angus out of the kingdom; and sensible that a person, so far fupe-
rior to the other nobles in abilities, might create many obRacles,
which would retard, or render ineffectual all his schemes, he solemn-
ly swore, that he would never permit him to return into Scotland,
and, notwithflanding the repeated solicitations of the king of Eng-
land, he adhered to his vow with unrelenting obstinacy. He then
proceeded to repair the fortifications of Edinburgh, Stirling, and
other castles, and to fill his magazines with arms and ammunition.
Having taken these precautions by way of defence, he began to
treat the nobility with the utmost coldness and' reserve. Those of-
sices, which they were apt, from long possession, to confider as ap-
propriated to their order, were now befowed on ecclesiastics, who
alone poiffefed the King's ear, and together with a few gentlemen
of inferior rank, to whom he had communicated his schemes, were
entrusted with the management of all public affairs. These mini-
fiers were chosen with judgment and Cardinal Beatoun, who soon.
became the most eminent among them, was a man of superior ge-
nius. They served the King with fidelity, they carried on his
measures with vigour, with reputation, and with success. James no
longer concealed his contempt of the nobles, and suffered no op-
portunity of mortifying them to escape. Slight offences were ag~
gravated into real crimes, and punished with severity. Every accu-
fation against persons of rank was heard with pleasure, every appear-.
ance of guilt was examined with rigour, and every trial proved fatal
to those who were accused: the banishing Hepburn Earl of Bothwell,
for reasons extremely frivolous, the beheading the Master of Sorbes
without fuficient evidence of his guilt,. and the condemning Lady
Glamis, a fitter of the Earl of Angus, to be burnt for the crime of
witchcraft, of which even that credulous age bclicved her innocent,

a8re

are monuments both of the King's hatred- of the nobility, of the BOOK I.
severity of his government, and of the stretches he made towards -
absolute power. By these aEs of authority, he tried the spirit of
the nobles, and how much they were willing to bear. Their pa-
tience increased his contempt for them, and.added to the ardour and
boldness with which he pursued his plan. Meanwhile they observed
the tendency of his schemes with concern, and with resentment;
but the King's sagacity, the vigilance of his ministers, and the want of
a proper leader, made it dangerous to concert any measures for their
defence, and impossible to ad with becoming vigour. James and
his counsellors, by a .false ilep which they took, presented to them,
at length, an advantage which they did not fail to improve.

MOTIVES, which are well known, had prompted Henry VIIL

to disclaim the Pope's authority, and to seize- the revenues of the
regular clergy. His fyftlem of Reformation satisfied none of his sub-
jeds. Some were enraged because he had proceeded so far, others
murmured because he proceeded no farther; and by his imperious
temper, and alternate persecutions of the zealots for Popery, and
the converts to the Protestant opinions, he was equally formidable
to both. Henry was afraid that this general diffatisfaaion of his
people might encourage his enemies on the Continent to invade his
kingdom. He knew that both the Pope and Emperor courted the
friendship of the King of Scots, and endeavoured to engage him in
an alliance against England. He resolved, therefore, to disappoint
the effects of their negotiations, by entering into a closer union with
his nephew, and for that purpose sent ambassadors into Scotland,
to propose a personal interview with him at York. It was plainly
James's interest to accept of this invitation; the afliftance of so power-
ful an ally, the high honours which were promised him,; and the

I 2 liberal

Boon I. liberalTfbfidies he might have obtained, would have added no lit.

k'~ tie dignity to his domestic government, and must have greatly fa-

cilitated the execution of his favourite plan. On the other hand,
a war with England, which he had reason to apprehend, if he re-
jeced Henry's offers of- friendship, was inconsistent with all his
views. This would bring him to depend on his barons; an army
could not be raised without their affiflance: to call nobles incensed
against their Prince into the field, was to. unite his enemies, to make
them sensible of their own firength, and. to afford them an oppor-
tunity of revenging their wrongs. James, who was not ignorant
that all these consequences might follow a breach with England,
listened at first to Henry's proposal, and conrented to the interview
at York. But the clergy dreaded an union, which must have been
eflablifhed on the ruins of the church. Henry had taken great pains
to infuse into his nephew his own sentiments concerning religions.
and had frequently follicited him, by ambassadors, to renounce the
usurped dominion of the Pope, which was no less dishonourable ta
Princes, than grievous to their fubjeas.. The clergy had hitherto,
with great address, diverted theKing from regarding there follici-
tations. But, in an amicable conference, Henry expeded, and they
feared that James would yield to his intreaties, or be convinced by
his arguments, They knew that the revenues, of the church. were
an alluring objec to a Prince, who wanted, money, and who loved
it; that the pride and ambition ofecclefiaflics raised the.indignation of
the nobles; that their indecent lives gave offence: to the people;. that.
the Protestant opinions were spreading. fast throughout the 'nation ;.
and that an universal. defecion from the eftablitfed church, w6uld
he the consequence of giving the smallest degree of encouragemeht to,
these principles. For these reasons, they employed all their credit
with the King, and had recourse to every artifice and insinuation, 'in

ordei-

order to divert him from a journey, which must have been so fital BooK I,.
to their interest. They endeavoured to inspire him with fear, by. -'" -
magnifying the danger to which he would expose his. person,,. by
venturing so far into England, without any security but the word
of a Prince, who having violated every thing venerable and sacred
in religion, was no longer to be trusted; and by way of compenfa-
tion for the fums which he might have received from Henry, they
offered an annual donative of 5o,orc, crowns; they promised to
contribute liberally towards carrying on a war with England, and
flattered him with the prospect of immense riches, arising from,
the forfeiture of persons,. who were to: be tried and condemned as.
heretics. Influenced by there considerations, James broke his agree-
ment with Henry, who, in expectation of meeting him, had' already
come to York; and that haughty and impatient. Monarch resented
the affront, by declaring, war againit. Scotland. His army was soon
ready to invade the kingdom,. James was obliged to have recourse-
to the nobles, for the defence of his dominions.. At his; command.
they assembled their followers.; but with the fame dispositions, which
had animated their ancestors in the. reign of James IIL and with a
full resolution of imitating their example, by punifhingthofe to whom
they imputed the grievances,. of which, they had reason to complain .,,
and if the King's Minifrers had not been men of abilities, superior
to those of James III. and of considerable interest even with their
enemies, who could not agree among themselves what victims to.'
sacrifice, the camp of Fala would have been as remarkable as that
of Lawder,, for. the da'ing encroachments of the nobility on the pre'
rogative of the Princ. But though his ministers were saved by this'
accident, the nobles had soon another opportunity, of discovering to'
the King, their diffatisfadion with his government, and their conr'
tempt of his authority, Scarcity of provisions, and the rigour of the

sCeasos$

BoaQ L feal..n having obliged the ¢Engliha army which had invaded Scot-.

....1
- land, to.retire,. James imagined that he could attack them, with

great advantage, in their retreat.; but the principal barons, with an
obRtinacy and disdain, which greatly aggravated their disobedience,
refuted to advance a flep beyond the limits of their own country.
Provoked by this insult to himself, and suspicious of anew conspiracy
again ft. his ministers, the King instantly disbanded an army,. which
paid : little regard to :his orders, and returned abruptly into the.
heart of.the kingdom.

AN ambitious and high spirited Prince could not brook such a

mortifying affront. His hopes of success had been rash, and his-
despair upon a disappointment was excefiive. He felt himself en-
gaged in an unnecessary war with England, which, inflead of yield-
ing him the laurels and triumphs that he expected, had begun with
such circumstances, as encouraged the insolence of his subjects, and
exposed him to the scorn of his enemies. He saw how vain and
ineffecual all his projets to humble the nobles had been, and
that, though in times of peace, a Prince may endeavour to depress
them, they will rife, during war, to their former importance and
dignity. Impatience, resentment, indignation filled his bosom by
turns. The violence of these passions altered his temper, and, per-
haps, impaired his reason. He became pensive, fullen, and retired.
He seemed, through the day, to be swallowed up in'profound
meditation, and through the night, he was disturbed with those
visionary terrors, which make impression upon a weak understand-
ing only, or a disordered: fancy. In order tbo revive the 'King'si
spirits, an inroad on the western borders was concerted by his'
ministers, who prevailed upon the- Barons in thie neighbouring'
provinces, to raise as many troops as were thought neceifil; :

and

7

and to :enterthe enemy's 'country. But nothing could remove BoOKi I
the King's aversion for his nobility, or diminish hid jealousy of "
their power. He would not even entrufi 'them with the coi
mand of the forces which they had assembled ^ 'that was reserve'd
for Oliver Sinclair his favourite, who no sooner 'appeared to take
poffeflion of the dignity conferred upon him, than rage and indig-
nation occasioned an universal mutiny in the army. Five hundred
English, who happened to be drawn up in: fight, attacked the
Scots in this disorder. Hatred to the King, and contempt of their
General produced an effect, to which there is no parallel in hifto-
ry. They overcame the fear of death, and the love of liberty; and
ten thousand men surrendered to a number so far inferior, without
firiking a single blow. No man was desirous of a victory, which
would have been acceptable to the King, and to'his favourite ; few
endeavoured to save themselves by flight; the Engliih had the
choice of what prisoners they pleated to take; and almost every
person of diftindion, who was engaged.in the expedition, remained:
in their hands. This aflonifhing event: was a: new proof to the
King of the general difaffeation of the nobility, and a: new disco-
very of his own weakness, ,and: want of authority. Incapable of'
-bearing these repeated insults, he found himself unable to revenge
-them. The deepest melancholy and despair Succeeded to the fu-
rious transports of rage and indignation, which the firfi account
of the rout of his army occasioned. All. the violent paflions,
which are the enemies of life, preyed upon his mind, and wafted
and consumed a youthful. and vigorous conflitition. Some authors.
of that age impute his untimely death to poison; but the diseases of
the iinid, when they rife td an heiglt,, are often mortal ' and the
known effeds of disappointment, rage, ahd indignation upon a fani
:uine and' impetuous temper, ftfflciehtly accdtint for his unhappy

fate;

BOOK L fate. " His death (fays Drummond) proveth his mind to have
.-.--^, been raised to an high strain, and above mediocrity; he could die,

but could not digest a disaster." Had James survived this misfor-
tune, one of two things mufft have happened: either the violence
,of his temper would have engaged him openly to attack the
nobles, who would have found in Henry a willing and powerful
protecor, and have derived the fame assistance from him, which
the malecontents, in the succeeding reign, did from his daughter
Elizabeth; in that cafe, a dangerous civil war would have been
the certain consequence. Or, perhaps, necessity might have ob-
liged him to accept of Henry's offers, and be reconciled to his no-
bility. In that event the church would have fallen a sacrifice to
their union, a Reformation, upon Henry's plan, would have been
established by law, a great part of the temporalities of the church
would have been seized, and the friendthip of the King and Barons
would have been cemented by dividing its spoils.

SUCH were the efforts of our Kings, towards reducing the ex-

orbitant power of the nobles. If they were not attended with
success, we must not, for that reason, conclude that they were not
conducted with prudence. Every circumstance seems to have com-
bined againit the Crown. Accidental events concurred with politi-
cal causes, in rendering the bell concerted measures abortive. The
assassination of one King, the sudden death of another, and the fa-
tal despair of a third, contributed no less than its own natural firength,
to preserve the aristocracy from ruin.

AMIDST there struggles, the influence which our Kings pofTefled

in their parliaments, is a circumstance seemingly inexplicable, and
which merits particular attention. Ad these affienblies were com-

posed

posed chiefly of the nobles, they, we are apt to imagine, must have BOOK I.
di6tated all their decisions; but, inifead of this, every King found e xtraor
them obsequious to his will, and obtained such laws, as he efteern- dinary influ-

ence of the

ed necefary for extending his authority. All things were conduct- Scottish Kings
ed there with dispatch and unanimity; and, in none of our hifto-iParliament'
rians, do we find an instance of any opposition formed againif the
court in Parliament, or mention of any difficulty in carrying through
the measures which were agreeable to the King. In order to ac-
count for this singular sac, it is necessary to enquire into the origin
and constitution of Parliament:

THE genius of the feudal government, uniform in all its opera- The reasons

tions, produced the fame effects in small, as in great societies; and of it.
the territory of a Baron, was, in miniature, the model of a king-
dom. He pofiefred the right of jurifdicion, but those, who- de-
pended on him, being free men, and not slaves, could be tried by
their Peers only; and, therefore, his vaflals were bound to attend
his courts, and to affill both in passing and executing his sentences.
When assembled, on these occasions, they eifablifhed, by mutual
content, such regulations, as tended to the welfare of their small
society; and often granted, voluntarily, such supplies to their Supe-
rior, as his neceflities required. Change now a single name: in
place of Baron, substitute King, and we behold a Parliament in
its first rudiments, and observe the firif exertions of those powers,
which its members now possess as Judges, as Legislators, and as dif-
penfers of the public revenues. Suitable to this idea, are the
appellations. of the King's Court *, and of the King's Great
Council, by which, Parliaments were anciently diftinguiflmed; and
suitable to this, likewise, were the conflituent members of which

0 Du Cange, Voc. Curia.
VOL. . Kt

BOOK I. it was composed. In all the feudal kingdoms, those who held of

'- ' the King in chief were bound, by the condition of their tenure, to

attend and to assist in his courts. Nor was this esteemed a privi--
lege, but a service, It was exaded likewise of Biflops, Abbots,
and the greater ecclesiastics, who holding vast pofeflions of the Crown,.
were deemed subject to the fame burden. Parliaments did not con-
tinue long in this date. Cities gradually acquired wealth, a confin
derable share of the public taxes were levied on them, the inhabi-
tants grew into eflimation, and being enfranchised by the Sovereign, a
place in Parliament was the consequence of their liberty, and of their
importance. But as it would have been absurd to confer such a
privilege, or to impose such a burden on a whole community, every
burrough was permitted to chufe one or two of its citizens to ap-
pear in the name of the corporation; and the idea of reprefenta-
tion was first introduced in this manner. An innovation, fill more
important, naturally followed. The vassals of the Crown were
originally few in number, and extremely powerful'; but- as it is
impossible to render property fixed and permanent; many of their
pofeflions came, gradually, and by various methods of alienation,
to be split and parcelled, out into different hands. Hence arose the
diflin&ion between the Greater and the Leser Barons. The for-
mer were those who retained their original fiefs undivided, the lat-
ter were the new and less potent vassals of the Crown. Both were
bound, however, to perform all feudal services, and, of consequence,
to give attendance in Parliament. To the lesser Barons, who formed.
no inconsiderable body, this was an intolerable grievance. Barons
sometimes denied their tenure, burroughs renounced their right of
electing, charters were obtained, containing an exemption from at-
tendance; and the anxiety, with which our ancestors endeavoured
to get free from the obligation of fitting in Parliament, is iurpafied

'by that only, with which their poflerity solicit to be admitted there. BOOK L
In order to accommodate both parties, and, at once, to secure to
the King a fuflicient number of members in his great council, and
to save his vassals from an unneceifary burden, 'an easy expedient
was found out. The obligation to personal attendance was conti-
nued upon the Greater Barons, from which the LefTer Barons were
exempted, on condition of their electing, in each county, a certain
number of Representatives, to appear in their name. Thus a Par-
liament became compleat in all its members, and was composed of
Lords Spiritual and Temporal, of Knights of the shires, and of
Burgefles. As many causes contributed to bring government earlier
to perfection in England, than in Scotland; as the rigour of the
feudal institutions abated sooner; and its defeEts were supplied with
greater facility in the one kingdom, than in the other; England
led the way in all there changes, and Burgesses, and Knights of
the filire appeared in the Parliaments of that nation, before they
were heard of in ours. Burgesses were firfl admitted into the Scot-
tifh Parliaments by Robert Bruce *; and in the preamble to the laws A. . D3z6,
of Robert III. they are ranked among the constituent members of
that assembly. The Lesser Barons were indebted to James I. for a 1427.
flatute exempting them from personal attendance, and permitting
them to ele&c representatives; the exemption was eagerly laid hold
on, but the privilege was so little valued, that, except one or two
instances, it lay neglected during I60 years; and James VI. firil
obliged them to fend representatives regularly to Parliament f-.

A SCOTTISH Parliament, then, confifled anciently of Great Barons,
of Ecclesiastics, and a few representatives of burroughs. Nor were

** Abercromby, I. 635.
1- E flys on Brit. Antiq. EIl, II. Dalrymp. Hill. of Feud. Prop. ch. 8.

K i these

BooK I. these divided, as in England, into two houses, but composed ond
' J"-v assembly, in which the Lord Chancellor presided *. And, in rude

ages, when the science of government was extremely imperfect,
among a martial people, unacquainted with the arts of peace, itran-
gers to the talents which make a figure in debate, and despising them,
Parliaments were not held in the fathe estimation as at present; nor
did haughty Barons love those courts, in which they appeared, with
such evident marks of inferiority. Parliaments were often hastily
assembled, and it was, probably, in the King's power, by the man-
ner in which he issued his writs for that purpose, to exclude those
who were averse from his measures. At a time when deeds of
violence were common, and the restraints of law and decency were
little regarded, no man could venture with safety to oppose the King
in his own court. The Great Barons, or Lords of Parliament,
were extremely few; even so late as the beginning of the reign of
James VI. they amounted only to fifty-three: The Eccleflaftics
equalled them in number, and being devoted implicitly to the Crown,
for reasons which have been already explained, rendered all hopes
of victory in any firuggle desperate. Nor were the nobles them-

* In England, the Peers and Commons seem early to have met in separate houses;

and James I. who was fond of imitating the English in all their culloms, had pro-
bably an intention of introducing rome considerable diftinstion between the Greater
and Lesser Barons inr Scotland; at least he determined that their consultations should
not be carried on under the direction of the fame President; for by his law, A. D.
J327. it is provided, " that out of the Commissioners of all the ihires shall be cho-
fen a wife and expert man, called the Common Speaker of the Parliament, who
ihall propose all and sundry needs and caufcs, pertaining to the Commons in the
Parliament or general council." No such Speaker, it would fecm, was ever cho-
fen; and by a subsequent law the Chancellor was declared perpetual President of
Parliament.

-t And. Coil. v. i, pref. 40.c fv

sc~lves

selves so anxious, as might be imagined, to prevent ats of Parlia- BOOK L
ment favourable to the royal prerogative; conscious of their own
strength, and of the King's inability to carry these aas into execution
without their concurrence, they trufied either to elude, or to contemn
them; and the statute revoking the King's property, and annexing alie-
nated jurifdidions to the Crown, repeated in every reign, and vio-
lated and despised as often, is a flanding proof of the impotence of
laws, when opposed to power. So many concurring causes are sus-
ficient, perhaps, to account for the ascendant, which our Kings
acquired in Parliament. But without having recourse to any of
there, a single circumstance, peculiar to the constitution of the
Scottilh Parliament, the mentioning of which we have hitherto
avoided, will abundantly explain this fa&, seemingly so repugnant
to all our reasonings concerning the weakness of the King, and the
power of the nobles.

As far back, as our records enable us to trace the constitution of

our Parliaments, we find a committee, distinguished by the name
of Lords of Articles. It was their business to prepare, and to di-
gest all matters which were to be laid before the Parliament;
every motion for a new law was first made there, and approved or
rejected by them at pleasure; what they approved was formed into
a bill, and presented to Parliament; what they rejeted could not
be introduced into the house. This committee owed the extraordi-
nary powers vested in it, to the military genius of the ancient nobles;
too impatient to submit to the drudgery of civil business, too inpe-
tuous to observe tlie forms, or to enter into the details necessary in
condudLing it, they were glad to lay that burden upon a fmnall
number, while they themselves had no other labour than simply
to give, or to refuse their fandion to the bills, which were pre,
sented to them. The Lords of Articles, then, not only dirededl

5 the

BooK I. the whole proceedings of Parliament, but possessed a negative be'
*.--..' Afore debate. That committee was chosen and constituted in such

a manner, as put this valuable privilege entirely in the King's hands.
It is extremely probable, that the King once had the sole right of
nominating the Lords of Articles *. They came afterwards to be
elected by the Parliament, and coniifted of an equal number out of
each estate, and most commonly of eight Temporal and eight Spi-
ritual Lords, of eight representatives of burroughs, and of the eight
great officers of the Crown. Of this body, the eight ecclesiastics,
together with the officers of the Crown, were entirely at the King's
devotion, and it was scarce possible that the choice could fall on such
Temporal Lords and Burgesses as would unite in opposition to his mea-
fures, Capable either of influencing their election, or of gaining them
when eleted, the King commonly found the Lords of Articles no
less obsequious to his will, than his own privy council, and by
means of his authority with them, he could put a negative upon

' IT appears from authentic records, that a Parliament was appointed to be

held March 12, I566, and that the Lords of Articles were chosen and met on the
'th, five days before the assembling of Parliament. If they could be regularly
eleted so long before the meeting of Parliament, it is natural to conclude, that the
Prince alone possessed the right of electing them. There are two different accounts
of the manner of their election at that time, one by Mary herself, in a letter to the
Archbishop of Glasgow, '" We, accompanied with our nobility for the time, pall
Ic to the Tolbuith of Edinburgh, for holding of our Parliament on the 7th day of
'G this initant, and elected the Lords Articulars." If we explain there words, ac-
cording to Ilrid Grammar, we mull conclude that the Qucen herself cleded them.
It is, however, more probable that Mary meant to fiy, that the nobles then prerfnt
with her, viz. her privy counsellors, and others, elecled the Lords of Articles.
Keith's Hill:. of Scotland, p. 331. The other account is Lord Ruthven's, who ex-
prefly aflirms that the Queen herself eleced them. Keith's Append. 126. Whether
we embrace the one or the other of these opinions, is of no consequence. If the privy
counsellors and nobles attending the court had a right to elcS the Lords of Articles, it
was equally advantageous for the Crown, as if the Prince had had the sole nominatioln
of themt

iris

his Parliament before debate, as well as after it; and what may Book I.
teem altogether incredible, the most limited Prince in Europe ac- A-"-
tually poffelfed, in one instance, a prerogative which the most abfo»
lute could never attain ,

To this account of the internal constitution of Scotland, it will State of Eu,

not be improper to add a view of the political slate of Europe atgning of the
that period, where the following history commences,. A. thorough i6th century.

know-

* HAVING deduced the history of the committee of Lords of Articles, as low as

the subjet of this preliminary book required, it may be agreeable, perhaps, to some
of my readers, to know the subsequent variations in this singular institution, and the
political use which our Kings made of these. When Parliaments became more nu-
merous, and more considerable by the admiflion of the representatives of the Lesser
Barons, the preserving their influence over the Lords of Articles became, likewise,
an objeA of greater importance to our Kings. James VI. on pretence, that the
Lords of Articles could not find leisure to confider the greatr multitude of affairs
laid before them, obtained an aa,, appointing four persons to be named out of each'
eJtate, who flould meet twenty days before the commencement of Parliament -,
to receive all supplications, &c. and rejecting what they thought frivolous,- hould
engross in a book.what they thought worthy the attention of the Lords of Arti-
cles. No provision is made in the ad for the choice of this felec body, and the
King would, of course, have claimed that privilege. In 1633,. when Charles I.
was beginning to introduce these innovations which gave to much offence to the na-
tion, he dreaded the opposition of his Parliament, and in order to prevent that,
an artifice was made use of to secure the Lords of Articles for the Crown. The
Temporal Peers were appointed to chufe eight Bishops and the Bishops eight Peers,
these sixteen met together, and clceted eight Knights of the flire, and eight Bur-
gefles, and to these the crown officers were added as usual. If we can only suppose
eight persons of so numerous a body, as the Peers of Scotland were become by
that time, attached to the court, thefr, it is obvious, would be. the men whom.
the Bishops would chufe, and of confcquence, the whole Lords of Articles were

t Aó'. 222. P. X594;

tlw

BocK I. knowledge of that general system, of which every kingdom in Eia-
'-- --- rope forms a part, is not less requisite towards underfianding the

hiflory of a nation, than an acquaintance with its peculiar govern-
ment and laws. The latter may enable us to comprehend domestic
occurrences and revolutions, but without the former, foreign tranf-
aaions mufi be altogether mysterious and unintelligible. By attend-
ing to this, many dark passages in our hiflory may be placed in a
clear light; and where the bulk of historians have seen only the es-
sect, we may be able to discover the cause.

THE subversion of the feudal government in France, and its de-

clenfion in the neighbouring kingdoms, occasioned a remarkable
alteration in the political itate of Europe. Kingdoms, which were
inconsiderable when broken, and parcelled out among nobles, ac-
quired firmness and itrength, by being united into a regular mo-
narchy. Kings became conscious of their own power and im-
portance. They meditated schemes of conquef, and engaged in
wars at a distance. Numerous armies were raised, and great taxes
imposed for their fubfifterice. Considerable bodies of infantry were
kept in constant pay; that fcrvice grew to be honourable; and ca-
valry, in which the strength of European armies had hitherto con-

the tools and creatures of the King. This practice, so inconsistent with liberty, was
abolished during the civil war; and the flatute of James VI. was repealed. After
the Restoration, Parliaments became more servile than ever. What was only a tem-
porary device, in the reign of Charles I. was, then, converted into a ltanding law.
( For my part, fays the author from whom I have borrowed many of these particu-
" lars, I should have thought it less criminal in our Restoration Parliament, to have
s, openly bestowed upon the King a negative before debate, than, in flch an un-
" dcihand artificial manner, to betray their conflituents, and the nation." Essays
on Brit. Antiq. 55. It is probable, however, from a letter of Randolph's to Cecil
o1. Aug. 1560, printed in the Appendix, that this Parliament had some appearance
of antient precedent to juflify their unworthy contdut.

sifted,

silted, though proper enough for the short and voluntary excur- BOOK I.
sions of Barons who served at their own expence, were found to be "
unfit either for making, or defending any important conquest.

IT was in Italy, that the powerful monarchs of France and Spain

and Germany first appeared to make a trial of their new strength.
The division of that country into so many small fiates, the luxury
of the people, and their effeminate aversion to arms invited their
more martial neighbours to an easy prey. The Italians, who had
been accustomed to mock battles only, and to decide their quarrels
by innocent and bloodless victories, were aflonifhed at the fight of
real war; and as they could not resist the torrent, they suffered it
to take its course, and to spend its rage. Intrigue and policy sup-
plied the want of strength; and necessity and felf-prefervation led
that ingenious people to the great secret of modern politics, by teach-
ing them how to balance the power of one Prince, by throwing
that of another into the opposite scale. By this happy device, the
liberty of Italy was long preserved. The scales were poised by very
lkilful hands; the smallest variations were attended to, and no
Prince was allowed to retain any superiority, that could be dan-
gerous.

A SYSTEM of conduc, pursued with so much success in Italy,

was not long confined to that country of political refinement. The
maxim of preserving a balance of power is founded so much upon
obvious reasoning, and the situation of Europe rendered it so necef-
fary, that it soon became a matter of chief attention to all wife
politicians. Every ftep any Prince took was observed by all his
neighbours. Ambassadors, a kind of hollourable spies, authorized
by the mutual jealousy of Kings, resided almost conflantly at every

VOL. I. L dif-

BooK I. different court, and had it in charge to watchall, its motions. Dan.
L,.,_. gers were foreseen at a greater distance, and prevented with more

ease. Confederacies were formed to humble any power which rose
above its due proportion. Revenge or felf-defence were no longer
the only causes of hostility, it became common to take arms out of
policy; and war, both in its commencement, and in its opera-.
tions, was more an exercise of the judgement, than of the pafilons
of men. A!moft every war in Europe became general, and the
moit inconsiderable states acquired importance, because they couldL
add weight to either fca!e.

FRANCIS I. who mounted the throne of France in the year-. . I,5

and Charles V. who obtained the Imperial crown intheyear'. 1519,.
divided between them the strength and affecions of; all Europe,
Their perpetual enmity. was not owing either to personal jealousy,.
or to the caprice of private passion, but was founded ,f. much in
nature and true policy, that it subsisted between- their posterity for'
several ages; and, notwithstanding. their pre1ent accidental and uni-
natural union, must again revive. Charles succeeded to all the domi--
nions of the houfc. of Austria. No family had ever gained so much
by wife and fortunate marriages. By acquisitions of this kindthe -
Austrian Princes rose, in a fliort time, from obscure Counts of Hapf-
bourg, to be Archdukes of Austria, and' Kings of .Bohemia, and.
were in poffeflion of the imperial dignity by a fort of hereditary
right. Betides these territories in Germany, Charles was heir:
to the crown of Spain, and to all the dominions-which .belonged to
the house of Burgundy. The Burgundian provinces!engroled, at
that time, the riches and commerce of one half of Europe; and Ihe
drew from them, on many occasions, those immienfe frus, which
no people without trade and liberty arc able, to contribute. Spain.

7 furnifhedc

furrmfnhed 'hi m a gallant rand hardy infantry, t6 whose discipline he Booc I.
wras indebted for all 'his 'conquests. And at the fame time, by the: '~
discovery 'of the new woild, a vein of wealth was opened to him,
which all the extravagance of ambition could not exhaust. These
advantages rendered Charles the firfl Prince in Europe; but he
wished to be more, and openly aspired to universal monarchy. His
genius was of that kind which ripens (lowly, and lies long con-
cealed; but it grew up without observation, to an unexpected height
and vigour. He possessed, in an eminent degree, the characeriflic
virtues of all the different races of Princes to whom he was allied,
In forming his-fchemes, he discovered all the subtlety and pene-
tration of Ferdinand his grandfather; he pursued them with that
obtinate and inflexible perseverance which has ever been peculiar
to the Austrian blood; and in executing them, he could employ
the magnanimity and boldness of his Burgundian Ancestors. His
abilities were equal to his power, and neither of them would have
been inferior to his designs, had not Providence, in pity to man-
kind, and in order to preserve them from the worst of all evils,
Universal Monarchy, raised up Francis I. to defend the liberty of
Europe. Hisdominions were less extensive, but more united than
the Emperor's. His fubjeds were numerous, acive, and warlike,
lovers of glory, and lovers of their King. To Charles power was
the only objec of desire, and he pursued it with an unwearied and
joyless industry. Francis could mingle pleasure and elegance with
,his ambition, and though he neglected some advantages, which a
more phlegmatic ,or more frugal Prince would have improved, an
active and intrepid courage supplied all his defets, and checked or
defeated many of the Emperor's designs.

THE reft of Europe observed all the motions of there mighty
rivals, with a jealous attention. On the one fide, the Italians saw

L 2 the

BooK I. the danger which threatened Christendom, and in order to avert

^-- it, had recourse to the expedient, which they had often employed

with success. They endeavoured to divide the power of the two
contending Monarchs into equal scales, and by the union of feve.
ral small flates, to counterpoise him, whose power became too great.
But, what they concerted with much wisdom, they were able to
execute with little vigour; and intrigue and refinement were feeble
fences againit the incroachments of military power.

ON the other fide, Henry VIII. of England held the balance

with less delicacy, but with a fironger hand. He was the third
Prince of the age in dignity and in power; and the advantageous
situation of his dominions, his domestic tranquillity, his immense
wealth, and absolute authority rendered him the natural guardian
of the liberty of Europe. Each of the rivals courted him with
emulation; he knew it to be his interest to keep the balance even,
and to restrain both, by not joining intirely with either of them.
But he was seldom able to reduce his ideas to practice; he was go-
verned by caprice more than by principle; and the passions of the
man were an overmatch for the maxims of the King. Vanity and
resentment were the great springs of all his undertakings, and his
neighbours easily found the way, by touching there, to force him
upon many rah and inconsistent enterprises. His reign was a per-
petual series of blunders in politics, and while he esteemed himself
the wisest Prince in Europe, he was a constant dupe to those, who
found it necessary, and could submit to flatter him.

IN this situation of Europe, Scotland, which had hitherto wafted

her strength in the quarrels between France and England, emerged
from her obscurity, took her fRation in the system, and began to

have

have some influence upon the fate of distant nations, Her assistance BOOK T.
was, frequently, of consequence to the contending-parties, and the ~----
balance was often so nicely adjusted, that it was in her power to
make it lean to either fide. The part assigned her was to divert
Henry from carrying his arms into the continent. That Prince,
having routed the French at Guinegat, and inverted Terouenne,
France attempted to divide his forces, by engaging James IV.
in -that unhappy expedition which ended with his life. For the
fame reason, Francis encouraged and assisted the Duke of Albany,
to ruin the families of Angus and Home, which were in the in-
terest of England, and would willingly have persuaded the Scots
to revenge the death of their King, and to enter into a new war
with that kingdom. Henry and Francis having united not long
after against the Emperor, it was the interest of both Kings, that
the Scots thould continue inactive; and a long tranquillity was the
effec of their union. Charles endeavoured to break this, and to
embarrass Henry by another inroad of the Scots. For this end, he
made great advances to James V. flattering the vanity of the young
Monarch, by elecing him a Knight of the Golden Fleece, and by
offering him a match in the imperial family; while, in return for
these empty honours, he demanded of him to renounce his alliance
with France, and to declare war againfl England. But James, who
had much to lose, and who could gain little by embracing the Em-
peror's proposals, rejected them with decency, and keeping firm
to his ancient allies, left Henry at full liberty to ad upon the con-
tinent with his whole firength.

Henry himself began his reign, by imitating the example of

his ali::tors with regard to Scotland. HIe held its power in such ex-
treme contempt, that. he was at no pains to gain its friendlhip ; but
3 oln

BoOsT I. on the contrary, he irritated the whole nation, by reviving the anr
^-.t ctiquated pretensions of the crown of England to the sovereignty

over Scotland. But his own experience, and the example of lis
enemies, gave him a higher idea of its importance. It was impof-
fible to defend an open and extensive frontier, against the incur-
.ions of an acive and martial people. During any war on the con-
tinent this obliged him to divide the strength of his kingdom. It
was necefiary to maintain a kind of army of observation in the
north of England ; and after all precautions, the ScottiSh borderers,
who were superior to all mankind in the pracice of irregular war,
often made successful inroads, and spread terror and desolation over
,many counties. He fell, at last, upon the true secret of policy,
with refpet to Scotland, which his predecessors had too little pene-
tration to discover, or too much pride to employ. The situation
of the country, and the bravery of the people made the conquest
of Scotland impossible; but the national poverty, and the violence
of faction rendered it an easy matter to divide, and to govern it. He
abandoned, therefore, the former design, and resolved to employ
the utmost address in executing the latter. It had not yet become
honourable for one Prince to receive pay from another, under the
more decent name of a subsidy. But, in all ages, the fame ar-
guments have been good in courts, and of weight with minifsers,
factious leaders, and favourites. What were the arguments, by
which Henry brought over so many to his interest during the mi-
nority of James V. we know by the original warrants flill extant '*,
for remitting considerable fums into Scotland. By a proper diftri-
bution of these, many persons of note were gained to his party,
and a facion which held secret correspondence with England,
:and received all its directions from thence, appears hencefor.

$ Burn. Hist. JRf. v, i, . 7.

ward

ward in all our domestic contests. In the sequel of the history, Boo I.
we shall find Henry labouring to extend his influence in Scotland, ---v'
His successors adopted the fame plan, and improved upon it, The
affairs of the two kingdoms became interwoven, and their interests
were often the fame. Elizabeth divided her attention almost equal-
ly between them, and the authority, which Ihe inherited in the one,
was not greater than that, which she acquired in the other.

T HI- E

# THE HISTORY OF SCOTLAND. BOOK II.

THE
T H E

0 F
S C OTLAND.

BOOK IL
A R Y Queen of Scots was born a few days before the BooK I.

death of her father James V. The situation in which he 4 .

Dec. I14,1I5 42.

left the kingdom alarmed all ranks of men, with the profped of a Birth of Mary,
turbulent and disastrous reign. A war against England had been and ateof the
undertaken without necessity, and carried on without success. Many
persons of the firfi rank had fallen into the hands of the Englifl, in
the unfortunate rout near the firth of Solway, and were till prison-
ers at London. Among the reft of the nobles there was little union,
either in their views, or in their affeCions ; and the religious dif-
putes, occasioned by the opinions of the reformers, growing every
day more violent, added to the rage of those fat'ions which are na-
tural to a form of government nearly ariftocratical.

VOL. I. M THE-

BooK II. THiE government of a Queen was unknown in Scotland, and did
.-,--'. noot imprint much reverence in the minds of a martial people. The

government of an infant Queen was frill more destitute of real au-
thority; and the profpett of a long and feeble minority invited to
faction by the hope of impunity. James had not even provided
the coImmon remedy again (I the disorders of a minority, by com-
mitting to proper persons the care of his daughter's education, and
the administration of affairs in her name. Though he saw the
clouds gathering, and foretold that they would quickly burst into a
storm, he was so little able to disperse them, or to defend his daugh-
ter and kingdom against the imminent calamities, that, in mere de-
fpair, he abandoned them both to the mercy of fortune, and left
open to every pretender, the office of Regent, which he could not
fix to his own fatisfadion.

Pretensions of CARDINAL Beatoun, who had for many years been confidered as
tounto the re- prime inifler, was the first who claimed that high dignity; and
gency. in support of his pretensions, he produced a testament *, which he

himself had forged in the name of the late King; and without any
other right, instantly assumed the title of Regent. He hoped, by
the assistance of the clergy, the countenance of France, the con-
nivance of the Queen Dowager, and the support of the whole Po-
pish faCtion, to hold by force, what he had seized on by fraud.
But Beatoun had enjoyed power too long to be a favourite of the
nation. Those among the nobles who wished for a Reformation
in religion dreaded his severity, and others confidered the eleva-
tion of a Churchman to the highest office in the kingdom as a de-
pression of themselves. At their initigation, James Hamilton Earl

'* Sadler's Lett. 16I.

of

of Arran, and next heir to the Queen, rouzed himself from his BooK II.
inactivity, and was prevailed on to aspire to that flation, to which '--
proximity of blood gave him a natural title. The nobles, who Earl of Arran
were aifembled for that purpose, unanimously conferred on him chose Re-
the office of regent; and the public voice applauded their choice.

No two men ever differed more widely in disposition and charac- Charaeer of

ter, than the Earl of Arran and Cardinal Beatoun. The Cardinal eatoun'
was by nature of immoderate ambition; by long experience he had
acquired address and refinement; and insolence grew upon him from
continual success. His high flation in the church placed him in
the way of great employments; his abilities were equal to the great-
eft of these; nor did he reckon any of them to be above his merit:
As his own eminence was founded upon the power of the church
of Rome, he was a zealous defender of that superstition, and for
the fame reason an avowed enemy to the doctrine of the Reformers.
Political motives alone determined him to support the one, or to op-
pose the other. His early application to public business kept him
unacquainted with the learning and controversies of the age; he gave
judgment, however, upon all the points in dispute, with a precipi-
tancy, violence, and rigour, which cotemporary historians mention
with indignation.

THE charaCter of the Earl of Arran was, in almofl every thing, of Arran;

the reverse of the other's. He was neither infected with ambition,
nor inclined to cruelty: The love of ease extinguifled the former,
the softness of his temper preserved him from the latter. Timidity
and irresolution were his predominant failings, the one occalioned
by his natural confitution, and the other arising from a conscious-

M 2 ness

BoOK II. nets that his abilities were not equal to his itation. With these dif-
--/--- positions he might have enjoyed and adorned private life; but his

public conduct was without courage, or dignity, or confitence.
The perpetual slave of his own fears, and, by consequence, the
perpetual tool of those, who found their advantage in pratifing
upon them. But as no other person could be set in opposition to the
Cardinal, with any probability of success, the nation declared in
his favour with so general a content, that the artifices of his rival
could not withfiand its united flrength.

Schemes of THE Earl of Arran had scarce taken poffeflion of his new dig-
iienrs VIrInity, when a negociation was opened with England, which gave
with regard to w n a
Sco:land. birth to events of the most fatal consequence to himself, and to

the kingdom. After the death of James, Henry VIII. was no longer
afraid of any interruption from Scotland to his designs against France;
and immediately conceived hopes of rendering this security perpe-
tual, by the marriage of Edward his only son with the young Queen
of Scots. He communicated his intention to the prisoners taken
at Solway, and prevailed on them to favour it, by the promise of
liberty, as the reward of their success. In the mean time, he
permitted them to return into Scotland, that, by their pretence in
the Parliament which the Regent had called, they might be the
better able to persuade their countrymen to fall in with his propo-
fals. A cause, entrusted to such able and zealous advocates, could
not well miss of coming to an happy issue. All those who feared
the Cardinal, or who dcfired a change in religion, were fond of
an alliance, which afforded protection to the doctrine which they
had embraced, as well as to their own persons, against the rage of
that powerful and haughty Prelate.

3

BUT

BTnr Henry's rough and impatient temper was incapable of BocKi II.

improving this favourable conjuncture. Address and delicacy in I condujed
managing the fears, and follies, and interests of men, were arts with by h'mferf
which he was utterly unacquainted. The designs he had formed
upon Scotland were obvious from the marriage which he had pro-
posed, and he had not dexterity enough to disguise, or to con-
ceal them. Instead of yielding to the fear or jealousy of the Scots,
what time and accidents would soon have enabled him to recover,
he, at once, alarmed and irritated the whole nation, by demanding
that the Queen's person should be immediately committed to his
custody, and that the government of the kingdom should be put in
his hands during her minority.

HENRY could not have prescribed more ignominious conditions to ous to the

a conquered people, and it is no wonder they were rejected, with Scots, though
indignation, by men who scorned to purchase an alliance with i part accep-
England, at the price of their own liberty. The parliament of
Scotland, however, influenced by the nobles who returned from
England; desirous of peace with that kingdom; and delivered, by rc .
the Regent's confining the Cardinal as a prisoner, from any oppo- ,, '
fition to which he might have given rife; consented to a treaty of
marriage and of union, but upon somewhat a more equal foot-
ing. And after some dark and unsuccessful intrigues, by which his
ambassador endeavoured to carry off the young Queen and Cardinal
Beatoun into England, Henry was obliged to give up his own pro-
pofals, and to accept of theirs. On his fide, he ::onfented that the
Queen should continue to reside in Scotland, and himself remain
excluded from any flare in the government of the kingdom. On
the other hand, the Scots agreed to fend their Sovereign into
England as soon as lie attained the full age of ten years, and in-

it:antly

BooK Il. fiantly to deliver fix persons, of the first rank, to be kept as hof-
' --' tages by Henry till the Queen's arrival at his court.

iFavo:-. by THE treaty was frill so manifestly of advantage to England, that

the Regent loft much of the public confidence by consenting to it,
The Cardinal, who had now recovered liberty, watched for such
an opportunity of regaining credit, and he did not fail to cultivate
tcrei;al. and improve this to the utmost. He complained loudly, that the

Regent had betrayed the kingdom to its most inveterate enemies,
and sacrificed its honour to his own ambition. He foretold the
extincion of true catholic religion, under the tyranny of an excom-
municated heretic; but above all, he lamented to fee an ancient
kingdom consenting to its own slavery, descending into the igno-
minious fation of a dependent province; and, in one hour, the
weakness or treachery of a single man surrendering every thing, for
which the Scottish nation had firuggled and fought during so many
ages. These remonfIrances of the Cardinal were not without effect.
They were addressed to prejudices and paslions which are deeply
rooted in the human heart. The fame hatred to the ancient ene-
mies of their country, the fame jealousy of national honour, and
pride of independence, which, at the beginning of the present cen-
tury, went near to prevent the Scots from consenting to an union
with England, upon terms of great advantage, did, at that time,
induce the whole nation to declare against the alliance which had
been concluded. In the one period, an hundred and fifty years
of peace between the two nations, the habit of being fubjeaed to
the fame King, and governed by the. fame maxims, had considerably
abated old animofities, and prepared both people for incorporating.
In the other, injuries were still fresh, the wounds on both fides were
open, and, in the warmth of resentment, it was natural to seek re-

venge,

venge, and to be averse from reconcilement. At the Union in BooK IL
1707, the wisdom of parliament despised the groundless murmurs
occasioned by antiquated prejudices; but in 1543, the complaints
of the nation were better founded, and urged with a zeal and una-
nimity, which it is neither just, nor safe to disregard. The rage
of the people rose to such an height, that the Englith ambassador
could hardly be protected from their insults. The clergy contri-
buted a great fum towards preserving the church from the dominion
of a Prince, whose fyfiem of Reformation was so fatal to their power.
The nobles, after having mortified the Cardinal, so lately, in such
a cruel manner, were, now, ready to applaud and to second him,
as the defender of the honour and liberty of his country.

ARGYLL, Huntly, Bothwell, and other powerful Barons openly He excies al-

moltthe whole

declared against the alliance with England. By their assistance, the nation againf
Cardinal seized on the persons of the young Queen and her mother, the Engli.
and added to his party the splendor and authority of the royal name *.
He received, at the fame time, a more real acceficon to his strength,
by the arrival of Matthew Stewart Earl of Lennox, whose return
from France he had earnestly follicited. This young nobleman
was the hereditary enemy of the house of Hamilton. He had ma-
ny claims upon the Regent, and pretended a right to exclude him,
not only from succeeding to the Crown, but to deprive him of the
possession of his private fortune. The Cardinal flattered his va-
nity, with the prolpec of marrying the Queen Dowager, and as-
feted to treat him with so much refped, that the Regent became
jealous of him as a rival in power.

THIS suspicion was artfully heightened by the Abbot of Paisley,
who returned into Scotland some time before the Earl of Lennox,

*I Kcith's Hist. of Scotl. 30.

3 and

Booc II. and aAed in concert with the Cardinal. He was a natural brother

i--s--J of the Regent, with whom he had great credit; a warm partizan

of France, and a zealous defender of the eflablifhed Religion. He
took hold of the Regent by the proper handle, and endeavoured to
bring about a change in his sentiments, by working upon his fears.
The desertion of the nobility, the difaffeftion of the clergy, and the
rage of the people; the resentment of France, the power of the
Cardinal, and the pretensions of Lennox, were all represented with
aggravation, and with their most threatning aspe&t.

MEAN while, the day appointed for the ratification of the treaty

with England, and the delivery of the hostages approached, and
the Regent was still undetermined in his own mind. He aaed to
the las, with that irresolution and inconsistence, which is peculiar
to weak men, when they are so unfortunate as to have the chief
part in the condud of difficult affairs. On the 25th ofAuguit, he
ratified the treaty with Henry, and proclaimed the Cardinal, who
fiill continued to oppose it, an enemy to his country. On the 3d

c'-i::ccr, of September, he secretly withdrew from Edinburgh, met with
P:"ene to re- thC Cardinal at Callender, renounced the friendship of England,
'i ,.isiis and declared for the interefis of France *

tHENRs'Y, in order to gain the Regent, had not spared the mofl:

mag nificent promises. lie had offcred to give the Princess Eliza-
beth in marriage to his eldest Ion, and to conflitute him King of
thl.t part of Scotland, wl.ich lies beyond the river Forth. But
upon finding h's intcrefl in the kinllgdom to be less considerable
than he had imagined, the Englifl monarch bcgan to treat him

* Sadlcr, 339, 356.

with

with little refpet. The young Queen was now in the custody of BooI II.
his enemies, who grew every day more numerous and more po- . -
pular. They formed a separate court at Stirling, and threatened to
eled another Regent. The French King was ready to afford them
his protecion, and the nation, out of hatred to the English, would
have united in their defence. In this situation, the Regent could
not retain his authority, without a sudden change of his measures;
and though he endeavoured, by ratifying the treaty, to preserve
the appearances of good faith with England, he was obliged to
throw himself into the arms' of the party, which adhered to
France.

SOON after this sudden revolution in his political principles, the And to peifi-

Regent changed his sentiments concerning religion. The spirit offcouts.
controversy was then new and warm ; books of that kind were eagerly
read by men of every rank ; the love of novelty, or the conviction
of truth, had led the Regent to express great esteem for the writings
of the Reformers; and having been powerfully supported by those
who had embraced their opinions, he, in order to gratify them, enter-
tained, in his own family, two of the nioft noted preachers of the Pro-
tefant dotrine, and, in his firfi Parliament, consented to an acs, by
which the laity were permitted to read the scriptures in a language
which they understood. Truth needed only a fair hearing to be an
over-match for error. Absurdities, which had long imposed on the
ignorance and credulity of mankind, were detected and exposed to
public ridicule; and under the countenance of the Regent, the Refor-
mation made great advances. The Cardinal observed its progress
with concern, and was at the utmofi pains to obflrud it. Ire re-
prfcentcd to the regent his great imprudence in giving encourage-
ment to opinions, so favourable to Lennox's pretentious; that his

VOL. . N own1

BooK II. own legitimacy depended upon the validity of a sentence of di-

L-A ' vorce, founded on the Pope's authority; and that by suffering it to

be called in question, he weakened his own title to the succession,
and furniffied his rival with the only argument, by which it could
be rendered doubtful .. These insinuations made a deep impref-
lion on the Regent's timorous spirit, who, at the profped of such
imaginary dangers, was as much flartled as the.Cardinal could have
willed ; and his zeal for the Proteflant religion was not long proof
against his fear. He publickly abjured the docrine of the Reformers
in the Franciscan church at Stirling, and declared not only for the
political, but the religious opinions of his new confidents.

THE Protetant doctrine did not susser much by his apoflacy.

It had already taken so deep root in the kingdom, that no difcou-
ragement or severity could extirpate it. The Regent indeed con-
sented to every thing, that the zeal of the Cardinal thought necef-
fary for the preservation of the established religion. The Reform-
ers were persecuted with all the cruelty, which superstition inspires
into a barbarous people. Many were condemned to that dreadful
death, which the church has appointed for the punishment of its
enemies; but they suffered with a spirit so nearly resembling the pa-
tience and fortitude of the primitive martyrs, that more were con-
verted, than terrified by those fpeaacles.

* THE pretensions of the Earl of Lennox to the fuccefllon were thus founded.

Mary, the daughter of James II. was married to James Lord Hamilton. Eliznbeth,
a daughter of that marriage, was the wife of Matthew Earl of Lennox, and the
present Earl was her grandson. The Regent was likewise the grandson of the lh'in-
cels Mary. But his father having marricd Janet Beaton the Regent's mother, after
he had obtained a divorce from Elizabeth Home his former wife, Lennox pretended
that the fentcnce of divorce was unjust, and that the Regent, being born while Eli-
zalieth Home was still alive, ought to be confidercd as illegitinate. Crawf, Peer. 192.

T'HIE

THE Cardinal, however, was now in poffeflion of every thing BooK II.

his ambition could desire; and exercised all the authority of a Re-Beatoun en-
gent, without the envy of the name. He had nothing to fear from 1-oSlt tIl

chier'uic etioni

the Earl of Arran, who having by his inconstancy forfeited the of:iiir.
public esteem, was contemned by one half of the nation, and little
trusted by the other. The pretensions of the Earl of Lennox were
the only thing which remained to embarrass him. He had very
successfully made use of that nobleman to work upon the Regent's
jealousy and fear, but as he no longer flood in need of fuich an
instrument, he was willing to get rid of him with decency. Len-
nox soon began to fufped his intention; promises, flattery, and
refpet were the only returns he had hitherto received for fubftan
tial services; but at last the Cardinal's artifices could no longer be
concealed, and Lennox, inifead of attaining power and dignity
himself, saw that he had been employed only to procure these for
another. Resentment and disappointed ambition puflhed him on
to seek revenge on that cunning prelate, who, by sacrificing his
interest, had so ungenerously purchased the Earl of Arran's
friendship. He withdrew, for that reason, from court, and de-
clared for the party at enmity with the Cardinal, which, with
open arms, received a convert, who added so much lufire to their
cause.

THE two facions which divided the kingdom were still the fame,

without any alterations in their views or principles; but, by one of
those strange revolutions, which were frequent in that age, they had,
in the course of a few weeks, changed their leaders. The Regent
was at the head of the partizans of France and the defenders of
Popery, and Lennox in the fame flation with the advocates for the
Englifi alliance, and a reformation in religion. The one laboured

N2 to

BooK II. to pull down his own work, which the other upheld with the fame

L-~~^~~ hand, that had hitherto endeavoured to destroy it.

LENNOX'S impatience for revenge got the start of the Cardinal's

ativity. He surprised both him and the Regent by a sudden march
to Edinburgh with a numerous army; and might easily have crushed
them, before they could prepare for their defence. But he was
weak enough to liften to proposals for an accommodation; and the
Cardinal amused him so artfully, and spun out the treaty to such
a length, that the greater part of the Earl's troops, who served, as
is usual wherever the feudal institutions prevail, at their own ex-
pence, deserted him; and in concluding a peace, inflead of giving
the law, he was obliged to receive it. A second attempt to retrieve
his affairs ended yet more unfortunately. One body of his troops
was cut to pieces, and the reft dispersed; and with the poor remains
of a ruined party, he muf either have submitted to the conqueror,
or have fled out of the kingdom, if the approach of an English ar-
my had not brought him a short relief.
rbin i HENRY was not of a temper to bear tamely the indignity, with

: which he had been treated, both by the Regent and Parliament of
Scotland, who, at the time when they renounced their alliance
with him, had entered into a new and flricSer confederacy with
France. The rigour of the feafbn retarded for some time the exe-
cution of his vengeance. But in the spring, a considerable body
of infantry which was defined for France, received orders to fail
for Scotland, and a proper number of cavalry was appointed tojoin
it by land. The Regent and Cardinal little expected such a viiito
They had trusted that the French war would find employment
fbr all Henry's forces ; and, from an unaccountable security, were

wvholly

wholly unprovided for the defence of the kingdom. The Earl of BOOK II.
Hartford, a leader fatal to the Scots in that age, commanded this -- -
army, and landed it, without opposition, a few miles above Leith. May 3, 1544-
He was quickly master of that place; and marching diretly to
Edinburgh, entered it with the fame ease. After plundering the
adjacent country, the richest, and most open in Scotland, he set on
fire both there towns; and upon the approach of some troops ga-
thered together by the Regent, put his booty on board the fleet, and
with his land forces retired safely to the English borders, delivering
the kingdom, in a few days, from the terror of an invasion, con-
certed with little policy, carried on at great expence, and attended.
with no advantage. If Henry aimed at the conquest of Scotland,
he gained nothing by this expedition; if the marriage he had pro-
posed, was frill in his view, he loft a great deal. Such a rough court-
ship, as the Earl of Huntly humorously called it, difgufled the whole
nation; their aversion for the match grew into abhorrence ; and
exasperated by so many indignities, the Scots were never, at any
period, more attached to France, or more alienated from Eng-
land.

THE Earl of Lennox alone, in spite to the Regent and French

King, continued a correspondence with England, which ruined his
own interest, without promoting Henry's. Many of his own vas-
fals preferring their duty to their country before their affection to
him, refuted to concur in any design to favour the public enemy.
And after a few feeble and unsuccessful attempts to ditlurb the Re-
gent's administration, he was obliged to fly for safety to the court
of England, where Henry rewarded ficrvices which Ie had the in-
clination, but not the power to perform, by giving him in mar-
riage his niece the Lady Margaret Douglas. This unhappy exile,

however,
8

BooK II. however, was cdtcined to be the father of a race of kings. He saw
' --/-- his son Lord Darnley mount the throne of Scotland, to the perpe-

tual exclfi on of that rival who now triumphed in his ruin. And,
from that time, his poflerity have held the sceptre in two kingdoms,
by one of which he was call out as a criminal, and by the other
received as a fugitive.

M\ eME .x'N whCile hostilities were continued by both nations, but with

-\ p;.ace con-
c:~udcd. little vigour on either fide. The historians of that age relate mi-

nutely the circumstances of several skirmishes and inroads, which
as they did not produce any considerable effeCt, at this distance of time
deserve no remembrance *. At last an end was put to this languid

and

* THOrGH this war was distinguished by no important or decisive action, it was,

however, extremely ruinous to individuals. There still remain two original papers,
which give us some idea of the miseries, to which the most fertile counties in the
'kingdom were exposed, by the sudden and deftruaive incursions of the borderers.
The first teems to be the report made to Henry by the English wardens of the
marches, for the year 1544, and contains their exploits from the 2d of July, to
the 17th of November. The account it gives of the different inroads, or Forrays,
as they are called, is very minute; and in conclusion, the fum total of mischief
they did is thus computed:

Towns, towers, etcdes, barnekyns, paryfhe-churches, baitcl-houfes cafl

down or burnt - 192

Scots slain - - 403
Prisoners taken - - - 816
Nolt, i. e. horned cattle, taken - - - 10,386
Shee - 12,492
Nags and geldings - - ,296
Goats - - 200
Bolls of corn -- 850
infight-gcar, i. c. houfhold furniture, not rcckoncd.

H-ayncs' slate papers, 13

The

and inactive war, by a peace, in which England, France, and BOOK II.
Scotland were comprehended. Henry laboured to exclude the j4 6.'
Scots from the benefit of this treaty, and to reserve them for that
vengeance, which his attention to the affairs of the continent had
hitherto delayed. But although a peace with England was of the
last consequence to Francis I. whom the Emperor was preparing to
attack with all his forces, he was too generous to abandon allies,
who had served him with fidelity, and he chose rather to purchase
Henry's friendship with disadvantage to himself, than to leave them
exposed to danger. By yielding some things to the interet, and
more to the vanity of that haughty Prince; by fubmifion, flattery,
and address, he, at length, prevailed to have the Scots included in-
the peace agreed upon.

THE consternation occasioned by an event, which happened a The murde

short time before the conclusion of this peace, rendered it more f Beato"
acceptable to the whole nation. Cardinal Beatoun had not used
his power with moderation, equal to the prudence by which he

The other contains an account of an inroad by the Earl of Hartford, between the

8th and 23d of September, 1545 ; the narrative is more general, but it appears that
he had burnt, razed, and destroyed in the counties of Berwick and Roxburgh only,

Monasteries and Friar-houfes - - 7
Cafiles, towers, and piles - 6
Mirket towns - 5

Villages .- 243

Milns .--

_ 3

Hospitals - - 3

All there were cast down or burnt. Haynes 52. As the Scots were no less ikilful
in the pracice of irregular war, we may conclude that the damage which they did in
England was not inconsiderable ; and that their raids were no less wnflcful, than
theforrays of the English.

4 attained

Boor IL attained it. Notwithstanding his great abilities, he had too many

CBY- of the rafiions and prejudices of an angry leader of a faction, to

govern a divided people with temper. His resentment againfi
one party of the nobility, his insolence towards the reft, his fe-
verity to the Reformers, and, above all, the barbarous and. illegal
execution of the famous George Wiflart, a man of honourable
birth, and of primitive fandcity, wore out the patience of a
fierce age; and nothing but a bold hand was wanting to gratify
the public wish by his deftruaion. Private revenge, inflamed
and fanaified by a false zeal for religion, quickly supplied this
want. Norman Lefly, the eldest son of the earl of Rothes, had
been treated by the Cardinal with injustice and contempt. It was
not the temper of the man, or the spirit of the times, quietly to
digest an affront. And as the profession of his adversary screened
him from the effets of what is called an honourable resentment,
he resolved to take that fatisfadion, which he could not demand°
This resolution deserves as much censure, as the singular courage
and conduct with which he put it in execution excite wonder. The
Cardinal, at that time, resided in the castle of Saint Andrew's, which
he had fortified at great expence, and in the opinion of the age
had rendered it impregnable. His retinue was numerous, the town
at his devotion, and the neighbouring country full of his dependents.
In this situation, sixteen persons undertook to surprise his castle,
and to aflaflinate himself; and their success was equal to the bold-
ness of the attempt. Early in the morning they seized on the gate
It.:: 146. of the cafile, which was set open to the workmen who were em-

ployed inr finifiing the fortifications ; and having placed sentries at
the door of the Cardinal's apartment, they awakened his numerous
dorneflics one by one, and turning them out of the castle, they
without noise, or tumult, or violence to any other pcrfon, delivered

their

their country, though by a moif unjufifiable action, from an am- BOOK It.
bitious man, whose pride was insupportable to the nobles, as his .-- ^
cruelty and cunning were the great checks to the Reformation.

His death was fatal to the Catholic religion, and to the FrenchThe Rceget

attempts In

interest in Scotland. The fame zeal for both continued among avain to eize
great party in the nation, but when deprived of the genius and autho- murderers.
rity of so skilful a leader, was of fmallconfequence. Nothing can
equal the consternation which a blowfo unexpected occasioned among
his adherents; while the Regent secretly enjoyed 'an event, which
removed out of his way a rival, who had not only eclipsed his great-
ness, but almost extinguished his power. Decency, however, the
honour of the church, the importunity of the Qeen Dowager and
her faction, his engagements with France, and, above all these,
the desire of recovering his eldest son, whom the Cardinal had de-
tained for some time at St. Andrew's in pledge of his fidelity, and
who, together with the castle, had fallen into the hands of the
conspirators, induced him to take arms in order to revenge the death
of a man he hated.

HE threatened vengeance, but was unable to execute it. One

part of military science, the art of attacking fortified places, was
then unknown in Scotland. The weapons, the discipline, and im-
petuofity of the Scots, rendered their armies as unfit for sieges,
as they were ative in the field. An hundred and fifty men, which
was the greatest number the conspirators ever assembled, refitted
all the efforts of the Regent for five months , in a place, which
a single battalion, with a few battering cannon, would now re-

* Epifl. Reg. Scot. 2. 379.
VOL. I 0 dice

BOOK II. duce in as many days. This tedious siege was concluded by a

truce. The Regent undertook to procure for the conspirators an
absolution from the Pope, and a pardon in Parliament; and upon
obtaining these, they engaged to surrender the cafile, and to set
his son at liberty.

IT is probable, that neither of them were sincere in this treaty.

On both fides, they fought only to amuse, and to gain time. The
Regent had applied to France for assistance, and expected soon to
have the conspirators at mercy. On the other hand, if Lefly and
his associates were not at first incited by Henry to murder the Car-
dinal, they were, in the sequel, powerfully supported by him.
Notwithstanding the silence of cotemporary historians, there are
violent presumptions of the former; of the latter there is undoubted
certainty*. During the siege, the conspirators had received from
England supplies both of money and provisions; and as Henry was
preparing to renew his proposals concerning the marriage and
the union he had projected, and to second his negotiations with a
numerous army, they hoped, by concurring with him, to be in a
situation, in which they would no longer need a pardon, but might
claim a reward.

THE death of Henry blasted all these hopes. It happened in
J1547. 28 the beginning of next year, after a reign of greater splendor than

true glory; buffling, though not active; oppressive in domeflic go-
vernment, and in foreign politics wild and irregular. But the vices
of this Prince were more beneficial to mankind, than the virtues of
others. His rapaciousness, hisprofufion, and even his tyranny, by
depressing the ancient nobility, and by adding new property and

Keith, 6o0
8 power

power to the Commons, laid the foundations of the Britihf liberty. BOOK II.
His other passions contributed no less towards the downfal of Popery, --
and the eflabliflment of religious freedom in the nation. His re-
fentment led him to abolifl the power, and his covetousness to seize
the wealth of the church; and by withdrawing these supports,
made it easy, in the following reign, to overturn the whole fabric
of fuperflition.

FRANCIS I. did not long survive a Prince, who had been alter-

nately his rival and his friend; but his successor Henry II. was not
neglecful of the French interest in Scotland. He sent a considerable Troops arrive

from France.

body of men, under the command of Leon Strozzi, to the Regent's
assistance. By their long experience in the Italian and German
wars, the French had become as dextrous in the conduct of sieges,
as the Scots were ignorant; and as the boldness and despair of the
confpiratorscould not defend them against their superior art, they,
after a short resistance, surrendered to Strozzi, who engaged, in the Force the
name of the King his master, for the security of their lives; and Adrle,'s to
as his prisoners transported them into France. The castle itfelf,furrender.
the monument of Beatoun's power and vanity, was demolished, in
obedience to the canon law, which, with admirable policy, de-
nounces its anathemas even against the houses in which the sacred
blood of a Cardinal happens to be shed, and ordains them to be
laid in ruins*.

THE archbifhoprick of St. Andrew's was bestowed by the Re-
gent upon his natural brother, John Hamilton Abbot of Paisley.

* Burn. Hist. Ref. I. 338;

0 a TirE

BooK II. THE delay of a few weeks would have saved the conspirators.
ewbrch) Those Ministers of Henry VIII. who had the chief direcion of as-
withEnglandfairs during the minority of his son Edward VI. conducEed them-

selves, with regard to Scotland, by the maxims of their late master,
and resolved to frighten the Scots into a treaty, which they had not
abilities or address to bring about by any other method.

BUT before we proceed to relate the events which their inva-

sion of Scotland occasioned, we shall stop to take notice of a cir-
cumftance unobserved by cotemporary historians, but, extremely re-
markable for the discovery it makes of the sentiments and spirit,
which then prevailed among the Scots. The conspirators against
Cardinal Beatoun found the Regent's eldest son in the castle of St.
Andrew's ; and as they needed the protection of the English, it was
to be feared that they might endeavour to purchase it, by delivering
to them this important prize. The presumptive heir to the Crown,
in the hands of the avowed enemies of the kingdom, was a dread-
ful profpet. And, in order to avoid it, the Parliament fell upon
avery extraordinary expedient. By an aa made of purpose, they
excluded " the Regent's eldest son from all right of succession,
i' public or private, so long as he should be detained a prisoner,
" and substituted in his place, his other brothers, according to their
"f enioritv, and in failure of them, those who were next heirs to
(, the Regent*." Succession by hereditary right is an idea so ob-
vious and so popular, that a nation seldom ventures to make a breach
in it, but in cafes of extreme necessity. Such a neceflity did the
Parliament discover in the present situation. Hatred to England,,
founded on the memory of past hostilities, and heightened by the
smart of recent injuries, was the national passion. This dictated

* Epift. Rcg. Scot. 2. 359.

that

that uncommon flatute, by which the order of lineal fuccefflon was BooK II.
so remarkably broken. The modern theories, which represent this
right as divine and unalienable, and that ought not to be violated;
upon any consideration whatsoever,. seem to have been then alto-
gether unknown.

IN the beginning of September, the Earl of Hartford, now Duke Scotland in-

of Somerset, and Protedtor of England, entered Scotland at the head vadd by the
of i8,ooo men; and, at the fame time, a fleet of 60 ships ap-
peared on the coast, to second his land forces. The Scots had;
for some time observed this storm gathering, and were prepared.
for it. Theirarmy was almost double to-thatof the enemy, and.
pofled to the greatest advantage on a riling ground, above Muffel-
burgh, not far from the banks of the river Efke. Both these circum-
flances alarmed the Duke of Somerset, who saw his danger, and
would willingly have extricated himself out of it, by a new over-
ture of peace on conditions extremely reasonable. But this mode-
ration was imputed to fear; and his proposals were rejected with that
scorn, which the confidence of success inspires. And had the con-
duc of the Regent, who commanded the Scottish army, been in any
degree equal to his confidence, the deftrution of the English.
must have been inevitable. They were in a situation, precisely
similar to that of their countrymen under Oliver Cromwell, in the
following century. The Scots had chosen their ground so well,
that it was impossible to force them to give battle; a few days had
exhausted the forage and provision of a narrow country; the fleet
could only furnifs a scanty and precarious fibfiflence; a retreat
therefore was neceflary; but disgrace, and perhaps ruin, were the
consequences of retreating.

ON

BooK Ir. ON both these occasions, the national heat and impetuosity of

""'"' the Scots fved the English, and precipitated their own country in-
Batileof to the utmost danger. The undisciplined courage of the private

men became impatient at the fight of an enemy. The General
was afraid of nothing, but that the English would escape from him
by flight; and leaving his advantageous situation, he attacked the
Septemberio, Duke of Somerset near Pinkey, with no better success than his rash-

ness deserved. The Protetor had drawn up his troops on a gentle
eminence, and had now the advantage of ground on his fide. The
Scotch army consisted almost intirely of infantry, whose chief wea-
pon was a long spear, and for that reason their files were very deep,
and their ranks close. They advanced towards the enemy in three
great bodies, and as they paficd the river, were considerably ex-
posed to the fire of the English Fleet, which lay in the bay of Muf-
felburgh, and had drawn near the flore. The English cavalry,
-fufhed with an advantage which they had gained in a skirmish
some days before, began the attack with more impetuosity, than good
conduct. A body so firm and compaat as the Scots, easily resifted
the imprefilon of cavalry, broke them, and drove them off the
field. The English infantry, however, advanced, and the Scots
were at once exposed to a flight of arrows, to a fire in flank from
400 foreign Fusileers who served the enemy, and to their cannon
which were planted behind the infantry, on the highest part of the
eminence. The depth and closeness of their order making it impofil-
ble for the Scots to stand long in this situation; the Earl of Angus
who commanded the vanguard, endeavoured to change his ground,
and to retire towards the main body. But his friends unhappily mif-
took this motion for a flight, and fell into confusion. At that very
inflant, the broken cavalry having rallied, returned to the charge;
the foot pursucd tlhc advantage they had gained; the profped of

vicory

victory redoubled the ardor of both; and, in a moment, the rout BOOK II.
of the Scottish army became universal, and irretrievable. The en-
counter in the field was not long, nor bloody; but, in the pursuit,
the English discovered all the rage and fierceness, which national
antipathy, kindled by long emulation, and inflamed by reciprocal
injuries, is apt to inspire. The pursuit was continued for five hours,
and to a great distance. All the three roads, by which the Scots
fled, were firewed with spears and swords, and targets, and covered
with the bodies of the slain. Above io,ooo men fell on this day,
one of the moil fatal Scotland had ever seen. A few were taken
prisoners, and among these some persons of distinCtion. And the
Protetor had it now in his power to become mailer of a kingdom,
out of which, not many hours before, he was almost obliged to
retire with infamy g%

BUT

* The following passage in a curious and rare journal of the Protetor's expedi-

tion into Scotland, written by W. Patten, who was joined in commiflion with Cecil,
as Judge Marihal of the army, and printed in 1548, deserves our notice; as it gives
a just idea of the military discipline of the Scots at that time. " But what after I
learned, specially touching their order, their armour, and their manner as well of
going to offend, as of Handing to defend, I have thought necefliry here to utter.
Hackbutters have they few or none, and appoint their fight most commonly always
a-foot. They come to the field well furnished all with jack and skull, dagger and
buckler, and swords all broad and thin, of exceeding good temper, and universally
so made to slice, that as I never saw none so good, so think I it hard to devise the
better. Hereto every man his pike, and a great kercher wrapped twice or thrice
about his neck, not for cold, but for cutting. In their array towards joining with
the enemy, they cling and thrust so near in the fore rank, shoulder and fhouldcr to-
gether, with their pikes in both their hands fireight afore them, and their followers
in that order so hard at their backs, laying their pikes over their foregoers floul-
ders, that, if they do aflatil undiscovered,. no force can well withfland them. Stand-
ing at defence they thruit fboulders likewifc so nigh together, the fore ranks well

ni ghl

BooK II. fBur this vidory, however great, was of no real utility, for

--r- - v want of ikill, or of leisure, to improve it. Every new injury ren-

TIheir v. ory
oflitti- h: efit Iered the Scots more averse from an union with England; and the

'"Protector neglected the only measure, which would have made it

neceltary for them to have given their content to it. He amused
himaelf in wafting the open country, and in taking or building
Ievei-al petty caffles; whereas by fo'tifying a few places which were
,ccefllble by sea, he would have laid the kingdom open to the Eng-
jiih, and, in a short time, the Scots muf either have accepted of
his terms, or have submitted to his power. By such an improve-
ment of it, his vitory at Dutnbar gave Cromwell the command of
Scotland. The battle cf Pinkey had no other effed but to precipi-
tate the Scots into new engagements with France. The situation
of the Englifi court may, indeed, be pleaded in excuse for the Duke
of Someriet's conduct. That cabal of his enemies, which occa-
sioned his tragical end, was already formed ; and while he triumphed
in Scotland, they secretly undermined his power and credit at home.
Self-prefervation, therefore, obliged him to prefer his safety before his
fame, and to return without reaping the fruits of his victory. At
this time, however, the cloud blew over; the conspiracy by which

nigh to kneeling, sloop low before, their fellows behind holding their pikes with
both hands, and therewith in their left their bucklers, the one end of the pike against
their right foot, and the other againit the enemy breaft-high ; their followers crof-
sing their pike points with them forward; and thus each with other bo nigh as
space and place will susSer, through the whole ward, so thick, that as easily shall
a bare finger pierce through the skin of an angry hedge hog, as any encounter the
front of their pikes." Other curious particulars are found in this journal, from
which Sir John Hayward has borrowed his account of this expedition.

Life of Edward VI. 279, &c.

The length of the Scots pike or spear was appointed by AlC. 44. P. 1471. to
be fix ells; i. c. eightcen feet lix inches.

he

he fell was not yet ripe for execution; and his pretence suspended, BOOK II
for rome time, its effect. The supreme power still remained in his
hands, and he employed it to recover the opportunity, which he
had loft. A body of troops, by his command, seized and forti-
sied Haddingtoun, a place, which, on account of its distance fromnApril, i543
the Tea, and from any English garrison, could not be defended
without great expence and danger.

MEAN while the French gained more by the defeat of their al Foces the

Scots into a

lies, than the English did by their victory. After the death of Car- closer ui;on
dinal Beatoun, Mary of Guise, the Queen Dowager, took a con with Fance
fiderable (hare in the diretion of affairs. She was warmly attached
by blood, and by inclination, to the French interest; and, in order
to promote it, improved with great dexterity every event which oc-
curred. The spirit and strength of the Scots were broken at Pinkey;
and in an assembly of nobles which met at Stirling to consult upon
the situation of the kingdom, all eyes were turned towards France,
no profpeEt of safety appearing but in assistance from thence. But
Henry II. being then at peace with England, the Queen represent-
ed that they could not expeCt him to take part in their quarrel, but
upon views of personal advantage; and that without extraordinary
concessions in his favour, no afifltance in proportion to their pre-
sent exigencies could be obtained. The prejudices of the nation
powerfully seconded these representations of the Queen. What often
happens to individuals took place among the nobles in this conven-
tion; they were swayed entirely by their pailions, and in order to
gratify them, they deserted their former principles, and disregardcd
their true interest. In the violence of resentment, they forgot that
zeal for the independence of Scotland, which had prompted them
to reject the proposals of Henry VIII. and by offering, voluntarily,

VOL. I. P their

Loox II. their young Queen in marriage to the Dauphin eldest son of Henry II.
nl-4 t' o and w1nic1 was Rtill more, by proposing to fend her immediately
their Queen into France to be educated at his court, they granted, from a thirst
in uaiar e to
thei L.u:iin. of vengeance, what formerly they would not yield upon any con-

fideration of their own safety. To gain at once such a kingdom as
Scotland, was a matter of no small consequence to France. Hen-
ry, without hesitation, accepted the offers of the Scottifl ambafsa-
dors, and prepared for the vigorous defence of his new acquisition.
Si, thousand veteran soldiers, under the command of Monleur
DeflT, affitied by some of the best officers, who were formed in the
long wars of Francis I. arrived at Leith. They served two can-
paigns in Scotland, with a spirit equal to their former fame. But
their exploits were not considerable. The Scots soon became jea-
lous of their designs, and neglected to support them with proper
vigour; and the caution of the English, in ad-ing wholly upon the
defensive, prevented them from attempting any enterprize of con-
sequence; and obliged them to exhaust their Rrength in tedious
sieges, undertaken under many disadvantages. Their efforts, how.
ever, were not without some benefit to the Scots, by compelling the
English to evacuate Haddingtoun, and to surrender several small
forts, which they pofeffed in different parts of the kingdom.

BUT the consequences of these operations of his troops were f{ill

.of greater importance to the French King. The diversion which
they occasioned enabled him to wrest Boulogne out of the hands of
the English; and the influenc of his army in Scotland obtained
the concurrence of Parliament with the overtures made to him, by
the aficlml-,ly of nobles at Stirling, concclering the Qucen's marriage
with the Dalmplhin, and her education at the court of France. In
vain did a few patiriots rcmoni altte agaianf fIclh extravagant con.-

cclionls,

ceflions, by which Scotland was reduced to be a province of BOOK II.
France; and Henry, from an ally, raised to be master of the king- Th eat.for
dom; by which, the fiiendlaip of France became more fatal than that purpose
the enmity of England; and every thing was fondly given up to
the one, that had been bravely defended againfi the other. A point June 5, 1548.
of so much consequence was hastily decided, in a Parliament, as-
fembled in the camp before Haddingtoun: the intrigues of the
Queen Dowager, the zeal of the clergy, and resentment against
England, had prepared a great party in the nation for such a flep; the
French General and Ambassador, by their liberality and promises,
gained over many more. The Regent himself was weak enough
to Ptoop to the offer of a pension from France, together with the title
of Duke of Chatelherault in that kingdom. A considerable majo-
rity declared for the treaty, and the interefl of a faction was pre-
ferred before the honour of the nation.

HAVING hurried the Scots into this rafl and fatal resolution, the Mary lent to
source of many calamities to themselves, and to their Sovereign, the be educatedin

France.

French allowed them no time for reflecion or repentance. The
fleet, which had brought over their forces, was still in Scotland,
and without delay, convoyed the Qeen into France. Mary was
then fix years old, and by her education in that court, the politest,
but most corrupted in Europe, fle acquired every accompliil-
ment that could add to her charms as a woman, and contracted
many of those prejudices, which occalioned her misfortunes as a
Queen .

FROM the time that Mary was put into their hands, it was the

interefl of the Frcnch to fulner the war in Scotland to languish. The
recovering of the Boulonnois was the ol)jcEl Henry had moit at

P 2 heart;

BOOK II. heart; and a flight diversion in Britain was sufficient to divide the
---v'-.- attention and strength of the English, whose domestic fa&ions de-

prived both their arms and councils of their accuffomed vigour. The
government of England had undergone a great revolution. The
Duke of Somerset's power was acquired with too much violence, and
exercised with too little moderation, to be of long continuance. Many
good qualities, added to great love of his country, could not attone
for his ambition in usurping the sole direction of affairs. Many of
the most eminent courtiers combined against him; and the Earl of
Warwick their leader, no less ambitious, but more artful than Somer-
set, conducted his measures with so much dexterity, as to raise him-
self upon the ruins of his rival. Without the invidious name of
Protedor, he succeeded to all the power and influence, of which
Somerset was deprived, and he quickly found peace to be necessary
for the establishment of his new authority, and the execution of
the vast designs he had conceived.
Peace con- HENRY was no firanger to Warwick's situation, and improved

his knowledge of it to good purpose, in conducting the negocia-
tions for a general peace. He prescribed what terms he pleased to
the English Minifler, who scrupled at nothing, however advanta-
March z4, geous to that Monarch and his allies. England consented to restore

Boulogne and its dependencies to France, and gave up all pretcn-
sions to a treaty of marriage with the Queen of Scots, or to the
conquest of her country. A few small forts, of which the English
troops had hitherto kept poffefion, were razed ; and peace between the
two kingldoms was eflabliffed on its ancient foundation.

BoTH the Britifi nations loft power, as well as reputation, by
this unhappy quarrel. It was on both iides a war of emulation and

rcfcnt-.

resentment, rather than of interest ; and was carried on, under the BOOK II.
influence of national animofities, which were blind to all advan-
tages. The French, who entered into it with greater coolness, con-
duded it with more skill; and by dexterously availing themselves
of every circumstance which occurred, recovered possession of an
important territory which they had loft, and added to their mo-
narchy a new kingdom. The ambition of the Englifl Minister
betrayed to them the former; the inconsiderate rage of the Scots
against their ancient enemies bestowed on them the latter; their
own address and good policy merited both.

IMMEDIATELY after the conclusion of the peace, the French The Scots be-

forces left Scotland, as much to their own fatisfadion, as to that oftCean ou
of the nation. The Scots soon found, that the calling to their
assistance a people more powerful than themselves, was a danger-
ous expedient. They beheld, with the utmofl impatience, those
who had come over to protect the kingdom, taking upon them to
command in it; and on many occasions they repented the rash in-
vitation they had given. The peculiar genius of the French nation
heightened this disgust, and prepared the Scots to throw off the
yoke,, before they had well begun to feel it. The French were,
in that age, what they are in the pretent, one of the most polished
nations in Europe. But it is to be observed, in all their expeditions
into foreign countries, whether towards the south or north, that their
manners have been remarkably incompatible with the. manners of
every other people. Barbarians are tenacious of their own customs,
because they want knowledge and tafie to discover the reasonableness
and propriety of cuftorns which differ fiom them. Nations, which
hold the filflt rank in politeness, are frequently no less tenacious
out of pride. The Greeks were so in the ancient world ; and the

French.
4

BooK IT. French are the fame in the modern. Full of themselves, and ac-
--v---' cul:omed, by the imitation of their neighbours, to confider their

own modes as the standards of elegance, they scorn to disguise, or
to lay aside the diilinguiihing manners of their own nation, or to
make any allowance for what may differ from them among others.
For this reason, the behaviour of their armies has, on every occa-
sion, been insupportable to firangers, and has always exposed them
to hatred, and often to deftru'ion. In that age, they over-ran
ILaly four several times, by their valour, and loft it, as often, by
their insolence. The Scots, naturally an irascible and high-fpirited
people, and who, of all nations, can least bear the most diflant in-
finuation of contempt, were not of a temper to admit all the pre-
tensions of such assuming guests. The symptoms of alienation were
soon visible; they seconded the French in their military operations
with the utmost coldness, and this secret disgust grew insensibly to
a degree of indignation that could hardly be refrained; and on oc-
cafion of a very flight accident, broke out with fatal violence. A
private French soldier had an idle quarrel with a citizen of Edin-
burgh: both nations took arms, with equal rage, in defence of
their countrymen. The Provost of Edinburgh, his son, and feve-
ral citizens of diftindion were killed in the fray; and the French
were obliged to avoid the fury of the inhabitants, by retiring out
of the city. Notwithstanding the ancient alliance of France and
Scotland, and the long intercourse of good offices between the two
nations, an aversion for the French took its rife at this time, among
the Scots; the effecs whereof were deeply felt, and operated pow-
erfully through the subsequent period.

,.-icr ,otic F 'OM the death of Cardinal Beatoun, nothing has been said of
L(cioi mnaion.

the slate of religion. While the war with England continued, the

clergy

clergy had no leisure to molest the Protestants; and they were not BooK II.
yet considerable enough to expeóc any thing more than connivance -
and impunity. The new doetrines were flill in their infancy; but
during this short interval of tranquillity, they acquired strength,
and advanced, by large and firm fleps, towards a full eftabiifl
ment in the kingdom. The first preachers againfl popery in Scot.
land, of whom several had appeared during the reign of James V.
were more eminent for zeal and piety, than for learning. Their
acquaintance with the principles of the Reformation was partial,
and at second hand; some of them had been educated in England.
all of them had borrowed their notions from the books published
there; and, in the firif dawn of the new light, they did not venture
many steps before their leaders. But, in a short time, the doctrines
and writings of the foreign Reformers became generally known;
the inquisitive genius of the age pressed forward in quefl of truth
the discovery of one error opened the way to others; the downfal of
one imposture drew many after it; the whole fabric, which igno
rance and superstition had erected in times of darkness, began to
totter; and nothing was wanting to compleat its ruin, but a daring
and adtive leader to direc the attack. Such was the famous John
Knox, who, with better qualifications of learning, and more ex-
tensive views than any of his predeceflbrs in Scotland, poffefled a
natural intrepidity of mind, which set him above fear. .He began
his public ministry at St. Andrew's in the year 15147, with that fuc-
cess, which always accompanies a bold and popular eloquence. In-
stead of amusing himlelf with lopping the branches, lie struck di-
retly at the root of Popery, and attacked both the doctrine and dif-
cipline of the cfl-ablifhed church, with a vehemence peculiar to
limnfcclf, but admirably suitcd to the temper and wifics of the

J AN

BOOK II. AN adversary so formidable as Knox, would not have easily

A-'- escaped the rage of the clergy, who observed the tendency and

progress of his opinions, with the utmost concern. But, at first,
he retired for safety into the castle of St. Andrew's, and while the
conspirators kept poffiflion of it, preached publickly under their
protection. The great revolution in England, which followed
upon the death of Henry VIII. contributed no less than the zeal
of Knox, towards demolishing the Popish church in Scotland.
Henry had loosened the chains, and lightened the yoke of Popery.
The Ministers of his son Edward VI. cast them off altogether,
and eftablifihed the Protefl-ant religion upon almost the fame footing,
whereon it now stands in that kingdom. The influence of this ex-
ample reached Scotland, and the happy effects of ecclesiastical li-
berty, in the one nation, inspired the other with an equal desire of re-
covering it. The Reformers had, hitherto, been obliged to con-
duc& thenfelves with the utmost caution, and seldom ventured to
preach, but in private houses, and at a distance from court; they
gained credit, as happens on the firt publication of every new reli-
gion, chiefly among persons in the lower and middle rank of life.
But several noblemen of greatest difinction, having, about this time,
openly espoused their principles, they were no longer under the
neceflity of aaing with the fame reserve; and with more security
and encouragement, they had likewise greater success. The means
of acquiring and spreading knowledge became more common, and
the spirit of innovation, peculiar to that period, grew every day
bolder and more universal

HAPPILY for the Reformation, this spirit was dill under some

restraint. It had not yet attained firmness and vigour, fuflicient to
overturn a system, founded on the deepelt policy, and supported

by

by the mort formidable power. Under the present circumlsances, BooK IL
any attempt towards adion must have been fatal to the Protestant
dodrines; and it is no small proof of the authority, as well as pene-
ration of the heads of the party, that they were able to restrain
the zeal of a fiery and impetuous people, fill that critical and mature
juncture, when every ftep they took was decisive and successful.

MEANWHILE their cause received reinforcement from two dif-

ferent quarters, whence they never could have expeted it. The
ambition of the house of Guise, and the bigotry of Mary of Eng-
land hastened the subversion of the Papal throne in Scotland; and
by a singular disposition of Providence, the persons who opposed
the Reformation in every other part of Europe with the fiercefc
zeal, were made instruments for advancing it in that kingdom.

MARY of Guise possessed the fame bold and aspiring spirit, which The Queel,

distinguished her family. But in her it was softened by the femalee Dowager
character, and accompanied with greater temper and address. Herofice of Ra.
brothers, in order to attain the high objects at which they aimed,
ventured upon such daring measures, as suited their great courage.
Her designs upon the supreme power were concealed with the ut-
moll care, and advanced by address and refinements more natural
to her sex. By a dexterous application of those talents, (he had ac-
quired a considerable influence on the councils of a nation, hither-
to unacquainted with the government of women; and without the
smallest right to any (hare in the administration of affairs, had en-
grossed the chief direction of them into her own hands. But (lie
did not long reft satisfied with the enjoyment of this precarious
power, which the fickleness of the Regent, or the ambition of those
who governed him, might so easily dilturb; and fie began to [et

VOL. I, Q on

BOOK II. on foot new intrigues, with a design of undermining him, and of

.-?-- opening to- herself a way to succeed him in that high dignity. Her

brothers entered warmly into this scheme, and supported it with all
their credit at the court of France. The French King willingly
concurred in a measure, by which he hoped to bring Scotland en-
tirely under management, and in any future broil with England, to
turn its whole force upon that kingdom.

IN order to arrive at the desired elevation, the Qeen Dowager

had only one of two ways to chute; either violently to wrest the
power out of the hands of the Regent, or to obtain it by his con-
sent. Under a minority, and among a warlike and facious people,
the former was a very uncertain and dangerous experiment. The
latter appeared to be no less impracticable. To persuade a man vo-
luntarily to abdicate the supreme power; to descend to a level with
those, above whom he was raised; and to be content with the second
place where he hath held the first, may well pass for a wild and chi-
merical project. This, however, the Queen attempted; and the pru-
leince of the attempt was ufficiently jultified by its success.

THE Regent's inconstancy and irresolution, together with the

calamities which had Lefallen the kingdom under his adminifira-
tion, railed the prejudices both of the nobles and of the people againfl
him, to a great height; and the Queen secretly fomented these
with much industry. All who wished for a change met with a
gracious reception in her court, and their spirit of difaffedion was
nourished by such hopes and promises, as, in every age, impore

cout the on the credulity of the factious. The favourers of the Reforma-
ttforle;:. tion being the oilno numerous and spreading body of the Regent's

enemies, flic applied to them, with a particular attention; and the

gentle-

7

gentleness of her dispositions, and seeming indifference to the re- BooK I1.
ligious points in dispute, made all her promires of protection and --
indulgence pass upon them for sincere. Finding so great a part of
the nation willing to fall in with her measures, the Queen set out
for France, under pretence of visiting her daughter, and took along oat. ,o.
with her those noblemen, who pofiffed the greatest power and
credit among their countrymen. Softened by the pleasures of an ele-
gant court, flattered by the civilities of the French King, and the
carefles of the house of Guise, and influenced by the seasonable
distribution of a few favours, and the liberal promise of many more,
they were brought to approve of all the Queen's pretensions.

\WHI LE she advanced by these flow but important fleps, the Re-

gent either did not foresee the danger which threatened him, or
negleced to provide against it. The fir-st discovery of the train
which was laid, came from two of his own confidents, Carnegie
of Kinnaird, and Panter Bishop of Ross, whom the Queen had
gained over to her interest, and then employed as the most proper
instruments for obtaining his content. The overture was made to
him in the name of the French King, enforced by proper threaten-
ings, in order to work upon his natural timidity, and sweetened by
every promise that could reconcile him to a proposal so disagreeable.
On the one hand, the confirmation of his French title, together
with a considerable pension, the parliamentary acknowledgment of
his right of succession to the Crown, and a public ratification of his
conduct during his regency, were offered him. On the other
hand, the displeasure of the French King, the power and popula-
rity of the Queen Dowager, the difafeaiion of the nobles, with
the danger of an after-reckoning, were reprcfecned in the fhtongeft
colours.

Q2 ITr

BOOK IL. IT was not possible to agree to a proposal so extraordinary and

----" unexpected, without some previous struggle; and had the Archbishop

of St. Andrew's been present to fortify the irresolute and passive
spirit of the Regent, he would, in all probability, have rejected it
with disdain. Happily for the Queen, the sagacity and ambition
of that Prelate could, at this time, be no obstruction to her views.
He was lying at the point of death, and in his absence, the influ-
ence of the Queen's agents on a flexible temper counterballanced
leveral of the firongeft passions in the human mind, and obtained
his content to a voluntary surrender of the supreme power.
Dec. r15. AFTER gaining a point of such difficulty, with so much ease,

the Queen returned into Scotland, in full expectation of taking
immediate poieffeon of her new dignity. But, by this time, the
Archbiflop of St. Andrew's had recovered of that distemper, which
the ignorance of the Scottish physicians had pronounced to be in-
curable. This he owed to the assistance of the famous Cardan,
one of those irregular adventurers in philosophy, of whom Italy
produced so many about this period. A bold genius led him to
ltore useful discoveries, which merit the esteem of a more discern-
ing age; a wild imagination engaged him in those chimerical:
kclcnces, which drew the admiration of his cotemporaries. As a
pretender to astrology and magic, he was revered and consulted by
all Europe ; as a proficient in natural philosophy, he was but little
known. The Archbiflop, it is probable, confidered him as a power-
ihl magician, when he applied to him for relief; but it was his know-
ledge as a philosopher, which enabled him to cure his disease *.

" Cardan himself was more desirous of being confidered as an Afdrologer than a

Philofophlcr; ir1 his book De Gei'ittris, we find a calculation of the Archbilhop's.
iinltivity, from 'which he pretends both to have prcdi(cd his disease, and to have
clETctcd his cure. lie received, from the Archbilhop, a reward of 18oo crowns,
A great fimn in that
l cge. )c litiiarfw, p. 32.

TOG,,

TOGETHER with his health, the Archbishop recovered the en- BOOK II.

tire government of the Regent, and quickly determined him to re-
cal that dishonourable promise, which he had been seduced by the
artifices of the Queen to grant. However great her furprize and
indignation were, at this fresh instance of his inconstancy, the was
obliged to dissemble, that he might have leisure to renew her in-
trigues with all parties; with the Proteflants, whom she fa-
voured and courted more than ever; with the nobles, to whom [he
rendered herself agreeable by various arts; and with the Regent him-
self, in order to gain whom, fle employed every argument. But
whatever impressions her emissaries might have made on the Re-
gent, it was no easy matter to over-reach or to intimidate the Arch-
bishop. Under his management, the negociations were spun out to
a great length, and his brother maintained his station with that ad-
dress and firmness, which its importance so well merited. The
universal defection of the nobility, the growing power of the Pro-
teflants, who all adhered to the Queen Dowager, the reiterated so-
licitations of the French King, and, above all, the interposition of
the young Queen, who was now entering the twelfth year of her
age, and claimed a right of nominating whom she pleased to be
Regent, obliged him, at las, to resign that high office, which he Prevails on
had held many years. H-e obtained, however, the fame advanta-rthe tRegct to
geous terms for himself, which had been formerly tfipulated. fice.

IT was in the Parliament which met on the ioth of April, 1554, She obtaie n

thc e encN

that the Earl of Arran executed this extraordinary resignation; and
at the fame time Mary of Guise was railed to that dignity, which
had been so long the objc&t of her wifics. Thus, with their ownr
approbation, a woman, and a firanger, was advanced to the fupreace
authority over a fierce and turbulent people, who seldom submit-

ted)

Booz, Il.ted, w\thout reluiance, to the legal and ancient government of
_-?-.,. their native Monarchs..

Rrmo:-ct'n \WY I1ILE the Queen Dowager of Scotland contributed so much
contin: t tox wards the progress of the Reformation, by the protetion which

;. she afforded it, froin motives of ambition; the Englifl Queen,

by her indilcrcet zeal, filled the kingdom with persons active in
.lI. óc, !;i: promoting the flame cause. Mary ascended the throne of England,

on the death of her brother Edward, and soon after married Philip II.
cf Spain. To the persecuting spirit of the Romish superstition,
anld the icrcenefs of that age, fie added the private resentment of
her ow-n, and of her mother's sufferings, with which she loaded
the Reformed Religion; and the peeviflnefs and severity of her na-
tural temper carried the acrimony of all these paflions to the utnoft
extreme. The cruelty of her persecution equalled the deeds of those
tyrant-, who have been the greaterf reproach to human nature.
The bigotry of her clergy could scarce keep pace with the impe-
tuofity of her zeal. Even the unrelenting Philip was obliged, on
some occasions, to mitigate the rigour of her proceedings. Many
among the most eminent Reformers suffered for the doctrines which
they had taught; others fled from the storm. To the greater
part of these, Switzerland and Germany opened a fccure asylum;
and not a few, out of choice or necefl]ty, fled into Scotland.
V\hat they had seen and felt in England, did not abate the warmth
and zeal of their indignation against Popery. Their attacks were
bolder and more successful than ever; and their doctrines made a
rapid progress among all ranks of men.

THESE doctrines, calculated to rectify the opinions, and to reform
the planners of mankind, had hitherto produced no other effects;

but

but they soon began to operate with greater violence, and proved the BOOK II.
occasion, not only of Subverting the established religion, but of -v
Shaking the throne, and endangering the kingdom. The causes ew of the
which facilitated the introduction of there new opinions into Scot- politicalcaufes

which contri-

land, and which disseminated them so fafr through the nation, me- butedtowards
rit, on that account, a particular and careful inquiry. The Refor-that
mation is one of the greatest events in the history of mankind, and
in whatever point of light we view it, is inftrutive and interesting.

THE revival of learning in the s5th and i6th centuries rouzed

the world from that lethargy, in which it had been funk for many
ages. The human mind felt its own strength, broke the fetters of
authority by which it had been lb long restrained, and venturing to
move in a larger sphere, pushed its inquiries into every subjed,
with great boldness, and surprising fuccei's

No sooner did mankind recover the capacity of exercising their

reason, than religion was one of the firfl objeds which drew their
attention. Long before Luther published his famous Theses, which
shook the Papal throne, science and philosophy had laid open, to
many of the Italians, the imposture and absurdity of the eftablified
fuperflition. That subtle and refining people, satisfied with en-
joying those discoveries in secret, were little disposed to aflume the
dangerous character of Reformers, and concluded the knowledge of
truth to be the prerogative of the wife, while vulgar minds must be
overawed and governed by popular errors. But, animated with a
more noble and disinterested zeal, the German Theologian boldly
ereCted the flandard of truth, and upheld it witl an unconquerable
intrepidity, which merits the admiration and gratitude of all uic-
ceeding ages.

TH

BOOK II. THE occasion of Luther's being first disgusted with the tenets 6f
!-~*~' the Romish church, and how, from a small rupture, the quarrel

widened into an irreparable breach, is known to every one who has
been the least conversant in history. From the heart of Germany,
his opinions spread, with astonishing rapidity, all over Europe; and
wherever they came, endangered or overturned the ancient, but ill-
founded fyftemn. The vigilance and address of the court of Rome,
and the power and bigotry of the Aufirian family, suppressed these
notions on their first appearance, in the southern kingdoms- of
Europe. But the fierce spirit of the north, irritated by multiplied
impositions, could neither be mollified by the fame arts, nor subdued
by the fame force; and encouraged by some Princes from piety,
and by others out of avarice, it easily bore down the feeble oppo-
fition of an illiterate and immoral clergy.

THE fuperflition of Popery seems to have grown to the molf ex-

travagant height, in those countries which are situated towards the
different extremities of Europe. The vigour of imagination, and
sensibility of frame, peculiar to the inhabitants of southern cli-
mates, rendered them susceptible of the deepest imprefions of fu-
perflitious terror and credulity. Ignorance and barbarity were no
less favourable to the progress of the fame spirit, among the north-
ern nations. They knew little, and were disposed to believe every
thing. The most glaring absurdities did not {hock their gross un-
derftandings, and the mofl improbable fidions were received with
implicit aflent and admiration.

ACCORDINGLY-, that form of Popery, which prevailed in Scot-
aInd, was ofthe mofl bigotted and illiberal kind. Those doctrines
.'!lich are rnmoi ,vt to shock the human understanding, and those

legends

legends which farthest exceed belief, were proposed to the people BOOK II
without any attempt to palliate or disguise them; nor did they ever ~
call in question the reasonableness of the one, or the truth of the
other.

THE power and wealth of the church kept pace with the pro-

grefs of superstition ;- for it is the nature of that spirit to observe no
bounds in its refpee and liberality towards those, whose character
it efleems sacred. The Scottish Kings early demonstrated how much
they were under its influence, by their vast additions to the immu-
nities and riches of the clergy. The profuse piety of David I. who
acquired on that account the name of Saint, transferred almost the
whole crown-lands, which were at that time of great extent, into
the hands of ecclesiastics. The example of that virtuous Prince was
imitated by his successors. The spirit spread among all orders of
men, who daily loaded the priesthood with new possessions. The
riches of the church all over Europe were exorbitant; but Scotand
was one of those countries, wherein they had farthest exceeded the
just proportion. The Scottish clergy paid one half of every tax im-
posed on land ; and as there is no reason to think that, in that age,
they would be loaded with any unequal {hare of the burden, we
may conclude, that, by the time of the Reformation, little less than
one half of the property in the nation had fallen into the hands of
a society, which is always acquiring, and can never lose..

THE nature, too, of a considerable part of their property ex-

tended their influence. Many eflates, throughout the kingdom,
held of the church; church-lands were let in lease at an easy
rent, and were possessed by the younger sons, and descendants of

VOL. . R the

BOOK II. the best families*. The connexion between superior and vajal,
Lcy"J- between landlord and tenant, created dependencies, and gave rife

to an union of great advantage to the church; and in estimating
the influence of the Popish ecclesiastics over the nation, there, as
well as the real amount of their revenues, must be attended to,
and taken into the account.

Ti rs extraordinary share in the national property was accom-

panied with proportionable weight in the supreme council of the
kingdom. At a time, when the number of temporal Peers was
extremely furall, and when the Lesser Barons and representatives of
Burroughs seldom attended Parliamnents, the Ecclefiaflics formed a
considerable body there. And it appears from the ancient rolls of
Parliament, and from the manner of chufing the Lords of Articles,
that the proceedings of that high court must have been, in a great
measure, under their dirediont.

TiE reverence due to their sacred charaEer, which was often

carried incredibly far, contributed not a little towards the growth
of their power. The dignity, the titles, and precedence of the Po-
pifil clergy are remarkable, both as causes and effects of that do-
minion, which they had acquired over the reft of mankind. They
were regarded by the credulous laity as beings of a superior species;
they were neither subjed to the fame laws, nor tried by the fame

ldigcs. Every guard, that religion could supply, was placed around
their power, their poffeflions, and their persons; and endeavours
were uicd, not without fucclfs, to reprflent them all as equally
tacrcd.

Kcithl, 521l. Not (b). Spots. [-ift. of the Ch, of Scot. 4 19.

6 TitE

THE reputation for learning, which, however inconsiderable, Booi II.

was wholly engrossed by the clergy, added to the reverence which --- J
they derived from religion. The principles of found philosophy, and
of a just taste, were altogether unknown; in place of there, were
fubltituted fludies, barbarous and uninftrudtive; but as the eccle-
fiaflics alone were conversant in them, this procured them esteem;
and a very little knowledge drew the admiration of rude ages, which
knew nothing. War was the sole profession of the nobles, and
hunting their chief amusement; they divided their time between
these; unacquainted with the arts, and unimproved by science,
they disdained any employment foreign from. military affairs, or
which required rather penetration and address, than bodily vigour.
Wherever the former were necessary, the clergy were entrusted;
because they alone were properly qualified for the trust. Almost all
the high offices in civil government devolved, on this account, into
their hands. The Lord Chancellor was the firfi fubjedt in the
kingdom, both in dignity and in power. From the earliest ages
of the monarchy, to the death of Cardinal Beatoun, fifty-four
persons had held that high office; and of these, forty-three had
been ecclefiafticsl-. The Lords of Session were supreme Judges in
all matters of civil right; and by the original conflitution, the Pre-
sident and one half of the Senators in this court were churchmen.

To all this we may add, that the clergy being separated from the

ref: of mankind by the law of celibacy; and undift'raced by those
cares, and unincumbered with those burdens which occupy and op-
press other men, the interest of their order became their only ob-
ject, and they were at full leisure to pursue it.

' Crawf. Offic, of State.

R z2 T,

BOOK II. THE nature of their funtion gave them access to all persons, and

-i- at all seasons. They could employ all the motives of fear and of

hope, of terror and of consolation, which operate moit powerfully
on the human mind. They haunted the weak and the credulous;
they besieged the beds of the sick and of the dying. They suffered
few to go out of the world without leaving marks of their liberality
to the church; and taught them to compound with the Almighty
for their fins, by bestowing riches upon those, who called them-
selves his servants.

WHEN their own indufiry, or the fuperifition of mankind failed

of producing this effect, they had influence enough to call in the aid
of law. Whoever died inteJlate, was presumed to have destined his
moveables to pious uses. The church took possession of them. The
children, the wife, the creditors of the person deceased were often
excluded from any Ihare in what was esteemed a sacred property*.
As men are apt to trust to the continuance of life with foolish con-
fidence, and childi/hly shun every thing, that forces them to think
of their mortality, many die without fettling their affairs by will;
and the bold usurpation of ecclesiastics in this cafe, of which there
are frequent vefriges in our laws, though none in our historians, may
be reckoned among the most plentiful sources of the wealth of the
church.

AT the fame time, no matrimonial or testamentary cause could

be tried but in the spiritual courts, and by laws which the clergy
themselves had framed. The penalty, too, by which the decisions
ofthefe courts were enforced, added to their authority. A sentence

* EITays on Brit. Antiq. 17l.

of

of excommunication was no less formidable, than a fentence-ofout-BooK II.
lawry. It was pronounced on many occasions, and against various - -
crimes: and betides excluding those, upon whom it fell, frodt
Christian privileges, it deprived them of all their rights as men, pr
as citizens. And the aid of the secular power concurred with 'he
superstition of mankind, in rendering the thunders of the church no
less destructive than terrible.

To these general causes, may be attributed the immense growth

both of the wealth, and power of the Popish church; and without
entering into any more minute detail, this may serve to discover the
foundations, on which a ftruature so stupendous was ereced.

BUT though the laity had contributed, by their own superstition

and profuseness, to raise the clergy from poverty and contempt to
riches and dignity, they began, by degrees, to feel and to murmur
at their incroachments. No wonder haughty and martial Barons
should view the power and poffeflons of the church with envy;
and regard the lazy and inative character of churchmen with the
utmost contempt. While, at the fame time, the indecent and licen-
tious lives of the clergy gave great and just offence to the people,
and considerably abated the veneration, which they were accustomed
to yield to that order of men.

IMMENCE wealth, extreme indolence, gross ignorance, and, above

all, the severe injunction of celibacy, had concurred to introduce
this corruption of morals among the clergy; who, presuming too
much upon the fubmifion of the people, were at no pains either
to conceal, or to disguise their own vices. According to the accounts
of the Reformers, confirmed by several Popilh writers, the moit

open
S

BOOK II. open and fcandalovs diIfolution of manners prevailed among the

-'- / Scottish clergy *. Cardinal Beatoun, with the fame public pomp,

which is due to a legitimate child, celebrated the marriage of his
natural daughter with the Earl of Crawfurd's son t; and, if we may
believe Knox, he publickly continued to the end of his days a cri-
minal correspondence with her mother, who was a woman of rank.
The other prelates seem not to have been more regular and exem-
plary than their Primate II.

MEN of such charaders ought, in reason, to have been alarmed

at the first clamours railed against their own morals, and the doc-
trines of the church, by the Protestant preachers; but the Popish
ecclefiaflis, either out of pride or ignorance, neglected the proper
methods for silencing them. Inflead of reforming their lives, or
disguising their vices, they affeded to despise the censures of the
people. And while the Reformers, by their mortifications and au-
iierities, endeavoured to resemble the firit propagators of Chriftia-
nity, t;le Popish clergy were compared to all those persons, who

iV Winzet. np. Keith Append. 202, 205. Lefl. de Reb. Gefl. Scot. 232.

*t The marriage articles fubL-ribed with lis own hand, in which he calls her
ny .,lhiger, arie fhll extant. Keith, p. +2.

|I A remarkable proof of thc difbtlute manners of the cleigy is found in the pub-

lic rccords. A treater number of letters of Irit:io',¥an was grante(d during the
firtl thirty years attcr the Reformation, than during the whole period, that has
c'aplfd since tl;.it time. Theft wvce obtained by the ions of the Popilh clergy.
The ccc!rfiillics, lxho were allowed to retain their bcnclices, alienated them to
'hcir chllciren, who, when they acquired wealth, were desirous that the slain of
'tikc'ilim'!ri. v rnii. t :o longer renciillii upon their familics. In Kelith's Catahlgue of the
,',oo 'li. ]iBJ p, v. c filnd scvcral inftanccs of fuc h alienations of church lands, by the

,',.: i n bin lmbz::, to their natural children.

are

are mofl infamous, in history, for the enormity and scandal ofBooK If.
their crimes.

ON the other hand, inrfead of mitigating the rigour, or colour-

ing over the absurdity of the effablifhed doctrines; inflead of at-
tempting to found them upon scripture, or to reconcile them to
reason; they left them without any other support or recommenda-
tion, than the au:hority of the church, and the decrees of councils.
The fables concerning purgatory, the virtues of pilgrimage, and the
merits of the faints, were the topics, on which they infilled in their
discourses to the people; and the duty of preaching being left wholly
to Monks of the lowed and most illiterate orders, their compofi-
tions were flill more wretched and contemptible, than the fubjeds
on which they infited. While the Reformers were attended by
crowded and admiring audiences, the Popish preachers were either
universally deserted, or listened to with scorn.

THE only device which they employed in order to recover their

declining reputation, or to confirm the wavering faith of the people,
was equally imprudent, and unsuccessful. As many doctrines of
their church had derived their credit, at first, from the authority of
false miracles, they now endeavoured to call in these to their aid I
But those lying wonders, which were beheld with unfufpicious admi-
ration, or heard with implicit faith, in times of darkncfs and of igno-
rance, met with a very different reception, in a more enlightenld
period. The vigilance of the Reformers detected these impoliures,
and exposed not only them, but the cause, which needed the aid
of such artifices, to ridicule.

* Spot(wood, 69.

A\

EooK II. As the Popifl ecclesiastics became more and more the objecs of

L^-/mJ hatred and of contempt, the discourses of the Reformers were listened

to as so many calls to liberty; and besides the pious indignation
which they excited against those corrupt dot rines, whch had
perverted the nature of true Christianity; besides the zeal, which
they inspired for the knowledge of truth, and the purity of religion;
they gave rife also, among the Scottish nobles, to other views and
pafions. They hoped to flake off the yoke of ecclesiastical domi-
nion, which they had long felt to be oppressive, and which they
now discovered to be unchristian. They expected to recover pof-
session of the church revenues, which they were now taught to
confider as alienations made by their ancestors, with a .profusion no
less undifcerning, than unbounded. They flattered themselves that
a check would be given to the pride and luxury of the clergy, who
would be obliged, henceforward, to confine themselves within the
sphere, peculiar to their sacred character. An aversion for the efta-
blifhed church, which flowed from so many concurring causes, which
was raised by considerations of religion, and heightened by motives
of policy, spread fait through the nation, and excited a spirit, that
burst out, at last, with irresistible violence.

RELIGIOUS considerations, alone, were sufficient to have rouzed

this spirit. The points in controversy with the church of Rome
were of so much importance to the happiness of mankind, and so
essential to Christianity, that they merited all the zeal with
which the Reformers contended in order to eftablifl them. But
the Reformation having been represented as the effect of some
wild and enthusiastic frenzy in the human mind, this attempt to
account for the eagerness and zeal, with which our ancestors em-
braced and propagated the Protestant doctrines, by taking a view of

the

the political motives, alone, which influenced them, and by shew- BOOK II.
ing how naturally there prompted them to aa with so much ardor, '
will not, perhaps, be esteemed an unnecessary digression. We now
return to the course of the history.

THE Queen's elevation to the office of Regent seems to have ,5,4

transported her, at first, beyond the known prudence, and mode-
ration of her characer. She began her administration, by con-
ferring upon foreigners several offices of trust and of dignity; a ftep, The Queen
which both from the inability of strangers to discharge there offices Regent be-

gins her adini-

with vigour, and from the envy which their preferment excites niflrationwith
among the natives, is never attended with good consequences. Vil- lar meafues.
mort was made Comptroller, and entrusted with the management of
the public revenues; Bonot was appointed Governor of Orkney;
and Rubay honoured with the custody of the Great Seal, and the
title of Vice Chancellor *. It was with the utmost indignation, that
the Scots beheld offices of the greatest eminence and authority,
dealt out among firangers. By there promotions they conceived the
Queen to have offered an insult both to their understandings, and to
their courage; to the former, by supposing them unfit for those
flations, which their ancestors had filled with so much dignity; to
the latter, by imagining that they were tame enough not to com-
plain of an affront, which, in no former age, would have been to-
lerated with impunity.

WHILE their minds were in this disposition, an incident happened

which inflamed their aversion for French councils to the highefi:
degree. Ever since the famous contest between the houses of Va-

* Lefly, de Rcb. Gcft. Scot. i89.
VoL. I. S lois

BooK II. lois and Plantagenet, the French had been accuifomed to embarrass
-"-~- the Engliih, and to d-ivide their firength by the sudden and formi-

da'bic incurinons of their allies, the Scots. But, as these inroads
were feldomn attended with any real advantage to Scotland, and ex-
poled it to the dangercus refcntment of a powerful neighbour, the
Scots began to grow lets tradable than formerly, and scrupled, any
longer, to serve an ambitious ally at the price of their own quiet
and security. The change, too, which was daily introducing into
the art of war, rendered the afliftance of the Scottish forces of less
importance to the French Monarch. For these reasons, Henry
having resolved upon a war with Philip II. and foreseeing that the
Queen of England would take part in her huiband's quarrel, was
extremely solicitous to secure, in Scotland, the affiflance of some
troops, which would be more at his command than an undisciplined
army, led by chieftains who were almost independent. In profecu-
tion of this design, but under pretence of relieving the nobles from
the expence and danger of defending the borders, the Queen Regent
55; proposed, in Parliament, to register the value of lands throughout

the kingdom, to impose on them a small tax, and to apply that
revenue towards maintaining a body of regular troops, in constant
pay. A fixed tax upon land, which the growing expence of go-
vernment hath introduced into almost every part of Europe, was un-
known, at that time, and seemed altogether inconfiflent with the
free and independent spirit of the feudal government. Nothing
could be more shocking to a generous and brave nobility, than the
entrufiing, to mercenary hands, the defence of those territories which
had been acquired, or preserved by the blood of their anccltors.
They received this proposal with the utmost indignation. About
300 of the Lefler Barons repaired in a body to the QuCccn Regent,
and rcprelfnted their fcnfc of the intended innovation, withl that

1 nmanly

manly and determined boldness, which is natural to a free people, BooK II.
in a martial age. Alarmed at a remonstrance delivered in so firm '
a tone, and flpported by such formidable numbers, the Queen pru-
dently abandoned a scheme, which (ie found to be universally odi.-
ous. As the Queen herself was known perfefly to understand the
circumitances and temper of the nation, this measure was imputed
wholly to the fuggeflions of her foreign counsellors; and the
Scots were ready to proceed to thd most violent extremities against
them.

THE French, instead of extinguishing, added fuel to the flame. Attempts to
They had now commenced hostilities againfl Spain, and Philip had engage the

*'r . . . ~kingdom in

prevailed on the Queen of England, to reinforce his army with aa war with
considerable body of her troops. In order to deprive him of thisEngland
aid, Henry had recourse, as he projected, to the Scots; and at-
tempted to excite them to invade England. But, as Scotland had
nothing to dread from a Princess of Mary's charader, who, far
from any ambitious scheme of disturbing her neighbours, was wholly
occupied in endeavouring to reclaim her heretical fubjeds; the no-
bles, who were aflmTbled by the Queen Regent at NIewbottle,
listened to the solicitations of the French Monarch with extreme
coldness, and prudently declined engaging the kingdom in an en-
terprize so dangerous and unneccfiuay. What fihe could not obtain
by persuasion, the Queen Regent brought about by a firatagem.
Notwithflanding that peace subsisted between the two kingdoms,
she commanded her French soldiers to rebuild a finall fort near Ber-
wick, which was appointed, by the lafl treaty, to be razcd. The
garrilion of crvvick sallied out; interrupted the work ; and ravaged
the adjacent country. This insult rouzed thle icry spirit of the
ScoLs, and their promptness to revenge the Icaft appearance of na-

S 2 tional

BOOK 1I. tional injury dissipated, in a moment, the wife and pacific refolu-
'--*--/ tions which they had so lately formed. War was determined, and

orders inltantly given for raising a numerous army. But before
their forces could assemble, the ardor of their indignation had time
to cool, and the English having discovered no intention to push the
war with vigour, the nobles resumed their pacific system, and re-
;-56 solved to stand altogether upon the defensive. They marched to

the banks of the Tweed, they prevented the incursions of the ene-
my, and having done what they thought sufficient for the safety
and honour of their country, the Queen could not induce them, ei-
ther by her intreaties, or her artifices, to advance another ftep.

WHILE the Scots persisted in their inactivity, D'Oyfel, the Com-

mander of the French troops, who possessed entirely the confidence
of the Queen Regent, endeavoured, with her connivance, to en-
gage the two nations in hostilities. Contrary to the orders of the
Scottish General, he marched over the Tweed with his own soldiers,
and inverted Werk, a garrison of the English. The Scots, instead
of seconding his attempt, were enraged at his presumption. The
Queen's partiality towards France had long been fufpedted; but it
was now visible that she wantonly sacrificed the peace and safety of
Scotland, to the interest of that ambitious and assuming ally. Under
the feudal governments, it was in camps, that fubjecs were accustomed
to address the boldest remonstrances to their Sovereigns. While arms
were in their hands, they felt their own flrength; and at that time
all their representations of grievances carried the authority of com-
mands. On this occasion, the indignation of the nobles broke out
with such violence, that the Queen perceiving all attempts to en-
gage them in action to be vain, abruptly difmifled her army, and
retired with the utmost shame and disgust; having discovered the

impo-

impotence of her own authority, without effecing any thing which BOOK HI.
could be of advantage to France.

IT is observable, that this firfl instance of contempt for the Re-

gent's authority can, in no degree, be imputed to the influence of
the new opinions in religion. As the Queen's pretensions to the
Regency had been principally supported by those who favoured the
Reformation, and as ihe itill needed them for a counterpoise to
the Archbishop of St. Andrew's, and the partizans of the house of
Hamilton ; they were now treated by her with great refpet, and
even admitted to no inconsiderable share in her favour and confi-
dence. Kirkaldy of Grange, and the other surviving conspirators
against Cardinal Beatoun were, about this time, recalled by her
from banishment; and, through her connivance, the Protestant
preachers enjoyed an interval of tranquillity, which was of great
advantage to their cause. Soothed by these instances of the Queen's
moderation and humanity, the Protestants left to others the office of
reronftrating; and the leaders of the opposite faction set them the
first example of disputing the will of their Sovereign.

As the Queen Regent felt how limited and precarious her autho- The Queen's
rity was, while it depended on the poise of these contrary factions, thearrgeuith'

the Dauphin.

she endeavoured to eftablifl it on a broader and more secure foun-
dation, by hastening the conclusion of her daughter's marriage with
the Dauphin. Amiable as the Queen of Scots then was, in the
bloom of youth ; and considerable as the territories were, which
she would have added to the French monarchy; there did not want
reasons to dissuade Henry from compleating his first plan of marrying
her to his son. The Conflable Montmorency employed all his
intcreft to defeat an alliance, which reflected so much lufire on

the

BOOK I . tl', PrincS - of Lorrain. He represented the impossibility of maintain-
--__--'.. r . order and tranquillity among a turbulent people, during the ab-

i!ice of their Sovereign ; and for that reason, advised Henry to be-
s5ow the young Queen upon one of the Princes of the blood, who,
by residing in Scotland, might preserve that kingdom an useful ally
to France, which, by a nearer union to the Crown, would become
a mutinous and ungovernable province *o But, at this time, the
Conlta'le was a prisoner in the hands of the Spaniards, and the
Princes of Lorrain were at the height of their glory; and their in-
fluence, seconded by the charms of the young Queen, triumphed
over the prudent, but envious remonstrances of their rival.
:et. i_:, THEr French King accordingly applied to the Parliament of Scot"

land, which appointed eight of its memberss to represent the
whole body of the nation, at the marriage of the Queen. Among
the persons on whom the public choice conferred this honourable
charaacer, were some of the most avowed and zealous advocates
for the Reformation ; by which, may be efiimated the degree of
rc-fpcd and popularity, which that party had now attained in the
kiingdom. The inftru.tions of the Parliament to those Commis-
fioners still remain :, and do honour to the wisdom and integrity of
that assembly. At the fame time that they manifefRed a laudable
concern for the dignity and interlc of their Sovereign, with re-
fl£cl- to the articles of marriage, they employed every precaution
which prudence could didcate, for prcfcrving the liberty and indc-

":: clv. Merl . I;.
- Viz. The Archhifliop of G'afl.ow, the Piflop of Ross, the Biflop of Ork-

ney, thc Earls of Rothcs and C;:;ills, Lord Flecming, Lord Seton, the Prior of
St. And rcw's, andl Johnli l, inc of D)un.

K1: Keith, Ap)pend. 13.

pcndaiincc

pendance of the nation, and for securing the fuccefilon of the Crown BOox II.
in the house of Hamilton. '-

WITH regard to each of these, the Scots obtained whatever fa- .i.^lcs or

tisfadlion their fear or jealousy could demand. The young Queen, tl m'1lia:e
the Dauphin, and the King of France ratified every article, with t1"c-t
the most solemn oaths, and confirmed them by deeds in form, un-
der their hands and feals. But on the part of France, all this was
one continued scene of ltudied and elaborate deceit. Previous to
these public tranfadions with the Scottish deputies, Mary had been
persuaded to subscribe privately three deeds, equally unjuf:, and in-
valid; by which, failing the heirs of her own body, the conferred
the kingdom of Scotland, with whatever inheritance or fucceflion
might accrue to it, in free gift upon the Crown of France, declar-
ing all promises to the contrary, which the necefity of her aiffirs,
and the follicitations of her fubjeas had extorted, or might extort
from her, to be void and of no obligation -. As it gives us a pro-
per idea of the chara&er of the French court under Henry II. we
may observe that the King himself, the Keeper of the Great Seals;
the Duke of Guise, and the Cardinal of Lorrain, were the persons
engaged in conducting this perfidious and dishonourable projcd.
The Queen of Scots was the only innocent actor in that Scene of
iniquity. Her youth, her inexperience, her education in a so-
reign country, and her deference to her uncles will, vindicate her,
with every impartial person, from any imputation of blame on that
account.

This grant, by which Mary beflowed the inheritance of her
kingdom Upon ftrantges, was concealed with the utmost care from

': Corps 1Diplomat, tom. v. 21. Kdith, 73.

her

BoOK II.her fubjets. They seem, however, not to have been unacquaint-
b--v-- ed with the intention of the French to overturn the settlement of

the succession in favour of the Duke of Chatelherault. The zeal,
with which the Archbishop of St. Andrew's opposed all the mea-
fures of the Queen Regent, evidently proceeded from the fears and
suspicions of that prudent prelate, on this head '.

April 1.+, THE marriage, however, was celebrated with great pcmp; and
,5ss. the French, who had hitherto affected to draw a veil over their de-

signs upon Scotland, began now to unfold their intentions without
any disguise. In the treaty of marriage, the deputies had agreed
that the Dauphin should assume the name of King of Scotland.
This they confidered only as an honorary title; but the French
laboured to annex to it some solid privileges and power. They in-
sifted that the Dauphin's title should be publicly recognized; that
the Crown Matrimonial should be conferred upon him; and that
all the rights pertaining to the husband of a Queen should be vefled
in his person. By the laws of Scotland, a person who married an
heiress kept pofiTffion of her estate during his own life, if he hap-
pened to survive her and the children born of the marriage A-. This
was called the courtesy of Scotland. The French aimed at
applying this rule, which takes place in private inheritances,
to the succession of the kingdom; and that seems to be im-
plied in their demand of the Crown Matrimonial, a phrase pecu-
liar to the Scottish hiflorians, and which they have neglected to
explain. As the French had reason to exped difficulties in carry-

About this time, the French feern to have had Come design of reviving the Earl

of l.cirox's pretensions to the Succeflion, in order to intimidate and alarm the Duke
of Chlatcllicirult. Haynes, 215, 219. Sorbes Colleg. vol. i. 189.

'Il Rcg. M:j. lib. ii. 58.

ing

ing through this measure, they began with founding the deputies BooK II.
who were then at Paris. The English, in the marriage articles
between their Queen and Philip of Spain, had let an example to
the age, of that prudent jealousy and reserve, with which a foreigner
should be admitted so near the throne. Full of the fame ideas, the
Scottish deputies had, in their oath of allegiance to the Dauphin,
expressed themselves with remarkable caution ". Their answer
was in the fame spirit, refpedful, but firm; and discovered a fixed
resolution of consenting to nothing, thattended to introduce any al-
teration in the order of fuccefion to the Crown.

FoUR of the deputies - happening to die before they returned:

into Scotland, this accident was universally imputed to the effects
of poison, which was fippofed to have been given them by the
emissaries of the house of Guile. The hillorians of all nations
discover an amazing credulity with refped to tfories of this, kind,
which are So well calculated to please the malignity of Come men, and
to gratify the love of the marvellous which is natural to all, that,, in,
every age, they have been swallowed without examination, and be-,
lieved contrary to reason. No wonder the Scots should easily give
credit to a suspicion, which received such itrong colours of pro-
bability, both from their own resentment, and fiom the known
character of the Princes of Lorrain, so little scrupulous about the
juflice of the ends which they pursued, or of the means which
they employed. For the honour of human nature, it muff, how-
ever, be observed, that as we can discover no motive, which could
induce any man to perpetrate such a crime, so there appears no
evidence to prove that it was committed. But the Scots of that
age, influenced by national animofities and prejudices, were inca-

* Keith, Append. 20.

i The Biflop of Orkney, the Earl of Rothcs, the Earl of Callils, and Lord
Fleming.

VOL. I. T pable

BOOK II. pable of examining the circumstances of the cafe with calmness, or
^--'-- of judging concerning them with candour. All parties agreed in

believing the French to have been guilty of this detestable adion;
and it is obvious how much this tended to increase the aversion for
them, which was growing among all rinks of men.

The Regent NOTWITHSTANDING the cold reception which their proposal
r. vails on theconcerning the Crown Matrimonial met with from the Scottifli de-
Parliament to
grant t. puties, the French ventured to move it in Parliament. The par-
ovem. 9. tizans of the house of Hamilton, suspicious of their designs upon

the succession, opposed it with great zeal. But a party, which the
feeble and unsteady conduc of their leader had brought under much
difreputation, was little able to withstand the influence of France,
and the address of the Queen Regent, seconded, on this occasion,
by all the numerous adherents of the Reformation. Besides, that
artful Princess dressed out the French demands in a less offensive
garb, and threw in so many limitations, as seemed to render them
of small consequence. These either deceived the Scots, or removed
their scruples; and in compliance to the Queen, they passed an a&,
conferring the Crown Matrimonial on the Dauphin; and, with the
fondest credulity, trusted to the frail security of words and statutes,
againit the dangerous encroachments of power .

Coinnues to THE concurrence of the Protestants, with the Queen Regent,
court the Pro-in promoting a measure so acceptable to France, while the Popish

tlts clergy, under the influence of the Archbishop of St. Andrew's, op-

posed it with so much violence -, is one of those singular circurm-

* The At of Parliament is worded with the utmost care, with a view to guard

against any breach of the order of fucceelion. Bnt the TDuke, not relying on this
alone, entered a folcmn proteflation to secure his own right, Keith, 76. It is plain,
that he fufpecfed the Frcncl of having rome intention to set aside his right of fuccef-
son ; and, indeed, if they had no design of that kind, the eagerness with which
they urged their demand, was cchildlifi. t Mlv.47.

3 fiances

fiances, in the condua of parties, for which this period is so re- BOOK: II.
markable. It may be ascribed, in some degree, to the dextrous -
nmanagement of the Queen, but chiefly to the moderation of those
who favoured the Reformation. The protestants were, by this
time, almost equal to the Catholics both in power, and in num-
ber; and, conscious of their own strength, they submitted with
impatience to that tyrannical authority, with which the ancient
laws armed the ecclesiastics against them. They longed to be ex-
empted from this oppressive jurifdiEion, and publicly to enjoy the
liberty of professing those opinions, and of exercising that worship,
which so great a part of the nation deemed to be founded in truth,
and to be acceptable to the Deity. This indulgence, to which the
whole weight of priestly authority was opposed, there were only
two ways of obtaining. Either violence, muff extort it from the
reluctant hand of their Sovereign, or by prudent compliances, they
might expea it from her favour, or her gratitude. The former
is an expedient for the redress of grievances, to which no nation
has recourse suddenly; and fubjeds seldom venture upon resistance,
which is their last remedy, but in cafes of extreme necessity. On
this occasion, the Reformers wifely held the opposite course, and
by their zeal in forwarding the Queen's designs, they hoped to me-
rit her protection. This disposition the Queen encouraged to the
utmost, and amused them so artfully with many promises, and some
concessions, that, by their affiffance, she surmounted in Parliament
the force of a national, and perhaps a laudable jealousy, which
would, otherwise, have swayed with the greater number.

ANOT rHE R circumstance contributed somewhat to acquire the Re-

gent such considerable influence in this Parliament. In Scotland, all
the bishoprics, and those abbeys which conferred a title to a feat in
Parliament, were in the gift of the Crown *'. From the time of her

' See Book I.

T 2 acceffioia

BOOK II. accession to the regency, the Queen had kept in her own hands almost
--·-- ' all those which'became vacant, except such as were, to the great dif-

gust of the nation, beflowed upon foreigners. Among these, her
brother the Cardinal ofLorrain had obtained the abbeys of Kelfo
and Melrofs, two of the most wealthy foundations in the kingdom *.
By this condud, ihe thinned the ecclesiastical bench -, which was
entirely under the influence of the Archbishop of St. Andrew's, and
which, by its numbers and authority, had great weight in the house,
o as to render any opposition it could give of little consequence.

THE. Earl of Argyll, and James Stewart Prior of St. Andrew's,

one the mofl powerful, and the other the most popular leader of the
Protestants, were appointed to carry the Crown and other ensigns
of royalty to the Dauphin. But from this they were diverted by the
part they were called to at, in a more intererfing scene, which now
begins to open.

Elizabeth fuc- BEFORE we turn towards this, it. is neceflary to observe, that,
ceeds to te on the I7th of November, Mary of England finished her short,
Crown of
England. and inglorious reign. Her filler Elizabeth took poffeflion of

the throne without opposition; and the Protestant religion was,
once more, eftablifhedby law in England. The accession of a Queen,
who, under very difficult circumfiances, had given strong indica-
tions of those eminent qualities, which, in the sequel, rendered her
reign so illufltious, attraced the eyes of all Europe. Among the
Scots, both parties observed her first motions with the utmost con-
cern, as they easily foresaw that ihe would not remain long an in-
different'fpetator of their tranfadions.

* Lefly, 202.
+ It appears from the rolls of this Parliament, which Lefy calls a very full one,
that only seven Biflops and sixteen Abbots were prcfcnt.

UNDER

UNDER many discouragements, 'and much oppreffin, the Re- BOOK II.

formation advanced towards a full eftablifhiment in Scotland. All ---
the low country, the noft populous, and, at that time, the moss
warlike part of the kingdom, was deeply tinctured with the Pro-
teflant opinions; and if the fame impressions were not made in the
more distant counties, it was owing to no want of the fame difpofi-
tions among the people, but to the scarcity of preachers, whose most
indefatigable zeal could notfatisfy the avidity of those, who desired
their inftruCions. Among a people bred to arms, and so prone to mu-
tiny as the Scots; and in an age, when religious passions had taken
such strong possession of the human mind, and moved and agitated
it with so much violence; the peaceable and regular demeanour of
so numerous a party is truly aflonifhing. From the death of Mr.Ta-
trick Hamilton, the firif who suffered in Scotland for the Protestant
religion, thirty years had elapsed, and during so long a period, no
violation of public order or tranquillity had proceeded from that
fed *; and though rouzed and irritated by the moil cruel excefles
of ecclesiastical tyranny, they did, in no instance, transgress those
bounds of duty which the law prescribes to fubjeds. Besides the
prudence of their own leaders, and the protection which the Queen
Regent, from political motives, afforded them, the moderation of
the Archbihfop of St. Andrew's encouraged this pacific disposition.
That Prelate, whose private life cotemporary writers tax with great
irregularities f, governed the church, for some years, with a tem-
per and prudence of which there are few examples in that age.
But some time before the meeting of last Parliament, the Arc!h-

* The murder of Cardinal Beatoun was occasioned by private revenge, and be-

ing contrived and executed by sixteen persons, cannot, with juflicc, be imputed to
the whole Protestant party.

*I Knox, Buchanan, Keith, 208.

bishop

BooK. II. bishop departed from those humane maxims, by which he had hi-

L-*- therto regulated his conduat; and whether, in spite to the Queen,

who had entered into so close an union with the Protestants, or in
compliance with the importunities of his clergy, he let loose all the
rage of persecution against the Reformed; sentenced to the flames
an aged priest, who had been conviated of embracing the Proteflant
opinions; and summoned several others, fufpeaed of the fame crime,
to appear before a fynod of the clergy, which was soon to convene
at Edinburgh.

NOTHING could equal the horror of the Protestants at this un-

expeeed and barbarous execution, but the zeal, with which they
.efptufed the defence of a cause, that now seemed devoted to de-
ftruaion. They had immediate recourse to the Queen Regent;
.and as her success in the Parliament, which was then about to meet,
depended on their concurrence, ihe not only sheltered them from
the impending form, but permitted them the exercise of their re-
ligion, with more freedom than they had hitherto enjoyed. Unfa-
tisied with this precarious tenure, by which they held their re-
ligious liberty, the Protestants laboured to render their poifeflion of
it more secure and independent. With this view, they determined
to petition the Parliament for rome legal protetion, againfi the ex-
orbitant and oppressive jurifdition of the ecclesiastical courts, which,
by their arbitrary method of proceeding, founded in the canon law,
were led to sentences the most ihocking to humanity, by maxims
the most repugnant to justice. But the Queen, who dreaded the
effects of a debate on this delicate subjed, which could not fail of
exciting high and dangerous passions, prevailed on the leaders of
the party, by new and more solemn promises of her protection, to
desist from any application to Parliament, where theti numbers

and

and influence would, in all probability, have procured them, if not BOOK II.
the entire redress, at least, some mitigation of their grievances.

THEY applied to another assembly, to a convocation of the Po-

pish clergy, but with the fame ill success, which hath always at-
tended every proposal for Reformation, addressed to that order of
men. To abandon usurped power, to renounce lucrative error, is
a sacrifice, which the virtue of individuals has, on some occasions,
offered to truth; but from any society of men, no such effort can
be expeded. The corruption of a society, recommended by com-
mon utility, and justified by universal practice, ate viewed, by its
members, without hame, or horror; and Reformation never pro-
ceeds fronm themselves, but is always forced upon them by some
foreign hand. Suitable to this unfeeling and inflexible spirit, was
the behaviour of the convocation in the present conjuncture. All
the demands of the Protestants were rejeaed with contempt; and
the Popi(h clergy, far from endeavouring, by any prudent concef-
sions, to sooth and to reconcile such a numerous body, asserted the
doctrines of their church, concerning some of the most exception-
able articles, with an ill-timed rigour, which gave new offence 4

DURING the fitting of the convocation, the Protellants firit be-

gan to fufpeed ome change in the Regent's disposition towards them,
Though joined with them for many years, by interest, and united,
as they conceived, by the firongeft ties of affection and of grati-
tude, (he discovered, on this occasion, evident symptoms, not only
of coldness, but of a growing disgust and aversion. In order to ac-

KIeith, 81.

count

BoOK 1t. count for this, our hiflorians do little more than produce the trite

--^--'J observations concerning the influence of prosperity to alter the cha-:

rater, and to corrupt the heart. The Queen, fay they, having
reached the utmost point to which her ambition aspired, no longer
preserved her accustomed moderation, but, with an insolence usual
to the fortunate, looked down upon those, by whose afflltance she
had been enabled to rife so high. But it is neither in the depravity
of the human heart, nor in the ingratitude of the Queen's difpo-
fition, that we must search for the motives of her present conduct.
These were derived from another, and a more remote source, which,
in order to clear the subsequent tranfadions, we shall endeavour to
open with some care.

Ambi:ious THE ambition of the Princes of Lorrain had been no less fuc-
views of he
Princes of cefsful, than daring; but all their schemes were diltinguifhed by
Lorrain. being vast and unbounded. Strangers at the court of France, their

eminent qualities had raised them, in a short time, to an height of
power, superior to that of all other fubjeds, and had placed them
on a level even with the Princes of the blood themselves. The
church, the army, the revenue, were under their direrion. No-
thing but the royal dignity remained unattained, and to a near al-
liance with it, they were elevated by the marriage of the Queen of
Scots to the Dauphin. In order to gratify their own vanity, and to
render their niece more worthy the heir of France, they set on
foot her claim to the Crown of England, which was founded on
pretences not unplaufible.

TltE tragical amours and marriages of Henry VIII. are known

to all the world. Moved by the caprices of his love, or of his
resentment, that impatient and arbitrary Monarch had divorced or

beheaded

beheaded four of the fix Queens, whom he married. In order toBooK II.
gratify him, both his daughters had been declared illegitimate by
Ad of Parliament; and yet, with that fantastic inconsistence which
distinguishes his charaAer, he, in his lail will, whereby he was im-
powered to fettle the order of succession, called both of them to
the throne, upon the death of their brother Edward; and, at the
fame time, passing by the pofierity of his eldef si ler Margaret
Queen of Scotland, he appointed the line of succession to con-
tinue in the descendents of his younger sifter, the Dutchess of
Suffolk.

IN consequence of this destination, the validity whereof was ad-

mitted by the English, but never recognized by foreigners, Mary
had reigned in England, without the least complaint of neighbour-
ing Princes. But the fame causes, which facilitated her accession
to the throne, were obstacles to the elevation of her siser Eliza-
beth, and rendered her poffefion of it precarious and insecure. Rome
trembled for the Catholic faith, under a Protestant Queen of such
eminent abilities. The fame fuperflitious fears alarmed the court
of Spain. And France beheld, with indignation, a throne, to which
the Queen of Scots could form so many pretensions, occupied by a
rival, whose birth, in the opinion of all good Catholics, excluded
her from any legal right of succession. The impotent hatred of
the Roman Pontiff, or the flow councils of Philip II. would have
produced no sudden or formidable effect. The ardent and impetu-
ous ambition of the Princes of Lorrain, who, at that time, go-
verned the court of France, was more decisive, and more to be dread-
ed. Infligated by them, Henry, soon after the death of Mary, per- They per-
fuaded his daughter-in-law and her husband, to assume the title of to afume' le

title of Queen
King and Queen of England. They affected to publish this to of England.

VOL. I. U all

BOOK II. all Europe. They used that ltyle and appellation in public papers,

-- frome of which itill remain . The arms of England were en-
I559. graved on their coin and plate, and born by them on all occasions.

No preparations, however, were made to support this premature
and impolitic claim. Elizabeth was already feated on her throne;
she possessed all the intrepidity of spirit, and all the arts of policy,
which were neceliary for maintaining that Rtation. England was
growing into reputation for naval power. The marine of France
had been utterly negleded; and Scotland remained the only avenue,

Resolve toin-by which the territories of Elizabeth could be approached. It
vadeEngland. was on that fide, therefore, that the Princes of Lorrain determined

to make their attack t; and, by using the name and pretensions of
the Scottish Queen, they hoped to rouze the English Catholics, for-
midable at that time for their zeal and numbers, and exasperated
to the utmost against Elizabeth, on account of the change which
The had made in the national religion.

In order T was vain to expet the assistance of the Scottish Protestants to

In order to
this, necef'ary dethrone a Queen, whom all Europe esteemed the guardian and
Refohrmaion defender of thereformed faith. To break the power and reputa-
in ScotlanJ. tion of that party in Scotland, became, for this reason, a necessary

flep towards the invasion of England. With this the Princes of
Lorrain resolved to open their scheme. And as persecution was
the only method for suppressing religious opinions, known in that
age, or dicated by the despotic and sanguinary spirit of the Romish
fuperifition, this, in its utmost violence, they determined to em-
pluy. The Earl of Argyll, the Prior of St. Andrew's, and other

* Andcrf. Diplon. Scot, No. 68 & I64.
-l Forbcs, Collcet, i. 253. 277.

leaders

leaders of the party, were marked out by them for immediate de- BooK II.
ftruion *; and they hoped, by punishing them, to intimidate
their followers. Inftruations for this purpose were sent from
France to the Queen Regent. That humane and sagacious
Princess condemned a measure, which was equally violent and
impolitic. By long residence in Scotland, she had become ac-
quainted with the eager and impatient temper of the nation; she
well knew the power, the number, and popularity of the Pro-
teftant leaders; and had been a witness to the intrepid and un-
conquerable resolution which religious fervour could inspire. What,
then, could be gained by rouzing this dangerous spirit, which,
hitherto, all the arts of policy had scarce been able to restrain ? If
it once broke loose, the authority of a Regent would be little ca-
pable to subdue, or even to moderate its rage. And if, in order
to quell it, foreign forces were called in, this would give the alarm
to the whole nation, irritated already at the excessive power which
the French poffefied in the kingdom, and suspicious of all their
designs. Amidst the shock which this might occasion, far from
hoping to exterminate the Protestant doctrine, it would be well if
the whole fabric of the effablifhed church were not fliaken, and
perhaps overturned from the foundation. These prudent remon-
firances made no impression on her brothers; precipitant, but in-
flexible in all their resolutions, they insisted on the full and rigorous
execution of their plan. Mary, passionately devoted to the
interests of France, and ready, on all occasions, to sacrifice her
own opinions to the inclinations of her brothers, prepared to exe-
cute their commands, with implicit submission t-; and, contrary

* Sorbes i. 152.
t Mel. 48. Mem. de Caftelnau. ap. Jcbb. vol. ii. 446.

U 2 to

BOOK II. to her own judgment, and to all the rules of found policy, she

'--'-~ became the instrument of exciting civil commotions in Scotland,
1559.

which ended with the ruin of the French power, and of the Po-
pihf religion in that kingdom.

The Regent FROM the time of the Queen's competition for the Regency
alters henrcon- with the Duke of Chatelherault, the Popifl c'ergy, under the di-
duEt with re-
gard to the redion of the Archbilhop of St. Andrew's, had set themselves in
Proteltants,

opposition to all her measures. Her first ftep towards the execu-
tion of her new scheme, was to regain their favour. Nor was
this reconcilement a matter of difficulty. The Popifi ecclesiastics,
separated from the reft of mankind by the law of celibacy, the
boldest and most successful invention of humans policy; and com-
bined among themselves in the closest and most sacred union; have
been accustomed, in every age, to sacrifice all private and particu-
lar passions to the dignity and interest of their order. Delighted,
on this occasion, with the profpedt of triumphing over a fadion,
whose encroachments they had long dreaded; and animated with
the hopes of re-eflablifhing their declining grandeur on a firmer
basis; they, at once, cancelled the memory of past injuries, and
engaged to second the Queen in all her attempts to check the pro-
grefs of the Reformation. The Queen, being secure of their aflift-
ance, openly approved of the decrees of the convocation, by which
the principles of the Reformers were condemned ; and at the fame
time, she iflued a proclamation, enjoining all persons to observe the
approaching festival of Easter, according to the Romifl ritual.

As it was no longer possible to mistake the Queen's intentions,

the Protestants, who saw the danger approach, in order to avert
it, employed the Earl of Glencairn, and Sir Hugh Campbell of

Loudon,

Loudon,, to expostulate with her, concerning this change towards BooK II.
severity, which their former services had so little merited, and '5

'559.

which her reiterated promises gave them no reason to expet. She,
without disguise or apology, avowed to them her resolution of ex-
tirpating the Reformed religion out of the kingdom. And, upon
their urging her former engagements, with an uncourtly, but ho-
nea boldness, file so far forgot her usual moderation, as to utter a
sentiment, which, however apt those of royal condition may be to
entertain it, prudence should teach them to conceal with the utmost
care. The promises of Princes, fays the, ought not to be too care-
fully remembered, nor the performance of them exaded, unless it
suits their own conveniency.

THE indignation, which betrayed the Queen into this rah ex- Summons

pression, was nothing in comparison of that, with which she wastheo ppea"r be
animated, upon hearing that the public exercise of the Reformed fore her.
religion had been introduced into the town of Perth. At once, (he
threw off the mask, and commanded all the Protestant preachers in
the kingdom to be summoned to a court of justice, which was to
be held at Stirling on the tenth of May. The Pr:teftants, who,
from their union, began, about this time, to be distinguished by the
name of the CONGREGATION, were alarmed, but not intimidated
by this danger; and instantly resolved not to abandon the men, to
whom they were indebted for the molt valuable of all blessings, the
knowledge of truth. At that time, there prevailed in Scotland,
with refpet to criminal trials, a cuflom, introduced, at first, by
the institutions of vafisalage and clanfhip, and tolerated, afterwards,
under a feeble government; any person acculcd of a crime was ac-
companied to the place of trial, by a retinue of his friends and ad-
hcrents, aflnciblcd for that purpoe, fri ol every corner of the king-

doms

BOOK II. dom. Authorized by this ancient pracice, the Reformed convened

559J iin great numbers, to attend their pastors to Stirling. The Q.een

dreaded their approach with a train so numerous, though unarmed,
and in order to prevent them from advancing, she empowered
John ErIkine of Dun, a person of eminent authority with the par-
ty, to promise, in her name, that she would put a tfop to the in-
tended trial, on condition, the preachers and their retinue advanced
no nearer to Stirling. Erikine, being convinced himself of the Queen's
finrcerity, served her with the utmost zeal. And the Proteflants,
averse from proceeding to any at of violence, listened with p!ea-
sure to so pacific a proposition. The preachers; with- a few leaders
of the party, remained at Perth; the multitude, which had ga-
thered from different parts of the kingdom, dispersed, and retired
to their own habitations.

Brak s apro BUT, notwithstanding this solemn promise, the Queen, on the
n.ife on which tenth of May, proceeded to call to trial the persons who had been
l' had re summoned, and upon their non-appearance, the rigour of jufice

took place, and they were pronounced outlaws. By this ignoble
artifice, so incompatible with regal dignity, and so inconfiflent with
that integrity which should prevail in all transactions between a So-
vereign and his people, the Queen forfeited the esteem and con-
fidence of the whole nation. The Protestants, flocked no less at
the indecency, with which fle violated the public faith, than at
the danger which threatened themselves, prepared boldly for their
own defence. Erfline, enraged at having been made the inflru-
mnent for deceiving his party, instantly abandoned Stirling, and re-
pairing to Perth, added to the zeal of his associates, by his repre-
fentations of the Qeen's inflexible resolution to suppress their re.
ligion. 6

THE popularrhetoric of Knox powerfully seconded his reprefen- BOOK II.

tations. Knox, having been carried a prisoner into France, toge- 559
ther with the other persons taken in the castle of St. Andrew's, soon Tiisocafiors

an infJ rreaion

made his escape out of that country; and residing sometimes inat Pefrti
England, sometimes in Scotland, had, at lafd, been driven out of
both kingdoms by the rage of the Popish clergy, and was obliged
to retire to Geneva. Thence he was called by the leaders of the
Protestants in Scotland; and, in compliance with their solicitations,
he set out for his native country, where he arrived a few days be-
fore the trial appointed at Stirling. He hurried instantly to Perth,
to share with his brethren in the common danger, or to affif them
in promoting the common cause. While their minds were in that
ferment, which the Queen's perfidiousness and their own danger
occasioned, he mounted the pulpit, and by a vehement harangue
against idolatry, inflamed the multitude with the utmost rage. The
indiscretion of a priest, who, immediately after Knox's sermon, was
preparing to celebrate mass, and began to decorate the altar for
that purpose, precipitated them into immediate adion. With tu-
multuary, but irrefifible violence, they fell upon the churches in
that city, overturned the altars, defaced the picures, broke in pieces
the images; and proceeding next to the monasteries, they, in a
few hours, laid those sumptuous fabrics almost level with the ground.
This riotous infurredion was not the effect of any concert, or ,pre-
vious deliberation: censured by the reformed preachers, and pub-
lickly condemned by the persons of most power and credit with the
party, it must be regarded merely as an accidental eruption of po-
pular rage .

* Knox, HifUt 127, i28.

BuIra

BooK II. BvUT to the OQeen herfilf, these proceedings appeared in a very

A1-° ' different light. Besides their manifest contempt for her authority,

The .,.!:t the Protestants had violated every thing in religion, which she
iarchts ecieened venerable or holy; and, on both there accounts, fle de-
a~ ai.ia iem. acons

termined to in flic the fevei et vengeance on the whole party. She
had already drawn the troops in French pay to Stirling; with these,
and what Scottish forces ihe could levy of a sudden, ffe marched
direAly to Perth, in hopes of surprising the Protestant leaders, be-
fore they could aflemble their followers, whom out of confidence in
her disingenuous promises they had been rashly induced to dismiss.
Intelligence of there preparations and menaces was soon conveyed
to Perth. The Proteflants would, gladly, have soothed the Queen,
by addresses both to herself, and to the pei sons of greatest credit in
her court; but finding her inexorable, they, with great vigour,
took measures for their own defence. Their adherents, animated
with zeal for religion, and eager to expose themselves in so good a
cause, flocked, in such numbers, to Perth, that they not only fe-
cured the town from danger, but, within a few days, were in a
condition to take the field, and to face the Queen, who advanced
with an army 7000 strong.

NEITHER party, however, was impatient to engage. The

Queen dreaded the event of a battle with men, whom the ser-
vour of religion raised above the sense of fear, or of danger. The
Proteflants beheld, with regret, the Earl of Argyll, and Prior of
St. Andrew's, and some other eminent persons of their party, still
adhering to the Queen; and destitute of their aid and counsel, de-
clined hazarding an ation, the ill success of which might have
proved the ruin of their cause. The profpee of an accommoda-
tion was for these reasons highly acceptable to both fides: Argyll

5 and

and the Prior, who were the Queen's commifioners for conduc- BooK II.
ing the negotiation, seem to have been sincerely desirous of recon- 559
ciling the contending faaions; and the earl of Glencairn arriving
unexpecedly with a powerful reinforcement to the Congregation;
augmented the Queen's eagerness for peace. A treaty was accord- A.treaty co-
ingly concluded, in which it was flipulated, that both armies should
be disbanded, and the gates of Perth set open to the Queen; that
indemnity hould be granted to the inhabitants of that city, and to
all others concerned in the late infurreacion ; that no French gar-
rifon should be left in Perth, and no French soldiers should ap-
proach within three miles of that place; and that a Parliament
should immediately be held, in order to compose whatever diffe-
rences might till remain *;

THE Leaders of the Congregation, distrustful of the Queen's fin- May 29.

cerity, and sensible that concessions, flowing not from inclination,
but extorted by the necessity of her affairs, could not long remain
in force, entered into a new association, by which they bound them-
selves, on the first infringement of the present treaty, or on the least
appearance of danger to their religion, to reassemble their followers,
and to take arms in defence of what they esteemed the cause of
God, and of their country -.

THEI Queen, by her conduct, demonstrated there precautions tOBrokenlbythe

be the result of no groundless or unnecessary fear. No sooner were egent.
the Protestant forces difiniffd, than flhe broke every article in the
treaty. She introduced French troops into Perth, fined some of
the inhabitants, baniffed others, removed the Magifirates out of
office, and, on her retiring to Stirling, hie left behind her a garrison

* Keith, 89. t Knox, 138.
VOL. I. X of

BOOK II.of 60o men, with orders to allowthe exercif of no trher r¢ligion

-'t than the Roman Catholics The situation of Perth, a place at that
15.59. time of some strength, and a town the nmot proper of any in t:he

kingdom for the station of a garrison, seems to have allur¢e, the
Queen to this unjustifiable, and ill-judged breach of public fail.;
which fle endeavoured to colour, by alledging that the body of
men left at Perth was entirely composed of native Scots, though kept
in pay by the King of France.

THE Queen's scheme began gradually to unfold; it was now

apparent, that not only the religion, but the liberties of the kig:-
dom were threatened; and that the French troops were to be p:-
ployed as instruments for subduing the Scots, and wreathing the
yoke about their necks. Martial as the genius of the Scots then was,
the poverty of their country made it inmpolible to keep their armies
long assembled; and even a very finall body of regular troops might
have proved formidable to the nation, though confining wholly of
soldiers. But, what number of French forces were then in ScQt-
laud, at what time, and under what pretexts they returned, ater
having left the kingdom in the year 1550, we cannot, with any
certainty, determine. Cotemporary hifiorians often feled, with
little judgment, the circumstances which they transmit to pofletity
and,' with refped to matters of the greatest curiosity and import-
ance, leave succeeding ages altogether in the dark. We may con-
jedure however, from tome passages in Buchanan, that the French
and Scots in French pay, amounted at leafl to 3000 men, under
the command of Mons. D'Oyfel, a creature of the houfe.of Guise;
and they were soon augmented to a much more formidable num-
ber.

Tr s

THE Queen, encouraged by having so considerable a body of well BooK I I.

disciplined troops"'at her command, and instigated by the violent "-
counsels of D'Oyfel, had ventuied, as we haveobferved, to violate £559
the treaty of Perth, and, by that rash action, once more threw the
nation into !the most dangerous convulsions. The Earl of Argyll and The Protest-
Prior of St. Andrew's instantly deserted a court, where faith and ho- ts again

take arms.

nour seemed to them to be no longer regarded. The Barons from
the neighbouring counties repaired to them, the preachers rouzed
the people to arms, and wherever they came, the fame violent ope-
rations, which accident had occasioned at Perth, were now encou-
raged out of policy. The enraged multitude was let loose, and
churches and monasteries, the monuments of ecclesiastic pride and
luxury, were sacrificed to their zeal.

IN order to check their career, the Queen, without losing a mo-

ment, put her troops in motion; but the zeal of the Congregation
got the flart, once more, of her vigilance and acivity. In that
warlike age, when all men were accustomed to arms, and on the
least profpea of danger were ready to run to them, the leaders of
the Proteltants found no difficulty to raise an army. Though they
set out from St. Andrew's with a slender train of an hundred horse,
crowds flocked to their flandards from every corner of the country
through which they marched, and before they reached Falkland, a
village only ten miles distant, they were able to meet the Queen
with superior force *.

THE Queen furprized at the approach of so formidable a body,
which was drawn up by its leaders in such a manner, as added

* Knox, 141.

X .2 greatly

BOOK II. greatly in appearance to its numbers, had again recourse to nego.
'-- -- ciation. She found, however, that the preservation of the Proh

15 59 teiant religion, their zeal for which had at firif rouzed the leaders

They im at of the Congregation to take arms, was not the only object they had
red:'ce ;:g civil
as well as re- now in view. They were animated with the warmest love of civil
itgies grie- liberty, which they conceived to be in imminent danger, from the

attempts of the French forces; and these two paflions mingling,
added reciprocally to each other's flrength. Together with more
enlarged notions in religion, the Reformation filled the human mind
with more liberal and generous sentiments concerning civil govern-
ment. The genius of Popery is extremely favourable to the power
of Princes. The implicit fubmiflion to all her decrees, which the
Romish Church exacs, prepares and breaks the mind for political ser-
vitude; and the doctrines of the Reformers, by overturning the efta-
blifhed system of superstition, weakened the firmefl foundations of
civil tyranny. That bold spirit of enquiry, which led men to reject
theological errors, accompanied them in other sciences, and disco~-
vered every where the fame manly zeal for truth. A new tfudy
introduced at the fame time, added greater force to the spirit of
liberty. Men became acquainted with the Greek and Roman au-
thors, who described exquisite models of free government, far fu-
perior to the inaccurate and oppressive system eflabliflled by the
feudal law ; and produced such illustrious examples of public vir-
tue, as wonderfully suited both the circumstances, and spirit of that
age. Many, among the most eminent Reformers, were themselves
considerable masters in ancient learning; and all of them eagerly
adopted the maxims and spirit of the ancients, with regard to go-
vernment *. The most ardent love of liberty accompanied the Pro-

teflant

* The exccffive admiration of ancient policy was the occasion of Knox's famous
book concerning the Government of Iromen, wherein, conformable to the maxims

o.f

teftant religion, throughout all its progress; and wherever it was BooK II.
embraced, it rouzed an independent spirit, which rendered men at- 55
tentive to their privileges as fubjets, and jealous of the incroach-
ments of their Sovereigns. Knox, and the other preachers of the
Reformation, infused generous sentiments concerning government
into the minds of their hearers, and the Scottish Barons, naturally
free and bold, were prompted to assert their rights with more free-
dom and boldness than ever. Instead of obeying the Qeen Re-
gent, who had enjoined them to lay down their arms, they de-
manded not only the redress of their religious grievances, but as
a preliminary toward fettling the nation, and securing its liberties,
required the immediate expulsion of the French troops out of Scot-
land. It was not in the Queen's power to make so important a
concession, without the concurrence of the French Monarch; and
as some time was requisite in order to obtain that, she hoped, dur-
ing this interval, to receive such reinforcements from France, as
would insure the accomplishment of that design, which she had
twice attempted with unequal strength. Mean while, mhe agreed
to a cessation of arms for eight days, and, before the expirationJune 13.
of these, engaged to transport the French troops to the other fide
of the Forth; and to fend commissioners to St. Andrew's, who
mhould labour to bring, all differences to accommodation. As ihe
hoped, by means of the French troops, to overawe the Protestants
in the southern counties, the former article in the treaty was

of the ancient legislators, which modern experience has proved to be ill-founded,
he pronounces the elevation of women to the fupremc authority, to be utterly de-
firucive of good government. His principles, authorities, and examples were all
drawn from ancient writers. The iame obfcrvation may be made with regard to
Buchanan's 1)ialogue, De 'ure Regni apud Scotos, It is founded not on the maxims
of feudal, but of ancient government.

punctually

300BK II. putniually executed; the latter, having been inserted merely tb
'--'---J aliufe the Con;,egaton, was no longer remembered.

i559.

rea BY these reiterated and wanton instances of perfidy, the Qen
t, viaiat:d. 16f all credit wi'th hier adveffaries; and no safety appearing in any

other course, they agati took arms with more inflamed resentment,
and with bolder and more extensive views. The removing of the
French forces had laid open to them all the country situated be-
tween Forth and Tay. The inhabitants of Perth alone remaining
fubjeded to the insolence and exactions of the garrison, which the
Queen had left there, implored the assistance of the Congregation for
their relief. Thither they marched, and having, without effet,
required the 'Qeen to evacuate the town -in terms of the former
treaty, they prepared to besiege it in form. The Queen employed
the Earl of Huntly and Lord Erskine to divert them from this en-
'terprize. But her wonted artifices were now of no avail; repeated so
oftenr, theycould deceive no longer; and without listening to her
offers, the Proteflants continued the flege, and soon obliged the gar-
rifon 'to capitulate.

Rapid march AI'FTER the loss of Perth, the Queen endeavoured to seize Stirling,
and success ofa 'place of fofme :frength, and, from its command of the only bridge
the Prote-
itants. over thbe Fotth, of great importance. But the leaders of the Con-

giegation, having intelligence of her design, prevented the execu-
tion of it, by an hasty march thither, with part of their forces. The
inhabitants, heartily attached to the cause, set open to them the
gates of their town. Thence they advanced, with the fame rapi-
dity, towards Edinburgh, which the Queen, on their approach,
abandoned with precipitation, and retired to Dunbar.

THE

THE Protestant army, wherever it came, kindled, or spread the BooK JI.

ardour of Reformation, and the utmofl excesses of violence were corn- -
witted upon pchurche es

n The f9ormer were fpoile 55

ofevery decoration, which was theli esteemed sacre4, .the latter were
laid in ruins. We are apt, at this distance of time, to condemn
the furious zeal of the Reformers, and to regret the overthrow of
so many ,iately fabrics, the monuments of our ancestors magni-
ficence, and among the noblest ornaments .of the kinggpm.
But, aridft tle violence of a Reformation, carried on in opp,ofiL
tion to legal authority, tome irregularities were unavoidable; and
perhaps no one could have been perrpitted more proper to allure
and interest the multitude, or more fatal to. the grandeur of the
eftabliffied church. However absurd and ill-fonded the fpecula-
vtive errors of Popery may be, fomne inquiry and attention are requi-
site towards difcoyveriog .them. The abuses and corruptions, which
had crept into the public wqorhip of .that caurch, lay More open
to observation, and by firiking the senses, excited. more universal
disgust. Under the long reign of Heathenism, fuperfition feerps to
have exhaufled its talent of invention, so that when a fuperIltious
spirit seized Chriifians, they w.ere obliged. to imitate tle Heathens
in the pomp and magnificence of their ceremonies, and to borro.w
from them the ornaments and decorations of their temples. To tle
pure and ,simple wor.fiip.of the primitive Chriffians, there succeeded
a species of splendid idolatry, nearly resembling those pagan origi-,
nals, whence it had been.copied. The contrariety of such obfer-
vances, to the spirit of Christianity, was almost the sirss thing, in3
the Romish system, which awakened the indignation of the Re-
formers, who applyingt.t: tlefe, the denunciations in the ,Old Tesla-
ment against .idotatry, imagined that tlley could not ele(,lcavour at
suppressing them, with too much zeal. No tafl could be more ac-.

ceptable

BOOK II. ceptable to the multitude, than to overturn those feats of fuperfli-
_----J tition; they ran with emulation to perform it, and happy was the
1559. man whose hand was most adventrous and successful in executing a

work esteemed so pious. Nor did their leaders labour to restrain this
impetuous spirit of Reformation. Irregular and violent as its rallies
were, they tended directly to that end which they had in view;
for by demolilhing the monasteries throughout the kingdom, and
setting at liberty their wretched inhabitants, they hoped to render
it impossible ever to rebuild the one, or to re-assemble the other.

BUT amidst these irregular proceedings, a circumifance, which

does honour to the conduct and humanity of the leaders of the
Congregation, deserves notice. They so far restrained the rage of
their followers, and were able so to temper their heat and zeal,
that few of the Roman Catholics were exposed to any personal in-
fult, and not a single man suffered death *.

AT the fame time, we discover, by the facility with which there

great revolutions were effected, how violently the current of na-
tional favour ran towards the Reformation. No more than 300
men marched out of Perth under the Earl of Argyll and Prior of
St. Andrew's t; with this inconsiderable force they advanced. But
wherever they came, the people joined them in a body; their army
was seldom less numerous than 5000 men ; the gates of every town
were thrown open to receive them ; and, without striking a single
Jane 29. blow, they took pofefiion of the capital of the kingdom.

Tuis rapid and astonishing success seems to have encouraged the
Reformers to extend their views, and to rife in their demands.

* Lefy, 231. -t Kcith, 94.

NotY

Not satisfied with their first claim of toleration for their religion, BOOK IL.
they now, openly, aimed at establishing the Protestant dotrine on
the ruins of Popery. For this reason, they determined to fix their
residence at Edinburgh; and, by their appointment, Knox and some
other preachers taking possession of the pulpits, which had been
abandoned by the affrightened clergy, declaimed against the errors
of Popery, with such fervent zeal, as could not fail of gaining
many proselytes.

IN the mean time, the Qeen, who had prudently given way

to a torrent which the could not resist, observed, with pleasure,
that it now began to subside. The leaders of the Congregation had
been above two months in arms, and by the expences of a cam-
paign, protracted so long beyond the usual time of service in that
age, had exhaufled all the money, which a country, where riches
did not abound, had been able to supply. The multitude, dazzled
with their success, and concluding the work to be already done, re-
tired to their own habitations. A few, only, of the more zealous or
wealthy Barons remained with their preachers at Edinburgh. As
intelligence is procured in civil wars with little difficulty, whatever
was tranfated at Edinburgh, was soon known at Dunbar. And the
Queen, regulating her own conduct by the situation of her adver-
saries, artfully atnufed them with the profpef: of an immediate
accommodation; while, at the fame time, fle, by fludied delays,
spun out the negociations for that purpose, to such a length, that,
in the end, the party dwindled to an inconsiderable number, and,
as if peace had been already re-eflablifhed, became carclefs of mili-
tary discipline. The Qucen, who watched for such an opportunity,
advanced, unexpecaedly, by a sudden march in the night with all
her forces, and appearing before Edinburgh, filled that city with

VOL, I. Y the

BooK II. the utmofi consternation. The Protestants, weakened by the im-

.-7. 9 prudent di!ferfion of their followers, durst not encounter the French

troops in the open field ; and were even unable to defend an ill-
fortified town, againit their afTaults. Unwilling, however, to aban-
don the citizens to the Queen's mercy, they endeavoured, by facing
the enemies army, to gain time for collecting their own associates.
But, the Queen, in spite of all their resistance, would have easily
forced her way into the town, if the seasonable conclusion of a
truce had not procured her admirffon, without the effusion of
blood.
Athird reaty. THEIR dangerous situation easily induced the Congregation to

liften to any overtures of peace; and as the Queen was looking
daily for the arrival of a firong reinforcement from France, and ex-
pet:ed great advantages from a cessation of arms, she also agreed to
it upon no unequal conditions. Together with a suspension of hof-
tilities, from the 24th of July to the ioth of January, it was ftipu-
lated, in this treaty, that, on the one hand, the Protestants should
abandon Edinburgh next morning; remain in dutiful fubjefion
to the government of the Queen Regent; abstain from all future
violation of religious houses; and give no interruption to the efla-
blifhed clergy, either in the discharge of their functions, or in the
enjoyment of their benefices. On the other hand, the Qeen
agreed to give no molestation to the preachers or professors of the
Protetant religion; to allow no other form of worship in Edin-
burgh but the Reformed; and to permit the free and public exer-
cife of it all over the kingdom. The Queen hoped to sooth the
Prot(Ltalnt, tby these liberal concefflons in behalf of their religion,
and cxpcdtfcd, from indulging their favourite paflion, to render them

s1O1'0

more compliant with refpeEt to other articles, particularly the ex- BOOK II
pulfion of the French troops out of Scotland. The anxiety which L-
the Queen expressed for retaining this body of men, rendered them, '559
more and more, the objects of national jealousy and aversion. The
immediate expulsion of them was therefore demanded a-new, and
with greater warmth; but the Queen, taking advantage of the dif-
trefs of the adverse party, eluded the request, and would content
to nothing more, than that a French garrison Ihould not be intro-
duced into Edinburgh.

THE desperate slate of their affairs, imposed on the Congrega-

tion the necessity of agreeing to this article, which, however, was
very far from giving them fatisfation. Whatever apprehensions
the Scots had conceived, from retaining the French forces in the
kingdom, were abundantly justified during the late commotions.
A small body of those troops, maintained in conflant pay, and ren-
dered formidable by regular discipline, had checked the progress of
a martial people, though animated with zeal both for religion and
liberty. The smallest addition to their number, and a considerable
one was daily expected, might prove fatal to public liberty, and
Scotland might be exposed to the danger of being reduced, from
an independent kingdom, to the mean condition of a province, an-
nexed to the empire of its powerful ally.

In order to provide againif this imminent calamity, the Duke

of Chatelherault, and Earl of Huntly, immediately after conclud-
ing the truce, desired an interview with the chiefs of the Congre-
gation. These two noblemcn, the miof: potent, at that time, in
Scotland, were the leaders of the party, which adhered to the
ePlablifcd church. Thcy had followed the Q2een, during the

Y 2 late

BOOK II. late commotions, and having access to observe more narrowly the

-- ' dangerous tendency of her councils, their abhorrence of the yoke
1559. which was preparing for their country, surmounted all other con-

fiderations, and determined them rather to endanger the religion
which they professed, than to give their aid towards the execution
of her pernicious designs. They proceeded farther, and promised
to Argyll, Glencairn, and the Prior of St. Andrew's, who were
appointed to meet with them, that if the Queen should, with her
usual insincerity, violate aly article in the treaty of truce, or refuse
to gratify the wishes of the whole nation, by dismissing her French
troops, they would, then, instantly join with their countrymen, in
compelling her to a measure, which the public safety, and the pre-
servation of their liberties rendered necessary *.
July s. ABOUT this time, died Henry II. of France; just when he had

adopted a system, with regard to the affairs of Scotland, which
would, in all probability, have reitored union and tranquillity to
that kingdom t. Towards the close of his reign, the Princes of
Lorrain began, visibly, to decline in favour, and the Contlable
Montmorency, by the assistance of the Dutchess of Valentinois,
recovered that ascendant over the spirit of his matter, which his
great experience, and his faithful, though often unfortunate ser-
vices, seemed justly to merit. That prudent minister imputed the
infurredions in Scotland wholly to the Duke of Guise and Cardi-
nal of Lorrain, whose violent and precipitant councils could not fail
of transporting, beyond all bounds of moderation, men, whole
minds were pofiefled with that jealousy, which is inseparable from
the love of civil liberty, or inflamed with that ardour which ac-

* Knox, 154. t Mclv. 49.

companies

companies religious zeal. And, in order to convince Henry, that BooK II.
he did not load his rivals with any groundless accusation, he pre-

1559.

vailed to have Melvil *, a Scottish Gentleman of his retinue, dif-
patched into his native country, with inftrudions to observe the
motions both of the Regent, and of her adversaries; and the King
agreed to regulate his future proceedings, in that kingdom, by
Melvil's report.

DID history indulge herself in such speculations, it would be

amusing to enquire what a different direction might have been given
by this resolution, to the national spirit; and to what a different
issue, Melvil's report, which would have set the conduct of the
malecontents in the most favourable light, might have conduced
the public disorders. Perhaps, by gentle treatment, and artful po-
licy, the progress of the Reformation might have been checked,
and Scotland brought to depend upon France. Perhaps, by gain-
ing possession of this avenue, the French might have made their
way into England, and, under colour of supporting Mary's title to
the Crown, they might have re-established the Roman Catholic re-
ligion, and destroyed the liberties of that kingdom. But, into this
boundless field of fancy and conjecture, the hiltorian must make no
excursions; to relate real occurrences, and to explain their real causes
and effects, is his peculiar and only province.

THE tragical and untimely death of the French Monarch put,,ce o
an end to all moderate and pacific measures, with regard to Scot- Francis 11. to

the Crown of

land. The Duke of Guise, and the Cardinal his brother, upon France.
the acceflion of Francis II. a Prince void of genius, and without

* The Author of the Memoirs.

experience,

BooK IT experience, assumed the chief diretion of French affairs. Allied
_.'-,- so nearly to the throne, by the marriage of their niece the Queen

'559' of Scots with the young King, they now wanted but little of re-

gal dignity, and nothing of regal power. This power did not long
remain inative in their hands. The fame vafL schemes of ambi-
tion, which they had planned out under the former reign, were
again resumed; and they were enabled, by poffefling such ample
authority, to pursue them with more vigour, and greater probabi-
lity of success. They beheld, with infinite regret, the progress of
the Protestant religion in Scotland; and sensible what an unfurmount-
able obstacle it would prove to their designs, they bent all their
flrength to check its growth, before it rose to any greater height.
For this purpose, they carried on their preparations with all pof-
fible expedition, and encouraged the Queen their fiter, to expet,
in a short time, the arrival of an army, so powerful, as the zeal of
their adversaries, however desperate, would not venture to op-
pose.

NoR were the Lords of the Congregation either ignorant of those

violent counsels, which prevailed in the court of France, iince the
death of Henry, or careless of providing against the danger, which
threatened them from that quarter. The success of their cause, as
well as their personal safety, depending entirely on the unanimity
and vigour of their own resolutions, they endeavoured to guard
against division, and to cement together more closely, by entering
into a fIrider bond of confederacy and mutual defence. Two per-
sons concurred in this new association, who brought a great ac-
ccfion both of reputation and of power to the party. These were
the Duke of Chatclherault, and his eldest son the Earl of Arran.
This young nobleman, having rcfided some years in France, where

lie

he commanded the Scottish Guards, had imbibed the Proteflant opi- BooK II.
nions concerning religion. Hurried along by the heat of youth, -

'559.

and the zeal of a proselyte, he had uttered sentiments, with refpet 5
to the points in controversy, which did not suit the temper of a
bigotted court, intent, at that juncure, on the extinction of the
Protestant religion; in order to accomplish which, the utmost ex-
cefes of violence were committed. The church was suffered to
wreak its utmost fury upon all who were fufpeeed of heresy. Courts
were erected, in different parts of France, to take cognizance of this
crime, and by their sentences, several persons of distinction were
condemned to the flames.

BUT, in order to inspire more universal terror, the Princes of

Lorrain resolved to select, for a sacrifice, some person, whose fall
might convince all ranks of men, that neither splendor of birth,
nor eminence in flation, would exempt from punishment, those
who should be guilty of this unpardonable tranfgrefllon. The
Earl of Arran was the person destined to be the unhappy vicim .
As he was allied to one throne, and the presumptive heir to an-
other; as he possessed the first rank in his own country, and enjoyed
an honourable flation in France; his condemnation could not fail of
making the desired impreflion on the whole kingdom. But the
Cardinal of Lorrain, having let fall some expreflions, which raised
the Earl of Arran's suspicions of the design, he escaped the intended
blow by a timely flight. Indignation, zeal, resentment, all prompted
him to seek revenge upon these persecutors of hlimnflf and of the
religion which he profefled; and as he passed through England,
on his return to his native country, Elizabeth, by hopes and

Thuan. lib. xxiv. p. 462. Edit. Francof.

I pro-

BOOK II. promises, inflamed those passions, and sent him back into Scotland,

A-~^--' animated with the fame implacable aversion for France, which pof-

E 59r ofeAr fed a great part of his countrymen. He quickly communicated
jins the P;o- thee sentiments to his father the Duke of Chatelherault, who was
te!ian!5.

already extremely disgusted with the measures carrying on in Scot-
land; and as it was the fate of that nobleman to be governed, in
every instance, by those about him, he now suffered himself to be
drawn from the Queen Regent; and having joined the Congrega-
tion, was confidered, from that time, as the head of the party.

BUT with refpee to him, this diftindion was merely nominal.

James Stewart, Prior of St. Andrew's, was the person who moved
and actuated the whole body of the Protestants, among whom, he
poffefied that unbounded confidence, which his strenuous adhe-
rence to their interest, and his great abilities, so justly merited.
He was the natural son of James V. by a daughter of Lord Erskine;
and as that amorous Monarch, had left several others a burden upon
the Crown, they were all destined for the church, where they
could be placed in flations of dignity and affluence. In consequence
of this resolution, the Priory of St. Andrew's had been conferred
upon James: but, during so busy a period, he soon became dif-
gufled with the indolence and retirement of a monastic life; and
his enterprising genius called him forth, to ad a principal part on
a more public and conspicuous theatre. The scene, in which he
appeared, required talents of different kinds; and military virtue,
and political discernment, were equally necefliry in order to render
him illustrious. These he pofleficd in an eminent degree. To the
mofl unquestionable personal bravery, he added great skill in the
art of war, and in every enterprize his arms were crowned with
fucccls. His sagacity and penetration in civil affairs enabled him,

amidst

amidst the reeling and turbulence of facions, to hold a prosperous BooK II.
course. While his boldness in defence of the Reformation, toge- -
ther with the decency, and even severity of his manners, secured
him the reputation of being sincerely attached to religion, without
which, it was impoflible, in that age, to gain an ascendant over
mankind.

IT was not without reason, that the Queen dreaded the enmity

of a man, so capable to obftrua her designs. And as she could
not, with her utmost address, make the least impression on his
fidelity to his aflociates, she endeavoured to lessen his influence,
and to scatter among them the feeds of jealousy and distrust, by
insinuating that the ambition of the Prior aspired beyond the con-
dition of a subjea, and aimed at nothing less than the Crown it-
self.

AN accusation so improbable gained but little credit. And what-

ever thoughts of this kind, the presumption of unexpected fuc-
cess, and his elevation to the highest dignity in the kingdom, may
be alledged to have inspired, at any subsequent period, it is certain
that, at this juncture, he could form no such vast design. To de-
throne a Queen, who was lineal heir to an ancient race of Monarchs;
who had been guilty of no action, by which The could forfeit the
efreem and affection of her fubjets; who could employ, in de-
fence of her rights, the forces of a kingdom, much more power-
ful than her own; and to fubititute, in her place, a person, whom
the illegitimacy of his birth, by the practice of all civilized nations,
rendered incapable of any inheritance, either public or private; was
a project, so chimerical, as the mofl extravagant ambition would
scarce entertain, and could never conceive to be pracicable. The

VOL. I. Z promise,

BooKII. promise, too, which the Prior made to Melvil, of residing con-

flantly in France,. on condition the public ,grievances were redref-
fed -; the confidence reposed in him by the Duke of Chatelherault
and his son, the presumptive heirs ,to the. Crown.;, and the con-
currence of almost the whole Scottish nobles, in promoting those
measures, by which he gave offence to the French court, go far
towards his vindication from those illegal and criminal designs, with
the imputation of which, the Queen endeavoured, at that time, to
load him.

THE arrival of a thousand French soldiers compensated, in some

Trcops arris e
frcm France, degree,. for the loss which the Queen fultained by the defection of
and fortify, '
Leith. the Duke of Chatelherault. These were, immediately, commanded

to fortify Leith, in which place, on account of its commodious
harbour, and its situation in the neighbourhood of Edinburgh, and
in a plentiful country, the Queen resolved to fix the head quar-
ters of her foreign forces. This unpopular measure, by the man-
ner of executing it, was rendered frill more unpopular. In order
to bring the town entirely under their command, the French turn-
ed out a great part of the ancient inhabitants, and taking pofleffion
of the houses, which they had obliged them to abandon, present-
ed, to the view of the Scots, two objedts equally irritating
and offensive; on the one hand, a number of their countrymen
expelled their habitations by violence, and wandering without any
certain abode; on the other, a colony of foreigners, fettling, with
their wives and children, in the heart of Scotland, growing into
strength by daily reinforcements, and openly preparing a yoke, to
which, without some timely exertion of national spirit, the whole
kingdom muff, of necessity, submit.

* Melvil, 54.

IT

IT was with the utmost concern that the Lords of the Con- BooK II.
gregation beheld this bold and decisive ftep, taken by the Queen,-

'559.

Regent: nor did'they hesitate, a moment, whether they should em- The Prote-
ploy 'their wiole strength,' in one generous effort, to rescue their fan remoai-
religion arid liberty' from impending destruCtion; But, .in order .to this.
justify their own cohdudc, and- to throw the blame entirely on their
adversaries, they resolved to preserve the appearances of decency and
refpeet towards their superiors, and to have no recourse to arms,
without 'the' most urtgent and apparent necefiity. They joined, Sept. 29.
with this view,: in an address to the Regent, representing, in the
firongeft terms, their diffatisfaaion with the measures the was pur-
suing, and beseeching her to quiet the fears and jealousies of the
nation, by desisting from fortifying Leith. The Queen, conscious of
her present advantageous situation, and elated with the hopes of frelh
succours, was in no disposition for listening to demands, utterly in-
consistent with her views, and urged with that bold importunity,
which is so little acceptable to Princes.

THE suggestions of her French Counsellors contributed, with-

out doubt,: to alienate her frill farther from any scheme of accorm- disregards
modation. As the Queen was ready, on all occasions, to discover rhncei, 'On
an extraordinary deference for the opinions of her countrymen,
her brothers, who knew her secret disapprobation of the violent
measures they were driving on, took care to place near her such
persons, as betrayed her, by their insinuations, into many acions,
which her own unbiaffed judgment would have highly condemned.
And as thei' success in the present jundture, when all things were
hastening towards a crisis, depended entirely on the Queen's firm-
ness, the Princes of Lorrain did not trutl wholly to the influence of
their ordinary agents; but, in order to add the greater weight to

Z 2 their

BOOK II. their counsels, they called in aid the Ministers of religion; and,. by
'- ·' the authority of their sacred character, they hoped effecually to

x559- recommend to their sifter, that system of feverity'which they had

espoused *. With this view, but under pretence of confounding
the Proteflants by the skill of such able masters in controversy,
they appointed several French divines to reside in Scotland. At
the head of these, and with the character of legate from the Pope,
was Pelieve Bishop of Amiens, and afterwards Archbishop and
Cardinal of Sens, a furious bigot, servilely devoted to the house of
Guise, and a proper infirument for recommending or executing the
molt outrageous measures.

AMIDST the noise and danger of civil arms, these Doctors had

little opportunity to display their address in the use of their theolo-
gical weapons. But they gave no small offence to the nation by one
of their actions. They persuaded the Queen to seize the church
of St. Giles in Edinburgh, which had remained, ever since the
late truce, in the hands of the Protestants; and having, by a new
and solemn consecration, purified the fabric from the pollution, with
which they supposed the profane minifirations of the Protestants
to have defiled it, they, in direct contradiction to one article in the
late treaty, re-established there the rites of the Romish church.
This, added to the indifference, and even contempt, with which
the Queen received their remonstrances, convinced the Lords of the
Congregation, that it was not only vain to expeCt any redress of
their grievances at her hands, but absolutely necessary to take arms-
in their own defence.

" Lefy, 2.15, Callelnau, ap. Jebb. vol. ii, 446. 473.

THsE.

THE eager and impetuous spirit of the nation, as well as every B30OK II,

consideration of good policy, prompted them to take this bold flep L---'
without delay. It was but a small part of the French auxiliaries ' T55ta9
which had as yet arrived. The fortifications of Leith, though ad- armns in their
vancing fast, were mill far from being compleat. Under there cir-
cumfiances of disadvantage, they conceived it possible 'to furprize
the Queen's party, and, by one sudden and decisive blow, to pre-
vent all future bloodshed and contention. Full of these expeda-
tions, they advanced rapidly towards Edinburgh with a numerous
army. But it was no easy matter to deceive an adversary, so vigi- O obe 6.
Iant and attentive as the Queen Regent. With her usual saga-
city, fle both foresaw the danger, and took the only proper course
to avoid' it. Inflead of keeping the field againif enemies, superior
in number, and formidable on a day of battle, by the ardour of
their courage, she retired into Leith, and determined patiently
to wait the arrival of new reinforcements. Slight and unfiniihed
as the fortifications of that town then were, fie did not dread the
efforts of an army, provided neither with heavy cannon, nor with
military stores, and utterly ignorant of the method of attacking any
place, fortified with more art than those ancient towers, erected all
over the kingdom, in defence of private property against the incur-
sions of banditti.

NOR did the Q:een, mean while, neglect to have recourse to

those arts, which ihe had often employed, to weaken or divide her
adversaries. By private follicitations and promises, she shook the
fidelity, or abated the ardor of some. By open reproach and ac-
cufation, she blasted the reputation, and diminified the authority
of others. Her emifaries were every where at work, and, notwith-
standing the zeal for religion and liberty, which then animated the

nation.,
8

BOOK II. nation, they seem to have laboured not without success. Wefind
'-"-' Knox, about this period, abounding in complaints of the luke-

'559' warm and languid spirit, which had begun to spread among his

party *. But, if their zeal slackened a little, and suffered a momen-
tary intermifion, it soon blazed up with fresh vigour, and rofe'to
a greater height than ever.

Renew their THE Queen herself gave occasion to this, by the reply which she
remon- lrances. made to a new remonitrance from the Lords of the Congrega-

tion. Upon their arrival at Edinburgh, they once more repre-
sented to her the dangers arising from the increase of the French
troops, the fortifying of Leith, and her other measures, which they
conceived to be deftruaive to the peace and liberty of the kingdom;
and in this address, they spoke in a firmer tone, and avowed,
more openly than ever, their resolution of proceeding to the utmost
extremities, in order to put a flop to such dangerous encroach-
ments. To a remonstrance of this nature, and urged with so much
boldness, the Queen replied in terms no less vigorous and explicit.
She pretended that fihe was not accountable to the confederate lords
for any part of her condut. And upon no representation of theirs,
would she either abandon measures, which She deemed necessary;
or dismiss forces, which fle found useful; or demolish a fortifica-
tion, which might prove of advantage. At the fame time, ihe

But wit required them, on pain of treason, to disband the forces which they
utcc-fs. had assembled.

THIS haughty and imperious stile founded harshly to Scottifli nobles,
impatient, from their i;ational character, of the slightest appearance

* Knox, 180. o

of injury; accustomed, even from their own Monarchs, to the moftBooK II.
refpeEful treatment; and poffefling, underan a rifocratical form of ",.'

1559.

government, such a share of power as equalled, at all times, and
often controlled that of the Sovereign. They were fenfibie, at once,
of the indignity offered to themfelies, and alarmed with this plain
declaration of the Queen's intentions; and as there now remained
but one flep to take, they wanted neither public spirit nor refolu-
tion to take it.

BUT, that they might not seem to depart from the eftablifhedDeliberate

forms of the constitution, for which, even amidst their most vio-the courf
lent operations, men always retain the greatest reverence, they as- ouhcht to
fembled the whole Peers, Barons, and Representatives of burroughs take
who adhered. to their party. These formed a convention, which oaober z.
exceeded in number, and equalled in dignity, the usual meetings of
parliament. The leaders of the Congregation laid before them the
declaration which the Qeen had given in answer to their remon-
itrance ; represented the unavoidable ruin, which the measures, the
therein avowed and justified, would bring upon the kingdom; and
requiring their direction with regard to the obedience due to an ad-
ministration so unjust and oppressive, they submitted to their deci-
sion, a question, one of the most delicate and interefling that can
possibly fall under the consideration of fubjeas.

THls assembly proceeded to decide, with no less dispatch, than

unanimity. Strangers to those forms, which protraa business; un-
acquainted with the arts, which make a figure in debate; and much
more fitted for aCtion, than discourse; a warlike people always haften
to a conclusion, and bring 'their deliberations to the shortest issue.
It was the work but of one day, to examine and to resolve this

nice

BOOK II.lnice probleln, concerning the behaviour of fubjeEs towards a ruler
---v--/ who abuses his power. But, however abrupt their proceedings
* n55' may appear, they were not destitute of solemnity. As the deter-

mination of the point in doubt, was conceived to be no less the of-
fice of divines, than of laymen, the former were called to assist
with their opinion. Knox and Willox appeared for the whole or-
der, and pronounced, without hesitation, both fiom the precepts
and examples in scripture, that it was lawful for fubjeas not only
to resist tyrannical princes, but to deprive them of that authority,
which, in their hands, becomes an infirument f6r destroying those,
whom the Almighty ordained them to proted. The decision of
persons, revered so highly for their sacred charater, but more for
their zeal and their piety, had great weight with the whole as-
fembly. Not satisfied with the common indiscriminate manner of
signifying consent, every person present was called in his turn to

Thepr dedare his sentiments, and rising up in order, all gave their fuffra-
the Qeen ofges, without one difenting voice, for depriving the Queen of the
the office of >1 r
Regent. office of Regent, which she had exercised so much to the detri-

ment of the kingdom *.

The rights of THIS extraordinary sentence was owing no less to the love of li-
zheir condut,. berty, than to zeal for religion. In the ad of deprivation, religi-

ous grievances are slightly mentioned; and the dangerous incroach-
ments of the Queen upon the civil conffitution are produced, by
the Lords of the Congregation, in order to prove their conduct to
have been not only jutf, but necessary. The introducing foreign
troops into a kingdom, at peace with all the world ; the seizing and
fortifying towns in different parts of the country; the promoting
slrangers to offices of great power and dignity; the debating the

X Knox, 184.

current

current coin ; the subverting the ancient laws; the impoing of BooK II.
new and burdensome taxes; and the attempting to subdue the king-

6 6 1

5- I--· -- - _,_I$59.

dom, and to oppress its liberties, by open and repeated acts of vio-
lence, are enumerated at great length, and placed in the strongest
light. On all these accounts, the Congregation maintained that the
nobles, as counsellors to their monarchs, and the guardians and
defenders of the constitution, had a right to interpose; and there-
fore, by virtue of this right, in the name of the King and Qeen,
and with many expressions of duty and submission towards them
they deprived the Queen Regent of her office, and ordained, that,
for the future, no obedience should be given to her commands -.

VIOLENT as this aAion may appear, there wanted not principles

in the constitution, nor precedents in the history of Scotland, to
jt4ftify and to authorize it. Under the ariftocratical form of go-
vernment established among the Scots, the power of the Sovereign
was extremely limited. The more considerable nobles were them-

* The flandard of money in Scotland was continually varying. In the I6th of

James V. A. D. 1529, a pound weight of gold, when coined, produced o08 pounds
of current money. But under the Queen Regent's adminiflration, A. D. 1556, a
pound weight of gold, although the quantity of alloy was considerably encreafed,
produced 144 pounds current money. In 1529, a pound weight of silver, when
coined, produced 91. 2s.; but in 1556, it produced 13 1. current money. Rud-
dim. Prefat. ad Anders. Diplomat. Scotiae, p. 80, 8r. from which, it appears that
this complaint, which the malecontents often repeated, was not altogether dcRi-
tute of foundation.

' M. Caflelnau, after condemning the dangerous councils of the Princes of Lor-

rain with regard to the affairs of Scotland, acknowledges, with his ufilal candour,
that the Scots declared war againfl the Queen Regent, rather from a desire of vin-
dicating their civil liberties, than from any motive of religion. MVm. 44.6.

VOL. . A a fclves

Booic II. selves petty Princes, possessing extensive jurifdidions, almost inde;
"--'---' pendent of the crown, and followed by numerous vassals, who, in

J559'

every contest, espoused their chieftain's quarrel, in opposition to the
King. Hence the many instances of the impotence of regal autho.
rity, which are to be found in the Scottish history. In every aged
the nobles not only claimed, but exercised the right of controuling
the King. Jealous of their privileges, and eager to take the field
in defence of them, every error in administration was observed
every encroachment upon the rights of the aristocracy excited indigna-
tion, and no Prince ever ventured to transgress the boundaries>
which the law had prescribed to prerogative, without meeting re-
fiftance, which shook, or overturned his throne. Encouraged by
the spirit of the constitution, and countenanced by the example of
their ancestors, the Lords of the Congregation thought it incum-
bent on them, at this juncture, to inquire into the mal-adminiftra-
tion of the Queen Regent, and to preserve their country from being
enslaved or conquered, by depriving her of the power to execute
such a pernicious scheme *.

* The ad of deprivation, and a letter from the Lords of the Congregation to the

Queen Regent are flill extant, Knox, 184. They discover not only, that masculine
and undaunted spirit, natural to men capable of so bold a resolution; but are re-
markable for a precision, and vigour of expreflion, which we are furprized to meet
with in an age so impolilhed. The fame observation may be made with refpet to the
other public papers of that period. The ignorance or bad taste of an age may
render the compositions of authors by profession obscure, or affcEtcd, or absurd ;
but the language of business is nearly the fame at all times; and wherever men think
clearly, and are thoroughly interefled, they exprcfs thcmfelves with perspicuity and
force.

THE

# THE HISTORY OF SCOTLAND. BOOK III.

THE

S I S T I0 R
J

O F

B O O K III
·Tjp %H E Lords of the Congregation loon found, that their zeal Book III

had engaged them in an undertaking, which it was beyond ,
their utmost ability to accomplish. The French garrison, I559.

despising their numerous, but irregular forces, refused to surrender gationCvo-
Leith, and to depart out of the kingdom; nor were they fuffici-veididfficul-
ently filful in the art of war to reduce the place by force; or
possessed of the artillery, or magazines, requisite for that purpose ;
and their followers, though of undaunted courage, yet being accuf-
tomed to decide every quarrel by a battle, were strangers to the
fatigues of a long campaign, and soon became impatient of the
severe and constant duty which a siege requires. The Queen's
eminiaries, who found it easy to mingle with their countrymen,
were at the utmost pains to heighten their difguf-, which discovered
itself at firlt in murmurs and complaints, but on occasion of the
want of money for paying the army, broke out into open mutiny.

A a 2 The

BooK III. The most eminent leaders were scarce secure from the unbridled
--~-- ' insolence of the soldiers'; while some of inferior rank, interposing
1559' too raflly in order to quell them, were torn in pieces by their rage.

Discord, consternation, and perplexity reigned in the camp of the
Reformers. The Duke, their General, funk, with his usual timi-
dity, under the terror of approaching danger, and discovered ma-
nifeft symptoms of repentance for his rashness, in espousing such
a desperate cause.

Apply to Eli- IN this situation of their affairs, the Congregation had recourse
zabeth for as- to Elizabeth, from whose protection they could derive their
siitance

nce only reasonable hopes of success. Some of their more sagacious

leaders, having foreseen that the party might probably be involved
in great difficulties, had endeavoured to secure a resource in any such
exigency, by entering into a secret correspondence with the court of
England *. Elizabeth, aware of the dangerous designs which the
Princes of Lorrain had formed againit her Crown, was early sensible:
of how much importance it would be, not only to check the
progress of the French in Scotland, but to extend her own influ-
ence in that kingdom t; and perceiving how effetually the pre-
sent infurretions would contribute to retard or defeat the schemes
formed against England, ihe listened with pleasure to these ap-
plications of the malecontents, and gave them private assurances of
powerful support to their cause. Randolph+, an agent extremely
proper for conducting any dark intrigue, was dispatched into Scot-
land, and residing secretly among the Lords of the Congregation,
observed and quickened their motions. Money seemed to be the
only thing they wanted at that time; and it was owing to a season-

* Burn. Hist. Ref. 3. Append. 278. Keith, Append. 21.
*t Sec Append. No I. i Keith, Append. 29..

able

able remittance from England , that the Scottish nobles had been Booi III.
enabled to take the field, and to advance towards Leith. But as ;i9
Elizabeth was distrustful of the Scots, and studious to preserve
appearances with France, her subsidies were bestowed at first with
extreme frugality. The fubfiflence of an army, and the expences
of a siege soon exhausted this penurious supply, to which the Lords.
of the Congregation could make little addition from their own
funds; and the ruin and dispersion of the party muff have inflantly
followed.

IN order to prevent this, Cockburn of OrmiRlon was frnt, with She fends

them a fmrall

the utmost expedition, to the governors of the town and cate Oi:fumofmoney,
Berwick. As Berwick was, at that time, the town of greatest im-
portance on the Scottish frontier, Sir Ralph Sadler and Sir James
Crofts, persons of considerable figure, were employed to command
there, and were entrusted with a discretionary power of supplying
the Scottish malecontents, according to the exigency of their affairs.
From them Cockburn received 4000 crowns, but little to the ad-
vantage of his party. The Earl of Bothwell, by the Qeen's infti- whichi is ,-

tercepted,

gation, lay in wait for him on his return, dispersed his followers,
wounded him, and carried off the money.

THiI unexpe6ted disappointment proved fatal to the party. In

mere despair, some of the more zealous attempted to aifault Leith,
but the French beat them back with disgrace, seized their can-
non, and pursuing them to the gates of Edinburgh, were on the
point of entering along with them. All the terror and confusion,
which the prospect of pillage or of massacre can excite in a place

* Knox, 214. Keith, Append. 44..

taken.

BooK lII. taken by florm, filled the city on this occasion. The inhabitants

L-~^' fled from the enemy by the opposite gate; tbe forces of the Con.

gregation were irresolute and dismayed; and the Queen's par izans
in the town openly insulted both. At last, a few of the nobles ven-
tured to face the enemy, who, after plundering some houses in the
suburbs, retired with their booty, .and delivered the city from this
dreadful alarm.

A SECOND skirmish, which happened a few days after, was no

less unfortunate. The French sent out a detachment to intercept
a convoy of provisions which was designed for Edinburgh. The
Lords of the Congregation, having intelligence of this, marched in
all haste with a considerable body of their troops, and falling upon
the enemy between Reftalrig and Leith, with more gallantry than
good condut, were almost surrounded by a second party of French,
who advanced in order to support their own men. In this fitua-
tion, a retreat was the only thing which could save the Scots; but
a retreat over marshy ground, and in the face of an enemy fupe-

They retire rior in number, could not long be conduced with order. A small
from Leith in
confuroin body of the enemy hung upon their rear, horse and foot fell into

the utmost confusion, and it was entirely owing to the caution of the
French, that any of the party escaped being cut in pieces.

ON this second blow, the hopes and spirits of the Congregation

funk altogether. They did not think themselves secure, even
within the walls of Edinburgh, but instantly determined to retire
to some place at a greater diflance from the enemy. In vain did
the Prior of St. Andrew's and a few others oppose this cowardly
and ignominious flight. The dread of the present danger prevailed
over both the fcnfe of honour, and zeal for the cause. At mid-

night,

night, they set out from Edinburgh, in great confusion, and marched BOOK III.
without halting till they arrived at Stirling. 55

November 6.

DURING this last infurrestion, the great body of the Scottish

nobility joined the Congregation. The Lords Seton and Borthwick
were the only persons of rank who took arms for the Queen, and
afiifled her in defending Leith *. Bothwell openly favoured her
cause, but resided at his own house. The Earl of Huntly, con-
formable to the crafty policy which diftinguiffes his character,
amused the leaders of the Congregation, whom he had engaged
to assist, with many fair promises, but never joined them with a
tingle man --. The Earl of Morton, a member of the Congrega-
tion, fluctuated in a state of irresolution, and did not at hearti-
ly for the common cause. Lord Erskine, Governor of Edin-
burgh castle, though a Protestant, maintained a neutrality, which
he efleemed becoming the dignity of his'office; and having been en-
trusted by Parliament with the command of the principal fortress
in the kingdom, he resolved that neither faction should get it into
their hands.

A FEW days before the retreat of the Congregation, the Queen Maitland re-

suffered an irreparable loss by the defection of her principal Secre- voctD oth
tary, William Maitland of Lethington. His zeal for the Reformed re- ger.
ligion, together with his warm remonstrances againfi the violent mea-
fures which the Queen was carrying on, exposed him so much to her
resentment, and to that of her French Counfeilors, that he, suspect-
ing his life to be in danger, withdrew secretly firom Leith, and fled
to the Lords of the Congregation T ; and they, with open arms, re-

X Keith, Append. 31, *l Ibid. Append. 33. Knox, 222. :1: Knox 192.

ceived

Booi._ II. ceivcd a convert, whose abilities added both strength and reputa.
--£j-' tionl to their cause. Maitland had early'applied to public business

I-559 admirable natural talents, improved by an acquaintance with the li.

beral arts; and, at a time of life, when his countrymen of the
fame quality were following the pleasures of the chace, or serving
as adventurers in foreign armies, he was admitted into all the secrets
of the cabinet, and put upon a level with persons of the most con-
furnmate experience in the management of affairs. He possessed,
in an eminent degree, that intrepid spirit, which delights in pur-
suing bold designs, and was no less master of that political art and
dexterity which is necessary for carrying them on with success. But
these qualities were deeply tinctured with the neighbouring vices.
His address sometimes degenerated into cunning; his acuteness bor-
dered upon excess of subtlety and refinement; his invention, over
fertile, suggested to him, on some occasions, chimerical systems of
policy, little suitable to the genius of the age; and his enterprising
spirit engaged him in projets vast and splendid, but beyond his ut-
most power to execute. All the cotemporary writers, to whatever
fation they belong, mention him with an admiration, which no.
thing could have excited but the greatest superiority of penetration
and abilities.

TIIE precipitate retreat of the Congregation increased, to such

a degree, the terror and confusion which had seized them at Edin-
burgh, that before they reached Stirling, their army dwindled to
an inconsiderable number. The spirit of Knox, however, frill re-
mained undaunted and ere&, and having mounted the pulpit, he
addressed to his desponding hearers, an exhortation which wonder-
fully animated and revived them. The heads of this discourse are

inserted

inserted in his history *, and afford a ifriking example of the bold- BOOK III.
ness and freedom of reproof assumed by the first Reformers, as well ._,.
as a specimen of his own skill in chufing the topics moftl fitted to
influence and rouze his audience.

A MEETING of the leaders being called, to confider what Tle Lords of

course they should hold, now that their own resources were alliheConpgl
exhausted, and their deftrution appeared to be unavoidable, with-again to Eli-
out foreign aid; they turned their eyes once more to England, and
resolved to implore the assistance of Elizabeth towards finishing an
enterprize, in which they had so fatally experienced their own weak-
ness, and the strength of their adversaries. Maitland, as the most
able negociator of the party, was employed in this embassy. In his
absence, and during the inactive season of the year, it was agreed
to dismiss their followers, worn out by the fatigues of a campaign,
which had so far exceeded the time of ferviee usual in that age.
iut, in order to preserve the counties most devoted to their interest,
the Prior of St. Andrew's, with part of the leaders, retired into Fife.
The Duke of Chatelherault, with the reft, fixed his residence at Ha-
milton. There was little need of Maitland's address or eloquence
to induce Elizabeth to take his country under her protecion. She
observed the prevalence of the French counsels, and the progress of
their arms in Scotland, with great concern and as fle well fore-
saw the dangerous tendency of their schemes in that kingdom, file
had already come to a resolution with regard to the part fie her-
self would ad, if their power there lhould grow frill more formi-
dable.

' IKnox, I93.
VoL. I1 B b TIJ

BOOK III. IN order to give the Queen and her Privy Council a full and dif-

.--_-~ tin(r view of any important matter which might come before them,

Motivewich khit seems to have been the p adice of Elizabeth's Ministers to pre-
deter-mini i pare memorials, in whlich they clearly fated the point under deli

the. beration, laid down the grounds of the conduct, which they held

to be most reaionable, and proposed a method for carrying their
plan into execution. Two papers of this kind, written by Sir Wil-
liam Cecil with his own hand, frill remain*; they are intitled,
,, A short difcufion of the weighty matter of Scotland," and do
honour to the industry and penetration of that great Minis-er. The
motives, which determined the Queen to espouse so warmly the
defence of the Congregation, are represented with perspicuity and
force; and the consequences of suffering the French to establish
themftlves in Scotland, are predicted with great accuracy and dif-
cernment.

HE lays it down as a principle, agreeable to the laws both of

God and of nature, that every society hath a right to defend itself,
not only from pre ent dangers, but from such as may probably en-
sue; to which, he adds, that nature and reason teach every Prince
to defend himself by the fame means, which his adversaries employ
to diftres: him. Upon these grounds, he eflablifes the right of
England to interpose in the affairs of Scotland, and to prevent the
conquefi of that kingdom, at which the French openly aimed. The
French, he observes, are the ancient and implacable enemies of Eng-
land. I-oftilities had fuibfifted between the two nations for many cen-
turies. No treaty of peace, into which they entered, had ever been.
cordial or sincere. No good cffci : was therefore to be expected from

: Burn, vol. iii. Append. 283. Keith, Append. 24.

the

the peace lately agreed upon, which being extorted by present ne- Book III.
ceffity, would be negligently observed, and broken on the slightest 5"-
pretences. In a very ihort time, France would recover its former
opulence; and though now drained of men and money by a tedious
and unsuccessful war, it would quickly be in a condition fcr adting,
and the restless and martial genius of the people would render action
necessary. The Princes of Lorrain, who at that time had the en-
tire direction of French affairs, were animated with the most vi-
rulent hatred against the English nation. They openly called in
q.uefion the legitimacy of the Qeen's birth, and by advancing
the title and pretensions of their niece the Queen of Scotland, ftu-
died to deprive Elizabeth of her Crown. With this view, they
had laboured to exclude the English fiom the treaty of Chateau
en Cambrefis, and endeavoured to conclude a separate peace with
Spain. They had persuaded Henry II. to permit his daughter-in-
law to affnme the title and arms of Queen of England; and even
since the conclusion of the peace, they had follicited at Rome, and
obtained a bull, declaring Elizabeth's birth to be illegitimate. And
though the wisdom and moderation of the Constable Montmorency
had, for some time, checked their career, yet these refiraints being
now removed by the death of Henry II. and the disgrace of his
Minifler, the utmost excefles of violence were to be dreaded from
their furious ambition, armed with Sovereign power. Scotland is
the quarter, whence they can attack England with moit advantage.
A war on the borders of that country exposes France to no danger,
but one unsuccessful action there may hazard the Crown, and
overturn the government of England. In political condu(l, it is
childish to wait till the designs of an enemy be ripe for cxccution.
The Scottih nobles, after their utmost eflors, have been obliged
to quit the field ; and far from expelling the invaders of their li-

B b 2 berties,
()

BooK III. berties, they behold the French power daily increasing, and rmu
1.----' at last cease from struggling any longer in a contest so unequal. The

I559. invading of England will immediately follow the reduction of the

Scottish malecontents, by the abandoning of whom to the mercy of
the French, Elizabeth will open a way for her enemies into the heart
of her own kingdom, and expose it to the calamities of war, and
the danger of conquest. Nothing therefore remained but to meet
the enemy while yet at a distance from England, and by supporting
the Congregation with a powerful army, to render Scotland the
theatre of the war, to crush the designs of the Princes of Lorrain
in their infancy, and, by such an early and unexpecded effort, to
expel the French out of Britain, before their power had time to
take root, and grow up to any formidable height. But as the mat-
ter was of as much importance, as any which could fall under the
consideration of an English Monarch, wisdom and mature coun-
fel were necefiary in the first place, and afterwards vigour and ex-
pedition in conduc; the danger was urgent, and, by losing a tingle
moment, might become unavoidable +.

THESE arguments produced their full effeEt upon Elizabeth, who

was jealous, in an extreme degree, of every pretender to her Crownj
and no less anxious to preserve the tranquillity and happiness of her
subjeCts. From thcfe motives file had acted, in granting the Congre.
gation an early supply of money ; and from the fame principles she
determined, in their present exigency, to afford them more effectual
aid. One of Maitland's attendants was infantly dispatched into
Scotland with the firongeft a.fiirances of her protection, and the
Lords of the Congregation were defi-ed to fend commiflnoners into

* The arguments which the Scots employed, in order to obtain Elizabeth's afift-
ance, arc urged with great force, in a paper of Maitland's. See Appendix, No. II.

England,

England, to conclude a treaty, and to fettle the operations of the BooK ilI.
campaign, with the Duke of Norfolk *.

'559.

MEAN while, the Queen Regent, from whom no motion Of TheQueen
the Congregation could long be concealed, dreaded the success of Dovager

ine:i n while
this negotiation with the court of England, and foresaw how little ends her

French troop,

she would be able to refill the united effort of the two kingdoms. agaitRf tiemn:.
For this reason she determined, if pofiible, to get the fart of Eli-
labeth; and by venturing, notwithstanding the inclemency of the
winter season, to attack the malecontents in their present dispersed
and helpless situation, she hoped to put an end to the war, before
the arrival of their English allies.

A CONSIDERABLE body of her French forces, who were aug-

mented, about this time, by the arrival of the Count de Martigues,
with a thousand veteran foot, and some cavalry, were commanded
to march to Stirling. Having there crossed the Forth, they pro-
ceeded along the coast of Fife, destroying and plundering, with ex-
ceffive outrage, the houses and lands of those whom they esteemed
their enemies. Fife was the molt populous and powerful county
in the kingdom, and most devoted to the Congregation, who had
hitherto drawn from thence their most considerable supplies, both
of men and provisions; and therefore, betides punishing thediaf-
fetion of the inhabitants, by pillaging the country, the French pro-
posed to seize and fortify St. Andrew's, and to leave in it a garrison
sufficient to bridle the mutinous spirit of the province, and to keeo
pnceffion of a port situated on the main ocean.

I(Keith, 114.,

11?U -

Boo0i ITI. BUT on this occasion, the Prior of St, Andlew's, Lord Ruthven,
L-,.-- Ki:ikaldy of Grange, and a few of the most adive leaders of the

Congregation, performed, by their bravery and good conduc, a
service of the utmost importance to their party. 1aving aflembled
fix hundred horse, they infefled the French with continual iicur-
sions, beat up their quarters, intercepted their convoys of provisions,
cut off their -raggling parties, and so harraffed them with perpetual
alarms, that they prevented them for more than three weeks from
advancing

a .
1560. AT last the Prior, with his feeble party, was conifrained to

retire, and the French set out from Kirkaldy, and began to move
along'the ccaft towards St. Andrew's. They had advanced but a few
j.nua'y 23. miles, when from an eminence they descried a powerful fleet fleer-

ing its course up the Firth of Forth. As they knew that the Marquis
D'Elbeufwas, at that time, preparing to fail for Scotland with anume-
rous army, they hastily concluded that there ships belonged to him
and gave way to the most immoderate transports of joy, on the
profpeat of this long-expeded succour. Their great guns were al-
ready fired to welcome their friends, and to spread the tidings and
terror of their arrival among their enemies, when a small boat from
the opposite coast landed, and blaated their premature and short-lived
triumph, by informing them, that it was the fleet of England which

The E.nglish was in fight, intended for the aid of the Congregation, and was soon
flcaViita. to to be followed by a formidable land army A.

THROUGHOUT her whole reign, Elizabeth was cautious, but de-
cifive ; and by her promptitude in executing her resolutions, joined

' I Knox, 202. 1|l Knox, 203.

to

to the deliberation with which she formed them, her adminifiration Boox III.
became remarkable, no less for its vigour, than for its wisdom. No .'

156o.

sooner did she determine to afford her protecion to the Lords of
the Congregation, than they experienced the activity, as well as
the extent of her power. The feafbn of the year would not per-
mit her land army to take the field; but left the French should, in
the mean time, receive new reinforcements, she inflantly ordered a
strong squadron to cruize in the Firth of Forth. She seems, by her
infrruAions to Winter her Admiral, to have been desirous of pre-
serving the appearances of friendship towards the French*. But these
were only appearances ; if any French fleet should attempt to land,
he was commanded to prevent it, by every ad of hostility and
violence. It was the fight of this squadron, which occasioned at
firfl so much joy among the French, but which soon inspired them
with such -error, as saved Fife from the effets of their vengeance.
Apprehensive of being cut off from their companions on the oppo-
site fiore, they retreated towards Stirling with the utmost precipita-
tion, and, in a dreadful season, and through roads almost impafiable,
arrived at Leith, harassed and exhaufled with fatigue -.

THE English fleet cast anchor in the road of Leith, and conti-

nuing in that fiation till the conclusion of peace, both prevented
the garrison of Leith from receiving succours of any kind, and con-
fiderably facilit.itcd the operations of their own forces by land.

SOON after the arrival of the Engliff fqiuadron, the Comm-ission- Thcv con-

ers of the. Congregation repaired to Berwick, and concluded withvwitC'lhl;Ln:,
the Duke of Norfolk, a treaty, the bond of thaL union with Eliza- IFcbrllary 7.

" Kecith, Appendix 45. *1 Kinox, 203.

beth,,.

BOOK III. beth, which was of so great advantage to the cause. To give a

,- _..' check to the dangerous and rapid progress of the French arms in

Scotland, was the professed design of the contracding parties. In
order to this, the Scots engaged never to susser any closer union of
their country with France; and to defend themselves to the utter-
mofI againfi all attempts of conquefi; and for their affiflance, Eli-
zabeth promised to employ, in Scotland, a powerful army, which
the Scots undertook to join with all their forces; no place in Scot-
land was to remain in the hands of the Englith; whatever should
be taken from the enemy was either to be razed, or kept by the
Scots, at their choice; if any invasion should be made upon Eng-
land, the Scots were obliged to assist Elizabeth with part of their
forces; and to ascertain their faithful observance of the treaty, they
bound themselves to deliver hostages to Elizabeth, before the march
of her army into Scotland; in conclusion, the Scots made many
protefrations of obedience and loyalty towards their own Queen, in
every thing not inconfifent with their religion, and the liberties of
their country ".

The FEn!ifhl THE Englifih army, consisting of fix thousand foot, and two
army lays
fiegctoLeith. thfoufand horse, under the command of Lord Grey of Wilton,
April Z. entered Scotland earry in the fpiing. The members of the Congre-

gation assembled from all parts of the kingdom to meet their new
allies; and having joined them with great multitudes of their fol-
lowers, they advanced together towards Leith. The French were
little able to keep the field against an enemy so much superior in
number. A strong body of troops, defined for their relief, had
been scattered by a violent florm, and had either periflled on

:* Knox, 217.

the

the coast of France, .or with difficalty had recovered the ports of Boor III.
rhat:kingdom *. But they hoped to be able to defend Leith, till Ió
the Princes of.Lorrain ihould make good the magnificent promises
of assistance, with which .they daily.encouraged them.; or till fear-
city of provifio ns ifhoptld conftrairn the Englila .to retire into their
own country. In order to haflen this latter event, they-did not neg-
lect the usual, though barbarous precaution for .disrefsing an invad-
ing enemy, by burning and laying waste all the adjacent country -.
The zeal, however, of the nation fruifrated their intentions;
eager to contribute towards removing their oppressors, the people
produced. their hidden Rores :to support their friends; ,the neigh-
bouring counties supplied every thing necessary, and far from want-
ing subsistence, the- English found, in their camp, all forts of pro-
visions, at a cheaper rate, than had for some timne been known in
that part of the kingdom .

ON the approach of the Engliffi army , ;the .Qeen Regent re-

tired into the cafile of Edinburgh. Her health was now in a de-
clining state, and her mind broken and depressed by the misfor-
tunes of her adminifration. To avoid the danger and fatigue of a
siege, she committed herself to the protetion.of Lord ,Erskine. This
nobleman. fill preserved his neutrality, and by his integrity and love
of his country, merited equally the esteem of both parties. He
received the Queen herself with .the utmost honour and'refpe&,
but took care to admit no such retinue, as might endanger his
command of the castle 'j.

* Mem. de CaftelI 450. 1- Knox, 225.
;t Knox, ibid. {) Sorbes Collca. vol. 1. 503. Keith, 122.
VOL. I. C c A FEW

BooK 111. A FEW days after they arrived in Scotland, the English inyefted
-"rT^ LLeith. The garrison, shut up within the town, was almost half
April 6. as numerots as the army which fat down before it, and by an ob-

ftinate defence protraded the siege to a great length. The circum.
fiances of this siege, related by cotemporary historians, men with-
out knowledge or experience in the art of war, are often obscure
and imperfect, and at this distance of time are not considerable
enough to be entertaining.

AT first the French endeavoured to keep poeffetion of the

Hawk Hill, a rising ground not far distant from the town, but were
April s. beat from it with great slaughter, chiefly by the furious attack of

the Scottilh cavalry. Within a few days, the French had their full
revenge ; having rallied out with a iProng body, they entered the
Englilh trenches, broke their troops, nailed part of their cannon,
and killed at least double the number themselves had loft in the
former skirmish. Nor were the English more fortunate in an at-
May 7 tempt which they made to take the place by assault; they were

met with equal courage, and repulsed with considerable loss.
From the detail of these circumstances by the writers of that
age, it is easy to observe the different chara&ers of the French
and Englith troops. The former, trained to war, under the ac-
tive reigns of Francis I. and Henry II. defended themselves not
only with the bravery, but with the skill of veterans. The latter,
who had been more accustomed to peace, still preferyed the in-
trepid and desperate valour peculiar to the nation, but, discovered
few marks of military genius, or of experience in the practice of
war. Every misfortune or disappointment during the siege mull
be imputed to manifest errors in conducs. The success of the be-
fieged, in their sally was owing intirely to the security and negligence
of the English: many of their officers were absent; their soldiers

had

had left;their Ieations; and the trenches were almof:, without a BOOK III,
guard. The ladders, which -ha4, lbeenprovided- for the aftault, -5..
wanted a great deal of the necffary length;, and the,:troops emplaoy-1
ed inthat.fervice were ill supported, .The trenches were opened,
at firfl, in an: improper place and as it was found expedient to
change the ground, both time and labour. -were loft. The weak-
ness of their own Generals, no less than the strength of the French
garrison, rendered the progress of the English wonderfully-,fow.
The length, however, of the siege, and the loss of part of their
magazines by an accidental fire, reduced the French to extreme dif-
trefs, which the profped of relief made them bear with admirable
fortitude.

WHILE the hopes and courage of the French 'protrated the

siege To far beyond expectation, the leaders of the Congregation were
not idle. By new associations and confederacies, they laboured more
perfedly to unite their party. By publicly ratifying the treaty:con-
eluded at Berwick, they endeavoured to render the alliance 'with
England firm and indissoluble. Among the subscribers of these
papers, we find the Earl of Huntly, and some others who had not
hitherto concurred with the Congregation in any of their measures '.
Several of these Lords, particularly the Earl of Huntly, fill ad'hered
to the Popish church; but on this occasion, neither their religious
sentiments, nor their former cautious maxims, were regarded ' the
torrent of national resentment and indignation against the French
hurried theim -on '

TEI

* Burn. vol. iii. 287. Knox, 221.
' The dread of the French power did,, on many occasions, surmount the zealk
which the Catholic nobles had for theirreligion. Betides the prcfumptive evidence

C* 2: V 1

' *

' '
, , ,

BoOK IIIl. THE Queen-Regent, the instrument, rather thau the. cause of

ó--'--' involving Scotland in; those calamities, unider which it groaried; at

1 56-'.

Death and that time, died during the heat of the siege. No Princess ever pof.
theara er o sessed qualities more capable of rendering her administration' illus.
Dowager. trious, or her people, happy. Of much discernment, and no less

Ju . address; of great intrepidity, and equal prudence; gentle and hu-

mane, without weakness; zealous for her religion, without bigotry;
a lover of jufliee, without rigour. One circuriftance, however,
and that, too, the exeefs of a virtue, rather than any vice, poisoned
all these great qualities, and rendered her government unfortunates
and her name odious. Devoted to the interest of France, her na.
tive country, and attached to the Princes of Lorrain her brothers,
with most passionate fondness; (he departed, in order to gratify them,
from every maxim, which her. own wisdom or humanity would
have approved. She outlived, in a great measure, that reputation
and popularity, which had smoothed her way to the highest station
in. the kingdom; and many examples of falfhood, and some of feve-
rity, in the latter part of her administration, totally alienated from her
the affetions of a people, who had once placed in her an unbounded
confidence. But, even by her enemies, these unjustifiable acions
were imputed to the facility, not to the malignity of her nature;
and while they taxed her brothers, and French counsellors, with
rafneefs and cruelty; they still allowed her the praise of prudence

for this, arising from the memorial mentioned by Burnet, Hist. of the Reformation,
vol iii. 281, and published by him p. 278; the inftruftionsof Elizabeth to Ran.
dolph her agent, put it beyond all doubt, that many zealous Papists thought the al-
liance with England to be necessary for preserving the liberty and independence of
the kingdom. Keith, 158. Huntly himself began a correspondence with Eliza-
beth's Ministers, before the march of the Englifll army into Scotland. Hayncs State
Papers, 261, 263. See Append. N° III.

and

and of lenity *. A few days before her death, she desired an inter- BOOK III.
view with the Prior of St. Andrew's,. the Earl of Argyll, and other ó-
chiefs of the Congregation. To them she lamented the fatal issue 5
of those violent councils, which she had been obliged to follow;
and, with the candour natural to a generous mind, confeifed the
errors of her own adminiifration, and begged forgiveness of those,
to whom they had been hurtful; but, at the fame time, (he warned
them, amidst their firuggles for liberty, and the (hock of arms,
not to lose fight of the loyalty and fubjetion, which was due to
their Sovereign --. -The remainder of her time, {he employed in
religious meditations and exercises. She even invited the attendance
of Willox, one of the most eminent among the Reformed preachers,
listened- to his inltrutions with reverence and attention and pre-
pared for the approach of death with a decent fortitude.

NOTHING could now save the French troops, shut up in Leith, Motivesof the
but the immediate conclusion of a peace, or the arrival of a powerful Frenchtocon-

,-*r r A elude a peace,

army from the continent. The Princes of Lorrain amused their party
in Scotland, with continual expectations of the latter, and had there-
by kept alive their hopes and their courage. But at last, the fitua-
tion of France, rather than the terror of the English arms, or the re-
monitrances of the Scottiih malecontents, constrained them, though
with reluctance, to turn their thoughts towards pacific councils.
The Protestants in France were, at that time, a party formidable
by their number, and more by the valour and enterprising genius of
their leaders. Francis II. had treated them with extreme rigour,
and discovered, by every ftep he took, a fettled resolution to extir-
pate their religion, and to ruin those who professed it. At the pro-

* Buchan. 324. t Lefly, de Rebus Gest. Scot. 222. :' Knox. 228.

fpea
2g

Boox III. fpe& of this danger to themselves, and to their cause, the Proteflants

were alarmed, but not terrified. Animated with zeal, and inflamed
Jo '. with resentment, they not only prepared for their own defence, but

- resolved, by'fole bold ation, to anticipate the schemes of their ene-
mies. And as the Princes of Lorrain were esteemed the'authors'F6
all the King's violent measures, they marked them out, to be the
firl viLtims of their indignation. - Hence, and not from any dif-
loyalty to the King, proceeded the famous conspiracy of Amboise,:
and though the vigilance and good fortune of the Princes of Lor.
March 'S rain discovered and disappointed that design, it was easy to observe

new forms gathering in every province of the Kingdom, and ready
to burin out with all the fury and outrage of civil war.- In this
'ituation, the ambition of the house of Lorrain was called off from
tie ithoughts of foreign conquests, to defend the honour and dig-
nity of the French crown; and instead of fending new reinforce-
ments into Scotland, it became necessary to withdraw, the, veteran
troops already employed in that kingdom *.

,.2- ,- - ' . , x

- '.

The negocia- . IN order to conduct an affair of so much importance and delicacy,
tions for that the Princes of Lorrain made choice of Monluc Bishop of Valence,

; ,... and:of the Sieur de Randan. As both these, especially the former,

were reckoned inferior to no persons of that age,'in .address and
political refinement; Elizabeth opposed to them Aimbaffador's of
equal abilities; Cecil her Prime Minister, 'a man perhaps of the
greatest capacity who had ever held that office; and Wotton Dean
of Canterbury, grown old in the art of negodiating unider three fuc-
ceffive Monarchs. The interests of the French and' Eglifh courts
were soon adjusted by men of so great dexterity'in biufinefs; and 'as

, ' [ i I
Lcfly, 22,+.

France

France easily consented to withdraw those forces, which had been BOOK Ill.
the chief occasion of the war; the other points in dispute, between .---'
that kingdom and England, were not matters of tedious, or of dif- 56°
ficult discussion.

THE grievances of the Congregation, and their demands upon

their own Sovereigns for redress, employed longer time, and re-
quired to be treated with a more delicate hand. After so many
open attempts, carried on by command of the King and Queen,
in order to overturn the ancient constitution, and to suppress the
religion which they had embraced, the Scottish nobles could not
think themselves secure, without fixing some new barrier against
the future encroachments of regal power. But the legal steps to-
wards accomplishing this were not so obvious. The French ambaf-
fadors considered the entering into any treaty with fubjets, and with
rebels, as a condescension, unworthy the dignity of a Sovereign
and their scruples on this head might have put an end to the treaty,
if the impatience of both parties for peace had not suggested an ex-
pedient, which seemed to provide for the security of the fubje&,
without derogating from the honour of the Prince. The Scottish A

Articles of thl

nobles agreed, on this occasion, to pass from the point of right and treaty.
privilege, and to accept the redress of their grievances, as a matter
of favour. Whatever additional security their anxiety for personal
safety, or their zeal for public liberty, prompted them to demand,
was granted in the name of Francis and Mary, as ads of their royal
favour and indulgence. And left concessions of this kind should
seem precarious, and liable to. be retraaed by the fame power, which
had made them, the French Ambassador agreed to insert them. in
the treaty with Elizabeth, and thereby to bind the King and Queea
inviolably to observe them *.

- Keith, 134, &c,

INa

BOOi III. IN relating this tranfaaion., .cotemporary historians have con-

ó-~- founded the concessions of Francis and Mary to their Scottish sub-

' jecs, with the treaty between France and England; the latter, be-

fides the ratification of former treaties between the two kingdoms,
and flipulations with regard to the time. and manner of removing
both armies out of Scotland, contained an article, to which, as the
source of many important events, we shall often have -occasion to
refer. The right of Elizabeth to her crown is, thereby, acknow-
ledged in the strongest terms; and Francis and Mary lolemnly en-
gage, neither to assume the title, nor to bear the arms of King and
Qeen-of England, fin any time to come.

HONOURABLE as this article was for Elizabeth herself, the con-

ditions te obtained for her allies the Scotch were no less advanta-
fu 6. geous to them. Monluc and Randan consented, in the name of

Francis and Mary,- that the French forces in Scotland fliould in-
flantly be sent back into their own country, and no foreign troops
'be hereafter introduced into the'kingdom, without the knowledge
and consent of Parliament; that the fortificatiors of 'Leith and
Dunbar should immediately be razed, and no new fort 'be ere'&ed
without the permiflion of Parliament; that a Parliament should be
held on the firit day of August, and that assembly be deemed as
valid, in all refpeAs, as if it had been called by the express com-
'mandment of the King and Queen ; that, conformable to the an-
cient laws and cufloms of the country, the King and Queen thould
not declare war, or conclude peace, without the concurrence of
Parliament; that, during the Queen's absence, the adminiflration
of government should be ve'fed in a council of twelve persons, to
be chosen out of twenty-four named by Parliament, seven of which
council to be elected by the Queen, and five by the Parliament;

that,

that hetrefter, the King and Queen hould not advahce foreigners Booiz III.
to places of trust or dignity in the kingdom, nor confer the offices ;-

:56o.

of Treasurer or Comptroller of the revenues upon any ecclesiastic;
that an aa of oblivion, abolishing the guilt and memory of all of-
fences, committed since the 6th of March, 558, should be passed
in the ensuing Parliament, and be ratified by the King and Queen;
that the King and Queen should not, under colour of punishing any
violation of their authority during that period, seek to deprive any of
their fubjeas of the offices, benefices, or estates which they now
held; that the redress due to churchmen, for the injuries which they
had sustained during the late infurreitions, fliould be left entirely to
the cognizance of Parliament. With regard to religious controver-
fies, the Ambassadors declared that they would not presume to de-
cide, but permitted the Parliament, at their first meetingi to exa-
mine the poiints in difference, and to represent their fenrf of them to
the King and' Queen *.

To such a memorable period, did the Lords of the Congrega- The ffeas of

tion, by their courage and perseverance, condua an enterprize, "
which, at firfl, promised a very different issue. From beginnings
extremely feeble, and even contemptible, the party grew by degrees
to great power; and being favoured by many fortunate incidents,
baffled all the efforts of their own Queen, aided by the forces of
a siore considerable kingdom. The whole sovereign authority was
transferred, by this treaty, into the hands of the Congregation; that
limited prerogative, which the Crown had hitherto poffefecd, was
almft entirely anfiihilated; and: the ariftocratical power, which al-
ways predominiated: in the Scottish government, became supreme

* Keith, 137, &c.
VOL. I. D d and

BooK I1I. and incontroulable. By this treaty, too, the influence of France,
-'------' which had long' been of nmuch weight in the affairs of Scotland,
' 560 was greatly diminithed -and not only were the present iricroach-

ments of that ambitious ally refrained, but, by confederating with
England, protection was provided against any future attempt from
the fame quarter. At the fame time, the controversies in religion
being left to the consideration of Parliament, the Protestants might
reckon upon obtaining whatever decision was moif favourable to the
opinions which they professed.

A FEW days after the conclusion of the treaty, both the French
and English armies quitted Scotland.

THE eyes of every man in that kingdom were turned towards
helPariament the approaching Parliament. A meeting, summoned in a manner

so extraordinary, at such a critical juncture, and to deliberate upon
matters of so much consequence, was expected with the utlnoft
anxiety.

A SCOTTISH Parliament, suitable to the ariflocratical genius of the

government, was properly an assembly of the nobles. It was com-
posed of Bishops, Abbots, Barons, and a few commissioners of bur-
roughs, who met altogether in one house. The Lesser Barons,
though possessed of a right to be present, either in person, or by
their representatives, seldom exercised it. The expence of attend-
ingy according to the fashion of the times, with a numerous train of
vafials and dependants; the inattention of the age, to any legal or re-
gular system of government; but, above all, the exorbitant authority
of the greater nobles, who had drawn the whole power into their
own hands, made this privilege of so little value, as to be almoff

neglected.

3

negle&ed. It appears from. the ancient rolls, that during times of Booc. IIT.
tranquillity, few commissioners of burroughs, and almost none of the
Lesser Barons appeared in Parliament. The ordinary adminiria-
tion of government was abandoned without scruple or jealousy, to
the King and to the Greater Barons. But in extraordinary conjunc-
tures, when the struggle for liberty was violent, and the spirit of op-
position to the Crown rose to an height, the Burgesses and Lesser
Barons were rouzed from their inactivity, and flood forth to vindi,
cate the rights of their country. The turbulent reign of James II.
affords examples in proof of this observation T. The public indig-
nation againfR the rash designs of that weak and ill-advifed Prince,
brought into Parliament, betides the Greater nobles and prelates, a
considerable number of the Lesser Barons.

THE fame causes occasioned the unusual confluence of all orders

of men to the Parliament, which met on the sirs of August. The
universal passion for liberty, civil and religious, which had seized
the nation, suffered few persons to remain unconcerned fpelators
of an assembly, whose ads were likely to prove decisive with refped
to both. From all corners of the kingdom, flocked in men, eager
and determined to aid, with their voices in the senate, the fame
cause, which they had defended with their swords in the field.
Betides a full convention of Peers, Temporal and Spiritual, there ap-
peared the representatives of allnoft all the burroughs, and above an
hundred Barons, who, though of the lesser order, were Gentlemen
of the first rank and fortune in the nation f.

THE. Parliament was ready to enter on business with the utmofl
zeal, when a difficulty was farted concerning the lawfuliefs of the

* Keith, I47. - Ibid. 46.

D d 2 meeting.

BOOK III. meeting. No Commissioner appeared in the name of the King

- 6o- ' and Queen, and no signification of their content and approbation
i6o. was yet received. These were deemed, by many, essential to the

very being of a Parliament. But, in opposition to this sentiment,
the express words of the treaty of Edinburgh were urged, by which
this assembly was declared to be as valid, in all refpeds, as if it had
been called and appointed by the express, command of the King
and Queen. As the adherents of the Congregation greatly out-
numbered their adversaries, the latter opinion prevailed. Their
boldest leaders, and those of most approved zeal, were chosen to: be
Lords of the Articles, who formed a committee of ancient use,
and of great importance in the Scottish Parliament. The;ddelibera-
tions of the Lords of the Articles were carried on with; the mpfil
unanimous and active zeal. The at of oblivion, the nomination
of twenty-four persons, out of whom the council, entrusted with
supreme authority, was to be eleted; and every other thing pre,
fcribed by the late treaty, or which seemed necessary to render it

I c eedeffeaual, passed without dispute or, delay, The.article of religion

ings with re- employed longer time, and was attended. with greater difficulty. It
gaud to reli-was brought into Parliament, by a petition from, those who had.

adopted the principles of the Reformation. Many doctrines of the
Popish church were a contradiction to reason, and a disgrace to re-
ligion; its discipline had become corrupt and oppressive,; and its
revenues were both exorbitant and ill applied. Against all these,
the Proteflants remonstrated with the utmost severity of stile, which
indignation at their absurdity, or experience of their pernicious ten-.
dency, could inspire; and encouraged, by the number and zeal of
their friends, to improve such a favourable, juntpre, they aimed
the blow at the whole fabric of Popery; and besought. the Parlia-,

ment

ment to 'interpose their authority for recifying these multiplied BOOK II.
abuses,. I56

1 56o.

SEVERAL prelates, zealously attached to the ancient superstition,

were present in this Parliament. But during these vigorous proceed-
ings of the Protefsants, they stood confounded, and at a gaze, and
persevered in a silence which was fatal to their cause. They esteem-
ed: it impossible toi resist or divert that torrent of religious zeal, which
was frill in its full' firength; they dreaded that their opposition
would irritate their adversaries, and excite them to new acs of vio-
lence; they hoped that the King and Queen would soon be at
leisure to put. a, fop to the career of their insolent fubjeds, and
that, after the rage and havock of the present storm, the former
tranquillity and order would be reflored to the church and kingdom.
They were willing, perhaps, to sacrifice the dodrine, and even
the power of the church, in order to ensure the safety of their own
persons, and to- preserve the pofeffilon of those revenues, which were
fill in their hands. From whatever motives they ated, their silence,
which was imputed to the consciousness of a bad cause, afforded
matter of great triumph to the Protestants, and encouraged them
to proceed with more boldness and alacrity +.

THE Parliament did not think it enough to condemn those doc-

trines mentioned in the petition of the Protestants; they, moreover,
gave the fandion of their approbation to a Confession of Faith
presented to them by the Reformed teachers $, and composed, as
might be expected from such a performance at that juncture, on
purpose to expose the absurd tenets and pracices of the Romish

* Knox, 237. t Ibid. 253. t Id. ibid.

church.

BooK I!I. church. By another aQ, the jurifdicEion of the ecclesiastical courts

-was abolifsed, and the causes, which formerly came under their
i 6o.

cognizance, transferred to the decisions of civil judges *. By a third
flatute, the exercise of religious worship, according to the rites of
the -Romish church, was prohibited. The manner in which the
Parliament inforced the observation of this law discovers the zeal of
that assembly; the first transgression fubje'ted the offender to the
forfeiture of his goods, and to a corporal punishment, at the difcre-
tion of the judge; banishment was the penalty of a second vio-
lation of the law; and a third aa of disobedience was declared to be
capital -f. Such strangers were men, at that time, to the spirit of
toleration, and to the laws of humanity; and with such indecent
haste did the very persons, who had just escaped the rigour of ec-
clefiaftical tyranny, proceed to imitate those examples of severity, of
which they themselves had fojufly complained.

,tWitl regard THE vigorous zeal of the Parliament overturned, in ' few days,
to the reve- the ancient system of religion, which had been established so many
hues of the
church. ages. In reforming the doctrine and discipline of the church, the

nobles kept pace with the ardor and expectations even of Knox him-
fell. But their proceedings, with refpet to these, were not more
rapid and impetuous, than they were flow and dilatory when they
entered on the consideration of ecclesiastical revenues. Among the
lay-members, some were already enriched with the spoils of the
church, and others devoured in expectation the wealthy benefices
which fiill remained untouched. The alteration in religion had as.
forded many of the dignified ecclesiastics themselves, an opportunity
of gratifying their avarice or ambition. The demolition of the mo-

* Keith, 152. -t Knox, 254.

natieries,

iteries, having set the Monks at liberty from their confinement, BOOK III.
they inRtantly dispersed all over the kingdom, and commonly be- "'
took themselves to forne secular employment. The Abbot, if he
had been so fortunate as to embrace the principles of the Reforma-
tion from convidion, or so cunning as to espouse them out of po-
licy, seized the whole revenues of the fiaternity, and, except what
he allowed for the fubfiflence of a few superannuated Monks'*, ap-
plied them entirely to his own use. The proposal, made by the
Reformed teachers, for applying there revenues towards the main-
tenance of Ministers, the education of youth, and the support of the
poor, was equally dreaded by all these orders of men. They op-
pofedit with the utmost warmth, and by their numbers and autho-
rity, easily prevailed on the Parliament to give no ear to such a dif-
agreeable demand -. Zealous as the first Reformers were, and ani-
mated with a spirit superior to the low considerations of interest, they
beheld these early symptoms of felfifhnefs and avarice among their
adherents, with indignation; and we find Knox expressing the ut-
most fenfibilty of that contempt, with which they were treated by
many, from whom he expected a more generous concern for the
success of religion, and the honour of its Ministers _.

A DIFFICULTY hath been flarted, with regard to the ads of Thc validity

of this Parlia-

this Parliament, concerning religion. This difficulty, frivolous inmentcallcdin
itself, and at this distance of time of no importance, is founded on quellion.
the words of the treaty of Edinburgh. By that, the Parliament was
permitted to take into consideration the state of religion, and to fig-
nify their sentiments of it to the King and Queen. But, instead of
presenting their desires to their Sovereigns, in the humble form of a

* Keith, 496, Append. 190, x91. '1 See Append. N? IV. :t Knox, 239, 256.

sup-

BooK III. supplication or address, the Parliament converted them into so ma-
"s-'v-' ny adts; which, although they never received the royal assent, ob'-

J560 tained, all over the kingdom, the weight and authority of laws.

In compliance with their injunctions, the established system of reli-
gion was every where overthrown, and that recommended by the
Reformers introduced in its place. The partiality and zeal of the
people overlooked or supplied any defec in the form of these ats
of Parliament, and rendered the observance of them more universal
than ever had been yielded to the statutes of the moit regular or con-
flitutional afembly. By those proceedings, it must, however, be
confessed, that the Parliament, or rather the nation, violated the last
article in the treaty of Edinburgh, and even exceeded the powers
which belong tofubjeas. But when oncemen have been accustomed
to break through the common boundaries of fubjedion; and their
minds are inflamed with the pafions which civil war inspire; it is
mere pedantry or ignorance to measure their conduct by those rules,
which can -be applied, only where government is in a state of order
and tranquillity. A nation, when obliged to employ such extraor-
dinary efforts in defence of its liberties, avails itself of every thing
which can promote this great end; and the: necessity of the cafe, and
the importance of the objea, juflify any departure from the common
and eftabli'hed forms of the contlitution.

Ambassadors IN consequence of the treaty of Edinburgh,, as well as by the
sent by the ordinary forms of business, it became necefary to lay the proceed-
Parliament to
France. ings of Parliament before the King and Qeen. For this purpose,

Sir James Sandilands of Calder Lord St. John, was appointed to
repair to the court of France. After holding a course so irregular,
the nobles had no reason to flatter themselves that Francis and
Mary would ever approve their condudc or confirm it, by their

royal

2

royal assent. The reception of their Ambassador was no other than BOOK IIL[
they might have expeEted. He was treated by the King and Queen .-.T-'
with the utmost coldness, and dismissed without obtaining the rati-
fication of the Parliament's proceedings. From the Princes of Lor-
rain and their partizans, he endured all the scorn and insult, which
it was natural for them to pour upon the party he represent-
ed .

THOUGH the Earls of Morton, Glencairn, and Maitland of Le-And toEliza-

thington, the Ambassadors of the Parliament to Elizabeth their Pro- beth.
teArefs, met with a very different reception; they were not more
successful in one part of the negotiation intrusted to their care.
The Scots, sensible of the security which they derived from their
union with England, were desirous of rendering it indissoluble.
With this view, they empowered these eminent leaders of their
party, to testify to Elizabeth their gratitude for that seasonable and
effectual aid which ihe had afforded them, and at the fame time,
to beseech her to render the friendship between the nations perpe-
tual, by condescending to marry the Earl of Arran, who, though
a fubjedt, was nearly allied to the royal family of Scotland, and,
after Mary, the undoubted heir to the Crown.

To the former part of this commiflion Elizabeth listened with the

utmost fatisfaation, and encouraged the Scots, in any future exi-
gency, to hope for the continuance of her good offices; with re-
gard to the latter, she discovered those sentiments to which ihe
adhered throughout her whole reign. Averse from marriage, as
some pretend through choice, but more probably out of policy, that

* Knox, 255. Buch. 327.
VOL. 1. E e ambiti-

Boo .,II. ambitious Princess would never admit any partner to the throne; but

delighted with the entire and uncontrolled exercise of power, she fa-
5 '5 crificed to the enjoyment of that, the 'hopes of transmitting her Crown

to her own posterity. The marriage with the Earl of Arran
could not be attended with any such extraordinary advantage, as to
shake this resolution; the declined it, therefore, but with many ex-
pressions of good-will towards the Scottish nation, and of refped for
Arran himself .

The death of TOWARDS the conclusion of this year, diftinguified by so many
Francs II, remarkable events, there happened one of great importance. On

the 4th of December, died Francis II. a Prince of a feeble confli-
tution, and of a mean understanding. As he did not leave any
issue by the Queen, no incident could have been more fortunate to
those, who, during the late commotions in Scotland, had taken
part with the Congregation. Mary, by the charms of her beauty,
had acquired dn entire ascendant over her husband; and as she tranf-
ferred all her influence to her uncles the Princes of Lorrain, Fran-
cis followed them implicitly in whatever track they were pleated to
lead him. The power of France, under such direction, alarmed
the Scottih malcontents, with apprehensions of danger, no less
formidable, than well founded. The intestine disorders which rag-
ed in France, and the seasonable interposition of England in be-
half of the Congregation, had hitherto prevented the Princes of Lor-
rain from carrying their designs upon Scotland into execution. But
under their vigorous and decisive administration, it was impossible
that the commotions in France could be of long continuance, and
many things might fall in to divert Elizabeth's attention, for the

X Burn, 3. Append. 308. Keith, 154, &c.

future,

future, from the affairs of Scotland. In either of these events, the Boot III.
Scots would fland exposed to all the vengeance, which the resent- i"5
ment ofthe French court could inflia. The blow, however long sus-
pended, was unavoidable, and must fall at last with redoubled weight.
From this profpea and expectation of -danger, the Scots were de-
livered by the death- of Francis; the ancient confederacy of the
two kingdoms had already been broken, and by this event, the only
bond of union which remained was diflolved. Catherine of Me-
dicis, who during the minority of Charles IX. her second son, en-
grossed the entire direction of the French councils, was far from
any thoughts of vindicating the Scottith Queen's authority. Cathe-
rine and Mary had been rivals in power during the reign of Fran-
cis II. and had contended for the government of that weak and un-
experienced Prince; but as the charms of the wife easily triumphed
over the authority of the mother, Catherine could never forgive
such a disappointment in her favourite passion, and beheld now,
with secret pleasure, the difficult and perplexing scene, on which
her daughter-in-law was about to enter. Mary, overwhelmed with

Mary retires

all the sorrow which so fad a reverse of fortune could occasion, from thecourt
flighted by the Queen mother *; and forsaken by the tribe of courti- France'
ers, who appear only in the sunshine of prosperity, retired to Rheims,
and there, in solitude, indulged her grief, or hid her indignation.
Even the Princes of Lorrain were obliged to contract their views;
to turn them from foreign to domestic objects; and instead of form-
ing vast projects with regard to Britain, found it neceflary to think
of acquiring, and efl-ablilhing an interest with the new admini-
ftration.

* Henaut. 340. Cafteln. 4541,

E e IT

BOOK III. IT is impofible to describe the emotions of joy, which, on all

5ó0^' these accounts, the death of the French Monarch excited among

the Scots. They regarded it as the only event, which could give
firmness and stability to that system of religion and government,
which was now introduced; and it is no wonder cotemporary his-
torians should ascribe it to the immediate care of Providence, which,
by unforeseen expedients, can secure the peace and happiness of
kingdoms, in those situations, where human prudence and invention
would utterly despair *.

Eflablifhment ABOUT this time, the Proteflant church in Scotland began to as-
of Prefbyteri-
an church- fume a regular form. Its principles had obtained the fandion of
government. public authority, and some fixed external policy became necessary

for the government and preservation of the infant society. The
model introduced by the Reformers, differed extremely from that,
which had been so long established. The motives, which induced
them to depart so far from the ancient system, deserve to be ex-
plained.

As the vices of the clergy had, at first, excited the indignation

of mankind, and rouzed that spirit of inquiry, which proved so fa-
tal to the whole Popih system : as this difguit at the vices of ec-
clefiaftics was soon transferred to their persons, and (histing from
them, by no violent transition, fettled at last on the offices which
they enjoyed; the effecs of the Reformation would naturally have
extended not only to the docrine, but to the government of the
Popish church; and the fame spirit which abolished the former
would have overturned the latter. But, in Germany, England,

* Knox, 259.

jr1~~. ~and

and the northern kingdoms, its operations were checked by the BOOK III.
power and policy of their Princes; and the ancient Episcopal ju- "
rifdidtion, under a few limitations, was fill continued in those
churches. The Episcopal hierarchy appears to be more conform-
able to the practice of the church, since Christianity became the
established religion of the Roman empire. The ecclesiastical go-
vernment was, at that time, plainly copied from the civil; the first
not only borrowed its form, but derived its authority from the
latter; and the dioceses and jurifdiaions of Patriarchs, Archbishops,
and Bishops, corresponded with the division and constitution of the
empire. In Switzerland, and the Low-countries, the nature of the
government allowing full scope to the genius of the Reformation,
all pre-eminence of order in the church was destroyed, and an
equality effablifhed more suitable to the spirit of republican policy.
The situation of the primitive church fuggefled the idea, and fur-
nifhed the model of the latter fyflem, which has since been called
Presbyterian. The first Christians, oppressed by continual perfecu-
tions, and obliged to hold their religious assemblies by stealth, and
in corners, were contented with a form of government extremely
simple. The influence of religion concurred, with the sense of dan-
ger, in extinguishing among them, the spirit of ambition, and in
preserving a parity of rank, the effect of their sufferings, and the
cause of many of their virtues. Calvin, whose decisions were re-
ceived, among the Protestants of that age, with incredible fubmif-
sion, was the patron and restorer of this scheme of ecclesiastical
policy. The church of Geneva, formed under his eye, and by
his direction, was esteemed the most perfect model of this govern-
ment; and Knox, who, during his residence in that city, had flu-
died and admired it, warmly recommended it to the imitation of
his countrymen.

AMONG

BooK III. AI MONG the Scottish nobility, rome hated the persons, and others
*----' coveted the wealth of the dignified clergy; and by abolishing that

I6o'5 order of men, the former indulged their resentment, and the lat-

ter hoped to gratify their avarice. The people, inflamed with the
most violent aversion to Popery, and approving of every fchleme that
departed farthest from the pratice of the Romish church, were
delighted with a fyflem, so admirably suited to their predominant
pafion. While the friends of civil liberty beheld, with pleasure,
the Protestant clergy pulling down, with their own hands, that
fabric of ecclesiastical power, which their predecessors had reared
with so much art and industry; and flattered themselves, that by
lending their aid to firip churchmen of their dignity and wealth,
they might entirely deliver the nation from their exorbitant and op-
preffive jurifdiAion. The new mode of government easily made its
way among men, thus prepared, by their various interests and pas-
tions, for its reception.

BUT, on the first introduction of his system, Knox did not deem

it expedient to depart altogether from the ancient form *. ,Inflead
of Bishops, he proposed to establish ten or twelve Superintendants in
different parts of the kingdom. These, as the name implies, were
impowered to inspeCt the life and docrine of the other clergy.
They presided in the inferior judicatories of the church, and
performed several other parts of the Episcopal function. Their
jurisdiction, however, extended to sacred things only; they claimed
no feat in Parliament, and pretended no right to the dignity, or re-
venues, of the former Bishops.

* Spotfwood, 158.

TEr

4

THE number of inferior clergy, to whom the care of parochial'BooK III.
duty could be committed, was still extremely small; they had em- ó-0

56o.

braced the principles of the Reformation at different times, and
from various motives; during the public commotions, they were
scattered, merely by chance, over the different provinces of the
kingdom; and, in a few places only, were formed into regular
clafesor societies. The first General Assembly of the church,December20.
which was held this year, bears all the marks of an infant and un-
formed society. The members were but few in number, and of
no Confidetable rank;- no uniform or confifent rule seems to have
been observed in elecding them. From a great part of the kingdom
no representatives appeared. In the name of some entire counties,
but one-perfon-was present; while, in other places, a tingle town
or church sent several members. A convention, so feeble and irre-
gular, could possess -no great authority; and conscious of their own
weaiknefs, the members put an end to their debates, without ven-
turing upon any decision of much importance ".

IN order.to-give greater strength and confifence to the Prefby-

terian plan, Knox, with the affiflance of his brethren, compored
the first book of discipline, which contains the model or platform of
the intended policy T. They presented it to a convention of estates
which was held in the beginning of this year. Whatever regulations J.anualv Ii
were proposed with regard to ecclesiastic discipline and jurifdidion,
would. have easily obtained the fandion of that assembly; but a de-
sign to recover the patrimony of the church, which is there infi-
nuated, met with a very different reception.

IN vain did the clergy display the advantages which would ac-
crue to the public, by a proper application of ecclesiastical revenues.

s' Keith, 498. t Spotfwood, 152.

In

BooK IlI. In vain did they propose, by an impartial distribution of this fund,

t to promote true religion, to encourage learning, and to support

the poor. In vain did they even intermingle threatnings of the di-
vine displeasure, against the unjust detainers of what was appro-
priated to a sacred use. The nobles held fafl the prey, which they
had seized; and bestowing upon the proposal, the name of a de-
vout imagination, they affected to confider it, as a projeat altoge-
ther visionary, and treated it with the utmoff scorn *.'

TheQueen in-
itedtoretiurn THIS convention appointed the Prior of St. Andrew's to repair
intoSotland. to the Queen, and to invite her to return into her native coun-

try, and to assume the reins of government, which had been
too long committed to other hands. And though some of her
fubjeas dreaded her return, and others foresaw dangerous confe-
quences with which it might be attended t, the bulk of them de-
fired it with so much ardour, that the invitation was given with the
greatest appearance of unanimity. But the zeal of the Roman Ca-
tholics got the start of the Prior in paying court to Mary; and Lefly,
afterwards bishop of Ross, who was 'commissioned by them, ar-
rived before him, at the place of her residence +-. Lefly endeavoured
to infuse into the Queen's mind suspicions of her Proteflant fubjeEts,
and to persuade her to throw herself entirely into the arms of those
who adhered to her own religion. For this purpose, he insisted that
she should land at Aberdeen; and as the Protestant doctrines had
made no considerable progress in that part of the kingdom, he
gave her assurance of being joined, in a few days, by 20o,000 men;
and flattered her, that with such an army, encouraged by her pre-
fence and authority, she might easily overturn the Reformed Church,
before it was firmly fettled on its foundations.

Knox, 256. -1 See Append. N° V. t Lefly, 227.

BUT

BUT at this juncture, the Princes of Lorrain were not disposed toBooK IlI.

liflen to this extravagant and dangerous proposal. Intent on de- ""
fending themnfelves against Catherine of Medicis, whose infidiouls
policy was employed in undermining their exorbitant power, they
had no leisure to attend to the affairs of Scotland, and wifled their
niece to take possession of her kingdom, with as little diflurbance
as possible. The French officers, too, who had served in Scotland,
dissuaded Mary from all violent measures; and, by representing the
power and number of the Protetfants to be irrefiflible, determined
her to court them by every art; and rather to employ the leading
men of that party as her Ministers, than to provoke them, by a fruit-
less opposition, to become her enemies *. Hence proceeded the
confidence and affection, with which the Prior of St. Andrew's was
received by the Queen. His representation of the slate of the king-
dom gained great credit; and Lefly beheld, with regret, the new
channel in which court favour was likely to run.

ANOTHER Convention of the eflates was held in May. The

arrival of an Ambassador from France, seems to have been the oc-
cafion of this meeting. He was inftruaed to follicit the Scots to
-renew their ancient alliance with France, to break their new confede-
racy with England, and to restore the Popish ecclesiastics to the
poffeflion of their revenues, and the exercise of their functions. It is
no easy matter to form any conjecture concerning the intentions of
the French court, in making these extraordinary and ill-timed pro-
positions. They were rejected with that scorn, which might well
have been expected from the temper of the nation --.

* Mclv. 61. 1l Knox, 269, 273.
VOL. . F f IN

BOOK II. IN this Convention, the Protestant clergy did not obtain a more

'-----' favourable audience than formerly, and their profped of recovering
I56i. the patrimony of the church still remained as diflant and uncertain

as ever. But with regard to another point,. they found the zeal of
the nobles in no degree abated. The book of discipline seemed
to require, that the monuments of Popery, which still remained
in the kingdom, fliould be demoli/hed . And, though neither
the fame pretence of policy, nor the fame ungovernable rage of the
people, remained tojuftify or excuse this barbarous havock, the Con-
vention, confidering every religious fabric as a relict of idolatry,
passed sentence upon them by an ad in form; and persons, the mofi
remarkable for the aaivity of their zeal, were appointed to put it
in execution. Abbies, cathedrals, churches, libraries, records, and
even the sepulchres of the dead, perished in one common ruin.
The first storm of popular infurredtion, though impetuous and ir-
resistible, had extended only to a few counties, and soon spent its
rage; but now a deliberate and universal rapine compleated the de-
vaftation of every thing, venerable and magnificent, which had
escaped its violence -.

Mary begins IN the mean time, Mary was in no haste to return into Scot-
io prepare for
. repeforland. Accustomed to the elegance, splendor, and gaiety of a po-

lite court, she tfill fondly lingered in France, the scene of all these
enjoyments, and contemplated, with horror, the barbarism of her own
country, and the turbulence of her fubjeds, which presented her
with a very different face of things. The impatience, however,
of her people, the persuasions of her uncles, but above all, the
fludied and mortifying neglect, with which she was treated by the

Spotfwood, 153. -t- Ibid. 7 ..

Q -Cen

Queen Mother, forced her to think of beginning this disagreeable BooKc III.
voyage . But while ihe was preparing for it, there were foown ,--
between her and Elizabeth, the feeds of that personal jealousy and
discord, which imbittered the life, and ihortened the days of the
Scottish Queen.

THE ratification of the late treaty of Edinburgh was the immediate Origin of ti;
occasion of this fatal animosity; the true causes of it lay much deeper. discord be-

~~~~~~~~~' ~~tween her and

Almost every article, in that treaty, had been executed by both par- Elizabeth.
ties, with a scrupulous exadtnefs. The fortifications of Leith were
demolished, and the armies of France and England withdrawn with-
in the appointed time. The grievances of the Scottish malecontents
were redressed, and they had obtained whatever they could de-
mand for their future security. With regard to all these, Mary
could have little reason to decline, or Elizabeth to urge, the ratifi-
cation of the treaty.

THE sixth article remained the only source of contest and diffi-

culty. No Minister ever entered more deeply into the schemes of
his Sovereign, or pursued them with more dexterity and success
than Cecil. In the conduc of the negociation at Edinburgh, the
found understanding of this able politician had proved greatly an
overmatch for Monluc's refinements in intrigue, and had artfully
induced the French Ambassadors, not only to acknowledge that
the Crowns of England and Ireland did of right belong to Eliza-
beth alone, but also to promise, that in all times to come, Mary
ihould abstain from using the titles, or bearing the arms'of those
kingdoms.

2 Brantomc, Jcbb. vol. ii. 482.

F f 2 .TIE

B13oK Ill. TiiS ratification of this article would have been of the most fil-

i-)r tal consequence to Mary. The Crown of England was an objed
J561.

worthy of her ambition. Her pretensions to it gave her great dig-
nity and importance in the eyes of all Europe. By many, her title
was esteemed preferable to that of Elizabeth. Among the Englifl
themselves, the Roman Catholics, who formed, at that time, a nu-
merous and active party, openly espoused this opinion; and even the
Protestants, who supported Elizabeth's throne, could not deny the
Queen of Scots to be her immediate heir. A proper opportunity to
avail herself of all there advantages, could not, in the course of
things, be far distant, and many incidents might fall in, to bring
this opportunity nearer than was expected. In these circumstances,
Mary, by ratifying the article in dispute, would have loll that rank
which fle had hitherto held among neighbouring Princes; the
zeal of her adherents must have gradually cooled; and she might
have renounced, from that moment, all hopes of ever wearing the
English Crown.

NONE of these beneficial consequences escaped the penetrating

eye of Elizabeth, who for this reason, had recourse to every thing,
by which fme could hope either to tooth or frighten the Scottifi
Queen into a compliance with her demands. And if that Prin-
cess had been so unadvised as to ratify the rash concessions of her
Ambassadors, Elizabeth, by that deed, would have acquired an ad-
vantage, which, under her management, must have turned to great
account. By such a renunciation, the question, with regard to
the right of succession, would have been left altogether open and
undecided; and, by means of that, Elizabeth might either have
kept her rival in perpetual anxiety and dependance, or, by the au-
thority of her Parliamcnt, fle might have broken in upon the order

,of

of lineal succession, and transferred the Crown to tme ether de-BooK III.
fcendant of the roval blood. The former condutl ihe observed ~. o
towards James VI. whom, during his whole reign, fNe held in per-
petual fear and fubjeftion. The latter, and more rigorous method
of proceeding; would, in all probability, have been employed againaf
Mary, whom, for many reasons, she both envied and hated.

NOR was this flep beyond her power, unprecedented in the his-

tory, or inconsistent with the constitution of England. Though
succession by hereditary right be an idea so natural and so popular,
that it has been eflablifhed' almost in every civilized nation, yet
England affords many memorable instances of deviations from that
rule. The Crown of that kingdom having once been seized by
the hand of a conqueror, this invited the bold and enterprising in
every age to imitate such an illufirious example of fortunate am-
bition. From the time of William the Norman, the regular course
of descent had seldom continued through three successive reigns.
Those Princes, whose intrigues or valour opened to them a way to
the throne, called in the authority of the great council of the nation
to confirm their dubious titles. Hence, parliamentary and heredi-
tary right became in England of equal consideration. That great
aftembly claimed and actually possessed a power of altering the or-
der of regal succession; and even so late as Henry VI)I: an ad of
Parliament had authorized -that capricious Monarch to fettle the
order of succession at his pleasure. The Englifll, jealous of their
religious liberty, and averse from the dominion of itrangers, would
have eagerly adopted the passions of their Sovereign, and might
have been easily i'nduced to exclude the Scottish line from the
right of succeeding to the Crown. These fcem to have been the

views

Book IIl. views of both Queens, and there were the difficulties which retard;-

-56i- ed the ratification of the treaty of Edinburgh.

BUT, if the sources of their discord were to be traced no higher

than this treaty, an inconsiderable alteration in the words of it,
might have brought the present question to an amicable iflue. The
indefinite and ambiguous expression, which Cecil had inserted into
the treaty, might have been changed into one more limited, but
more precise. And Mary, instead of promising to abflain from
bearing the title of Queen of England in all times to come, might
have engaged not to assume that title, during the life of Elizabeth,
or the lives of her lawful potferity.

THIS amendment, however, did not suit the views of either Queen.

Though Mary had been obliged to suspend, for some time, the prose-
cution of her title to the English crown, she had not, however, re-
linquifhed it. She determined to revive her claim, on the first pro-
speC of success, and was unwilling to bind herself, by a positive
engagement, not to take advantage of any such fortunate occurrence.
Nor would the alteration have been more acceptable to Elizabeth,
who, by agreeing to it, would have tacitly recognized the right of
her rival to ascend the throne after her decease. But neither the
Scottish nor English Queen durst avow there secret sentiments of
their hearts. Any open discovery of an inclination to disturb the
tranquillity of England, or to wrest the sceptre out of Elizabeth's
hands, might have proved fatal to Mary. Any suspicion of a de-
sign to alter the order of ficceffion, and to set aside the claim of
the Scottilh Queen, would have exposed Elizabeth to much and
deserved censure, and have raised up against her many and danger-
ous enemies. These, however carefully concealed, or artfully dif-

guised,

guised, were, in all probability, the real motives which determined BOOK III.
the one Queen to follicit, and the other to refute the ratification of ó'-.5-:
the treaty, in its original form; while neither had recourse to that
explication of it, which, to an heart unwarped by political interest,
and sincerely desirous of union and concord, would have appeared
so obvious and natural.

BUT though considerations of interest firfl occasioned this rup-

ture between the British Qgeens, rivalfhip of another kind contri-
buted to widen the.breach, and female jealousy increased the vio-
lence of. their.political. hatred. Elizabeth, with all those extraordi-
nary qualities, by which ihe equalled or surpassed those of her sex,
who have merited the greatest renown, discovered an admiration
of her own person, to a degree, which women of ordinary under-
standings either do.not entertain, or prudently. endeavour to con-
ceal. Her attention to dress, her solicitude to display her charms,
her love of flattery, were all excessive. Nor were there weaknesses
confined to that period of life, when they are more pardonable.
Even in very advanced. years, the wisest woman of that, or per-
haps of any other age, wore the garb, and affected the manners of
a girl . Though Elizabeth was as much inferior to Mary, in
beauty, and gracefulness of person, as she excelled her in political
abilities, and in the arts of government, ihe was weak enough
to compare herself with the Scottish Queen t; and as it was impof-
fible fie could be altogether ignorant how much Mary gained by
the comparison; she envied and hated her as a rival, by whom
she was eclipsed. In judging of the conduct of Princes, we are
apt to ascribe too much to political motives, and too little to the

* Johntfon Hist. Rer. Britan. 346, 347. Carte, vol. iii. 699. Catalogue of
Royal and Noble Authors, Article EJfex.

l Mclvil, 9,.

paflions
9,

BOOK III. paflions which they feel in common with the reft of mankind,
~----,-~ In order to account for Elizabeth's present, as well as her fubfe-

i56I. quent conduct towards Mary, we mu.ni not always confider her as

a Qeen, we must sometimes regard her as a woman.

ELIZABETH, though no stranger to Mary's difficulties with re-

sped to the treaty, continued to urge her, by repeated applications,
to ratify it ". Mary, under various pretences, frill contrived to gain
time, and to elude the request. But while the one Queen folli-
cited with persevering importunity, and the other evaded with art-
ful delay, they both fiudied an extreme politeness of behaviour, and
loaded each other with professions of sisterly love, with reciprocal
declarations of unchangeable esteem and amity.

F.ize:h r- IT was not long before Mary was convinced, that, among Princes,
fulfs xiMy a there expressions of friendship are commonly far distant from the

heart. In failing from France to Scotland, the course lies along
the English coast. In order to be safe from the insults of the Eng-
liih fleet, or in cafe of tempestuous weather, to secure a retreat il
the harbours of that kingdom, Mary sent M. D'Oyfel 'to demand
of Elizabeth a safe conduct during her voyage. This request,
which decency alone obliged one Prince to grant to another, Eli.
zabeth rejedted, in such a manner, as gave rife to no flight suspicion
of a design, either to obfiruc the pffaige, or to intercept the person
of the Scottifi Queen ~.

T-IS ungenerous behaviour of Elizabeth filled Mary with indig-

MI ary bel irs
her voage. nation, but did not retard her departure from France. She was

< Keith, 157, i6c, &c. t Ibid. 17r. Carmdcn. Sec Append. N0. VI.

3 accom-

-accompanied to Calais, the place where mhe embarked, in a manner BOOK III.
suitable to her dignity, as the Queen of two powerful kingdoms. 6
Six'Princes of Lorrain her uncles, with many of the mol. eminent
among the French nobles, were in her retinue. Catherine, who
secretly rejoiced at her departure, graced it with every circum-
flance of magnificence rnd refpea. After bidding adieu to her
mourning attendants, with a fad heart, and eyes bathed in tears, Mary
left that kingdom, the short, but only scene of her life, in which
fortune fmiiled upon her. While the French coast continued in
fight, she intently gazed upon it, and musing, in a thoughtful
posture, on that height of fortune whence she had fallen, and pre-
faging, perhaps, the disasters and calamities which imbittered the
remainder of her days, The sighed often, and cried out " Farewel
" France ! Farewel beloved country, which I fiall never more be-
" hold !" Even when the darkness of the night had hid the land
from her view, /he would neither retire to the cabin, nor tafle food,
but commanding a couch to be placed on the deck, She there
waited the return of day, with the utmost impatience. Fortune
soothed her on this occasion ; the galley made little way during the
night. In the morning, the coast of France was fRill within fight,
and ihe continued to feed her melancholy with the profped; and
as long as her eyes could diflinguifh it, to' utter the fame tender
expressions of regret *. At last a brisk gale arose, by the favour
of which for some days, and afterward under the covert of a thick
fog, Mary escaped the English fleet, which lay in wait to inter-
cept her ; and on the 1 9th of Auguil, after an absence of near Arrives in
thirteen years, landed safely at Lcith in her native kingdom. Scotland.

* Brantome, 483. He himself was in the fame galley with the Queen.
1- Goodal. vol. i. I75. Cafteln. 455. M
VOL. I. I. ; G g ,
' *MARY

Th. *,. ,g

BooK III. MARY was received by her fubjetcs with shouts and acclama.

T56 I tions of joy, and with every demonstration of welcome and re-

gard. But as her arrival was unexpected, and no suitable prepara-
tion had been made for it, they could not, with their utmost es-
forts, hide from her the poverty of the country, and were obliged
to condut her to the palace of Holyrood-houfe with little pomp,
The Queen, accustomed from her infancy to the utmost splendor
and magnificence, and fond of them, as was natural at her age,
could not help observing the change in her situation, and seemed to
be deeply affeced with it %

Stateof the NEVER did any Prince ascend the throne at a junture which
kingdom at
thattime. called for more wisdom in council, or more courage and steadiness

in ation. The rage of religious controversy was still unabated. The
memory of past oppression exasperated the Protestants ; the smart
of recent injuries rendered the Papists desperate; both were zeal
lous, fierce, and irreconcileable. The absence of their Sovereign
had accustomed the nobles to independency;, and, during the late
commotions, they had acquired such an increase of wealth, as threw
great weight into the scale of aristocracy, which flood not in need
of any accession of power. The kingdom had long been under
the government of Regents, who exercised a delegated jurifdic-
tion, attended with little authority, and which inspired no reverence.
A slate of pure anarchy had prevailed for the two last years, with-
out a Regent, without a supreme council, without the power, or
even the form of a regular government+. A licentious spirit, un-
acquainted with subordination, and disdaining the restraints of law
and juflice, had spread among all'ranks of men. The influence of
France, the antient ally of the kingdom, was withdrawn or despised.

The.
l Brant. 484. : Keith, /ppend. 9.

/

The Englifl, of enemies become confederates, had grown into BOOK 1l.
confidence with the nation, and had gained an. ascendant over all its 1561.
councils. The Scottish Monarchs did not derive more splendor or
power from the friendlhip of the former, than they had reason to
dread injury and diminution from the interposition of the latter.
Every consideration, whether-of iitereft, or of felf-prefervation, ob-
liged Elizabeth to depress the royal authority in Scotland, and to
create the Prince perpetual difficulties, by fomenting the spirit of
disaffection among the people.

IN this posture were the affairs of Scotland, when the admini-

ftration fell into the hands of a young Qeen, not nineteen years
of age, unacquainted with the manners and laws of her country, a
stranger to her fubjeas, without experience, without allies, and al-
most without a freind.

ON the other hand, in Mary's situation we find some circume

fiances, which, though they did not ballance these disadvantages,
contributed, however, to alleviate them; and, with skillful ma-
nagement might have produced great effects. Her fubjeds, unac-
customed so long to the residence of their Prince, were not only
dazzled by the novelty and splendor of the royal pretence, but in-
spired with awe and reverence. Besides the places of power and
profit bestowed by the favour of a Prince, his protection, his fami-
liarity, and even his smiles, confer honour and win the hearts of meno
From all corners of the kingdom, the nobles crowded to testify their
duty and affetion to their Sovereign, and studied, by every art,
to wipe out the memory of past mifcondua, and to lay in a tlock
of future merit. The amusements and gaiety of her court, which
was filled with the most accomplifled of the Freneh nobility, who

Gg z had

Booi III. had attended her, began to soften and to polifl the rude manners

156 I. of the nation. Mary herself possessed many of there qualifications,

which raise affetion, and procure esteem. The beauty and grace-
fulness of her person drew universal admiration, the elegance and
politeness of her manners commanded general refpea. To all the
charms of her own sex, she added many of the accomplishments
of the other. The progress she had made in all the Arts and Sci-
ences, which were then efleemed necessary or ornamental, was far
beyond what is commonly attained by Princes. And all her other
qualities were rendered more agreeable by a courteous affability,
which, without leifening the dignity of a Prince, steals on the hearts
of fubjeds with a bewitching insinuation.

FROM these circumfiances, notwithfianding the threatening as-

pee of affairs at Mary's return into Scotland, notwithflanding the
clouds which gathered on every hand, a political observer would
have predited a very different issue of her reign; and whatever fud-
den gusts of fation he might have expeced, he would never have
dreaded the defirudive violence of that storm which followed.

WHILE all parties were contending who should discover the molf

dutiful attachment to the Queen, the zealous and impatient spirit of
the age broke out in a remarkable instance. On the Sunday after
her arrival, the Queen commanded mass to be celebrated in the
chapel of her palace. The first rumour of this occasioned a secret
murmuring among the Protestants who attended the court; com-
plaints and threatenings soon followed. The servants belonging to the
chapel were insulted and abused; and, if the prior of St. Andrew's
had not seasonably interposed, the rioters might have proceeded to
the utmofl excesses *.

* Knox, 284.

IT is impossible, at this distance. of time, and under circumstances Boo.K IlL.

so very different, to conceive the violence of that zeal against Pope- 56.
ry, which then poifeffed the nation. Every initance of condefcen-
sion to the Papifls was esteemed an adc of apolfacy, and the tolera-
tion of a single mass pronounced to be more formidable to the na-
tion than the invasion of ten thousand armed men *. Under'the-
influence of these opinions, many Protestants would have ventured
to go dangerous lengths; and, without attempting to convince their
Sovereign by argument, or to reclaim her by indulgence, would:
have abruptly denied her the liberty of worshipping God in that-
manner, which alone she thought acceptable to him. But the Prior
of St. Andrew's, and other leaders of the party, not only refrained
this impetuous spirit; but, in spite of the murmurs of the people,
and the exclamations of the 'preachers, obtained for the Queen and
her dometlics the unditfurbed exercise of the Catholic religion. Near
an hundred years after this period, when the violence of religious.
animofities had begun to subside, when time and the progress of
learning had inlarged the views of the human mind, an English
house of Commons refused to indulge the wife of their Sovereign
in the private use of the mass. The Protestant leaders deserve,. on.
this occasion, the praise both of wisdom and of moderation for con-
duc so different. But,. at the fame time, whoever reflects upon
the encroaching and sanguinary spirit of Popery, will be far from
treating the fears and caution of the more zealous Reformers as al-
together imaginary, and destitute of any real foundation,.

THE Protestants, however, by this compliance withthe iQueenrs
prejudices, obtained a proclamation highly favourable to their reli-

* Knox, 287.

5 gibn.

BooK III. gion. The Reformed dotrine, though efablifhed -all over the

^'V"~ J kingdom, had never received the countenance or fantiaon of .royal
August 25. authority. On this occasion, the Queen declared .any attempt to-

wards an alteration or subversion of it, to be a capital crime *.

She employs THE Queen, conformable to the plan which had-been concerted
only Prote- in France, committed the adminiifration of affairs entirely to Pro-
Itants in the
adminiftra- -tefants. Her council was filled with the molt eminent persons of
uton. that party; not a tingle Papist was admitted into any degree of con-

fidence t. The Prior of St. Andrew's and Maitland of Lething-
ton seemed to hold the first place in the-Queen's affection, and pof-
sessed all the power and reputation of favourite Ministers. Her choice
could not have fallen upon persons more acceptable to her people.
And, by their prudent advice, Mary condudted herself with so
much moderation, and deference to the sentiments of the nation,
as could not fail of gaining the afferion of her fubjeds +, the firm-
eft foundation of a Prince's power, and the only genuine source
of his happiness and glory.

Attempts to A CORDIAL reconcilement with Elizabeth was another objec of
gain Eliza- great importance to Mary; and though hfe seems to have had it
beths favour. o

much at heart, in the beginning of her adminilration, to accom-
plifl such a defireable conjunction, yet many events occurred to
widen, rather than to close the breach. The formal offices of friend-
ship, however, are seldom neglected among Princes, and Elizabeth,
who had attempted so openly to obltrut the Queen's voyage into
Scotland, did not fail, a few days after her arrival, to command
Randolph to congratulate her safe return. Mary, that she might

Keith, 504. % Knox, 285. t Lefly, 235.

be on equal terms with her, sent Maitland to the English court, BOOK III.
with many ceremonious expreffions.of regard for Elizabeth*. Both 5
the Ambassadors were received with the utmost civility; and, on
each fide, the profeflions. of kindness, as they were made with little
sincerity, were listened to. with proportional credits

BO'TH were intrusted, however, with something more than mere

matter of ceremony. Randolph urged Mary, with freli importu-
nity, to ratify the treaty of Edinburgh. Maitland endeavoured to
amuse Elizabeth, by apologizing for the dilatory conduct of his
Mistress with regard to.that point. The multiplicity of public as-
fairs since her arrival in Scotland, the importance of the queflion in.
dispute, and the absence of many noblemen, with whom she was,
obliged in decency to consult,. were the pretences offered in excuse
for her conduct; the real causes of it were those, which have already
been mentioned. But in order to extricate herself out of these
difficulties, into which the treaty of Edinburgh.had ted her, Nfary
was brought to yield. a point, which formerly The. eemed' deter-
mined never to give up. She inftruEted Maitland to signify her
willinglefs to disclaim any right to the crown of England, during
the life of Elizabeth, and the lives of her posterity; if, in failure
of there, she were declared next heir by ad of parliament j-.

REASONABLE as this proposal might appear to Mary, who there-

by precluded herself from disturbing Elizabeth's poifeffion of the
throne, nothing could be more inconsistent with Elizabeth's inte-'
reft, or more contraditory to a passion, which predominiated in the
character of that Princess. Notwithstanding all the great qualities

Keith,. 18z, &c. *. Camden, 387. Buch. 329,

2. which

BooK III. which threw such luitre on her reign, we may observe, that (he was

·1 tinindured with a jealousy of her right to the Crown, which often

betrayed her into mean and ungenerous adions. The peculiarity
of her situation heightened, no doubt, and increased, but did not
infuse this passion. It descended to her from Henry VII. her grand-
father, whom, in several features of his character, the nearly refem-
bled. Like him (fle suffered the title by which she held the Crown
to remain ambiguous and controverted, rather than submit it to par-
liamentary discussion, or derive any addition to her right, from
such authority. Like him, The observed every pretender to the
succession, not only with that attention, which prudence prescribes;
but with that aversion which suspicion inspires. The present un-
certainty with regard to the right of fucceflion, operated for Eliza-
beth's advantage, both on her fubjedts, and on her rivals. Among
the former, every lover of his country regarded her life as the great
security of the national tranquillity; and chore rather to acknow-
ledge a title which was dubious, than search for one that was un-
known. The latter, while nothing was decided, were held in de-
pendence, and obliged to court her. The manner in which she re-
ceived this ill-timed proposal of the Scotifh Queen, was no other
than might have been expeted. She rejeaed it in a peremptory tone,
with many expressions of a resolution never to permit a point of so
much delicacy to be touched.
Septcmber ri ABOUT this time, the Queen made her public entry into Edin-

burgh with great pomp. Nothing was negleded, which could
express the duty and affedionl of the citizens towards their Sove-
reign. But amidst these demonifrations of regard, the genius and
sentiments of the nation discovered themselves, in a circumitance,
which, though inconsiderable, ought not to be overlooked. As it

was

was the mode of the times to exhibit many pageants at every public BoOK Il.
solemnity; on this occasion, most of these were contrived to berepre- 76i
fentations of the vengeance which the Almighty hath inflicted upon
idolaters *. Even while they itudied to amuse and to flatter the
Queen, her fubjets could not refrain from testifying their abhor-
rence of that religion which she professed.

To restore the regular adminifsration ofjuftice, and to reform the Refirains the

, licence f the

internal police of the country, became the next object of the Queen's borderes.
care. The laws enacted for preservation of public order, and the
security of private property, were nearly the fame in Scotland, as
in every other civilized country. But the nature of the Scottish
constitution, the impotence of regal authority, the exorbitant power
of the nobles, the violence of faction, and the fierce manners of
the people, rendered the execution of these laws feeble, disorder-
ly, and partial. In the counties which border on England, this
defect was most apparent; and the consequences of it most fen-
sibly felt. The inhabitants, strangers to industry, averse from la-
bour, and unacquainted with the arts of peace, subsisted intirely
by spoil and pillage, and being confederated in septs or clans, com-
mitted these excesses not only with impunity, but even with ho-
nour. During the unsettled state of the kingdom from the death
of James V. this dangerous licence had grown to an unusual height;
and the inroads and rapine of those freebooters were become no
less intolerable! to their own countrymen, than to the Englifl.
To restrain and punifl these outrages, was an action equally
popular in both kingdoms. The Prior of St. Andrew's was
the person chosen for -this important fcrvice, and extraordi-

' Keith, 189.
VOL. I. H h nary

BOOiK II. nary powers, together with the title of the Qeen's lieutenant,

"-"- were vefied in hit for this purpose.
1561,

NOTHING can be more furprfing to men, accuflomed to re-

gular 'gvetrnment, than the preparations made on this occasion.
They were such as might be expeced in the rudest and most inm-
perfed state of society. The freeholders of eleven several coun-
ties, with all their followers completely armed, were summoned to
aflift the Lieutenant in the discharge of his office. Every thing
'resembled a military expedition, rather than the progress of a court
of jutice -. The Prior executed his commission with such vigour
and prudence, as acquired him a great increase of reputation and
popularity among his countrymen. Numbers of the banditti sus-
sered the punishment due to their crimes; and, by the impartial
and rigorous administration of justice, order and tranquillity were
restored to that part of the kingdom.

The Papists DURIN G the absence of the Prior ,of St. Andrew's, the leaders
attempt, in
vain, to get of thePopifih faction seem to have taken some steps towards infi-
into favour
with her. nuating themselves into the Queen's favour and confidence -. But

the Archbishop of St Andrew's, the most remarkable person in the
party for abilities and political'addrefs, was received with little favour
at court; and whatever secret partiality the Queen might have to-
Wards thdfe who professed the fame religion with herlfelf, she dif-
covered no inclination, at that time, to take the adiniiftration of
;affairs out of tlhoe hands, to which she had already commaittedt t.

THIE cold reception of the Archbifhopiof St. Andrew's was owing
to his connction with the house of Hamilton from which the

X Keith, 198, t Ibid, 2,o3.

Queea

Queen was much alienated. The Duke of Guise and the Cardinal BOOK III.
could never forgive the zeal, with which the Duke of Chatelhe- ^r
rault and his son the Earl of Arran had espoused the cause of the
Congregation. Princes seldom view their fucceIfors without jealousy
and distrust. The Prior of St. Andrew's, perhaps, dreaded the
Duke as a rival in power. All there causes concurred in infusing
into the Queen's mind an aversion for that family. The Duke,
indulging his love of retirement, lived at a distance from courts
without taking pains to insinuate himself into favour. And
though the Earl of Arran openly aspired to marry the Queen, he,
'by a moRt unpardonable aft of imprudence, was the only noble-
man of diffintion who opposed Mary's enjoying the exercise of
her religion; and by rashly entering a public proteflation against it,
entirely forfeited 'her favour *. At the fame time, the fordid parsi-
mony of his father obliged him either to hide himself in some re-
tirement, or to appear in a manner unbecoming his dignity as firIt
Prince of the blood, or his high pretensions as suitor to the Queen f.
His love, inflamed by disappointment, and his impatience, exafpe-
rated by neglect, preyed gradually on his reason; and, after many
extravagancies, broke out at lat in ungovernable frenzy.

TOWARIS the end of the year, a Convention of Efates was held Decemb. 20.

chiefly on account of ecclefiaiftcal affairs. The assembly of the
church, which fat at the fame time, presented a petition, contain-
ing many demands with refpeat to the suppressing of Popery, the
encouraging the Proteftantreligion, and-the providing for the main-
tenance of the clergy T. The last was a matter of great impor-
tance, and the -feps taken towards it.deferve to be traced.
* Kcith, ,.or, 204.. Knox, 286. .- Keith, ,x96i* , Ibid. 210.

Ht h 2 THOUGHI

BOOK HI. - THOUG H the number of Protestant preachers was now confi-

ó-J dderably increased, many more were till wanted, in every corner of

1 5,6 i.

A new regu-the kingdom. No legal provision having been made for them,
lation con-

erning the they had hitherto drawn a scanty and precarious subsistence from

revenues of the benevolence of their people. To susser the Ministers of an
the church.

eur ablified church to continue in this itate of indigence and depen-
dence, was an indecency equally repugnant to the principles of reli-
gion, and to the maxims of found policy; and would !have. jufti-
fled all the imputations of avarice, with which the Reformation
was then loaded by its enemies. The revenues of the Popish
church were the only fund, which could be employed for their
relief; but during the three last years, the fRate of these was great-
ly altered. A great majority of Abbots, Priors, and other heads
of religious houses, had, either from.a sense of duty, or from views
of interef, renounced the errors of Popery; and, notwithstanding
this change in their sentiments, they retained their antient revenues.
Almost the whole order of Biflops, and several of the other dignita-
ries, still adhered to the Romifi superstition: and though debarred
from every spiritual funcion, continued to enjoy the temporalities
of their benefices. Some laymen, especially those who had been
active in promoting the Reformation, had, under various pretences,
and amid' the licence of civil wars,, got into their hands poffeflions,
which belonged to the church. And thus, before any part of the
ancient ecclesiastical revenues could be applied towards the main-
tenance of the Protestant Ministers, many different interests were
to be adjusted ; many claims to be examined ;, and the prejudices
and passions of the two contending parties required the application
of a delicate hand. After much contention, the following plan was
approved by a majority of voices, and acquiesced in even by the Po-
.pifli clergy themselves. An exat account of the value of eccle-

W ~i Ca

fiaftical benefices throughout the kingdom was appointed to be BOOK III.
taken. The present incumbents, to whatever party they adhered, i56i
were.allowed to keep pofleffion: two thirds of their whole reve-
nue were reserved for their own use, the remainder was annexed
to the Crown;:, and Out of that, the Qeen undertook to assign a
sufficient maintenance for the Protestant clergy *.

As most of the Bifhdps and several of the other dignitaries were

still firmly attached: to the Popish religion, the .extirpation of the
whole order, rather than an aa of such extraordinary indulgence,
might have been expeted from the zeal of the preachers, and from
the spirit which had hitherto animated the nation. But, on this
occasion, other principles obftrudted the operation of those, which
were purely religious. Zeal for liberty, and the love of wealth,
two passions extremely opposite, concurred in determining the Pro-
teflant leadersto fall in with this plan, which deviated so manifestly
from the niaxims, by which they had hitherto regulated their con-
dudte ''. . ...-

Ir the Reformers had been allowed to act without controul

and to level all difinAions in the church, the immense revenues
annexed to ecclesiastical dignities could not, with any colour of
justice, have been retained by those in whose hands they now were
but mufft either have been distributed among the Protestant clergy,
who performed all religious offices, or muff have fallen to the Queen,
from the bounty of whofc ancestors, -the greater part of them was
originally derived. The former, however suitable to.tlle religious
spirit of many among the people, .was attended with manifold dai_

' Keitl, Append. 175. Knox, 94..

29 g-r.

Book III. ger. The Popish ecclesiastics had acquired a share in the national

56 pproperty, which far exceeded the proportion that was consistent

with the happiness of the kingdom; and the nobles were deter-
mined to guard against this evil, by preventing those vast posses-
sions from ever returning into the hands'of the church. Nor was
the latter, which exposed the constitution to more imminentha-
zard, to be avoided with less care. Even that circumscribed pre-
rogative, which the Scottish Kings possessed, was the object of jea-
lousy to the nobles. If they had allowed the. Crown to seize the
spoils of the church, such an inrceafe of power must have fol,
lowed that accession of property, as would have raised the royal au-
thority above controul, and have rendered the most limited Prince
in Europe the most absolute and independent. The reign of
Henry VIII. presented a recent and alarming example of this nature.
The wealth which flowed in upon that Prince, from the fuppref-
sion of the -monasteries, not only changed the maxims of his go-
vernment, but the temper of his mind-; and he who had former-
ly submitted to his Parliaments, and courted his people, dictated,.
from that time, to the former, with intolerable insolence; and
tyrannized over the latter with unprecedented severity. And if his
policy had not been:extremely short-sighted, if he had not fquan-
dered what he acquired, with a profusion equal to his rapacious-
-ness, and which defeated his ambition, he might have cftablifhed
'despotism. in England, on a basis so broad and Aftrong, as all the
efforts of the fubjeds would never have been able to shake. In Scot-
land, where the riches of the clergy bore as great a proportion to
the wealth of the kingdom, the acquisition of church-lands would
-have been of no less importance to the Crown, and no less fatal ,to
the aristocracy. The nobles, for this reason, guarded againit such

2 an

an increase of the royal power, and thereby secured their own BooK III.
independence. 1561.

AVARICE mingled itself with their concern for the interest of

(their order. The re-uniting the poifeffions of the church to the
Crown, or the beltowing them on the Protestant clergy, would
have been a fatal blow both to those nobles, who had, by fraud or
violence, seized part of these revenues, and to those Abbots and
Priors who had totally renounced their ecclesiastical characer. But
as the plan, which was proposed, gave some fandion to their ufur-
pations, they promoted it with their utmost influence. The popi(h
ecclesiastics, though the lopping off a third of their revenues was
by no means agreeable to them, consented, under their prefentcir-
cumfiances, to sacrifice a part of their possessions, in order to pur-
chafe the secure enjoyment of the remainder; and after deeming
the whole irrecoverably loft, they confidered whatever they could
retrieve as so much gain. Many of the ancient dignitaries were
men of noble birth; and as they no longer entertained hopes of
restoring the Popish religion, they wifled their own relations, rather
than the Crown, or the ProteRfant clergy, to be enriched with the
spoils of the church. They connived, for this reason, at the en-
croachments of the nobles; they even aided their avarice and vio-
lence ; they dealt Jout the patrimony of thehe church among their own
relations, and by granting feZs and perpetual leafes ,of lands and
tithes, gave, to the utmost of their power, )fonMe; colour of legal pof-
session, to twhat was formerly mere uftirpation. Many vestiges of
such alienations fill remain %. Tihe nobles, with the concurrence
of the incumbents, daily extended their encroachments, and gra-

* Keith, 5.07. Spotl. 175.

dually

Booi 111. dually flripped theeclefaftics of their richeftand mofl valuable pof.,

^^T^ feflions. Even that third part, which was given up in order to silence

the clamours of the Protestant clergy, and to be fbme equivalent to
the Crown for its claims, amounted to no considerable fum. The
thirds due by the more powerful nobles, efpeciaily by those who
had embraced the Reformation, were almost universally remitted.
Others, by producing fraudulent rentals ; by estimating the corn, and
other payments in kind, at an under value; and by the connivance
of collectors; greatly diminished the charge againfi themselves*:
and the nobles had much reason to be satisfied with a device which,
at so fmiall expence, secured to them such vast poffefflons.

The Prote- NOR were the Proteflant clergy considerable gainers by this new
Uant clergy no

, ; su
gainers by it regulation; they found it to be a more easy matter to kindle zeal,

than to extinguifhl avarice. Those very men, whom formerly they
had swayed with absolute authority, were now deaf to all their
remonfirances. The Prior of St. Andrew's, the Earl of Argyll,
the Earl of Morton, and Maitland, all the moil zealous leaders of
the Congregation, were appointed to assign, or, as it was called,- to
modify their stipends. An hundred merks Scottifl was the allowance
which their liberality afforded to the generality of Miniflers. To
a few three hundred merks were granted f[. About twenty-four
thousand pounds Scottish appears to have been the whole fum al-
lotted for the maintenance of a national church eftabliflhed by law,
and efseemed, throughout the kingdom, the true church of God 4.
Even this fum was paid with little exadnefs, and the Ministers were
kept in the fame poverty and dependance as formerly.

* Keith, Append. 188. Spots. 183. Knox, 301. :t Keith, Appcn. 188,

THE

THE gentleness of the Queen's administration, and the elegance Booc III.

of her court, had mitigated, in some degree, the ferocity of the i562,
nobles, and accustomed them to greater mildness and humanity ;Dilfenfions

among the

while, at the fame time, her presence and authority were a check nobles.
to their fatious and tumultuary spirit. But, as a state of order and
tranquillity was not natural to the feudal ariffocracy, it could not
be of long continuance; and this year became remarkable for the
most violent eruptions of intestine discord and animosity.

AMONG the great and independent nobility of Scotland, a Mo-

narch could possess little authority, and exercise no extensive or rigo-
rous jurifdiAion. The interfering of interest, the unsettled slate of
property, the frequency of public commotions, and the fierceness
of their own manners, sowed, arnong the great families, the feeds
of many quarrels and contentions. These, as we have already ob-
served, were decided not by law, but by violence. The offended
Baron, without having recourse to the Monarch, or acknowledging
his superior authority, assembled his own followers, and invaded
the lands of his rival in an hostile manner, Together with his
eflate and honours, every nobleman transmitted some hereditary
feud to his posterity, who were bound in honour to adopt and to
prosecute it with the fame inveterate rancour.

SUCH a dissention had fubfiited between the house of H-amiltol

and the Earl of Bothwell, and was heightened by mutual injuries
during the late commotions'*. Both the Earl of Arran and
Bothwell happening to be in waiting at the fame time, their

* Keith, 215.
VOL. T. ii follow-

BOoK III. followers quarrelled frequently in the fireets of Edinburgh, and
b'5ó' excited dangerous tumults in that city. At last, the mediation
1562.
February. of their friends, particularly of Knox, brought about a reconcile-

ment, but an unfortunate one to both these noblemen *.

A FEW days after, Arran came to Knox, and with the utmost

terror and confusion, confessed first to him, and then to the Prior
of St. Andrew's, that, in order to obtain the sole direction of as-
fairs, Bothwell and his kinsmen the Hamiltons, had conspired to
murder the Prior, Maitland, and the other favourites of the Queen.
The Duke of Chatelherault regarded the Prior as a rival, who had
supplanted him in the Queen's favour, and who filled that place at
the helm, which he imagined to be due to himself, as first Prince of
the blood. Bothwell, on account of the personal injuries which he
had received from the Prior during the late commotions, was no
less exasperated againif him. But 'whether he and the Hamiltons
had agreed to cement their new alliance, with the blood of their
common enemy, or whether the conspiracy existed only in the fran-
tic and disordered imagination of the Earl of Arran, it is impossible,
amidst the contradiction of hiltorians, and the defedivenefs of re-
cords, positively to determine. Among men inflamed with resent-
ment, and impatient for revenge, rash expressions might be uttered,
and violent and criminal expedients proposed; and on that founda-
tion, Arran's diltempered fancy might rear the whole fuperfiruc-
ture of a conspiracy. All the persons accused, denied their guilt
with the utmost confidence. But the known characters of the men,
and the violent spirit of the age, added greatly to the probability
of the accusation, and abundantly justify the conduct of the Queen's

* Knox, 305.

Mini-

3

Miniflers, who confined Bothwell, Arran, and a few of the ring-BOOK III.
leaders, in separate prisons, and obliged the Duke to surrender the ó'
firong castle of Dunbarton, which he had held ever since the time
of his resigning the Office of Regent *.

THE designs of the Earl of Huntly against the Prior of St. An-The Earl of

Huntly's en-
drew's were deeper laid, and produced more memorable and more n.iy to the

Queen's Mi.-

tragical events. George Gordon Earl of Huntly, having been oneniites.
of the nobles who conspired against James III. and who raised his
son James IV. to the throne, enjoyed a great share in the confi-
dence of that generous Prince -. By his bounty, great accessions of
wealth and power were added to a family, already opulent and power-
ful. On the death of that Monarch, Alexander the next Earl, be-
ing appointed Lord Lieutenant of all the counties beyond Forth,
left the other nobles to contend fcr offices at court; and retiring
to the north, where his estate and influence lay, resided there, in a
kind of princely independence. The Chieftains in that part of the
kingdom dreaded the growing dominion of such a dangerous neigh-
bour, but were unable to prevent his encroachments. Some of
his rivals he secretly undermined, others he subdued by open force.
His estate far exceeded that of any other subjed, and hisfupe-io-
rities and jurifdidtions extended over many of the northern coun_
ties. With power and possessions so immense, under two long and
feeble minorities, and amidst the shock of civil commotions, the Earls
of Huntly might have indulged the mofi elevated hopes. But happily
for the Crown, an active and enterprising spirit was not the cha-
radteriftic of that family, and whatever objet their ambition might
have in view, they chore rather to acquire it by political address
than to seize it openly, and by force of arms.

* Knox, 307, 308. Kcitli, 202. t Crawf. Officers of State, 56.

I i2 T 1- r

BOOK III. THE condua of George the present Earl, during the late commo-

Z 56 2^ tions, had been perfealy suitable to the character of the family, in that
1562.

age; dubious, variable, and crafty. While the success of theLords of
the Congregation was uncertain, he assisted the Queen Regent in
her attempts to crush them. When their Affairs put on a better
atlect, he pretended to join them, but never heartily favoured their
caule. He was courted and feared by each of the contending
parties; both connived at his encroachments in the north; and, by
artitice and force, which he well knew how to employ alternately,
and in their proper places, he added every day to the exorbitant
power and wealth which he possessed.

HE observed the growing reputation and authority of the Prior

of St. Andrew's, with the utmost jealousy and concern, and con-
fidered him as a rival who had engrossed that share in the Queen's
confidence, to which his own zeal for the Popish religion seemed
to give him a preferable title. Personal injuries soon increased
the misunderstanding occasioned by rivalihip in power. The Queen
having determined to reward the services of the Prior of St. An-
drew's, by creating him an Earl, she made choice of Mar, as the
place whence he should take his title; and, that he might be bet-
ter able to support his new honour, bellowed upon him, at the
February lo fame time, the lands of that name. These were part of the royal

demesnes -, but the Earls of Huntly had been permitted, for feve-
ral years, to keep possession of them -. On this occasion, the
Earl not only complained, with some reason, of the loss which he
sustained, but had real cause to be alarmed at the intrusion of a
formidable neighbour into the heart of his territories, who might

* Crawf. Peer. 297. ' t Buch. 334.

be able to rival his power, and excite his oppressed vassals to shake BooK llI.
off his yoke.

1562.

AN incident, which happened soon after, eicreafed and confirmed June 27.

Huntly's suspicions. Sir John Gordon, his third son, and Lord
Ogilvie had a dispute about the property of an estate. This dif-
pute became a deadly quarrel. They happened unfortunately to
meet in the streets of Edinburgh, and being both attended with
armed followers, a scuffle ensued, in which Lord Ogilvie was dan-
geroufly wounded by Sir John. The Magistrates seized both the
offenders, and the Queen commanded them to be firidly confined.
Under any regular government, such a breach of public peace and
order would expose the person offending, to certain punishment.
At this time, some severity was neceflary, in order to vindicate the
Queen's authority from an insult, the mofl henious which had been
offered to it, since her return into Scotland. But in an age accuf-
tomed to licence and anarchy, even this moderate exertion of her
power in ordering them to be kept in custody, was deemed an ac
of intolerable rigour; and the friends of each party began to con-
vene their vaifals and dependants, in order to overawe, or to fruf-
trate the decisions of juflice*. Mean while, Gordon made his
escape out of prison, and flying into Aberdeenfhire, complained
loudly of the indignity with which he had been treated. And as
all the Queen's actions were, at this juncture, imputed to the Earl
of Mar, this added not a little to the resentment, which Hluntly
had conceived against that nobleman.

AT the very tite when these pafions fermented, with the utmost
violence, in the minds of the Earl of Huntly and his family, the Auguf l

* Keith, 223.

Queell

BooK III. Queen happened to set out on a progress into the northern parts of
a'ó'^' the kingdom. She was attended by the Earls of Mar and Mor-

ton, Maitland, and other leaders of that party. The prefenee of
the Queen, in a country where no name greater than the Earl of
Huntly's had been heard of, and no power superior to his had been
exercised, for many years, was an event, of itself, abundantly mor-
tifying to that haughty nobleman. But while the Queen was en-
tirely under the direaion of Mar, all her adtions were more apt to
be misrepresented, and construed into injuries; and a thousand cir-
cumnftances could not but occur to awaken Huntly'sjealoufy, to of-
fend his pride, and to inflame his resentment. Amidst the agitations
os'so many violent passions, some eruption was unavoidable,

ON Mary's arrival in the north, Huntly employed his wife, a

woman capable of executing the commiflion with abundance of dex-
terity, to sooth the Queen, and to intercede for pardon to their son.
But the Queen peremptorily required, that he flould again deliver
himself into the hands of justice, and rely on her clemency. Gor-
don was persuaded to do so; and being enjoined by the Queen to
enter himself prisoner in the castle of Stirling, he promised like-
wife to obey that command. Lord Erskine, Mar's uncle, was,
at that time, Governor of this fort. The Queen's severity, and the
place in which fl1e appointed Gordon to be confined, were inter-
preted to be new marks of Mar's rancour, and augmented the ha-
tred of the Gordons againtt him.
September i. MEAN time, Sir John Gordon let out towards Stirling; but in-

flead of performing his promise to the Queen, made his escape
from his guards, and returned to take the command of his follow-
ers, who were riling in arms, all over the north. These were

deflincd

defined to second and improve the blow, by which his father pro- BooR III.
posed, secretly, and at once, to cut off Mar, Morton, and Mait- ' 2'
land, his principal adversaries. The time and place for perpetrating
this horrid deed were frequently appointed; but the executing of it
was wonderfully prevented, by some of those unforeseen accidents,
which so often occur to disconcert the schemes, and to intimidate
the hearts of affaflins *. His own house at Strathbogie was the last
and moes convenient scene, appointed for committing the intended
violence. But, on her journey thither, the Queen heard of young
Gordon's flight and rebellion, and refuting, in the first transports
of her indignation, to enter under the father's roof, by that fortu-
nate expression of her resentment, saved her Ministers from una-
voidable destruction -.

THE ill success of these efforts of private revenge precipitated Takes arms
Huntly into open rebellion. As the Queen was entirely under the against the

Queen.

direcion of his rivals, it was impossible to work their ruin, without
violating the allegiance which he owed his Sovereign. On her ar-
rival at Inverness, the commanding officer in the cattle, by Hunt-
ly's order, shut the gates against her. Mary was obliged to lodge
in the town, which was open and defenceless; but this, too, was
quickly surrounded by a multitude of the Earl's followers +. The
utmost consternation seized the Queen, who was attended by a
very slender train. She every moment expected the approach of the
rebels, and some ships were already ordered into the river to fe-
cure her escape. The loyalty of the Monroes, Frazers, Mackin-
to(hes, and tome neighbouring clans, who took arms in her de-
fence, saved her from this danger. By their assistance, fle even

* Keith, 230. '- Knox, 318. $ Crawf. Officers of State, 87, 88.

forced

BOOK III. forced the caffle to surrender, and inflided on the Governor the

i 562. punishment which his insolence deserved.

THIS open aa of disobedience was the occasion of a measure

more galling to Huntly than any the Queen had hitherto taken.
Lord Erskine, having pretended a right to the earldom of Mar,
Stewart resigned it in his favour; and at the fame time Mary con-
ferred upon him the title of Earl of Murray, with the estate
annexed to that dignity, which had been in the poifeffion of the
Earl of Huntly since the year I548. From this he concluded
that his family was devoted to deftrution; and dreading to be
stripped, gradually, of those poifeffions, which, in reward of their
services, the gratitude of the Crown had bestowed on himself, or
his ancestors, he no longer disguised his intentions, but, in defiance
of the Queen's proclamation, openly took arms. Instead of yield-
ing those places of strength, which Mary required him to furren-
der, his followers dispersed or cut in pieces the parties which she
dispatched to take possession of them -; and he himself, advancing
with a considerable body of men towards Aberdeen, to which place
the Queen was now returned, filled her small court with the utmost
consternation. Murray had only a handful of men in whom he could
confide+. In order to form the appearance of an army, he was
obliged to call in the assistance of the neighbouring Barons; but as
most of there either favoured Huntly's designs, or flood in aweof
his power, from them no cordial or effecual service could be ex-
peced,

*: Crawf.Pcecr. 359. 4 Knox, 319. : Kcith, 230.

WITH
3

WITH these troops, Murray, who could gain nothing by de-BooK II.

lay, marched briskly towards the enemy. He found them at 562
Corrichie, posted to great advantage; he commanded his north-oaober 28.
ern associates instantly to begin the attack; but on the first motion
of the enemy, they treacherously turned their backs; and Hunt-
ly's followers, throwing aside their spears, and breaking their ranks,
drew their swords, and rushed forward to the pursuit. It wasHeisdefeated

by the Earl of

then, that Murray gave proof both of Rteady courage, and of pru- Murray.
dent condut. He stood immoveable, on a rising ground, with the
small but trusty body of his adherents, who presenting their spears
to the enemy, received them with a determined resolution, which
they little expecEed. The Highland broad sword is not a weapon
fit to encounter the Scotch' spear. In every civil commotion, the
superiority of the latter has been evident, and has always decided
the contef. On this occasion, the irregular attack of Huntly's
troops was easily repulsed by Murray's firm battalion. Before they
recovered from the confusion occasioned by this unforeseen resist-
ance, those who had begun the flight, willing to regain their cre-
dit with the victorious party, fell upon them, and compleated the
rout. Huntly himself, who was extremely corpulent, was trode
to death in the pursuit. His sons, Sir John and Adam, were taken,
and Murray returned in triumph to Aberdeen with his prisoners.

THEr trial of men taken in adual rebellion againfl their Sove-

vereign was extremely short. Three days after the battle, Sir
John Gordon was beheaded at Aberdeen. His brother Adam
was pardoned on account of his youth. Lord Gordon, who had
been privy to his father's designs, was seized in the south, and up-
on trial found guilty of treason ; but, through the Queen's clemency,
the punishment was remitted. The sirs Parliament proceeded againfl

Vo L. I. K k this

BOOK III. this great family, with the utmost rigour of the law, and reduced

i562 their power and fortune to the lowest ebb .
1562.

As

- This conspiracy of the Earl of Huntly is one of the most intricate and myC-

terious passages in the Scotch history. As it was a tranfacEioin purely domestic, and
in which the English were little interested, few original papers concerning it have
been found in Cecil's Collecion, the great florehoufe of evidence and information
with regard to the Affairs of this period.

Buchanan supposes Mary to have formed a design about this time, of destroying

Murray, and of employing the power of the Earl of Huntly for this purpose. But
his account of this whole tranfad-ion appears to be so void of truth, and even of
probability, as to deserve no serious examination. At that time, Mary wanted power,.
and seems to have had no, inclination to commit any aat of violence upon her bro-
ther.

Two other, hypotheses have been advanced, in order to explain this. matter.; but.
they appear to be equally removed from truth..

I. It cannot well. be conceived, that the Queen's journey to the north was, a.

scheme concerted by Murray, in order to ruin the Earl of Huntly. i. Huntly had
resided at court almost ever since the Queen's return. Keith I98. Append. 175,
&c. This was the proper place in which to have seized him. To attack him in
Aberdeenfhire, the feat of his power, and in the midit of his vasals, was a pro-
ject equally absurd and hazardous. 2.. The Queen was not accompanied with a
body of troops, capable of attempting any thing against Iluntly by violence.; her.
train was not more numerous, than was usual in times of greatest tranquillity, Keith,.
230. 3. There remain two original letters with regard to this conspiracy, one
from Randolph the English Resident, and another from Maitland, both direced
to Cecil. They talk of Huntly's measures as notoriously trcafonable. Randolph,
mentions his repeated attempts to assassinate Murray, &c. No hint is given of any
previous resolution, formed by Mary's Minifiers, to ruin Huntly and his family.
Had any such design ever existed, it was Randolph's duty to have discovered it;,
nor would Maitland have laboured to conceal it from the English Secretary. Keiths,
229, 232,.

II. T

As the fall of the Earl of Huntly is the most important event of BOOK IlI.

this year, it would have been improper to interrupt the narrative, 562.
by taking notice of lesser tranfadtions, which may now: be related
with equal propriety.

IN the beginning of summer, Mary, who was desirous of en- Aninterview

between Eli-

tering into more intimate correspondence and familiarity with Eli- zabeth and
zabeth, employed Maitland to desire a personal interview with her, poMed.a
somewhere in the north of England. As this proposal could not
be rejected with decency, the time, the place, and the circumflan-
ces of the meeting were instantly agreed- upon. But Elizabeth was
prudent enough not to admit into her kingdom, a rival, who
outshone herself, so far, in beauty, and gracefulness of person; and
who excelled, so eminently, in all the arts of insinuation and ad-

II. To suppose that the Earl of Huntly had laid any plan for seizing the Queen,

and her Ministers, seems to be no less improbable. I. On the Queen's arrival
in the north, he laboured, in good earnest, to gain her favour, and to obtain a
pardon for his son. Knox, 318. 2. He met the Queen, first at Aberdeen, and
then at Rothemay, whither he would not have ventured to come, had he harboured
any such treasonable resolution. Knox, 318. 3. His conduEt was irresolute and wa-
vering, like that of a man disconcerted by an unforeseen danger, not like one execut-
ing a concerted plan. 4. The moRs considerable Persons of his plan submitted
.to the Queen, and found surety to obey her commands, Keith, 226. Had the
Earl been previously determined to rife in arms against the Queen, or to seize
her Ministers, it is probable he would have imparted it to his principal followers,
nor would they have deserted him in this manner.

For there reasons, we have, on the one hand, vindicated the Earl of Murray

from any deliberate intention of ruining the family of Gordon; and on the other
hand, we have imputed the violent conduc of the Earl of Huntly, to a sudden
flart of rcfcntmcnt, without charging him with any premeditated purpore of re-
bellion.

K k 2 dress

BOOK III. dress. Under pretence of being confined to London, by the attention
'"5ó2 which the was obliged to give to the civil wars in France, she put
I$62.

off the interview for that season*, and prevented her subje&s from
feeing the Scottish Qeen, the charms of whose appearance, and be-
haviour, flie envied, and had some reason to dread.
lne 2 . DURING this year, the Assembly of the church met twice. In

both these meetings, were exhibited many complaints of the poverty
and dependence of the church; and many murmurs against the
negligence or avarice of those, who had been appointed 'to collect,
and to distribute the small fund, appropriated for the maintenance
of preachers- '. A petition, craving redress of their grievances,
was presented to the Queen; but without any effed. There was
no reason to expea that Mary would discover any forwardness to
grant the requests offuch supplicants. And as her Ministers, though
all molt zealous Protestants, were themselves growing rich on the
inheritance of the church, they were equally regardless of the in-
digence and demands of their brethren.

3 (563. MARY had now continued above two years in a state of widow-
xNgociations hood. Her gentle administration had secured the hearts of her sub-
witn regard to
the Queen's jets, who were impatient for her marriage, and wished the Crown
marriage,

to descend in the right line from their ancient Monarchs. ,She her-
self was the most amiable woman of the age, and the fame of her
accomplishments, together with the favourable circumstance of
her having one kingdom already in her ypoiflion, and the pro-
fpe&: of mounting the 'throne of 'another, prompted many dif-
fercnt Princes to solicit an alliance so illustrious. Scotland, by
its situation, threw so much weight and power into whatever

* Kcith, 216. t Knox, 311, 323.

x. scale

scale it fell, that all Europe waited with solicitude for Mary's de- BOOK IlI
termination. And no event in that age excited flronger politi-
cal fears and jealousies; none interefied more deeply the passions of
several Princes, or gave rife to more contradicory intrigues, than
the marriage of the Scottish Queen.

She is folici-

THE Princes of the house of Austria remembered what vasts d by differ-

projects the French had founded on their former alliance with the ent Princes
Queen of Scots; and though the unexpeted death, first of Henry
and then of Francis, had hindered these from taking effect, yet if
Mary should again make choice of a husband among the French
Princes, the fame designs might be revived and prosecuted with
better success.

IN order to prevent this, the Emperorsentered into a negocia-BY the Arch-

tion with the Cardinal of Lorrain, who had proposed to marry the
Scottish Queen to the Archduke Charles,. Ferdinand's third son.
The matter was communicated to Mary .and Melvil, who, at that
time, attended the EleCtor Palatine, was commanded to inquire in-
to the character and. situation of the A.echduke *.

PHILIP II. though no less apprehenfive-of Mary's falling once nB Don Car,

los of Spain,

more into the hands of France, envied his uncle Ferdinand the
acquisition of so important a prize; and as his own insatiable am-
bition grasped at all the kingdom.s of Europe, 'he'employed his am-
bafnador at the French court, to solicit the'Princes of Lorrain in be...
half of his son Don Carlos, at that time, the heir of all the ex-
'tensive dominions, which belonged to the Spanifl mnonarchy J->

* Melv. 63, 65. Keith, 239. Sec Append. N° VII.
i Cafteln. 461. Acldit. dc Labor. 5oJ, '503.

CATHEI- 11 1 ,"

BooK III. CATHERINE of Medicis, on the other hand, dreaded the mar-
--'-" ' riage of the Scottish Queen with any of the Austrian Princes, which

6-

By the Dike;e would have added so much to the power and pretensions of that
of AIWju. ambitious race. Her jealousy of the Princes of Lorrain rendered

her no less averse from an alliance, which, by securing them the
protection of the Emperor or King of Spain, would give new bold-
ness to their enterprising spirit, and enable them to set the power
of the Crown, which they already rivalled, at open defiance: And
as lfie was afraid that these splendid proposals of the Austrian fa-
mily would dazzle the young Queen, she instantly dispatched Caf-
telnau into Scotland, to offer her in marriage the Duke of Anjou,
the brother of her former husband, who soon after mounted the
throne of France *.

iMary'sdelibe- MARY attentively weighed the pretensions of so many rivals.
rations con-
gernin it. The Archduke had little to recommend him, but his high birth.

The example of Henry VIII. was a warning against contracting a
marriage with the brother of her former husband; nor could ihe
bear the thoughts of appearing in France, in a rank inferior to that
which she had formerly held in that kingdom. She listened there-
fore, with partiality, to the Spanish propositions, and the profped
of such vast power and dominions flattered the ambition of a young
and aspiring Princess.

TH REE several circumitances, however, concurred to divert Mary
from any thoughts of a foreign alliance.

The firtt of these was the murder of her uncle the Duke of
Guise. The violence and ambition of that nobleman had involved

' Caftilnau. 46x.

his

his country in a civil war; which was conducted with furious ani-BooK Ill.
mofity, and various success. At lass the Duke laid siege to Orleans, 563
the bulwark of the Protestant cause; and he had reduced that city-
to the last extremity, when he was assassinated by the frantic zeal
of Poltrot. This blow proved fatal to the Queen of Scots. The
young Duke was a minor. And the Cardinal, though subtle and
intriguing, wanted that undaunted and enterprising courage, which
rendered the. ambition of his brother so formidable. Catherine, in,
stead of encouraging the ambition, or furthering the pretensions of
her daughter-in-law, took pleasure in mortifying the one,. and in.
disappointing the other. In this situation, and without such a pro-
tetor, it became necessary for Mary to contract her views, and to
proceed with caution; and whatever profped of advantage might
allure her, she could venture upon no dangerous. or doubtful mea.-
sure,.

THE second circumtfance, which weighed with Mary, was the The views of

opinion of the Queen of England. The marriage of Elizabethe

Scoti

Queen interefted-Elizabeth more deeply than any other Prince;
and she observed all her deliberations concerning it with the most
anxious attention. She herself seems early to have formed a refo-
lution of living unmarried, and (he discovered no finall inclination
to impose the fame law on the Queen of Scots. She had already.
experienced what use might be made of Mary's power and preten-.
sions, to invade her dominions, and to diflurb her poieffion. of the
Crown. The death of Francis 11, had happily delivered her from,
this danger, which flle determined to guard against for the future,
with the utmost care. And as the restless ambition of the Austrian
Princes, the avowed and bigotted patrons of the Catholic fuperfli-
tioon made her, in a particular manner, dread their neighbourhood,

'h.

BooK III. fle inRlruted Randolph, to remonstrate, in the f:rongeRt terms,

k-63. againfl any alliance with them; and to acquaint Mary, that as she

herself would confider such a match to be a breach of the perfornal
friendflsip, in which they were so happily united; so the English
nation would regard it, as the dissolution of that confederacy which
now fubfiRed between the two kingdoms. That, in order to pre-
serve their own religion and liberties, they would, in all probabi-
lity, take tome ftep prejudicial to her right of succession, which, as
The well knew, they neither wanted power nor pretences to invali-
date, and set aside. This threatening was accompanied with a
promise, but expressed in very ambiguous terms, that if Ma-
ry's choice of a husband should prove agreeable to the English
nation, Elizabeth would appoint proper persons to examine her title
to the succession, and, if well founded, command it to be publickly
recognized. She observed, however, a myflerious silence concern.
ing the person, on whom she wished the choice of theScottifi
Queen to fall. The revealing of this secret was reserved for some
future negociation. Mean while she threw out some obscure hints,
that a native of Britain, or one not of princely rank, would be her
safest and most inoffensive choice *. An advice offered with such
an air of superiority and command, mortified, no doubt, the pride
of the Scottish Queen. But, under her present circumtfances, fle
was obliged to bear this indignity. Destitute of all foreign afliflance,
and intent upon the English succession, the great obIjec of her
wishes and ambition, it became necessary to court a rival, whom,
without manifest imprudence, flhe could not venture to offend.

Trhl rclti- 'rlTE inclination of her own fubjecs was another, and not the
mentsofher least considerable circumstance, which called for Mary's attention
own fubjcdts.

* Keith, 24?., 245 .

at

at this conjuncture. They had been taught, by the fatal experi- BooK III.
ment of her former marriage, to dread an union with any great "

I563.

Prince, whose power might be employed to oppress their religion
and liberties. They trembled at the thoughts of a match with a
foreigner; and if the Crown should be strengthened by new domi-
nions, or alliances, they foresaw that the royal prerogative would
soon be tretched beyond its ancient and legal limits. Their eager-
ness to prevent this could scarce fail of throwing them into the arms
of England. Elizabeth would be ready to afford them her aid, to-
wards obftruAing a measure so disagreeable to herself. 'Twas easy
for them to seize the person of the Sovereign. By the affif-ance of
the Englifl fleet, they could render it difficult for any foreign Prince
to land in Scotland. The Roman Catholics, now an inconsiderable
party in the kingdom, and dispirited by the loss of the Earl of Hunt-
ly, could give no obftrution to their designs. To what violent ex-
tremes, the national abhorrence of a foreign yoke might have been
carried is manifest from the tranfadions both previous, and ftb-
sequent to the present period.

FOR there reasons, Mary laid aside, at that time, all thoughts of

a foreign alliance, and seemed willing to sacrifice her own ambition,
in order to remove the jealousies of Elizabeth, and to quiet the
fears of her own fubjeds.

THE Parliament met this year, for the firif time, since the A parliament

held,

Queen's return into Scotland. Mary's administration had hitherto My 26.
been extremely popular. Her Ministers possessed the confidence
of the nation. And, by consequence, the proceedings of that aflem-
bly were conduted with perfect unanimity. The grant of the earl-
dom of Murray to the Prior of St. Andrew's was confirmed: the

VOL. I. L 1 Earl

BooK III. Earl of Huntly, and several of his vaflals and dependants were at-

'^s"' tainted: the attainder against Kirkaldy of Grange, and some of

5 his accomplices in the murder of Cardinal Beatoun, was reversed*:

the aa of oblivion, mentioned in the treaty of Edinburgh, received;
the royal fan&ion. But Mary, who had determined never to ratify
that treaty, took care that this fancion flould not be deemed any
acknowledgment of its validity ; {he granted her consent merely in
condescension to the Lords in Parliament, who, on their knees, be-
fought her to allay the jealousies and apprehensions of her subjects,
by such a gracious law --.

Nothing de.- No attempt was made, in this Parliament, to procure the Queen's
termined with
regard to re- assent to the laws eflablifhing the Protestant religion. Her Mi-
ligion.

nifters, though zealous Proteflants themselves, were aware that:this
could not be urged without manifest danger and imprudence. She
had consented, through their influence, to tolerate and protec the
reformed dotrine. They had even prevailed on her to imprison
and prosecute the Archbishop of St. Andrew's, and Prior of Whit-
horn, for celebrating mass contrary to her proclamation +. Mary
however, was still pafionately devoted to the Roriffi fuperflition.
Though, from political motives, Mhe had granted a temporary pro-
tetion to opinions, which the disapproved, there were no grounds
to hope that fle would agree to eftabliflh them for perpetuity. The
moderation of those who professed it, was the belt method for re-
conciling the Queen to the Proteflant religion. Time might abate
her bigotry. Her prejudices might wear off gradually, and at last
/he might yield to the wishes of her people, what their importunity
or their violence could never have extorted. Many laws of import-

' Knox, 330. f Spotfw. 188. t Keith, 239.

ance

3

ance were to be proposed in Parliament, and to defeat all these, by BOOK II'
such a fruitless and ill-timed application to the Queen, would have 6
been equally injurious to individuals, and detrimental to the 563
public.

THE zeal of the protestant clergy was deaf to all there confide- W'!ch offend

the clergy.

rations of policy. Eager and impatient it brooked no delay. Se-
vere and inflexible, it would condescend to no compliances. The
leading men of that order insisted, that this opportunity of cfiablifh-
ing religion by law, was not to be neglected. They pronounced the
moderation of the courtiers, apoftacy; and their endeavours to gain
the Queen, they reckoned criminal and servile. Knox solemnly re-
nounced the friendship of the Earl of Murray, as a man devoted
to Mary, and so blindly zealous for her service, as to become re-
gardlefs of those objects which he had hitherto esteemed most
sacred. This rupture, which is a strong proof of Murray's sincere
attachment to the Queen at that period, continued above a year and
an half*.

THE preachers being disappointed by the men in whom they

placed the greatest confidence, gave vent to their indignation in
their pulpits. These ecchoed more loudly than ever, with decla-
rations against idolatry; with dismal presages concerning the Queen's
marriage with a foreigner; and with bitter reproaches againfl those,
who, fiom interested motives, had deserted that cause, which they
once reckoned it their honour to support. The people, inflamed by And occafionn

a tumult

there vehement declamations, which were ditated by a zeal more among the
sincere than prudent, proceeded to rafl and unjuflifiable aCts of vio- popl.

* Knox, 331.

L 1 2 lence.

BooK 1II.lence. .During the Queen's absence, on a progress into the weft,
^^^J rmafs continued to be celebrated in her chapel at Holy-rood-houfe.
I563.
Auguit. The multitude of those who openly retorted thither, gave great

offence to the citizens of Edinburgh, who, being free from the re-
itraint which the royal presence imposed, assembled in a riotous
manner, interrupted the service, and filled those who were present,
with the utmost consternation. Two of the ringleaders in this tu-
mult were seized, and a day appointed for their trial*.

Knox tried on KNOX, who esteemed the zeal of these persons laudable, and their
that account,
but acquited. condut meritorious, confidered them.as sufferers in a good cause;
otober 8. and in order to screen them from danger, he issued circular letters,

requiring all who professed the true religion, or were concerned for
the preservation of it, to assemble at Edinburgh on the day of trial,
that by their presence, they might comfort and assist their distressed
brethren -. One of these letters fell into the Queen's hands. To
assemble the fubjets without the authority of the Sovereign, was
construed to be treason, and a resolution was taken to prosecute
Decem. i5. Knox for that crime, before the Privy Council. Happily for him,

his judges were not only zealous Protestants, but the very men, who,
during the late commotions, had openly resifted, and set at defiance
the Queen's authority. It was under precedents, drawn from their
own conduct, that Knox endeavoured to flaeltcr himself. Nor
would it have been an easy matter for these Counsellors to have found
out a diflintion, by which they could censure him, without condemn-
ing themselves. After a long hearing, he was unanimously acquit-
ed. Sinclair Biflop of Ross, and President of the Court of Sefflon,
a zealous Papist, heartily concurred with the other Counsellors in

"* Knox, 335. lIbkl. 236,

this

3

this decision ; a remarkable faa, which shows the unsettled fiate BooK III.
of government in that age, the low condition to which regal autho- . ..
rity was then funk; and the impunity with which fubjeas might
invade those rights of the Crown, which are now held sacred.

THE marriage of the Scottish Queen continued still to be the I564.
objec of attention and intrigue. Though Elizabeth, even while NiethgOclatt

~he~~ ~ ~wimed to~

~dir~ect Mear~ylt, treatedhe Queen's

he wihed to direct Mary, treated her with a disgustful reserve; nariage.
though she kept her, without necessity, in a slate of fufpence;
and hinted often at the person, whom she defined to be her hus-
band, without directly mentioning his name; yet Mary framed
all her ations to express such a prudent refpec for the English
Queen, that foreign Princes began to imagine she had given herself
up implicitly to her direcion -. The prospect of this union alarmed
Catherine of Medicis. Though Catherine had taken pleasure, all
along, in doing ill .offices to the Queen of Scots; though soon as-
ter the Duke of Guise's death, ihe had put upon her a most mor-
tifying indignity, by flopping the payment of her dowry, by 'depriv-
ing her subjet the Duke ofChatelherault of his pension, and by be-
flowing the command of the Scottif Guards on a Frenchman ;
nhe resolved, however, to prevent this dangerous conjunction of the
Briti/h Queens. For this purpose, she now employed all her art
to appease Mary 11, to whom {he had given so many causes of of-
fence. The arrears of her dowry were inflantly paid ; more punc-
tual remittances were promised for the future; and offers made, not
only to restore, but to extend the privileges of the Scottifhl nation
in France. It was easy for Mary to penetrate into the motives of
this sudden change; flhe well knew the character of her mother-

IKnox, 343. - 1 Keith, 248. X Id. 244. H Sec Appendix, No VIII.

ill-

BooK Ill. in-law, and laid little stress upon professions of friendship, which
i 6t_ . came from a Princess of such a false and unfeeling heart,

THE negociation with England, relative to the marriage, suffered

no interruption, from this application of the French Queen. As
Mary, in compliance to her subje&s, and prefed by the itrongeft
motives of interest, determined speedily to marry, Elizabeth was

March. obliged to break that unaccountable silence, which ihe had hither-

Elizabeth ic- to affected. The secret was disclosed, and her favourite Lord Ro-
conmmends
I.eicLiter to bert Dudley, afterwards Earl of Leicester, was declared to be the
her for a hus-
band. happy man, whom she had chosen to be the husband of a Queen,

courted by so many Princes .

ELIZABETH'S wisdom and penetration were remarkable in the

choice of her Ministers; in diffinguifhing her favourites, those great
qualities were less conspicuous. She was influenced in two cafes
so opposite, by merit of very different kinds. Their capacity for
business, their knowledge, their prudence, were the talents to which
alone she attended, in chufing her Ministers; whereas beauty and
gracefulness of p erfon, polished manners, and courtly address, were
the accomplishments on which fie bestowed her favour. She aded
in the one care with the wisdom of a Queen, in the other, she dif-
covered the weakness of a woman. To this Leicester owed his
grandeur. Though remarkable neither for eminence in virtue, nor
superiority of abilities, the Queen's partiality diffinguiflied him on
every occasion. She raised him to the higheil: honours, flme be-
flowed on him the most important employments, and manifefled
.an affeCion so disproportionate to his merit, that, in the opinion

* Keith, 251.

.of

of that age, it could be accounted for only by the power of plane- BooK 1iI.
tary influence . .-.

5 64.
THE high spirit of the Scottish Queen could not well bear the Mary offen-

ded at this.

first overture of a match with a subjed. Her own rank,, the fplen-
dor of her former marriage,. and the solicitations, at this time,. of
so many powerful Princes, crouded into her thoughts, and made
her sensibly feel how humbling and difrefpedful Eiizabeth's pro-
pofal was. She dissembled, however with the English Resident;
and though he declared, in strong terms, what a degradation she
would deem this alliance, which brought along with it no advan-
tage,, that could justify such neglec of her own dignity, she men-
tioned the Earl of Leicester, notwithstanding, in terms full of re-
fpet 'a

ELIZABETH, we may presume, did not wish that the proposal El izbeth
ilould be received in any other manner. After the extraordinary co.°meding

' him.,

marks she had given of her own attachment to Leicester, and while
he was frill, in. the very height of favour, it is not probable fie could
think seriously of bettowing him upon another. 'Twas not her aim
to persuade, but only to amuse Mary +. Almost three years were
elapsed since her return into Scotland; and though solicited by her
fubjpds, and courted by the greatest Princes in Europe, (he had
hitherto been, prevented from marrying, chiefly by the artifices of
Elizabeth. And if, at this time, the English Queen could have
engaged Mary to liften to her proposal in favour of Leicester, her
power over this creature of her own would have enabled her to pro-
trad the negociation, at pleasure; and by keeping her rival unmar-
ried, she would have ,rendered the profpe& of her fucceflion less ac-
ceptable to the Engli(h.

'* Camden, 549. E- Keith, 252. *: Mclv. 104, 105.

L E C ES TEmR'S

Boom III. LEICESTER'S own siLt'ation' was extetrely delicate, and emba-

Vó' raffing. To gain poireflion of the most amiable woman of the
J564.

age, to carry away this prize from so many contending Princes, to
mount the throne of an ancient kingdom, might have flattered the
ambition of a subjed, - much more considerable than him. He saw
all these advantages, no doubt; and, in secret, they made their full
impression on him. But, without offending Elizabeth, he durst
not venture on the molt distant discovery of his sentiments, or
take any ftep towards facilitating his acquisition of objects so worthy
of desire.

ON the other hand, Elizabeth's partiality towards him, which

she was at no pain's to conceal*, might inspire him with hopes of
attaining the supreme rank in a kingdom, more illustrious than Scot-
land. Elizabeth had often declared, that nothing but her resolution
to lead a single life, and his being born her own subject, would have
hindred her from chufing the Earl ofLeicefter for a husband. Such
considerations of prudence are, however, often surmounted by love;
and Leicester might flatter himself, that the violence of her assec-
tion would at length triumph both over the maxims of policy, and
the scruples of pride. These hopes induced him, now and then, to
conclude the proposal of his marriage with the Scottish Queen to be
a projeCt for his deftrudtion ; and he imputed it to the malice of Ce-
cil, who, under the specious pretence of doing him honour, intended
to ruin him in the good opinion both of Elizabeth and Mary t.

A TREATY of marriage, proposed by one Queen, who dreaded
its success; listened to by another, who was secretly dctermined

v' Mclv. 93, 94. -t Ibid. ior.

against

againIt it; and scarce desired by the man himself, whofe.intereft andBooK III.
reputation it was calculated, in appearance, to promote; could not, 564.
under so many unfavourable. circumstances, be brought to a for-
tunate issue. Both Elizabeth and Mary continued, however, to ad:
with equal diffiinulation. The former, notwithflanding her fears
of losing Leicester, solicited warmly in his behalf. The latter,
though (he began about this time to cast her eyes upon another
fubje: of England, did not, at once, venture finally to reject
Elizabeth's favourite.

THE person towards whom Mary began to turn her thoughts, Mary enter-

was Henry Stewart Lord Darnly, eldest son of the earl of Lennox. of marrying
That nobleman, having been driven out of Scotland under the re-Lord Darnl.
gency of the Duke of Chatelherault, had lived in banishment for
twenty years. His wife, Lady Margaret Douglas, was Mary's most
dangerous rival in her claim upon the English succession. She was
the daughter of Margeret, the eldest filter of Henry VIII. by the
Earl of Angus, whom that .Queen married after the death of her
husband James IV. In that age, the right and order of succession
was not fettled with the fame accuracy, as at present. Time, and
the decision of almost every cafe that can pofibly happen, have
at last introduced certainty into a matter, which, naturally, is
subjed to all the variety, arising from the caprice of lawyers,
guided by obscure, and often imaginary analogies. Lady Lennox,
though born of a second marriage, was one degree nearer the royal
blood of England, than Mary. She was the daughter, Mary only
the grandaughter of Margaret. This was not the only advantage
over Mary which Lady Lennox enjoyed. She was born in Eng.
land, and by a maxim of law in that country, with regard to
private inheritances, ( whoever is not born in England, or at least

VoL. I. M m of

BOOK III.of parents, who, at the time of his birth, were in the obedi..

J564. ence of the King of England, cannot enjoy any inheritance in

the kingdom '." This maxim, Hales,, an English lawyer, pro-
duced in a treatise, which he published at this time, and endea-
voured to apply it to the right of succession to the Crown. In a
private cause, these pretexts might have given rife to a long and
doubtful litigation; where a Crown was at fake, such nice disputes
and subtleties were to be avoided with the utmost care. If Darn-
ly should happen to contract an alliance with any of the powerful
families in England, or hould publickly profess the Protestant re-
ligion, these plausible and popular topics might be so urged, as to
prove fatal to the pretensions of a foreigner, and of a Papit.

MARY was aware of all this; and in.order to prevent any dan°

ger from that quarter,. had early endeavoured to cultivate a friendly
correspondence with the family of Lennox. In the year I562 1,
both the Earl and the Lady Margaret were taken into custody by
Elizabeth's orders, on account of their holding a.fecret correfpon-
dence with the Scottish Queen.

FROM the time that Mary became sensible of the difficulties,

Elizabeth fe. which would attend her marrying a foreign Prince, she entered
ci. ]y leafcd..
with this. into a still closer connexion with the Earl of Lennox i, and invited

him to return into Scotland. This she endeavoured to conceal from
Elizabeth; but a tranfacion of so much.importance did.not escape
the notice of that discerning Princess. She obfcrved, but did not
interrupt it. Nothing could fall in more perfectly with her views,
concerning Scottifhl affairs. She was pleased to fee the pride of

* Carte, Hill. of Eng. vol. iii. 422, .t Camd. 389. : Id. 396.

the

the Scottish Queen sloop, at last, to the thoughts of taking a sub- BOOK III.
ject to her bed. Darnly was in no situation to excite her jealousy, 564
or her fears. His father's estate lay in England, and by means of
this pledge, the hoped to keep the negociation entirely in her own
hands, and to play the fame game of artifice and delay, which ihe
had planned out, if her recommendation of Leicester had been
more favourably received.

As before the union of the two crowns, no fubjeac of one king-

dom could pass into the other without the permission of both Sove-
reigns; no sooner did Lennox, under pretence of prosecuting his
wife's claim upon the earldom of Angus, apply to Elizabeth for her
licence to go into Scotland, than he obtained it. Together with it,
the gave him letters, warmly recommending his person and cause
to Mary's friendship and protection *. But, at the fame time, as it
was her manner to involve all her tranfaations with regard to Scot-
land, in some degree of perplexity and contradiction; the warned
Mary, that this indulgence to Lennox might prove fatal to herself,
as his return could not fail of reviving the ancient animosity be-
twen him and the house of Hamilton.

THis admonition gave umbrage to Mary, and drew from her an

angry reply, which occasioned, for some time a total interruption
of all correspondence between the two Queens t. Mary was not a
little alarmed at this; she both dreaded the effects of Elizabeth's re-
fentment, and suffered, by being deprived of a free intercourse with
England, where her Ambassadors had, all along, carried on, with

* Keith, 255, 268. f Ibid. 253. Mclv. 83.

M m 2 rome

Book- I111 forne success, secret negociations, which increased -the nuiutber of

^^"^ her partizans, and paved her way towards the throne. In order to

remove the causes of the present difficulty, Melvil was sent ex-
press to the court of England. He found it no difficult matter to
bring about a reconcilement; and soon re-established the appear-
ance, but not the confidence of friendship, which was all that had
fubfifled, for some time, between the two Queens.

DURING this negociation, Elizabeth's profeffidns of love to Mary

and Melvil's replies in name of his Mifirefs, were made in the lan-
guage of the warmest and most cordial friendship. Btt what Mel-
vil truly observes, with refpeEt to Elizabeth, may be extended
without injufice to both Queens. " There was neither plain
dealing, nor upright meaning, but great dissimulation, envy and
fear t."

Lennox ar-
rives in Scot- LENNOX, however, in confequenee of the llcence which he Ihad
land. obtained, set out for Scotland, and was received by the Queen, not

only with the refpea due to a nobleman, so nearly allied to the
royal family, but treated with a distinguished familiarity, which
could not fail of inspiring him with more elevated hopes. The ru-
mour of his son's marriage to the Queen began to spread over the
kingdom; and the eyes of all Scotland were turned upon him, as
the father of their future Master. The Duke of Chatelherault was;:
the first to take the alarm. He confidered Lennox, as the ancient,
and hereditary enemy of the house of Hamilton; ands in his gran-
deur, saw the ruin of himself and his friends. But the Queen in-
terpofed her authority to prevent any violent rupture, and employed

· Meltil, xo4
2 all

all her influence to bring about an accommodation of their differ- BooK III'
ences *. i- - - 5

THE powerful family of Douglas no less dreaded Lennox's re'

turn, from an apprehension, that he would wrest the earldom of
Angus out of their hands. But the Queen, who well knew how'
dangerous it would be' to irritate Morton, and other great men of
that name, prevailed on Lennox to purchase their friendship, by
allowing his Lady's claim upon the earldom of Angus to drop -j-

AFTER these preliminary steps, Mary ventured to call a meet-December

ing of Parliament. The ad of forfeiture, passed against Lennox in
the year i545, was repealed, and he was publickly restored to the'
honours and estate of his ancestors ++.

THE ecclefiafical tranfadtions of this year were not confiderable.june 25.
In the assemblies of the church, the fame complaints of the increase elerg.5;

e C l oste

r gy

of idolatry, the fame reprefenfations concerning the poverty of the^se picius °of
clergy, were renewed. The reply which the Queen made to there, zeal for Pope-
and her promises of redress, were more satisfying to the Protestants,
than any they had hitherto obtained |. But, notwithstanding
these declarations in their favour, they could not help harbouring
many suspicions concerning Mary's designs against their religion.
She had never once consented to hear any preacher of the reformed
doctrine, She had abated nothing of her bigoted attachment to
the Romish faith. The genius of that superstition, averse at all
times, from toleration, was, in that age, fierce and unrelenting.
Mary had given her friends on the Continent repeated affu'r/nces of

" Keith, 259. f Id. 268. Not. (b),. SeeAppendix, No X.

U' Id. 533, 539.

her

BOOK III.her resolution to re-efablill the Catholic church . She had.in-

1zTó4 duftrioufly avoided every opportunity of ratifying the acs of Par-

liament 560, in favour of the Reformation. Even the protection,
which ever since her return, (he had afforded the Protestant religion,
was merely temporary, and declared by her own proclamation to
be of force, only " till fle should take some final order in the
matter of religion --.' The vigilant zeal of the preachers was in-
attentive to none of these circumflances. The coldness of their
principal leaders, who were, at this time, entirely devoted to the
court, added to their jealousies and fears. These they uttered to
the people, in language which they esteemed suitable to the necef-
fity of the times, and which the Queen reckoned difrefpeEful, and
insolent. In a meeting of the General Assembly, Maitland pub-
lickly accused Knox of teaching seditious doArine, concerning the
right of fubjedts to resist those Sovereigns, who trespass against the
duty which they owe to the people. Knox was not backward to
juflify what he had taught. And upon this general dotrine of re-
fiftance, so just in its own nature, but so delicate in its application
to particular cafes, there ensued a debate, which admirably displays
the talents and character of both the disputants; the acuteness of
the former, embellished with learning, but prone to subtlety; the
vigorous underflanding of the latter, delighting in bold sentiments,
and superior to all fear +,

i ^5·. Two years had already been consumed, in fruitless negcciations
1:l,,iiitll, o concerning the marriage of the Scottish Queen. Mary had full lei-

bdli

of thna-

b'Ldt :, Ma- flirt and opportunity to discern the fallacy and deceit of all Eliza-

ry, with dc-

gard
, hcr beth's proceedings, with refped to that aftlair. But, in order to set

the real i1ntcntions of the Engli llQueen in a clear light, and to bring

' 'Carte, vul. iii. 415. -1. Ke:ih, 504, 510o .t Knox, 349.

4 her

her to some explicit declaration of her sentiments, Mary, at lat, in- BooK III.
timated to Randolph, that, on condition her right of fuccefilon to 1565.
the Crown of England were publickly acknowledged, she was ready February 5.
to yield to the solicitations of his Mifirefs in behalf of Leicefler *.
Nothing could be farther than this from the mind and intention of
Elizabeth. The right of fuccefiion was a myitery, which, dur-
ing her whole reign, her jealousy preserved untouched, and unex-
plained. She had promised, however, when (he firit began to in-
terest herself in the marriage of the Scottih Queen, all that was now
demanded. How to retreat with decency, how to elude her for-
mer offer, was, on that account, not a little perplexing.

THE facility, with which Lord Darnley obtained permission to

visit the court of Scotland, was owing, in all probability, to that
embarrassment. From the time of Melvil's embassy, Lady Lennox
had warmly solicited this liberty for her son. Elizabeth was no
stranger to the ambitious hopes, with which that young nobleman
flattered himself. She had received' repeated advices from her Mi-
nifters, of the sentiments, which Mary began to entertain in his
favour -. It was entirely in her power, to prevent his stirring out
of London. In the present conjuncture, however, nothing could
be of more advantage to her, than Darnly's journey into Scotland.
She had already brought one adfor upon the stage, who, under her
management, had, for a long time, amused the Scottish Queen. She
hoped, no less absolutely, to diret the motions of Darnly, who was
likewise her subject; and again to involve Mary in all the tedious
intricacies of negociation. These motives determined Elizabeth and'
her Ministers to yield to the solicitations of Lady Lennox,

* Keith, 269. t 1d, 259, 261, 266,

Bu3T

Book III. BUT this deep laid scheme was in a moment disconcerted. Such

"5^6g unexpeaed events, as the fancy of poets ascribes to love, are, at

Darniy ar- some times, really produced by that passion. An affair, which had
rivcs in Scot-
lad. been the objec of so many political intrigues, and had movedand

intereted so many Princes, was at last decided by the sudden liking
of two young persons. Lord Darnly was, at this time, in the firil
bloom and vigour of youth. In beauty, and gracefulness of person,
he furpaTed all his cotemporaries; he excelled, eminently, in those
arts, which add ease and elegance to external form, and which en-

Gains the able it not only to dazzle, but to please. Mary was of an age,
Q~cen'sheart.

and of a temper, to feel the full power of these accomplishments,
The impression which Lord Darnley made upon her, was visible,
February 13. from the time of their first interview. The whole bufineEs of the

court was to amuse, and entertain this illustrious guest *; and in
all those scenes of gaiety, Darnly, whose qualifications were alto-
gether superficial and showy, appeared to great advantage. His
conquest of the Queen's heart became compleat. And inclination
now prompted her to conclude a marriage, the firlt thoughts of
which had been suggested by considerations merely political.

ELIZABETH contributed, and perhaps not without design, to

increase the violence of this passion. Soon after Darnly's arrival
in Scotland, fle, in return to that message, whereby Mary had fig-
nified her willingness to accept of Leicester, gave an answer, in
such terms, as plainly unravelled her original intention in that in-
trgue t. She promised, if the Scottish Queen's marriage with Lei-
cefter mhould take place, to advance him to great honours; but
with regard to her title to the English fucceflion, she would nei-
ther susser any legal inquiry to be made concerning it, nor permit

* Knox, 369. Keith, 270. Append. 158.

it

it to be publicly recognized, till she herself fould declare her BooK III.
resolution never to marry. Mary, notwithstanding Elizabeth's for- 6

I565'

mer promises, had reason to expe&t every thing contained in this
reply; her high spirit, however, could not bear, with patience,
such a cruel discovery of the contempt, the artifice, and mockery
with which, under the veil of friendflip, she had been so long
abused. She burst into tears of indignation, and exprcffed, with
the utmost bitterness, her sense of that.difingenuous craft, which
had been employed to deceive her*.

THE natural effect of this indignation was to add to the impe-

tuofity with which she pursued her own scheme. Blinded by re-
feAtment, as well as by love, (he observed no defects in the man,
whom ihe had chosen'; and began to take the necefiary fleps to-
wards accomplishing her design, with all the impatience, natural
to those passions.

As Darnly was so nearly related to the Queen, the canon lawv

made it necessary to obtain the Pope's dispensation, before the cele-
bration of the marriage. For this purpose, she early set on foot a
negociation with the court of Rome -.

SHE was busy, at the fame time, in procuring the consent of The Frrnch

the French King and his mother. Having communicated her de- of thel'iatch.
sign, and the motives which determined her choice, to Caflelnau
the French Ambassador, ihe employed him, as the most proper
person, to bring his court to fall in with her views. Among other
arguments to'this purpose, Caflelnau mentioned Mary's attachment
to Darnly, which he represented to be so violent and deep-rooted,

'* Keith, Append. i59. - Card. 396.
VOL. I. N n that

BOOK 1II. that it was no longer in her own power to break off the match .

5ó5^ NNor were the French Ministers backward in encouraging Mary's

passion. Her pride would never sloop to an alliance with a subjed
of France. By this choice, they were delivered from the appre-
henfion of a match with any of the Auflrian Princes, as well as the
danger of too close an union with Elizabeth. And as Darnly pro-
selfed the Roman Catholic religion, this suited the bigotted schemes
which that court had adopted.

Darnydif- WVHILE Mary was endeavouring to reconcile foreign courts to a
gutss several
of the nobles, measure which (he had so much at heart; Darnly, and his father,

by their behaviour, were raising up enemies at home, to obltrue
it. Lennox had, during the former part of his life, discovered no
great compass of abilities, or political wisdom; and appears to have
been a man of a weak understanding, and violent passions. Darnly
was not superior to his father in understanding, and all his passions
were frill more impetuous t. To these, he added thatinfolence,
which the advantage of external form, when accompanied with no
quality more valuable, is apt to inspire. Intoxicated with the Qeen's
favour, he began already to assume the haughtiness of a King, and
to put on that imperious air, which majesty itfelfcan scarce render
tolerable.

particularly IT was by the advice, or at least with the content of Murray, and
Murray. his party, that Lennox had been invited into Scotland 1:; and yet,

no sooner did he acquire a firm footing in that kingdom, than he
began to enter into secret cabals with those noblemen, who were
known to be avowed enemies to Murray, and with regard to re-
ligion, to be either neutrals, or favourers of Popery j1. Darnly, flill
* Caftcln. 464.. 1 Keith, 272,2.73. :t Knox, 367. Keith, 274. 11 Id. z2-7.

more

more imprudent, allowed some rafl exprefions concerning those fa- Booi III.
vours, which the Queen's bounty had conferred upon Murray, to 65.
escape him *

BUT, above all these, the familiarity which Darnly cultivated

with David Rizio the Italian, contributed to increase the suspicion
and disgust of the nobles.

THE low birth, and indigent condition of this man, placed him The rife of

Rizio's fa-

in a ltation, in which he ought naturally to have remained un- your.
known to posterity. But what fortune called him to ad, and
to susser in Scotland, obliges hiflory to descend from its dignity,
and to record his adventures. He was the son of a musician
in Turin, and having accompanied the Piedmontefe Ambaffa-
dor into Scotland, gained admififon into the Queen's family, by
his ikill in music. His servile condition had taught him suppleness
of spirit, and insinuating manners. He quickly crept into the
Queen's favour, and her French Secretary, happening to return at
that time into his own country, was preferred by her to that office.
He now began to make a figure in court, and to appear as a man
of weight and consequence. The whole train of suitors and ex-
peaants, who have an extreme sagacity in discovering the paths,
which lead molt directly to success, applied to him. His recom-
mendations were observed to have great influence over the Queen,
and he grew to be confidered, not only as a favourite, but as a
Minifler. Nor was Rizio careful to abate that envy, which always
attends such an extraordinary and rapid change of fortune. He
fludied, on the contrary, to display the whole extent of his favour.

* Keith, 274.
N n 2He

BOOK III. He affected to talk often, and familiarly, with the Queen in pub-
iI--- lic. He equalled the greatest and most opulent fubjeas, in rich-

i565'

ness of dress, and in the number of his attendants. He discovered,
in all his behaviour, that assuming insolence, with which unme-
rited prosperity inspires an ignoble mind. It was with the utmost
indignation that the nobles beheld the power; it was with the ut-
noft difficulty, that they tolerated the arrogance of this unworthy
minion. Even in the Qeen's pretence they could not forbear treat-
ing him with marks of contempt. Nor was it his exorbitant power
alone, which exasperated the Scots. They confidered him, and not
without reason, as a dangerous enemy to the Protefsant religion,
and fufpeAed that he held, for this purpose, a secret correspondence
with the court of Rome *.

Darnly's con-
netion with IT was Darnly's misfortune to fall under the management of

this man, who, by flattery and assiduity, easily gained on his vanity,
and inexperience. Rizio's whole influence on the Queen was em-
ployed in his behalf, and contributed, without doubt, towards
eitablifhing him more firmly in her affetions -. But whatever be-
nefit he might reap from his patronage, it did not counterbalance
the contempt, and even the infamy, to which he was exposed, on
account of his familiarity with such an upstart.

THOUGH Darnly daily made progress 'in the Queen's affetions,

she conducted herself, however, with such prudent reserve, as to
impose on Randolph the English Resident, a man otherwise frewd
and pcnetrating. It appears from his letters at this period, that he
entertained not the leafl suspicion of the intrigue which vwas carry-

' Buchan. 340. Melv. 107. * Id. I i.

ing

3*

ing on; and gave his court repeated assurances, that the Scottish BOOYK III.
Queen had no design of marrying Darnly *. In the midst of his 56
security, Mary dispatched Maitland to signify her intention to Eli-
zabeth, and to solicit her content to the marriage with Darnly.
This embassy was the first thing, which opened the eyes of Ran-
dolph.

ELIZABETH affeeted the greatest furprize at this sudden refolu-Elizabethde-
tion of the Scottish Queen, but without reason. The train was ares again" l

the Queen's
laid by herself, and {he had no cause to wonder when it took es- mariagewith

Darnly.

fed. She expressed, at the fame time, her disapprobation of the
match, in the strongest terms; and pretended to'forefee many dan-
gers and i-nconveniencies arising from it, to both kingdoms. But
this, too, was mere affetation. Mary had often and plainly de-
clared her resolution to marry. It was impoflible fle could make
any choice more inoffensive. The danger of introducing a foreign
interefl into Britain which Elizabeth had so justly dreaded, was en-
tirely avoided. Darnly, though allied to both Crowns, and pof-
fefed of lands in both kingdoms, could be formidable to neither.
It is evident, from all these circumstances, that Elizabeth's appre-
henfions of danger could not possibly be serious; and that, in all
her violent declarations against Darnly, there was much more of
grimace than of reality t.

4 Keith, 273. and Append. I59.
-t Even the Hitforians of that age acknowledge, that the marriage of the Scottish,

Queen with a fibljecct was far from being disagreeable to Elizabeth. Knox, 369, 373.
Buchan, 339. Caftclnau, who, at that time, was well acquainted with the in-
trigues of both the Britifli courts, afkcrts, and upon grounds of great probability,
that the i;atch was wholly Elizabcth's own work; Caflcln. 462. and that fl(e re-
joiced at the accompliflincnt of it, appears fiom the letters of her own AmLba;ladors.
Keith, 2o8, 29.8.

TIlERE

BOOK III. THERE were not wanting, however, political motives of much

ic
56 weight, to induce that wife Princess to put on the appearance of

great displeasure. Mary, intimidated by this, might perhaps delay
her marriage; which Elizabeth desired to obftrud with a weakness
that little suited the dignity of her mind, and the elevation of. her
character. Besides, the tranquillity of her own kingdom wasthe
great object of Elizabeth's policy; and by declaring her difatis-
fa'Sion with Mary's conduct, she hoped to alarm that party in Scot-
land, which was attached to the English interest, and to encourage
such of the nobles, as secretly disapproved the match, openly to op-
pose it. The feeds of discord would, by this means, be scattered
through that kingdom. Intestine commotions might arise. Amidst
these, Mary could form none of those dangerous schemes, to
which the union of her people might have prompted her. She
herself would become the umpire between her, and her contending
fubjeds. And England might look on, with security, while a
fiorm, which she had raised, wafted the only kingdom, which
could possibly diflurb its peace.
May 1. IN prosecution of this scheme, nie laid before her Privy Coun-

cil the mefage from the Scottish Queen, and consulted them with
regard to the nnfwer fle flould return. Their determination, it
is easy to conceive, was perfecly conformable to her secret views.
They drew up a rcmonftrance againfl the intended match, full of
the imaginary dangers, with which that event threatened the king-

SendsThrog- dot -. Nor did fie think it enough, to signify her difapproba-
inorton to ob-
irutt it. tion of the measure, either by Maitland, Mary's Ambaflador, or

by Randolph, her own Resident in Scotland ; in order to add more
dignity to tl fre
fr which fire chose to aC', fie appointed Sir Ni-

K eitlh, 2 74. Scc Append. N° X.

i1g~~~~~~ cholas

cholas Throgmorton her AmbafTador Extraordinary. She comr-BooK IIl.
manded him to declare, in the itrongeft terms, her diffatisfadion 56
with the ifep which Mary proposed to take; and, at the fame
time, to produce the determination of the Privy Council, as an
evidence that the sentiments of the nation were not different from
her own. Not long after, she confined Lady Lennox as a prifo-
ner first in her own house, and then sent her to the Tower *

INTELLIGENCE of all this reached Scotland, before the arrival

of the English Ambassador. In the first transports of her indigna-
tion, Mary resolved, no longer, to keep any measures with Eliza-
beth; and sent orders to Maitland, who accompanied Throgmor-
ton, to return instantly to the Engliih court, and, in her name to
declare to Elizabeth, that after having been amused so long to so
little purpose; after having been fooled, and imposed on so grossly
by her evasive artifices; she was now resolved to gratify her own
inclination, and to ask no other content, but that of her own sub-
jeEs, in the choice of an husband. Maitland, with his usual saga-
city, foresaw all the effedcs of such a rash and angry message, and
ventured rather to incur the displeasure of his Mistress, by difo-
beying her commands, than to be made the instrument of tearing
asunder, so violently, the few remaining ties, which still linked to-
gether the two Queens -.

MARY herself soon became sensible of her error. She received

the English Ambassador with refped: justified her own conduct with
decency; and though unalterable in her resolution, fle affeced a won-
derful solicitude to reconcile Elizabeth to the measure; and even
pretended, out of complaisance towards her, to put off the con-

'* Keith, Append. 16,. t1 Id. i6o.

summation

BOOK III. reclaiming her, which remained, was for ever cut off. Each of there

6 considerations had its influence on Murray, and all of them deter-
I565.

mined him to decline complying, at that time, with the Queen's
request.

Mao) '4. TtgE convention of nobles, which was assembled a few days
A tonven-
tion of tile after, discovered a greater disposition to gratify the Queen. Many
nobles ap-
Froves of the of them, without hefstation, expressed their approbation of the in-

tended match; but as others were startled at the fame dangers which
had alarmed Murray, or were influenced by his example, to refuse
their content, another Convention was appointed at Perth, in order
to deliberate more fully concerning this matter *.

MEAN while, Mary gave a public evidence of her own inclina-

tion, by conferring upon Darnly titles of honour peculiar to the
royal family. The opposition the had hitherto met with, and the
many contrivances employed to thwart and disappoint her inclination,
produced their usual effect on her heart, they confirmed her pafion,
and increased its violence. The simplicity of that age imputed an
affeEtion, so excessive, to the influence of witchcraft A-. It was ow-
ing, however, to no other charm, than the irresistible power of youth
and beauty, over a young and tender heart. Darnly grew giddy
with his prosperity. Flattered by the love of a Queen, and the
applause of many among her fubjets, his natural haughtiness and
insolence became insupportable, and he could no longer bear advice,
far less contradiction. Lord Ruthven, happening to be the firfl
person who informed him that Mary, in order to sooth Elizabeth,
had delayed, for some time, creating him Duke of Albany, he,
in a frenzy of rage, drew his dagger and attempted to stab him n.

: Keith, 283. Knox, 373. *1 Keith, 283. t Ibid. Append. 160.

1 It

It required all Mary's attention, to prevent his falling under that Booi III.
contempt, to which such behaviour deservedly exposed him. Lv5ó5

IN no scene of her life was ever Mary's own address more re- Mary'saddrefs

markably displayed. Love sharpened her invention, and made her ifaining her
study every method of gaining her fubjeds. Many of the nobles
she won by her caresses, and more by her promises. On some she
bestowed lands, to others the gave new titles of honour *. She
even condescended to court the Proteflant clergy. And having in-
vited three of their fuperintendants to Stirling, she declared, in
firong terms, her resolution to prote& their religion, expressed her
willingness to be present at a conference upon the points in doc-
trine which were disputed between the Protestants and Papists, and
went so far as to show Come desire to hear such of their preachers,
as were most remarkable for moderation -. By these arts, the Queen
gained wonderfully upon the people, who, unless their jealousy be
raised by repeated injuries, are always ready to view the acions of
their Sovereign with an indulgent eye.

ON the other hand, Murray and his associates were plainly the

dupes of Elizabeth's policy. She talked in so high aflrain, of her
displeasure at the intended match; she treated Lady Lennox with so
much rigour; she wrote to the Scottish Queen in such strong terms;
file recalled the Earl of Lennox and his son in such a peremptory
manner, and with such severe denunciations of her vengeance, if
they presumed to disobey Jo; that all these expressions of averion
fully persuaded them of her sincerity. This belief fortified their
scruples with refpea to the match, and encouraged them to op-

Keith, 283. Knox, 373. 1: Keith, 285, 286.

0 o pose

BooK III. pose it. They began with forming among themselves bonds ofcon-

T"Y(> federacy and mutual defence; they entered into a secret correfpon-

dence with the English Resident, in order to secure Elizabeth's as-
fitance, when it should become needful ; they endeavoured to
fill the nation with such apprehensions of danger, as might counter-
balance the influence of those arts, which the Queen had em-
ployed.

Schernesoi BESIDES these intrigues, there were secretly carried on, by both
Dar:'ii and
Aturra), a parries, dark designs of a more criminal nature, and more suit-
l;ier. C able to the spirit of the age. Darnly, impatient of that opposition,

which he imputed wholly to Murray, and resolving at any rate to
get rid of such a powerful enemy, formed a plot to assassinate him,
during the meeting of the Convention at Perth. Murray, on his
part, despairing of preventing the marriage by any other means,
had, together with the Duke of Chatelherault,. and the Earl of Ar-
gyll, concerted measures for seizing Darnly, and, carrying him a:
prisoner into England.

IF either of these conspiracies had taken effe&, this Convention:

might have been attended with consequences extremely tragical; but
both were rendered abortive, by the vigilance or good fortuneof
those against whom they were formed. Murray, being warned
of his danger by some retainers to the court,. who still favoured
his interest, avoided the blow, by not going to Perth. Mary,
receiving intelligence of Murray's enterprize, retired with the ut-
most expedition, along with Darnly, to the other fide of Forth.
Conscious, on both fides, of guilt, and inflamed with refentmentl
it was impossible they could either forget the violence, which them-

* Keith, 289, 292, 298.

selves,

selves had meditated, or forgive the injuries, intended against them. BOOK 1II-
All hope of reconcilement was at an end from that moment, and ''^"
their mutual enmity burst out with every symptom of implacable
hatred c.

ON.

T The reality ofthefe two opposite conspiracies has given occasion to many disputes'

And much contradiction. Some deny that any design was formed against the life
of Murray; others call in question the truth of the conspiracy against Darnly. There
seem, however, to be good reasons for believing both; though the zeal and credu_
lity of party-writers have added to each, many exaggerated circumritances. The
following arguments render it probable, that some violence was intended against
Murray.

I. This is positively aferted'by Buchanan, 34r. 2. The Englifn Resident writes to-

Cecil, that Murray was assuredly informed that a design was laid to murder him-
at Perth, and describes the manner in which this plot wsas to have been executed.
Keith, 287. 3. Murray himself constantly and publickly affirmed, that such a
design was formed againfi his life. Keith, Ap. io8. And though he was called upon
by the Queen to bring legal evidence of his assertion, and a safe conduc offered
him, while he came to court for that purpose. Ibid. Yet whoever confiders Mur-
rays's situation, and the spirit of those who ruled in court at that time, will scarce
deem it any proof of his guilt, that he did not clhue to risk his person on such fe-
curity. 4. The furious passions of Darnly, the fierceness of his resentment, which
scrupled at no violence, and the manners of the age,. render the imputation of such
a crime less improbable.,

II. That Murray and his aff6ciates had resolved to seize Darnly's person appeals

with still greater certainty; i. From the express testimony of Melvil, 12. Buchanan,
p. 341, and Knox, p. 377, asset, but without reason, to represent this as an idle
rumour. 2. The qucflion was put to Randolph, whether the Governor of Berwick
would receive Lennox and his son, if they were carried prisoners to that place. This
plainly shews, that some such design was in hand, and Randolph did not discourage it
by the answer which he gave. Keith, 290. 3. The precipitation, with which the
Queen retired, and the reason The gave for this sudden flight, arc mentioned by Ran-
dolph, 91. 4. A great part of the Scottish nobles, and. among these the Earls

B1ooK III. ON Mary's return to Edinburgh, she summoned her vassals by
u.]I-- - proclamation, and solicited them by her letters, to repair thither in
2565.

Ilarv im-i- arms, for the protection of her person against her foreign and do-
mohs her vail
fals to take meflic enemies *. She was obeyed with all the promptness and

arlir' :i''.' alacrity, with which fubjeds run to defend a mild and popular ad-

miniitration. This popularity, however, she owed in a great mea-

of Argyll and Rothes, who were themselves privy to the design, afTert the reality
of the conspiracy. Good. vol. ii. 358. ,

All these circumstances leave little room to doubt of the truth of both confpira-

cies. But we may observe how far this proof, though drawn from public records,
falls short, on both fides, of legal and formal evidence. Buchanan and Randolph,
in their accounts of the conspiracy against Murray, differ widely in almost every
circumstance. The accounts of the attempt upon Darnly, are not more confiflent.
Melvil alledges, that the design of the conspirators was to carry Darnly a prisoner
into England; the proposal made to Randolph agrees with this. Randolph fays,
that they intended to carry the Queen to St. Andrew's, and Darnly to Castle Camp-
bell. The Lords, in their declaration, affirm the design of the conspirators to have
been to murder Darnly and his father, to confine the Queen in Lochleven during
life, and to usurp the government. To believe implicitly, whatever they find in
an ancient paper, is a folly to which Antiquaries are liable. But ancient papers
often contain nothing more than the slanders of a party, and the lie of the day.
The declaration of the nobles referred to, is of this kind; it is plainly ranco-
rous, and written in the very heat of faction. Many things are afterted in it,
evidently false, or exaggerated. Let Murray and his confederates be as ambitious
as we can suppose, they must have had some pretences, and plausible ones too, be-
fore they could venture to imprison their Sovereign for life, and to seize the reins
of government; but, at that time, the Queen's conduc had afforded no colourable
excuse for proceeding to such extremities. It is, likewifc, remarkable, that in all
the proclamations against Murray, of which so many are publified in Keith, Ap-
pendix 108, &c. neither the violent attempt upon Darnly, nor that which he is al-
lcdged to have formed againit the Quecn herself, are ever once mentioned.

M Keith, 298.

flit re

sure to Murray, who had directed her administration with great BooK 1IL
prudence. But the crime of opposing her marriage, obliterated 56
the memory of his former services; and Mary, impatient of con-
tradiation, and apt to confider those who disputed her will, as ene-
mies to her person, determined to let him feel the whole weight of
her vengeance. For this purpose (he summoned him to appear before July i19
her upon a short warning, to answer to such things as should be laid
to his charge *. At this very time, Murray, and the Lords who ad-
hered to him, were assembled at Stirling, to deliberate what course
they should hold, in such a difficult conjuncture But the current of
popular favour ran so itrongly against them; and, notwithfland-
ing some fears and jealousies, there prevailed in the nation such a
general disposition to gratify the Queen, in a matter which so near-
ly concerned her, that, without coming to any other conclusion,
than to implore the Queen of England's protection, they put an end
to their ineffecual consultations, and returned every man to his
own house.

TOGETHER with this discovery of her enemies weakness, the

confluence of her fubjeAs from all corners of the kingdom,
afforded Mary an agreeable proof of her own strength. While
the Queen was in this prosperous situation, hfe determined to bring
to a period, an affair, which had so long engrossed her heart, and
occupied her attention. On the 29th July, She married Lord Celebratesher

marriage ivitli

Darnly. The ceremony was performed in the Queen's chapel, D)arnly.
according to the rites of the Romish church; the Pope's bull,
dispensing with their marriage, having been previously ob-
tained -. She issued, at the fame time, proclamations, conferring

* Keith, Append. 108. 1 Id. 307.

the

3BOK III. the title of King of Scots upon her husband, and commanding that

565^ henceforth all writs at law should run in the joint names of King

and Queen*. Nothing can be a stronger proof of the violence of
Mary's love, or the weakness of her councils, than this last fep.
Whether she had any right to chufe a husband, without content of
Parliament, was, in that age, a matter of some dispute t; that Ihe
had no right to confer upon him, by her private authority, the title
and dignity of King; or, by a simple proclamation, to raise her
husband to be the Master of her people, seems to be beyond all
doubt. Francis II. indeed, bore the fame title. It was not, how-
ever, the gift of the Queen, but of the nation; and the consent of
Parliament was obtained, before he ventured to assume it. Darn-
ly's condition, as a subject, rendered it frill more necessary to have
the concurrence of the supreme Council in his favour. Such a
violent and unprecedented stretch of prerogative, as the substituting
a proclamation in place of an at of Parliament, might havejufily
alarmed the nation. But the Queen possessed so entirely the confi-
dence of her fubjeds, that, notwihftanding all the clamours of
the malecontents, no symptoms of general discontent appeared on
that account.

EVEN amidfl that scene of joy, which always accompanies fuc-

cefsful love, Mary did not susser the course of her vengeance
against the malecontent nobles to be interrupted. Three days as-
ter the marriage, Murray was again summoned to court, under
the severest penalties, and upon his non-appearance, the rigour of
julice took place, and he was declared an out-law J:. At the fame
time, the Queen set at liberty Lord Gordon, who ever. since his

* Andcrfon, a. 33. See Append. No XI. AS Buchall 341. :t Keith, 309, 310.

-! father's

father's infurreaion in the year 1562, had been detained a prisoner; BomO III.
the recalled the Earl of Sutherland, who, on account of his con- 5
cern in that conspiracy, had fled into Slanders; and she permitted
Bothwell to return again into Scotland. The firrf, and las of these,
were among the most powerful fubjets in the kingdom, and all
of them animated with implacable hatred to Murray, whom they
esteemed the enemy of their families, and the author of their own
sufferings. This common hatred became the foundation of the
flridceft union with the Queen, and gained them an ascendant over
all her councils. Murray himself confidered this confederacy with
his avowed enemies, as a more certain indication than any measure
the had yet taken, of her inexorable resentment.

THE malecontents had not yet openly taken up arms -. But the Marches a-

gainIt Mur-

Queen having ordered her fubjets to march against them, they were ray and his
driven to the last extremity. They found themselves unable, how- aocates
ever, to make head against the numerous forces, which Mary
had assembled; and fled into Argyllthire, in expectation of aid
from Elizabeth, to whom they had secretly dispatched a messenger,
in order to implore her immediate afiftance -.

MEAN while, Elizabeth endeavoured to embarafs Mary, by a Elizabeth in.

terpoles in
new declaration of her disgust at her conduct. She blamed both their fvor.

-* After their fruitless consultation at Stirling, the Lords retired to their own
lhufcs. IKith, 304. Murray was flill at St. Andrew's on July 22. Keith, 306.
By the places of rendezvous, appointed for the inhabitants of the diffrent couii-
ties,. August 4j it appears that the QCeen's intention was to march into Fife, the.
county in which Murray, Rotlhes, Kircaldy, and other chiefs of the malecontcnts
rcfided. Keith, 310. Tlheir flight into the weft, Keith, 312. prevented this ex-
pedition, and the former rcndezvblls was altered. Keith, 310

1j Keith, 312. Knox, 380.
Vol. I. P P her

BOOK 1II. her choice of Lord Darnly, and the precipitation with which fie

ó-y - had concluded the marriage. She required Lennox and Darnly,
15 s6 whom she till called her fabj.ets, to return into England. And at

the fame time, (he warmly interceded in behalf of Murray, whose
behaviour she represented to be not only innocent, but laudable.
This mefage, so mortifying to the pride of the Queen, and' so full of
contempt for her husband, was rendered frill more insupportable, by
the petulant and saucy demeanour of Tamworth; the person who
delivered it*. Mary vindicated her own condu& with warmth,
but with great strength of reason, and rejected the interceEflon in be-
half of Murray, not without signs of resentment at, Elizabeth's pre-
tending to intermeddle in the internal- government of her king-
dom .

SHE did not, on that account, intermit in the least the ardour,

with which She pursued Murray and his adherents +. They now
appeared openly in arms; and having received a small supply
in money from Elizabeth 1:, were endeavouring to raise their fol-
lowers in the western counties. But Mary's vigilance hindered
them from assembling in any considerable body. All her military
operations, at that time, were concerted with wisdom, executed
with vigour, and attended with success. In order to encourage
her troops, ihe herself marched along with them, rode with loaded

** Camd. 398. t Keith, Append. 99..

t The most considerable persons who joined Murray, were the Duke of Chatel-

herault, the Earls of Argyll, Glencairn, Rothes; Lord Boyd and Ochiltree; the
Lairds of Grange, Cunninghamhead, Balcomie, Carmylie, Lawers, Bar, Dreghorn,,
Pitarrow, Comptroller, and the Tutor of Pitcur. Knox, 382.

U Knox, 380. <,3~~~~~~~ pis~~itol,

pistols *, and, endured all the fatigues of war! with admirable for- BooK III.
titude. Her alacrity inspired her forces with an invincible resolution, 565

i565.

which, together with their superiority in number, deterred the
malecontents from facing them in the field; but having artfully
passed the Queen's army, they marched with the utmost precipita-
tion to Edinburgh, and endeavoured to rouze the inhabitants of
that city to arms. The Queen did not susser them to remain long Auguit 31.
unmolested; and, on her approach, they were forced to abandon
that place, and retire in confusion towards the wefpern borders -.

As it was uncertain, for some time, what rout they had taken, They are ob-

Mary employed that-interval in providing for the security of the int England.
counties in the heart of the kingdom. She seized the places of
itrength which belonged to the rebels; and obliged the confider-
able Barons in those Shires, which (he most fufpeded, to join in as-
fociations for her defence +. Having thus left all the country be-
hind her in tranquillity, the, with an army 1 8,000 strong, marched
towards Dumfries, where the rebels then were. During their re-
treat, they had sent letters to the Queen, from almost every place
where they halted, full of submission, and containing various over-
tures towards an accommodation. But Mary, who determined not
to let flip such a favourable opportunity of crushing the mutinous fpi-
rit of her fubjets, rejeced them with disdain. As she advanced,
the malecontents retired : and, having received no effecual aid from
Elizabcth IH, they despaired of any other means of safety, fled into Ohber z2.
England, and put themselves under the proteCtion of the Earl of
Bedford, Warden of the marches.

NOTIII N G, which Bedford's personal friendship for Murray could They ,,et

vwith unex.-
supply, was wanting to render their retreat agreeable. But Eli-1:ta i11

ircatnmcnt
Keith, Append. i6. I64 . 315. ': I1. Append. 11 3. fl

1 Sec Appendix, No XII. XIII.

P p 2 zabcth

BOoK II. zabeth herself treated them with extreme neglect. - She had fully

ó-V - gained her end, and, by their means, had excited. such discord and

jealousies among the Scots, as would, in all probability, long diftrad
and weaken Mary's councils. Her business now, was to save appear-
ances, and to justify herself to the Ministers of France and Spain, who:
accused her of fomenting the troubles in Scotland, by her intrigues.
The expedient she contrived for her vindication, strongly displays
her own charater, and the wretched condition of exiles, who are
obliged to depend on a foreign Prince. Murray, and Hamil-
ton, Abbot of Kilwinning, being appointed by the other fugitives
to wait on Elizabeth, instead of meeting with that welcome recep-
tion which was due to men, who, out of confidence in her promises,
had hazarded their lives and fortunes, could not even obtain the
favour of an audience, until they had meanly consented to acknow-
ledge, in the presence of the French and Spanish Ambassadors,
that Elizabeth had given them no encouragement to take arms.
No sooner did they make this declaration, than the astonished them
with this reply, " You have declared the truth; I am far from set-
ting an example of. rebellion to my own subje&s, by countenancing
those who rebel against their lawful Prince. The treason, of which
you have been guilty, is detestable; and as traitors I banish you
from my pretence *." Notwithstanding this scene of farce and of
falfhood, so dishonourable to all the persons who aaed a part in it,
Elizabeth permitted the malecontents peaceably to reside in her
dominions, supplied them secretly with money, and renewed her
intercefilon with the Scottish Queen in their favour -.

X Mclv. 112, t Knox, 389..

TIE

TgE advantage be had gained;over them did not satisfy Mary flhe BooR III.

resolved to follow the blow, and to prevent a party, .which she dread- ~565.
ed, from ever recovering any footing in the nation. With this view,
/he called a meeting of Parliament ; and in order that a sentence of
forfeiture might be legally pronounced against the bani(hed Lords,
(he summoned them, by publick proclamation, to appear before it*. Decelmber i-

THE Duke of Chatelherault, on his humble application, ob-e

tained a separate pardon; but not without difficulty, as the King
violently opposed it. He was obliged, however, to, leave the king-
dom, and to reside for some time in France -.

THE numerous forces which Mary brought into the field, the

vigour with which she aAed, and the length of time fie kept
them in arms, resemble the efforts of a Prince with revenues much
more considerable than those which (he possessed. But armies
were then levied and maintained by a Prince, at small charge.
The vassal followed his superior, and the superior attended the.
Monarch, at his own expence. Six hundred horsemen, however,
and three companies of foot, betides her guards, received re-
gular pay from the Queen. This extraordinary charge, together
with the deburfements occasioned by her marriage, exhaufteda
treasury, which was far from being rich. In this exigency, ma-
ny devices were fallen upon for rairing money. Fines were le-
vied on the towns of St. Andrew's, Perth, and Dundee, which
were fufpeted of favouring the malecontents. An unusual tax was
imposed on the burroughs throughout the kingdom; and a great fum
was demanded of the citizens of Edinburgh, by way of loan. This
unprecedented exaCtion alarmed the citizens. They had recourse

* Keith, 320. -t Knox, 389,.

to

BoOK III. to delays, and flarted difiPculties, in order to avoid it. These Mary

565' construed to be ads of avowed disobedience, and instantly comr

mitted several of them to prison. But this severity did not sub-
due the undaunted spirit of liberty, which prevailed among the in-
habitants. The Queen was obliged to mortgage to the city, the
/fitperiority of the town of Leith, in return for which she obtained
a considerable ium of money *. The thirds of ecclesiastical be-
nefices proved another source, whence the Queen derived som-e
supply. About this time, we find the Protetlant clergy complain-
ing more bitterly than ever of their poverty. The army, it is pro-
bable, exhausted a great part of that fund, which was appropri-
ated for their maintencane t.

Church as- THE aflemblies of the church were not unconcerned fpeta-
fairs.

tors of the commotions of this turbulent year. In the meeting
June 24, several of the malecontent nobles were present, and seem
to have had great influence on their decisions. The high strain in
which the Assembly addressed the Queen, can be imputed only to
those fears and jealousies, with regard to religion, which they en-
deavoured to infuse into the nation. The aifembly complained,
with some bitterness, of the flop which had been put to the pro-
grefs of the Reformation by the Queen's arrival in Scotland ; they
required not only the total fuppreflion of the Popifl wnorflipthrough-
out the kilngdom, but even in the Queen's own chapel; and be-
fides the legal eflablifnment of the Protestant religion, they de-
manded that Mary herself should publickly embrace it. The Queen,
after some deliberation, replied, that neither her conscience, nor
her intcrcfl, would permit her to take such a flep. The former
would for ever reproach her for a change, which proceeded frotm

* Knox, 383, 386. t1 Maitl. -Iift of Edinburgh, 27.

110

no inward conviction; the latter would susser by the offence, which BOOK IIl.
her apoftacy mull give to the King of France, and her other allies .""-

1565.
on the continent *.

IT is remarkable, that the prosperous situation of dte. Queen's

affairs, during this year, began to work some change in favour of
her religion. The Earls of Lennox, Athol, and Caffils, openly
attended mass; she herself afforded the Catholics a more avowed
protection than formerly; and, by her permission, some of the anm
tient Monks ventured to preach publicly to the people t-

* Knox, 374, 376. t Id. 389, 390o

THE

# THE HISTORY OF SCOTLAND. BOOK IV.

THE
Hl IS TORY

OF
SCOTL AN Do

B 0 K IV.
BooK IV. A S the day appointed for the meeting of Parliament approached,

.óó R. Mary and her Ministers were employed in deliberating

. 66.

Mary's deli- concerning the course which it was most proper to hold
berationscon.
erning the with regard to the exiled nobles. Many motives prompted her to
exiled nobles. set no bounds to the rigour of justice. The malecontents had la-

boured to defeat a scheme, which her interest conspired with her
pafions in rendering dear to her; they were the leaders of a party,
whose friendflip she had been obliged to court, while fie held
their principles in abhorrence; and they were firmly attached to a
rival, whom she had good rcafon both to fear and to hate.

BUT, on the other hand, several weighty confidetations might be

urged. The noblemen, whofc fate was in fufpence, were among the
monl powerful fubjcs in the kingdom ; their wealth great, their con-
incions extensive; and their adherents numerous. They were

3 now

r7.0

now at mercy, the objects ofcompaffion, and suing for pardon with BOOK IV.
the moil humble submission. . 66

1566.

IN those circumfiances, an aat of clemency would exalt the

Queen's character, and appear no less splendid among foreigners,
than acceptable to her own fubjedts. Mary herself, though highly
incensed, was not inexorable; but the King's rage was implacable
and unrelenting. They were solicited in behalf of the fugitives,
from various quarters. Morton, Ruthven, Maitland, and all who
had been members of the Congregation, were not forgetful of their
ancient union with Murray, and his fellow-fufferers ; nor negled-
ful of their safety, which they esteemed of great importance to
the kingdom. Melvil, who at that time poffefled the Queen's con-
fidence, seconded their solicitations. And Murray, having fooped
so low as to court Rizio, that favourite, who was desirous of fecur-.
ing his proteCtion against the King, whose displeasure lie had late-
ly incurred, seconded the interceflions of his other friends, with
the whole of his influence . The interposition of Sir Nicholas
Throgmorton, who had lately been Elizabeth's Ambassador in
Scotland, in behalf of the exiles, was of more weight than all these,
and attended with more success. Throgmorton, out of enmity to
Cecil, had deeply embarked in all the intrigues which were carried
on at the English court, in order to undermine the power and credit
of that Minister. He espoused, for this reason, the cause of the
Scottish Queen, towards whose title and pretensions the other was
known to bear little favour; and vcntured in the.prefent critical jur c
ture, to write a letter to Mary, containing the noft salutary ad-
vices with regard to her conduc. I-Ie recommended the parn.on=

* Mcelvil, j5 .,.
VOL. I. Oq q.

i,,

BOOK IV. ing of the Earl of Murray and his associates, as a measure no less
b~..-. prudent than popular. An action of this nature, fays he, the pure

1566.

effetd of your Majesty's generosity, will spread the fame of your le-
nity and moderation, and engage the English to look towards your
accefion to their throne, not only without prejudice, but with de-
fire. By the fame means, a perfect harmony will be restored
among your own fubjeds, who, if any rupture should happen with
England, will serve you with that grateful zeal, which your cle-
mency cannot fail of inspiring*.

She resolves THESE prudent remonstrances of Throgmorton, to which his
to treat them
with clemen- reputation for wisdom, and known attachment to the Queen, added

great authority, made a deep impression on her spirit. Her cour-
tiers cultivated this happy disposition, and prevailed on her, not-
withstanding the King's inflexible temper, to sacrifice her own pri-
vate resentment to the interceflion of her fubjeds, and the wishes
of her friends *. With this view, the Parliament, which had been
called to meet on the 4th of February, was prorogued to the 7th of
Aprilt. And in the mean' time, she was busy in confidering the
manner and form in which she thould extend her favour to the
Lords who were under disgrace.

Is divcrted THOUGH Mary discovered, on this occasion, a mind naturally
fo"'tion btlC prone to humanity, and capable of forgiving, she wanted, how-
the folicita- ever, firmness to resist the influence, which was fatally employed to
tions of
,rance, and disappoint the effects of this amiable disposition. About this time,
her zeal for
Popery. and at no great distance from each other, two envoys arrived from
February 3. the French King. The former was intrudied with matters of mere

* Mclv. . 19 Id. 125. t Good. vol.i. 224.

ceremony

ceremony alone; he congratulated the Queen on her marriage, BooK IV.
and invested' the King with the ensigns of the order of St. Michael. 566
The inftru&ions of the latter related to matters of more import-
ance, and produced greater effeas'*.

AN interview between Charles IX. and his Sifter the Queen of

Spain had been often proposed; and after many obstacles arising
from the opposition of political interest, was at last appointed at
Bayonne. Cathrine of Mledicis accompanied her son; the Duke of
Alva attended his Mistress. Amidst the scenes of public pomp
and pleasure, which seemed to be the sole occupation of both courts,
a scheme was formed, and measures concerted, for exterminating
the Hugonots in France, the Proteflants in the low countries, and
for suppressing the Reformation throughout all Europe t. The
adtive policy of Pope Pius IV. and the zeal of the Cardinal of Lor-
rain, confirmed and encouraged dispositions, so suitable to the
genius of the Romish religion, and so beneficial to their own
order.

IT was on account of this holy league which the French envoy

brought to Mary, conjuring her, at the fame time, in the name of
the King of France, and the Cardinal of Lorrain, not to restore the
leaders of the Protestants in her kingdom to power and favour, at
the very time when the Catholic Princes were combined to de-
stroy that fed, in all the countries of Europe :+:.

POPERY is a species of false religion, remarkable for the strong

possession it takes of the heart. Contrived by men of deep infight
into the human charaaer, and improved by the experience and

Keith, 325. Append. i67. 1- Thuan, lib. 37. :: Mclv. 126.

Q q 2 obfcr-.

BoKr IV. observation of many successive ages; it arrived at last to a degree of

566. per'edlion, swhichno former system of fuperilitionhad ever attained,

There is no power in the underilanding, and no pailion in the heart,
to which it does not present objects, adapted to route, and to inte-
reft them. Neither the love of pleaCure, which, at that time, pre-
vailed in the court of France, nor the pursuits of ambitibn which-oc-
cupied the court of.Spain, had secured them from the dominion of
bigotry. Laymen, and courtiers, were agitated with that furious
and unmerciful zeal, which is commonly confidered as peculiar
to eccleliaftics; and Kings and _Ministers thought themselves bound,
in conscience, to extirpate the Protestant doctrine. Mary herself
vas deeply tinaured with all the prejudices of Popery; a paftion-
ate attachment to that fuperfiition is visible in every part of her cha.
racier, and runs through all the scenes of her life: flhe was de-
voted, too, with the utmost fubmiflion to the Princes of Lorrain,
her uncles; and had been accustomed, from her infancy, to liRen
to all their advices, with a filial refpet. The profpea of refloring
the public exercise of her own religion, the pleasure of comply-
ing with her uncles, and the hopes of gratifying the French Mo-
narch, whom the present situation of her affairs in England made
it ncceflary to court, counterbalanced all the prudent confidera.
tions which had formerly weighed with her. She instantly joined
the confederacy, which had been formed for the deftrudion of the
Protefants, and altered the whole plan of her conduct, with
reard to Murray and his adhcaents. *

To thi; fatal resolution may be imputed all the subsequent ca-

lamitics of Mary's life. E1vcr since her return into Scotland, for-
trunl may be ,cid to have been propitious to her, rather than adverse;
and if her profcrity did not rife to any great height, it had, how-

* Ecc Appcin'lix, N' XIV.
q4 eve l',

ever, suffered no considerable. interruption. A thick and fettledBooc 1IV.
cloud of adversity, with few gleams of hope, and none of real en- I5 6
joyment, covers the remainder of her days.

THE effedts of the new system, which Mary had adopted, were A Parli.mnt

called to at-

soon visible. The time of the prorogation of Parliament was flort- tant the exi-
ened; and by a new proclamation, the I2th of March was fixed led nobles.
for its meeting *. Mary resolved, without any further delay, to
proceed to the attainder of the rebel Lords, and, at the iaine time,
determined to take some steps towards the re-establishment of the
Romish religion in Scotland t. The Lords of the Articles were
chosen, as usual, to prepare the business which was to come befo e
the Parliament. They were all persons in whom the Queen could'
confide, and bent to promote her designs. The ruin of Murray and
his party seemed now inevitable, and the danger of the Reformed
Church imminent, when an event unexpectedly happened, which

* Keith,. 36..

-- It is not on the authority of Knox. alone, that we charge the Queen with the

design of re-establishing the Roman Catholic religion. He, indeed, afterts that
the altars, which should have been ereced in the church of St. Giles, were already
provided, 394. I. Mi\ary herself, in a letter to the Archbifflop of Glasgow her Ain-
baffador in France, acknowledges, " that in that Parliament, fhle intended to have
done some good, with rcfpc& to restoring the old religion." Keith, 33I. 2. Th.e
Spiritual Lords, iL c. the Popish ecclesiastics, had, by her authority, rcfumed their an-
cient place in that aflembly, ibid. She had joined the clonfcederacy at Bayonne,
Keith, Append. I67. 4. She allowed inasf to be celebrated in diflr-clnt parts cf
the kingdom, ibid. and declared that fie would have mats frcc for ali meni who
would hear it, Good. vol. i. 274. 5. Blackwood, who was furifihed by the Arch-
'iniop of Glasgow with materials for writing his 2Alrtyre d( Aiil', aflirms that
the Queen intended to have procured, in this Parliament, if not the rc-efliblifh-
ment of the Catholic religion, at leaf fonmthing t;.r the cafe of Catholics, Jcbb.
vol. ii. 204.

laved

BOOK IV. observation of many successive ages; it arrived at lafl to a degree of

1566. "per'e10ion, which no former system of fuperitition.had ever attained,

There is no power in the underflanding, and no pafrion in the heart,
to which it does not present objeds, adapted to rouse, and to inte-
reft them. Neither the love of pleasure, which, at that time, pre-
vailed in the court of France, nor the pursuits of ambition which-oc-
cupied the court of Spain, had secured them from the dominion of
bigotry. Laymen, and courtiers, were agitated with that furious
and unmerciful zeal, which is commonly confidered as peculiar
to eccleiaftics; and Kings and Ministers thought themselves bound,
in conscience, to extirpate the Protestant dodrine. Mary herself
was deeply tineured with all the prejudices of Popery; a pailonr-
ate attachment to that fuperfition is visible in every part of her cha.
rafer', and runs through all the scenes of her life: she was de-
voted, too, with the utnmof fubmifion to the Princes of Lorrain,
her uncles; and had been accuflomed, from her infancy, to liflen
to all their advices, with a filial refped. The profped of restoring
the public exercise of her own religion, the pleasure of comply-
ing with her uncles, and the hopes of gratifying the French Mo-
narch, whom the present situation of her affairs in England made
it nccef'ary to court, counterbalanced all the prudent confiderai,
tions whichl had formerly weighed with her. She instantly joined
the confederacy, which had been -ormed for the deftrucion of the
Protestants, and altered the whole plan of her condu;, with
regard to Murray and his alhcaents. -

To thil fatal resolution may be imputed all the fubfequencca-

lamities of Mary's life. Ever since her return into Scotland, for-
tLine may be said to have been propitious to her, rather than adverse;
and if her prolferity lidl not rife to any great height, it had, how-

-* Ecc( ApIerCnix, NI0 XIV.
4' eI/c,

ever, suffered no considerable interruption. A thick and fettlecBooK_ iV.
cloud of adversity, with few gleams of hope, and none of real en- x5ó<.
joyment, covers the remainder of her days.

THE effects of the new fyflem, which Mary had adopted, were A Parliamrent

called to a:-

soon visible. The time of the prorogation of Parliament was short- tint he exi-
ened; and by a new proclamation, the 2th of March was fixed led nobles.
for its meeting -. Mary resolved, without any further delay, to
proceed to the attainder of the rebel Lords, and; at the aine time,
determined to take some ifeps towards the re-eftabliflment of the
Romiih religion in Scotland t. The Lords of the Articles were
chosen, as usual, to prepare the business which was to come befo e
the Parliament. They were all persons in whom the Queen could'
confide, and bent to promote her designs. The ruin of Murray ald
his party seemed now inevitable, and the danger of the Reformed
Church imminent, when an event unexpecedly happenzed, which

Keith,. 326,-

f- It is not on the authority of Klnx. alone, that we charge the Queen with the

dcfign of re-establishing the Roman Catholic religion. He, indeed, affrts that
the altars, which should have been ereAed in the church of St. Giles, were alrealy
provided, 394. i. iMary herself, in a letter to the Archbiflop of Glasgow her Am-
baflador in France, acknowledges, " that in that Parliament, fle intended to have
done some good, with rcfpcc to refioring the old religion." Keith, 331. 2. ThVe
Spiritual Lords, i e. the Popilh ccclefiaflics, had, by hzr authority, resumed their an-
cient place in that aflemnbly, ibid. 3. Shl e ad joined the cionfedracy at Bayoniine
IKeith, Append. 167. 4. She allowed m;iss to be celebrated in liff'erent parts (f
the kingdom, ibid. and declared that file would have nmafs f-ee for all men who
would hear it, Good. vol. i. 274. 5. Blackwood, who was furnified by the Arch-
ibifhop of Glasgow with materials for writing his A/u/l y,' dl , l/,'lii, afslrms that
the Qicen intended to have procured, in this Parliamcnt, if not the rc-etfhlblili-
mcnt of the Catholic religion, , at Icafl fomnething ;f.r the ca( of Catholics, Jcbb.
vol. ii. 204.

falved

Booi IV. Caved both. If we regard either the barbarity of that age, when

5óógJ such ads of violence were common, or the mean condition of the
I566.

And prevent- unhappy person who suffered, the event is little remarkable; but if
ed hy the con
fpiracyagainl we refledc upon the circumstances with which it was attended, or
Rizio.

upon the consequences which followed it, it appears extremely me-
morable; and the rife and progress of it deserve to be traced with
great care.

Drrnly lores DARNLY'S external accomplishments had excited that sudden and
the Queen's

iWon,1. violent paflion which raised him to the throne. But the qualities

of his mind corresponded ill with the beauty of his person. Of a
weak underfranding, and without experience, conceited at the fame
time of his own abilities, and ascribing his extraordinary success en-
tirely to his distinguished merit. All the Queen's favour made no
impression on such a temper. All her gentleness could not bridle
his imperious and ungovernable spirit. All her attention to place
about him persons capable of direding his conduCt, could not pre-
serve him from rash and imprudent aAions *. Fond of all the amuse-
ments, and even prone to all the vices of youth, he became, by
degrees, careless of her person, and a Itranger to her company.
To a woman, and a Queen, such behaviour was intolerable. The
lower fhle had itooped to raise him, his behaviour appeared the
more ungenerous and criminal. And in proportion to the firength
of her firif affection, was the violence with which her diappointed
paflion now operated. A few months after the marriage, their do-
mesic quarrels began to be observed. The extravagance of Darn-
ly's ambition gave rife to there. Inflead of being satisfied with that
stretch of power, by which Mary had conferred on him the title
of King, andi had admitted him to a filare in the adininiftration, he

'* Good. vol. i. J22.
4 demanded

demanded the Crown Matrimonial with most insolent importunity*.. BOOK 1V.
And though Mary alledged that this gift was beyond her power, 566.
and that the authority of Parliament must be interposed to bellow
it, he wanted either underflanding to comprehend, or temper to
admit so just a defence; and often renewed and urged his re-
quefl.

RIZIO, whom the King had at firit taken into great confidence, Sufpetas RI.

zio to be the

did not humour him in these follies. By this, he incurred Henry's cause of it.
displeasure; and it was impossible for Mary to behave towards
her husband with the fame affetion, which distinguished the first
and happy days of their union, he imputed this coldness, not to
his own behaviour, which had so well merited it, but to the infi-
nuations of Rizio. Mary's own conduc confirmed and strengthen-
ed these suspicions. She treated this stranger with a familiarity, and
admitted him to a share in her confidence, to which neither his first
condition, nor the office she had lately betlowed upon him, gave
him any title. He was perpetually in her pretence, intermeddled
in every business, and, together with a few favourites, was the
companion of all her private amusements. The haughty spirit of
Darnly could not bear the interference of such an upstart. And im-.
patient of any delay, and unreifrained by any scruple, he instantly
resolved to get rid of him by violence.

AT the fame time, another design, which took its rife from very Riziolated

different motives, was carrying on against the life of Rizio. Mor- by the fiiend
ton, Ruthven, Lindsay, and Maitland, were the contrivers of it. nobles.
In all former commotions they had been firidly united with Mur-

* Keitl, 329. Knox, 404.

*^ly

BooK IV. ray, though in the late infurretion they had deserted him, for va-

i6ó. rious reasons. Morton was nearly allied to the family of Angus,

and during the minority of the present Earl, acted as Chief of the
name of Douglas. Ruthven was married to the King's aunt.
Lindsay's wife was of the fame blood. All these had vwarmIy con-
curred with the Queen in promoting a marriage, which did so much
honour to the house of Douglas, and naturally expected, that under
a King of their own blood, the chief management:of affairs would
be committed to them. Maitland, with his usual sagacity, fore-
saw that MIurray's opposition to the match would prove dangerous
and ineffecual; but whoever ruled at court, he hoped, by his dex-
terity and talents, to render himself necessary and of importance.
They were all equally disappointed in their expectations. The King's
headifrong temper rendered him incapable of advice. The Queen
could not help distrusting men who had been so long and To inti-
mately connected with Murray, and gave herself up entirely to
those Counsellors who complied with all her inclinations. The re-
turn of that nobleman and his followers was therefore the only event
which could restore Mvorton, Maitland, and their afrociates to their
former ascendant over the Queen's councils. For this reason, no-
thing could be more mortifying to them, than the resolution which
Mary had taken to treat the exiles with rigour. This they im-
puted to Rizio, wiho, after he had engaged to aid Murray with all
his intcreft, was now the imotdi active inflrumcnt in promoting the
neafures which were concerted for the ruin of that nobleman.
This officious zeal compleated the disgust which they had conceived
against him, and inspired them with thouoghts of vengeance, in no
wife suitable to jullice, to humanity, or to their own dignity.

WVVIILE

WHILE they were ruminating upon their scheme, the King com- BoOK IV.

municated his resolution to be avenged of Rizio to Lord Ruthven, -566
and implored his assistance, and that of his friends, towards the They com-

bine in order

execution of this design. Nothing could be more acceptable to-them to murder
than this overture. They saw at once all the advantages they would him
leap, by the concurrence of such an associate. Their own private
revenge upon Rizio would paPs, they hoped, for an a: of obedi-
ence to the King; and they did not despair of obtaining the reflo-
ration of their banished friends, and security for the Protestant re-
ligion, as the price of their compliance with his will.

BUT as Henry was no less fickle, than rash, they hesitated for

some time, and determined to advance no farther, without taking
every possible precaution for their own safety. They did not, in the
mean time, susser the King's resentment to abate. Morton, who
was inferior to no man in that intriguing age, in all the arts of in-
finuation and address, took the young Prince under his management.
He wrought upon his ruling passion, ambition to obtain the Ma-
trimonial Crown. He represented Rizio's credit with the Queen
to be the chief and only obstacle to his success in that demand.
This minion, alone, he said, possessed her confidence; and out of
complaisance to him, her fubjeds, her nobility, and even her hus-
band, were excluded from any participation of her secret councils.
Under the appearance of a confidence merely political, he infi-
nuated, and the King perhaps believed, that a familiarity of another
and more criminal nature might be concealed-:. Such various and

compli-

* Cf all our historians, Buchanan alone avowedly accuses Mary of a criminal

love for Rizio, 340, 344. Knox slightly insinuates that such a fufpiicioin \as
cntcrtained, 391. Mclvil, in a conversation with the Quccn, intimates that he
was afraid her familiarity with Rizio might be liable to mifconftldrion, 10.

VoL.. I, IK The

BoOK IV. complicated passions raged in the King's bosom, with the utmost

66 ó.fury. He became more impatient than ever of any delay, and even

threatened to strike the intended blow with his own hand. At last,
preliminaries were fettled on both fides, and articles for their mu-
tual security agreed upon. The King engaged to prevent the at-
tainder of the banfh-ied Lords, to consent to their return into Scot-
land, to obtain for them an ample remiflion of all their crimes, and
to support to the utmost of his power, the religion which was
now eflablifhed in the kingdom. On their parts, they undertook
to procure the Matrimonial Crown for Henry, to secure his right
of succession, if the Queen should die before him, and to defend
that right to the utter most, against whatever person should presume
to dispute it; and if either Rizio, or any other person, should hap-
pen to be killed in prosecuting of the design, the King promised to
acknowledge himself to be the author of the enterprize, and to
protect those who were embarked in it *.

NOTHING

The King himself seems, both by Melvil's account, and by his expostulation with
the Queen, which Ruthven mentions, to have given credit to these suspicions, Melv,
127. Keith, Append. 123, 124. But, in opposition to these suspicions, and they
are nothing more, we may observe that Raulet the Queen's French Secretary was dif-
minl'd from her service, and Rizio advanced to that office in December 1564..
Keith 268. It was in consequence of this preferment, that he acquired. his great
credit with the Queen, Melv. o07. Darnly arrived in Scotland about two months
after, Keith, 269. The Queen imrmediately conceived for him a paflion, which had
all the symptoms of genuine and violent love. Rizio aided this passion, and pro-
moted the marriage with all his intcreft, Mclv. iII. During some months after
the marriage, the Queen's fondnecs for Darnly continued. She soon proved with
child. Froin this enumeration of circumstances, it appears almost impossible that
the Quecn, unless we suppose her to have been a woman utterly abandoned, could

* Good. vol. i. 266.

carry

NOTUING now remained but to concert the plan of operation, to Boori IV.

chufe the adors, and to aflign them their parts in perpetrating this 566
detestable crime. Every circumitance here paints and charaae- Perpetrate

that crime it

rizes the manners and men of that age, and fillsaus with horror at the Qieen's
both. The place, chosen for committing such a deed, was thePalace
Queen's bedchamber. Though Mary was now in the sixth month
of her pregnancy, and though Rizio might have been seized
elsewhere, without any difficulty, the King pitched upon this
place, that he might enjoy the malicious pleasure of reproaching
Rizio with his crimes before the Queen's face. The Earl of
Morton, the Lord High Chancellor of the kingdom, undertook to
diret an enterprize, carried on in defiance of all the laws of which
he was bound to be the guardian. The Lord Ruthven, who had
been confined to his bed for three months, by a very dangerous
distemper, and who was still so feeble that he could scarce walk,
or bear the weight of his own armour, was entrusted with the exe-
cutive part; and while he himself needed to be supported by two
men, he came abroad to commit a murder in the presence of his
Sovereign.

ON the 9th of March, Morton entered the court of the palace with

an hundred and sixty men; and without noise, or meeting with any
resistance, seized all the gates. While the Queen was at supper with
the Countess of Argyll, Rizio, and a few domestics, the King fud-
denly entered the apartment, by a private paflhge. At his back,
was Ruthven, clad in complete armour, and with that ghaffly and

carry on any criminal intrigue with Rizio. But the filcnce of Randolph the Eng-
gliflh Rcfident, a man abundantly ready to mention, and to aggravate Mary's faults,
and who does not once insinuate that her confidence in Rizio concealed any thing
criminal, is in itfclf a sufficient vindication of her innocence.

R r 2 horrid

BOOK IV. horrid look which long sickness had given him. Three or four

5óó" of.his most trusty accomplices followed him. Such an unusual ap-
i$66.

pearance alarmed thoie who were present. Rizio instantly appre-
headed that he was the vitim at whom the blow was aimed; and
in the utmost consternation retired behind the Queen, of whom he
laid hold, hoping that the reverence due to her person might
prove some protection to him. The conspirators had proceeded too
far to be reRtrained by any consideration of that kind. Numbers of
armed men rushed into the chamber. Ruthven drew his dagger,
and with a furious mien and voice, commanded Rizio to leave a
place of which lie was unworthy, and which he had occupied too
long. Mary employed tears, and entreaties, and threatenings, to
save her favourite. But, notwithstanding all these, he was torn
from her by violence, and before he could be dragged through the
next apartment, the rage of his enemies put an end to his life.,
piercing his body with fifty fix wounds ..

ATROL, Huntly, Bothwell,, and other confidents of the Queen

who lodged in the palace, were alarmed at the uproar, and filled
with the utmost terror on their own account; but either no violence
was intended againif them, or the conspirators durst not fled the
noblest blood in the kingdom, in the fame illegal manner with
which they had ventured to take the life of a stranger. Some of
them were dismissed, and others made their escape.

THE conspirators, in the mean time, kept pofleffion of the pa-

T'hev confine
the Queen lace, and guarded the Queen with the utmost care. A proclama-

tion was published by the King, prohibiting the Parliament to meet
on the day appointed; and measures were taken by him for pre-

' Scc Appendix, N° XV,

1csit°

venting any tumult in the city *. Murray, Rothes, and their fol- BooK IV.
lowers being informed of every flep taken against Rizio, arrived I'
at Edinburgh next evening. Murray was graciously received
both by the King and Queen. By the former, on account of the
Articles which had been agreed upon between them; by the
latter, because she hoped to prevail on him, by gentle treat-
ment, not to take part with the murderers of Rizio. Their
power ihe still felt, and dreaded; and the insult which they had
offered .to her authority, and even to her person, so far exceeded any
crime fle could impute to Murray, that in hopes of wreaking
her vengeance on. them, she became extremely willing to be re-
conciled to him. The obligations, however, which Murray lay
under to men, who had hazarded their lives on his account, en-
gaged him to labour for their safety. The Queen, who scarce had
the liberty of choice left, was persuaded to admit Morton and Ruth-
ven into her presence, and to grant them the promise of pardon in
whatever terms they fshould deem necessary for their own fe-
curity..

THE King, niean while, flood astonished at the boldnees and

success of his own enterprize, and uncertain what course to hold
The Queen observed his irresolution, and availed herself of it. She But lie gains
employed all her art to disengage him from his new associates. His makes, '"d
consciousness of the insult which he had offered to so illustrious a ep
benefadrefs, inspired him with uncommon facility and complaisance.
In spite of all the warnings he received to difIruft the Queen's artifi-
ces, she prevailed on him, to dismiss the guards which the confpi-

* Keith, Append. iz6,.

amto rs

BOOK IV. rators had placed on her person. And that fame night he made his

,;óóT eefcape along with her, attended by three persons only, and retired
M.ircx ix. to Dunbar. The scheme of their flight had been communicated

to Huntly and Bothwell, and they were quickly joined by them,
and several other of the nobles. Bothwell's estate lay in that cor-
ner of the kingdom, and his followers cronded to their Chief, in
such numbers, as soon enabled the Queen to set the power of the
conspirators at defiance.

I reconciled THIS sudden flight filled them with inexpressible consternation.
to the exiled
nobles. They had obtained a promise of pardon; and it now appeared from

the Queen's conduct, that nothing more was intended by this pro-
mise, than to amuse them, and to gain time. They ventured, how-
ever, to demand the accomplishment of it; but their messenger was
detained a prisoner, and the Queen advancing towards Edinburgh,
at the head of 8ooo men, talked in the highest strain of resentment
and revenge. She had the address, at the fame time, to separate
Murray and his associates from the conspirators against Rizio. Sena
fible that the union of these parties would form a confederacy, which
might prove formidable to the crown, she expressed great willing-
ness to receive the former into favour; towards the latter, she de-
clared herself inexorable. Murray and his followers were no less
willing to accept of pardon, on her own terms. The conspirators
ngainft Rizio, deprived of every resource, and incapable of resist.

March ,9. ance, fled precipitately to Newcastle, having thus changed fitua-
The con ('pira-
tors agniii(t tions with Murray and his party, who left that place a few days
Rizio fly into
England. before.

No man so remarkable for wisdom, and even for cunning, as the
Earl of Morton, ever engaged in a more unfortunate enterprize. De-

3 fertcd

felted basely by the King, who now denied his knowledge of the BooK 1V
conspiracy, by public proclamations; and abandoned ungenerously I
by Murray and his party *, he was obliged to fly from his native
country, to resign the highefl office, and to part with one of the
molt opulent fortunes in the kingdom.

ON her return to Edinburgh, Mary began to proceed against

those concerned in the murder of Rizio, with the utmost rigour of
law. But, in praise of her clemency, it muf- he observed, that
only two persons, and there of no considerable rank, suffered for
this crime -.

IN this conspiracy there is one circumflance, which, though

somewhat detached, deserves not to be forgotten. In the confede-
racy between the King and the conspirators, the real intention of
which was assassination, the preserving of the Reformed Church is,
nevertheless, one of the most considerable articles; and the fame
men who were preparing to violate one of the first duties of mora-
lity, affected the highest regard for religion. History relates these
extravagancies of the human mind, without pretending to juflify,
or even to account for them; and regulating her own opinions by
the eternal and immutable laws of justice and of virtue, points out
such inconsistencies, as features.of the age which she describes, and
(ecords them for the inftrudion of ages to come.

As this is the second instance of deliberate aflaffination which Anaccountof

the frequency.
has occurred, and as we ihall hereafter meet with many other in- of aniclna-

tions in lthat

fiances of the fame crime, the causes which gave rife to a pracices ae.
so hfocking to humanity, deserve our particular attention. Resent-
ment is, for obvious and wife rcafons, one of the strongest passions
in the human mind. The natural demand of this passion is, that

* Melv. 130.. K Kickh, Appendix 30o, 334:,

the,

BooK IV. the perlfoi who feelshe e injury should himself inflic the vengeance
`y"V'I due on that account. The permitting this, however, would have

5 been delfruetive to society; and punishment would have known

no bounds, either in severity, or in duration. For this reason, in
the very infancy of the social rlate, the sword was taken out of pri-
vate hands, and committed to the Magifrate. But, at firfi, while
laws aimed at restraining, they really strengthened the principle of
revenge. The earliefl and most simple punishment for crimes was
retaliation ; the offender forfeited limb for limb, and life for life.
The payment of a compensation to the person injured, succeeded
to the rigour of the former institution. In both there, the gratifica-
tion of private revenge was the objec of law; and he who suffered
the wrong, was the only person who had a right to pursue, to exact,
or to remit the punishment. While laws allowed such full scope to
the revenge of one party, the interests of the other were not
neglected. If the evidence of his guilt did not amount to a full
proof, or if he reckoned himself to be unjuffly accused, the person
to whom a crime was imputed had a right to challenge his adversary
to tingle combat, and on obtaining the victory, vindicated his own
honour. In almost every considerable cause, whether civil or cri-
minal, arms were appealed to, in defence, either of the innocence,
or the property of the parties. Juflice had fcdlom occasion to use
her balance; the sword alone decided every contest. The passion
of revenge was nourified by all there means, and grew, by daily
indulgence, to be incredibly strong. Mankind became habituated
to blood, not only in times of war, but of peace; and from this,
as well as other causes, contraetcd an amazing ferocity of temper,
and of manners. This ferocity, however, made it nece'irry to dil-
courage the trial by combat; to abolifl the payment of coripenfa-
tions in criminal cafes ; and to thinl of rome milder metlod of ter-
minating disputes concerning civil rights. The puniflhments for

I crilces

crimes became more severe, and the regulations concerning pro-BooK IV-
perty more fixed; but the Princes, whose province it was to in- óó-
flit the one, and to enforce the other, possessed little power. Great
offenders despised their authority; smaller ones sheltered themselves
under the jurifdition of those, from whose protection they expected
impunity. The administration ofjuftice was extremely feeble and
dilatory. An attempt to punish the crimes of a Chieftain, or even
of his vaflals, often excited rebellions and civil wars. To nobles,
haughty and independent, among whom the causes of discord were
many and unavoidable, who were quick in discerning an injury,
and impatient to revenge it; who esteemed it infamous to submit
to an enemy, and cowardly to forgive him; who confidered the right
of punishing those who had injured them, as a privilege of their
order, and a mark of independence; such flow proceedings were
extremely unfatisfaaory. The blood of their adversary was, in their
opinion, the only thing which could washaway an affront; where
that was not shed, their revenge was disappointed, their courage be-
came fufpeted, and a stain was left on their honour. That venge-
ance, which the impotent hand of the Magistrate could not inflict,
their own could easily execute; under governments so feeble, men
assumed, as in a itate of nature, the right of judging, and redressing
their own wrongs. And thus assassination, a crime of all others
the most detfruCtive to society, came not only to be allowed, but to
be deemed honourable.

THE history of Europe, during the i4th and x5th centuries

abounds with detestable intfances of this crime. It prevailed chiefly
among the French and Scots, between whom there was a close
intercourse at that time, and a surprising resemblance in their na-
tional characters. In 407, the only brother of the King of France

VOL.. IS f was

BOOK IV. was murdered publickly in the fireets of Paris, and intfead ofpunif;h

"66. ing this horrible action, an eminent lawyer waas allowed to plead in

defence of it before the Peers of France, and, avowedly to main,
tain the lawfulness of assassination. In. 1417, it required, all the
eloquence and authority of the, famous Gerfon, to prevail onr the
Council of Coniance to condemn this proposition, c" That there are
some cafes in which affaftination is a virtue more meritorious in a
Knight than in a Squire, and. more meritorious, in a King than in a
Knight*." The number of eminent persons who were murdered
in France and Scotland, on account either of private, or political,
or religious quarrels, during the i5th and i6th centuries, is almost
incredible. Even after those causes, which first gave rife to this
barbarous practice were removed; after thejurifdiction of Magistrates,
and the authority of laws were better established, and become more
universal; after the progress of learning and philosophy had polihed
the manners, and humanized the minds of men, this, crime conti-
nued- in some degree, It was towards the close of the 17th cen-
tury before it disappeared in France. The additional vigour, which
the royal authority acquired by the accession of James VI. to the
throne of England, seems to have put a flop to it in Scotland,

THE influence, however, of'any national cuflom, both on the

understanding and on the heart, and how far it may go towards
perverting or extinguiflhing moral principles of the greatest import-
ance, is remarkable. The authors of those ages have perfetly irn-
bibed the fentimcnts of their cotemporaries, with regard to anaffi-
nation; and they, who had lIcifurc to reflect, and to judge, appear
to be no more flocked at this crime, than the persons, who com-
mitted it during the heat and impetuosity of paflion. Buchanan!

' L'Enfant, Hi,. d Coc.. onft

rceltes.

relates the murder of Cardinal Beatoun, and of Rizio, without BooK IV.
exprefilng those feelings which are natural to a man, or that in-

expr.ssing those .i 566.

dignation which became an fhiftorian -. Knox, whose mind was
fiercer and miore unpolifecd,i talks of the death of Beatoun and of
the Duke of Guise, not only without censure, but with the utmost
exultation t-. On the other hand, the Bifhlop of Ross mentions the
a. ldfiination of the:Earl of Murray, with some degrees ofapplaufe}.
Bi.ckwood dwells .upon it, with the- most indecent triumph, and
a.fc ibes it direaly to the hand of God 1j. Lord Ruthven, the prin-
cial. ador in the conspiracy against Rizio, wrote an account of it
iomc. ,hort time before his own death, and in all his long narra-
tive there is not one expression of regret, or one symptom of com-
punction for a crime no less dishonourable, than barbarous -**. Mor-
ton, equally guilty of the fame crime, entertained the fame senti-
ments concerning it; and in his last moments, neither he himself,
nor the Ministers who attended him, seem to have confidered it as
an adion :which called for repentance; even then he talks of. Da-
vid'sJiazighter as coolly, as if it had been an innocent or commend-
able. deed Tt. The vices of another age astonish and shock us;
the. vices of our own become familiar, and excite little horror. We
return from this.digreffion to the course of the history.

TIiE charm, which had at firif attached the Queen to Darnly, The Queen's

and held them for some time in an happy union, was now entire- Dtrdly in-
ly dissolved; and .love no longer covering his follies and vices with creaes.
its friendly veil, they appeared to Mary in their full dimension and
deformity f+. Tho' Henry published a proclamation, difclaimingl
any knowledge of the conspiracy against Rizio, the Quen was fully

B, J3chlan. 295, 345. ' 1 Knox, 334. :: Alnerf. 3. 4
II Jcbb. ?. 263. * t Keith, Append. i19. 1 i Crawf.: I. AppcndJ

1::1: See Appendix, N. XVI.

S f 2 convince(,

BooK IV. convinced, that he was not only accessory to the contrivance, but

'V 6 ^to the commission. of that odious crime*. That very power;
566.

which, with liberal and unfufpicious fondness, ihe had conferred up.
on him, he had employed to insult her authority, to limit her pre.
rogative, and to endanger her person. :Such an outrage, it was
impossible any woman could bear, or forgive. Cold civilities, fe-
cret distrust, frequent quarrels, succeeded to their former transports
of affection and confidence. The Queen's favours were no longer
conveyed through his hands. The croud of expectants ceased to
court his patronage, which they found to avail fo-little. Among
the nobles, some dreaded his furious temper, others complained of
his perfidiousness; and all of them despised the weakness of his
understanding, and the inconitancy of his heart. The people them-
selves observed some parts of his condut, which little suited the
dignity of a King. Addited to drunkenness, beyond what the
manners of that age could bear, and indulging irregular paffilons,
which even the licentiousness of youth could not excuse, he, by his
indecent behaviour, provoked the Queen to the ufmoft; and the
passions which it occasioned, often forced tears from her eyes, both
in public and in private A. Her aversion for himn increased every day,
and could be no longer concealed. He was often absent from court,
appeared there with little splendor, and was truifed with no power.
Avoided equally by those who endeavoured to please the Queen,
who favoured Morton and his aff6ciates, or who adhered to the
house of Hamilton; he was left almost alone in a neglected and
unpitied solitude 4.

The rife of ABOUT this time a new favourite grew into great credit with the
Bothwell's fa-
vour. Queen, and soon gained an ascendant over her heart, which encou-

* Keith, 350. t Ibid. 329. Melv. 131, &c.

raged

raged his enterprising genius to: form defighs that proved fatal to BOOK IV.
himself, and the occasion of all Mary's subsequent misfortunes. 66

1566.

This was James Hepburn Earl of Bothwell, the head of an ancient
family, and by his extensive possessions and numerous vassals, one
of the moot powerful noblemen in the kingdom. Even in that
turbulent age, when so many vast projects were laid open to an
aspiring mind, and invited it to action, no man's ambition was
more daring than Bothwell's, or had recourse to bolder or more
singular expedients for obtaining power. When almost every per-
son of diftincEion in the kingdom, whether Papist or Protestant, had
joined the Congregation in opposing the dangerous encroachments
of the French upon the liberties of the nation, he, though an avowed
Protestant, adhered to the Queen Regent, and acted with vigour on
her fide. The success which attended the arms of the Congrega-
tion having obliged him to retire into France, he was taken into
the Queen's service, and continued with her till the time of her re-
turn into Scotland *. From that period, every flep of his condudc
towards Mary was remarkably dutiful ; and amidfl all the shiftings
of faction, we scarcely ever find him holding any course which could
be offensive to her. When Murray's proceedings with regard to
her marriage gave umbrage to the Queen, the recalled Bothwell
from that banishment into which the had with reluctance driven
him, and confidered his. zeal and abilities as the most powerful'
supports, of her authority. , When the conspirators againt. Rizid'&
seized her person, he became the chief instrument of recovering.
her liberty, and served her, on that occasion, with so much fide-,
lity and success, as made the deepest impreflion on her mind, and
greatly increased. the confidence which she had hitherto placed in

* Anders. I. 90.
4 *'- ' him..

BOOK IV. him'. Her ratitude oaded him with marks of her bounty; flhe

-'v- raised him to offices of profit and of trust, and tranfaded no mat-

ter of importance without his advice '-. By complaisance, and as-
iiduity, he confirmed and fortified these dispositions of the Queen
in his favour, and insensibly paved the way towards that vast projed,
which his immoderate ambition had perlaps already conceived, and
which, in spite of many difficulties, and at the expenceof many
crimes, he at lft accomplished.

THE hour of the Queen's delivery now approached. As her

palace was defended only by a slender guard, it seemed impru-
dent to expose her person, at that time, to the insults (he might
susser in a kingdom torn by faAions, and prone to mutiny. For
this reason, the Privy Council advised the Queen to fix, her residence
in the castle of Edinburgh, the strongest fortress in the kingdom,
and the most proper place for the fecurity.of her person +. In order
to render this security more perfet, Mary laboured to ext.i:guifli
the domestic feuds which divided some of the principal nobles. Mur-
ray and Argyll were exasperated against Huntly and Bothwell, by
reciprocal and repeated injuries. The Queen,. by her authority
and entreaties, effected a reconcilement among them, and drew fioml
them a promise to bury their discords in everlasting oblivion. This
reconcilement Mary had so much at heart, that The made it the con-
dition on which fle again received Murray into favour Ij.

Birth of ON the 19 th of June, Mary was delivered of her onlyfon James, a
James VI. Prince whose birth was happy for the whole Island, and unfortunatc

to her alone. His acceflion to the throne of England united the two

* Andcer. 1. 92, 93. .-- Mlv. 133. Knox, 396.
1: Kcitli, 335. 1i Ibid. 336. Append. 139.

dividedc

divided kingdoms in one mighty monarchy, and effabliflied the BOOK IV..
power of Great Britain: on a firm foundation. While she, torn "

1566..

early from her son by the cruelty of her fate, was never allowed to
indulge those tender passions, nor to taste those joys which fill the
heart of a mother.

MELVIL was instantly dispatched to London with an account

of this event. It firuck Elizabeth, at firfi, in a sensible manner;
and the advantage and superiority which her rival had acquired by
the birth of a son, forced tears from her eyes. But before Melvil
was admitted to audience, ihe had so far recovered the command
ofherfelf, as to receive him not only with decency, but with ex-
cefilve cheerfulness; and willingly accepted the invitation which
Mary gave her, to fRand godmother to her.fon *-

As Mary loved splendor and magnificence, fne resolved to ce-

lebrate the baptism of the young Prince with great pomp; and for
that purpose sent invitations of the fame kind to the French. King,
and to the Duke of Savoy, the uncle of her former husband.

THE Queen, on her recovery, discovered no change in her fen- The Queen

continues to

timents with refped to the King F. The death of Rizio, and the treat Darnly
countenance he had given to an ation so insolent and. unjuftifi-ence and ns:
able, were fRill fresh in her memory. She was frequently pensive glc'
and dejeaed+ . And though Henry sometimes attended at court,
and accompanied her in her progreifes through different parts of
the kingdom, he met with little reverence from the nobles, while
Mary treated him with the utmost reserve, and did not suser him
to poftifs any authority 11. The breach between them became
* Mclv. 38. 1 Secc Appcnd. N° XVII. :1: Ibid. 148. 1 Keith, 350. M1cv. 132.

eve ry

BooK IV.every day more apparent*. Attempts were made toward a re

óóc ^ concilement, particularly by Caltelnau the French Ambassador;

but after such a violent rupture, it was found no easy mat-
ter to bind the nuptial knot a-new; and though he prevailed on
the King and Queen to pass two nights together f-, we may, with
great probability, pronounce this appearance of union, to which
CafIelnau truited, not to have been sincere; we know with certainty
that it was not lafling.

Hler at'ach- BOTHWELL, all this while, was the Queen's prime confident.
ment to Both-
.e!! increases. Without his participation no business was concluded, and no favour

bellowed. Together with this ascendant over her councils, Both-
well, if we may believe the cotemporary hiflorians, acquired no
less sway over her heart. But at what precise time, this ambitious
Lord first allowed the sentiments of a lover to occupy the place of
that duty and refped which a fubje& owes his Sovereign; or when
Mary, instead of gratitude for his faithful services, felt a passion of
another nature rifng in her bosom, it is no easy matter to determine.
Such delicate transitions of passion can be discerned only by those,
who are admitted near the persons of the parties, and who can view
the secret workings of the heart with calm and acute observation.
Neither Kox nor Buchanan enjoyed these advantages. Their
humble flation allowed them only a diflant access to the Queen and
her favourite. And the ardor of their zeal, and'the violence of
their prejudices, render their opinions rash, precipitate, and inaccu-
rate. It is by the effeEts of this reciprocal passion, rather than by
their accounts of it, that subsequent hiflorians can judge of its reality.

ADVENTUROUS as Bothwell's project to gain the Queen may ap-
pear, it was formed and carried on under very favourable circum-

* Keith, Append. 169. - Ibid.

tlances.

fDances. Mary was young, gay, and affable. She possessed great BooK IV.
sensibility of temper, and was capable of the utmost tenderness 566
of affection. She had placed her love on a very unworthy object,
who requited it with ingratitude, and treated her with negle&t,
with insolence, and with brutality. All these she felt, and resented.
In this situation, the attention and complaisance of a man, who
had vindicated her authority, and protected her person; who en-
tered into all her views, who toothed all her patiions, who watched
and improved every opportunity of insinuating his design, and re-
commending his passion , -could scarce fail of making an impref-
sion on a heart of such a frame as Mary's.

THE haughty spirit of Darnly, nursed up in flattery, and accuf- The King re-

solves to leave

tomed to command, could not bear the contempt under which he Scotland.
had now fallen, and the slate of insignificance to which he saw him-
self reduced. But in a country, where he was universally hated or
despised, he could never hope to form a party, which would fe-
cond any attempt he might make to recover power. He addrefl-
fed himself, therefore, to the Pope, and to the Kings of France
and Spain, with many professions of his own zeal for the Catho-
lic religion, and with bitter complaints against the Queen, for ne-
gleacing to promote that interest t: And soon after, he took a
resolution, equally wild and desperate, of embarking on board a
Thip, which he had provided, and of flying into foreign parts. It
is almost impossible to form any fatisfadory conjecture concerning
the motives which influence a capricious and irregular mind. He
hoped, perhaps, to recommend himfelfto the Catholic Princes on
the continent, by his zeal for religion, and that they would em-
ploy their interest towards reinflating him in the poffeflon of that
power which he had loft. Perhaps, he expedced nothing more than

* Andlcr. i. 93, 94. - Knox, 399.
VoL.. . T t the

BooK IV. the comfort of hiding the disgrace under which he was now fallen,
.M66,J among Ifrang'es, who had never been witnefles of his former pro.

fperity.
Hisbaprici- HE communicated his design to the French Ambassador Le Croc,

and to his father the Earl of Lennox. They both endeavoured'to
diffwade him from it, but without success. Lennox, who feerms,
as well as his son, to have loft the Queen's confidence, and who,
about this time, was seldom at court, instantly communicated the
matter to her by a letter. Henry, who had refused to accompany
the Queen from Stirling to Edinburgh, wa.s likewise absent from
court. He arrived there, however, on the fame day she received
the account ofhis intended flight. But he was more than usually way-
ward and peevish; and scrupling to enter the palace, unless certain
Lords who attended the Queen were dismissed; Mary wasibbliged
to meet him without the gates. At last he suffered her to conduit
him into her own apartment. She endeavoured to draw from him
the reasons of the strange resolution which he had taken, and to
divert him from it. In spite however of all her arguments and en.
treaties, he remained silent and inflexible. Next day the Privy Coun-
cil, by her direction, expoftulated with him on the fame head. He
persisted, notwithstanding, in his sullenness and obstinacy; and neither
deigned to explain the motives of his conduc, nor signified any in-
tention of altering it. As he left the apartment, he turned towards
the Queen, and told her, that she should not fee his face again, for
a long time. A few days after, he wrote to Mary, and, mentioned
two things as grounds of his disgust. She herself, he said, in
longer admitted him into any confidence, and had deprived him
of all power; and the nobles, after her example, treated him with
open neglct, so that he appeared in every place without the dig-
nity and fplendot of a Kling.

Z PNoT'IN.

NOTHING could be more mortifying to Mary, than this intended Booki IV.

flight of the King's, which would have Spread the infamy of their 566'
domeflic quarrel all over Europe. Compassion for a Monarch who.Mary endea-

vours to pre-

would then appear to be forced into exile by her neglect and ill usage, vent his in-
might have disposed mankind to entertain sentiments concerning the ended flight.
causes of their discord, little to her advantage. In order, therefore,
to prepossess the minds of her allies, and to screen her reputation
from any censure with which Darnly might endeavour to load it
the Privy council transmitted a narrative of this whole tranfadion,
both to the King, and to the Queen Mother of France. It is drawn
with great art, and sets Mary's conduct in the most favourable point
of light*

ABOUT this time, the licence of the borderers called for redress.

And Mary resolving to hold a court of justice at Jedburgh, the
inhabitants of several adjacent counties were summoned to attend
their Sovereign in arms, according to custom -. Bothwell was,
at that time Lieutenant or Warden of all the marches, an office
among the most important in the kingdom; and though usually di-
vided into three diftina governments, bestowed by the Queen's fa-
vour upon him alone. In order to display his own valour and ac-
tivity in the discharge of this trust, he attempted to seize a gang of
banditti, who,; lurking among the marshes of Liddefdale, infested
the refl of the country. But while he was laying hold of one of
those desperado's, he wa; wounded by him in several places, so that Oftober 6..
his followers were obliged to carry him to Hermitage castle. Mary
instantly flew thither, with an impatience which strongly marls the
anxiety of a lover, but little suited the dignity of a Queen :'. Find-

ing

* Kcith, 345, 347. *t Ibid. 353. Good. vol. i. 302.

t The diflance between, Jedburgh and Hermitage is 18 Scotch miles, through
a country almost impassable. The fcafon of the year was far advanced. BotlhwlC

T t 2 fecms

BooK.lV. ing that Bothwell was threatened with no dangerous symptom, ihe

8566 returned that fame day to Jedburgh.. The fatigue of such ajour-.
1,566.

ney, added to the anguish of mind he had suffered on Bothwell's
account, threw her next morning into a violent fever *. Her life
was despaired of, but her youth, and the vigour of her constitution,
resifted the malignity of her disease. During the continuance of
the Queen's illness, the King, who resided at Stirling, never came
No-vmber s. near Jedburgh A-. And when he afterwards thought fit to make.his

appearance there, he-met with such a cold reception, as did not
encourage him to make any long stay+. Mary soon recovered
strength enough to return along the eastern borders to Dunbar.

WHILE (he resided in this place, her attention was turned to-

wards England. Elizabeth, notwithfianding her promise, and
even proclamations to the contrary, not only allowed, but encou-
raged Morton and his associates to remain in England II. Mary, on
the other hand, afforded her protection to several English fugitives.
Each Queen watched the motions of the other with a jealous atten-
tion, and secretly countenanced the practices, which werec arrying
on, to diflurb the administration of her rival.

teems to have been wounded in a scuffle, occasioned by the derpair of a single man,
rather than in any open infurreftion of the borderers. It does not appear that
the Queen was attended thither by any considerable train. Had any military ope-
ration been, necessary, as is fuppofedj Good. vol. i. 304. it would have been ex-
tremely improper to rifque the Queen's person in an expedition against thieves. So
soon as the Queen found Bothwell to be in no danger, she instantly returned; and
after this wa,hear no more of the infurreftion, nor have we any proof that the rioters
took refuge in England. No other reason but that which we have produced; feemis
sufficient to account for the Queen's conduct

* Keith, 35r, 352. Ibid. Append. 133.
:. Knox, 400o, 1 Cald. vol. ii. 15.

FoRl

For this purpose,. Mary's Ambassador, Robert Melvil, 'and herlBooK IV..

other emissaries, were extremely. aaive. and:fuccefsful; We may 566'
impute, in a good degree, to their intrigues, that spirit which ap-- The English

/- T'. i i i i * i * /* i n i Parliament

peared in the Parliament of England, and which raised a ftorm.that favours Ma-
threatened Elizabeth's domestic tranquillity, more than anyother yi'stotehne
event of her reign, and required all her art and dexterity to al- succession
lay it.

ELIZABETH had now reigned eight years, without discovering

the- least intention to marry. A violent distemper, with which she
had lately been seized, having endangered her life, and alarmed the
nation with the prospect of all those calamities which are occasioned
by a disputed and dubious succession; a motion was made, and eager-
ly listened to in both houses, for addressing the Queen, to provide
against any such danger in times to come, either by signifying her
own resolution to marry, or by consenting to an ad: establishing
the order of succession to the Crown -. Her love to her sub-
jeds, her duty to.the public, her concern for posterity, it was pre-
tended, not only called'upon, but obliged her to take one ofthefe.
fleps. The insuperable aversion which she had allalong discovered
for marriage, made it improbablethat the would chute the former;
and if the complied with the latter request, no title to the Crown
could, with any colour of justice, be set in opposition to that of the
Scottish Queen. Elizabeth was sagacious enough: to fee the-re-
moteft consequences of this motion, and observed them with the ut-
most anxiety. Mary, by refuting so often to ratify the treaty of Edin-
burgh, had plainly intimated a design of embracing the first promif-
ing opportunity for prosecuting her right to the English Crown; and
by her secret negociations, Ihe had gained many to favour her title -j
All the Roman Catholics ardently wished for her fucceflion. Her

'' D'Ewcs Journ.of Parl. 10o.. 1 Mclv. 136.

X.
? genetlenf;

BOOK IV. gentleness and humanity had removed many of those apprehensions

5 X66 which the Protestants entertained on account ofher religion. The

court facion, which envied the power of Cecil, and endeavoured
to wrest the administration out of his hands, advanced the preten-
sions of the Scottish Queen in opposition to him. The union of the
two kingdoms was a defireable object to all wife men in both na-
tions; and the birth of the young Prince was a security for the con.
tinuance of this blessing, and gave hopes of its perpetuity.

Elizabeth's UNDER these circumfiances, and while the nation was in such a
perplexity on
that account. temper, a parliamentary declaration of Mary's title would have been

highly detrimental to Elizabeth. The present unsettled state of
the succession left much in her power. Her resentment alone might
have gonefar towards excluding any of the competitors from the
Crown; and the dread of this had hitherto restrained, and over-
awed the ambition of the Scottish Queen. But if this;check should
be removed, by the legal acknowledgment of her title, Mary would
be at full liberty to pursue her dangerous designs, and to aC. with-
out fear or reserve. Her partizans were already meditating schemes
for insurrections in different parts of the kingdom -; and an adc of
Parliament, recognizing the rights of that Princess; whose preten-
lions they favoured, would have been nothing less than a signal to
arms; and, notwithifanding Elizabeth's just title to the affetions
of her fubjeCs, might have shaken and endangered her throne.

Mary endea- WHILE this matter remained in fufpence in both houses, an ac-
vours to im-
prove this p. count of it was transmitted to Mary by Melvil her Ambassador. As
portunity. {he did not want advocates for her right, even among thofe'who

were near Elizabeth's person, fle endeavoured to cultivate the dif-
position which appeared towards [fettling the right of succession in

* Mclv. J47.

her

her favour, by a letter to the Privy Counsellors of England. She BOOK IV.
expressed in it a grateful sense of Elizabeth's friendship, which she 6

pI66.

chiefly ascribes to their good offices, with their Sovereign, in her
behalf. She declared her resolution to live in perpetual amity with
England, without urging or pursuing her claim upon the Crown,
any farther than should be agreeable to the Queen. But, at the
fame time, as her right of fuccefflon was undoubted, she hoped it
would be examined with candour, and judged of with impartiality.
The nobles who attended her wrote to the English Privy Council
in the fame strain *. Mary artfully gave there letters the air of be-
ing nothing more than a declaration of her own, and of her sub-
jeas gratitude towards Elizabeth. But as she could not be ignorant
of the jealousy and fear with which Elizabeth observed the pro-
ceedings of Parliament, a ftep so uncommon as this, of one Prince's
entering into public correspondence with the Privy Counsellors of
another, could not be otherwise construed than as taken with an in-
tention to encourage the spirit which had already been raised among
the English. In this light it seems to have appeared to Elizabeth
herfelft. But the disposition of her people rendering it necessary
to treat Mary's person with great decency, and her title with much
regard, she mentioned it to her only in the softest language.

NOTHING, however, could be a more cruel mortification to a Elizabeth
Princess of Elizabeth's character, than the temper which both sooths an,

gains her

houses of Parliament discovered on this occasion. She bent all her Parlianaen
policy to defeat, or elude the motion. After allowing the first
heat of their zeal to evaporate, (he called into her pretence a cer-
tain number of each house. She soothed and caressed them; fle
threatened and promised; {he remitted subsidies which were due,

* Keith, 354 Append. 136. t iKeith. 35,

andl

BoOK IV. arid refused those which were offered; and in the end prevailed to

óó7^ have this formidable: motion put off for that feflion. Happily for
A$66.

her, the condu tof the Scottish Queen, and the misfortunes which
besel her, prevented the revival of such a motion in any future
Parliament *.

MEAN time, in order to preserve the reputation of impar-

tiality, and that the might not drive Mary into any desperate mea-
sure, she committed to the Tower one Thornton, who had publifl-
ed obmething derogatory to the right of the Scottish line -; and fig-
nified her displeasure against a member of the house of Commons,
who seemed, by some words in a speech, to glance at Mary i+.

An extraordi- AMIDST all her other cares, Mary was ever solicitous to pro-
nary Ptep of
Mary s in fa- mote the interest of that religion which ihe professed. The re-
vour of Pope- establishment of the Romish doctrine seems to have been her
'y.

favourite passion; and though the design was concealed with
care, and conducted with caution, the pursued it with a perse-
vering zeal. At this time, &he ventured to lay aside somewhat
of her usual reserve; and the aid which the expected from the
Popish Princes, who had engaged in the league of Bayonne, en-
couraged her to take a flep, which, if we confider the temper of
the nation, appears to be extremely bold. Having formerly held a
secret correspondence with the court of Rome, flie now resolved to
allow a Nuncio from the Pope publickly to enter her dominions.
Cardinal Laurea, at that time Bishop of Mondovi, was the per-
son on whom Pius V. conferred this office, and along with him he
sent the Queen a present of 20,000 crowns 1[. It is not the cha-
racer of the Papal court, to open its treasury upon distant or imagi-

:X D'Ewes Journ. 104.-130. Camd. 399. Mclv. 119. Ilayncs, 446.
t' Camd. 401. :t Hayncs, 449. 1 Vita Card. Laur. ap. Burn. vol. iii. 32g.

nary

nary hopes. The business of the Nuncio in Scotland could be no BOOK IV.
other, than to attempt a reconciliation of theikingdonm to the Romish '5ó
fee. Thus Mary herself understood it. And in her answer to a
letter which she received from the Pope, after expressing her grate-
ful sense of his paternal care and liberality, ihe promises that she
would bend her whole strength towards the re-eflablithment and
propagation of the Catholic faith; that /he would receive the Nun-
cio with every possible demonstration of refpecE, and concur, with
the utmost vigour, in all his designs towards promoting the honour
of God, and refloring peace to the kingdom; that fle would cele-
brate the baptism of the Prince, according to the ceremonies which
the Romish ritual prescribes, hoping that her fubjecs would be
taught, by this example, again to reverence the. sacraments of the
church, which they had so long treated with contempt; and that
the would be careful to instill early into her son the principles of
a sincere love and attachment to the Catholic faith *. But though
the Nuncio was already arrived at Paris, and had sent over one of
his attendants with part of the money, the Queen did not think the
juncture proper for his reception. Elizabeth was preparing to fend
a magnificent embassy into Scotland, against the time of the Prince's
baptism, and as it would have been improper to offend her, She
wifely contrived, under various pretences, to detain Laurea at Paris t.
The convulsions into which the kingdom was thrown soon after,
made it impoflible for him to pursue his journey any farther.

AT the very time that Mary was secretly carrying on these nego-

ciations for subverting the Reformed Church, fle did not scruple
publickly to employ her authority towards obtaining for its Mini-
fters a more certain and comfortable subsistence . During this

* Conxi Vita Mariae ap. Jebb. vol. ii 51.
5 Keith, Append, 135.

'1: Keith, 56r, 562. Knox, 401.
VOL. I. U u year,

BoOK IV. year, flie issued several proclamations and ads of council for that

56 purpose, and readily approved of every scheme which was proposed
1566. p

for the more effedual payment of their stipends. This part of her
condut does little honour to Mary's integrity; and though.jufified
by the example of Princes, who often reckon falfhood and deceit
among the necessary arts of government, and even authorised by
the pernicious casuistry of the Romish Church,, which transfers
breach of faith to heretics, from the lift of crimes, to that of duties,
m us, however, be numbered among those blemifhles which never
stain a truly great and generous character.

December. As neither the French nor Piedmontefe Ambassadors were yet
Her aversion . ...
for the king arrived, the baptism of the Prince was put off fro tim timeto time

Mean while Mary fixed her residence at Craigmillar *'. Such a re-
tirement, perhaps, suited the present temper of her mind, and in-
duced her to prefer it before her own palace of Holy-rood-houfe,
'Her aversion for the King grew every day more confirmed, and was
become altogether incurable. A deep melancholy succeeded to that
gaiety of spirit, which was natural to her. The rafihnefs and levity,
of her own choice, and the King's ingratitude and obflinacy, filled
her with shame and with despair. A variety of passions preyed
at once on a mind, all whose sensations were exquisite, and all its
emotions Rtrong, and often extorted from her, the iaft wish of the

oifortunate, that life itself would come to an end-.

1A divorte bc- MURRAY and Maitland observed all those workiings of pafiion
;I'mosi. in the breast of the Queen, and conceived hopes of turning them to

the advantage of their ancient aflociates, Morton, and the other
conspirators againfi Rizio. They were tiil in banifiment, and the
Queen's refcntment againil them continued unabated. Murray and

' Keith, 355. t Ibid. Prcf. vii.

the

the: Secretary flattered ' themselves, however, that her inclination to BooK IV.
be separated from Darnly would surmount this deep-rooted aver-
sion, and that the hopes of an event so defireable might induce
her to be reconciled to the conspirators. It was easy to find rea-
f6ns, ii tlie King's behiaviur, 'on which to found a sentence of di-
vorces This 'enitence they had interest enough to obtain, and to
procure the ratification of it in Parliament. In return for this ser-
vice, they proposed to stipulate with the Queen to grant a pardon to
Mbrton and h'is followers. The design was first of all communi-
cated to Argyll, who, as well as Murray, owed his return into Scot-
land to thee conspiracy against Rizio. Huntly and Bothwell, who
at that time direted all Mary's councils, were likewise admitted
into the concert. They all joined together in making the overture to
the Queen, and enforced it with all Maitland's eloquence *. But
M1ary, however desirous of obtaining that deliverance from Darn-
ly's caprices, with whichthey endeavoured to allure her, had ne-
verthelefs good reasons for rejecting the method', by which they
proposed 'to accomplih it. The birth of her son had greatly
'trengthened her claim upon the English succession, and encourag-
ed the abettors of it to appear with greater boldness, and to as
with more vigour. She couild scarce hope to be divorced from her
husband, wiithout tlirowing some imputation on her son. This
might open a new dispute with regard to the fucceflion, and put
it in the power of Elizabeth and her Ministers to] call in question
the Prince's legitimacy, or at least to subject it to all the delays and
cavils of a judicial inquiry. The fear of there inconveniences
weighed with Mary, and determined her rather to endure her
hard fate, than to seek relief, by venturing on fich a dangerous ex-
perimnent.

* Anders. vol. iv. Part ii. x88.

* 2 TH E

BOOK IV. THE Earl of Bedford, and the Count de Brienne, the English

i566. and French Ambassadors, being arrived, Mary set out for Stirling,

to celebrate the baptism of her son. Bedford was attended by a
numerous and splendid train, and brought presents from Elizabeth,
suitable to her own dignity, and the refpeat with which she affected,
at that time, to treat the Queen of Scots. Great preparations had
been made by Mary, and the magnificence displayed by her on this
occasion, exceeded whatever had been formerly known in Scotland.
Decem 17. The ceremony itself was performed according to the rites of the

Romish Church. But neither Bedford, nor any of the Scottish nobles
who professed the Protestant religion, entered within the gates of the
chapel *. The spirit of that age, firm and uncomplying, would not,
upon any inducement, condescend to witness an action, which it
eRteemed idolatrous.

The King's HENRY'S behaviour, at this juncure, perfecly discovers the
capricious be-
haviour at excess of his caprice, as well as of his folly. He chose to
the baptism
of the Prince. reside at Stirling, but confined himself to his own apartment.

And as the Queen distrusted every nobleman who ventured to
converse with him, he was left in absolute solitude. Nothing
could be more singular, or was less expected, than his chufing to
appear in a manner, that both published the contempt under which
he had fallen, and, by exposing the Queen's domestic unhappi-
ness to the observation of so many foreigners, looked like a ftep taken
on purpose to mortify and to offend her. Mary felt this insult fen-
sibly; and notwithitanding all her efforts to assume the gaiety which
suitcd the occasion, and which was necessary for the polite reception
of her guests, the was sometimes obliged to retire, in order to be at li-
berty to indulge her sorrow, and give vent to her tears t. The King

* Keith, 360. t Ibid. Pref. vii.

still

still persisted in his design of retiring into foreign parts, and daily BooK IV.
threatened -to put it in execution 1566,.

1566.

THE ceremony of witnefling the Prince's baptism was not the sole Elizabeth en-

business of Bedford's embaiy. His inllrutions contained an over-daccouodate
ture, which ought to have gone far towards extinguishing thofejea- her diferences
loufies which had so long subsisted between the two Queens. The
treaty of Edinburgh, which has been so often mentioned, was the
principal occasion of there. The spirit, however, which had risen
to such an height in the late Parliament, the power of the party
which abetted the Scottish Queen's title, the number and adivity
of her agents in different parts of the kingdom, alarmed Eliza-

* Camden affirms, 401. that Bedford was commanded by Elizabeth not to give

Darnly the title of King. As this was an indignity, not to be born, either by Mary
or her husband, it hath, been asserted to be the cause of the King's absence fiom the
ceremony of his son's baptism. Keith, 360. Good. 319. But, i. No such thing is
to be found among Bedford's inftrudions, the original of which frill remains. Keith,
356. 2. Bedford's advice to the Queen by Melvil is utterly inconsistent with Cam--
den's assertion. Melv. I5,3. Melvil's account is confirmed by Elizabeth's inftruc-
tions to Sir Henry Norris, where she affirms that she commanded Bedford to employ
his best offices towards reconciling Mary to her husband, which he had attempted
to no purpose. Digges's Compl. Ambaff. p. 13: A paper published Append. No XVIII.
proves the fame thing. 3. Le Croc the French Resident mentions the King's ab-
fence, but without giving that reason for it, which has been founded on Camden's
words, though, if that had been the real one, he would scarce have failed to men-
tion it. His account of this matter is that which we have followed, Keith, Pref. vii.
,. He informs his court, that onl account of the difference betwixt the King and
the Qeien, he had refused to hold any further correfpondcnce with the former,
though he appears, in many instances, to have been his great confident. ibid. 5. As
the King was not prefcnt at the baptifin, he seems to have been excluded from any
llare in the ordinary adminifiration of bufilles. Two ants of Privy Council, one on
the 20th, and the other on the 2ift of December, arc found in Keith, 562. They
both run in the Qleen's name alone. The King fcems not to have been present,
lThis could not be owing to Elizabeth's inftrudions to Bedf(ord.

bctli,

BoOK IV.!beth, and induced her to forego any advantage, which the ambi-

6 guous and artful expreflions in that treaty might afford her. All she
i566.

now demanded of Mary, was to renounce any title to the Crown
of England during her life, and the lives of her posterity; and on
the other hand, she engaged to take no ftep, which might prove in-
jurious to'Mary's claim upon the succession .

MARY 'ould not, with decency, rejec& a proposition so equi-

table; she insisted, however, that Elizabeth should order the right
upon which the claimed to be legally examined, and publickly re-
cognized, and particularly that the testament of Henry VIII. where-
by he had excluded the descendants of his eldcefR filler the Queen
of Scotland, from the place due to them in the order of succession,
might be produced, and confidered by the English nobility. 'Ma-
ry's Ministers had credulously embraced an opinion, that this testa-
ment which they so justly conceived to be injuribus to their Mif-
trefs, was a mere forgery; and on different occasions had urged Eli-
zabeth to produce it. Mary would have suffered considerably by
gaining this point. The original testament is still extant, and not
the leafl doubt can be entertained of its genuineness and authenticity.
But it was not Elizabeth's intention to weaken or to set aside the
title of the house of Stewart. She aimed at nothing more, than to
keep the question concerning the fuccefilon perplexed and undecided,'
and by industriously eluding this requefl, flhe did real service to
Mary's cause I-.

A rEW days after the baptifin of the Prince, Morton and all

the other conspirators againf: Rizio obtained their pardon, and leave
to return into Scotland. Mary, who had hitherto continued inex-
;,;able to every entreaty in their behalf, yielded at last to the soli-

' Kicth, 35;6. -1 Ibid. 361, 358. N'ote (r.) Murdin. 368.

citations

citations of Bothwell *.. He could hope for no fuceefs' in th'bfe BboK 1V.
bold designs on which his ambition resolved to venture, without 56

' 566.

drawing aid from every quarter. By procuring a favour for Morton
and his associates, of which they had good reason to despair, he
expected to secure a band of faithful and determined adherents.

THE King flill remained at Stirling, in solitude, and under con-

tempt. His impatience in this situation, together with the alarm
given him, by the rumour of-a design to seize his person, and con-
fine him to prison -, was the occasion of his leaving that place
in an abrupt manner, and retiring to his father at Glasgow.

June 25.
Decenc. z,.

Two Afemblies of the Church were held during this year. New. Crch as'

complaints were made, and upon good grounds, of the poverty
and contempt under which the Protestant clergy were suffered to
languish. Penurious as the allotment for their subsistence was,
they had not received the least part of what was-due for the pre-
ceding year +. Nothing less than a zeal, ready to endure and to
susser every thing for a good cause, -could have persuaded men to
adhere to a church, so indigent and so neglected. The extraordi-
nary expences, occasioned by the Prince's baptifin, had exhauffed
the Queen's treasury, and the fums appropriated for the subsistence
of the clergy were diverted into other channels. The Queen was
therefore obliged to prevent the just rcmonflrances of the aflmnbly,
by falling on some new method for the relief of the church. Some
symptoms of liberality, some firetch towards munificence might
have been expeaed in an assignment which was made with'an in-'
tention of soothing and iilencing the clergy. But both' the Qpeen
and the nobles held fast the riches of the churcll which they had
fcized. A fum, which, at thehligheft computation, -can scarce be

* Good. vol. i. 140. Melv. 154. 1- Kcitlh, Prf. viii. t Ibid. 562.

reckon ed

BoOK IV. reckoned equal to 9000o , sterling , was deemed sufficient for the

óypJ maintenance of a whole national church, by men who had lately
J566.

seen single monasteries poilteffd of revenues far superior in value.

THE ecclesiastics in that age bore the grievances which affected

thenlfelves alone, with astonishing patience; but wherever the Re-
formed religion was threatened, they were extremely apt to be
alarmed, and to proclaim, in the loudest manner, their apprehensions
of danger. A jufi occasion of this kind was given them, a short
time before the meeting of the Assembly. The usurped and op-
preflivejurifdiction of the spiritual courts had been abolished by the
Parliament 156o, and Commiffaries were appointed to hear and
determine the causes which formerly came under their cognizance ~.
Among the few acts of that Parliament, to which Mary had paid
any regard this was one. She had confirmed the authority of the
Commiffaries, and had given them infirutions for direcing their
proceedings I, which are fill of great authority in that court. From
that time these judges had continued in the uninterrupted exercise of
their funtion, when of a sudden the Queen issued a proclamation,
restoring the Archbishop of St. Andrew's to his ancient jurifdidion,
and depriving the Commiffaries of all authority J1.

A MOTIVE, which cannot be justified, rendered the Queen not un-

willing to venture upon this rash ation. She had been contriving, for
some time, how to re-eftablilf the Popish religion; and the restoring
the ancient ecclesiastics to their former jurifdidtion, seemed to be a
considerable ftep towards that end. The motive which prompted
Bothwell, to whose influence over the Queen this adion mufl be
chiefly imputed-.*, was still more criminal. His enterprising ambition
had already formed that bold design, which soon after he put in exe-
* Keith, 562. 1 Id. x52. :t Id. 25I. 1 Knox, 4.03. ** Id. ibid.

I cutionl,

cution, and the use which we (hall hereafter find him making ofthat BOOI IV.
authority, which the Popish ecclesiastics regained, discovers the rea- ót.
sons of his present conduct, in contributing to revive their power. 5
The Protestant clergy were not unconcerned fpetators of an event,
which threatened their religion with unavoidable deftl'ucion ; but
as they despaired of obtaining the proper remedy from the Queen
herself, theyaddrefled a remonstrance to the whole body of the Pro-
teftant nobility, full of that ardent zeal for religion, which the dan-
ger to which it was exposed at that time, seemed to require *. What
effects this vehement exhortation might have produced, we have
no opportunity of judging, the attention of the nation being quickly
turned towards events of another, and more tragical nature.

IMMEDIATELY upon the King's leaving Stirling, and before he The King

could reach Glasgow, he was seized with a dangerous distemper. Glaow. at
The symptoms which attended it were violent and unusual, and in 1567°
that age it was commonly imputed to the effeds of poison --. It
is impolible, amidst the contradictions of historians, to decide with
certainty concerning its nature, or its cause 4. His life was in the

utmost

* Keith, 567. + Melv. I54. Knox, 401.

1: Buchanan and Knox are positive that the King had been poisoned. They

mention the black and putrid pustules which broke out all over his body. Bu-
chanan adds, that Abernethy his physician plainly declared that poison was the
cause ofthere symptoms, and that theQueen refused to allow her own physician to at-
tend him, Buch.349. Knox,4o1. 2. Blackwood Caufin. &c. Jehb. vol. ii. 24, 59.
aflert, that the small pox was the difeafc with which the King was seized. He is
called a pockiflh man in the Queen's letter, Good. vol. ii. 15. The reason given
lw It;oivchParis for lodging the King at the Kirk of Field, viz. left the young Prince
should catch the infetion if he flaid in the palace, seems to favour this opinion, An-
der. vol. ii. 193. Carte mentions it as a proof of M/ary's tcndernefs to her husband,
that though file never had the small pox hcrfelf, she ventured to attend him, vol. iii.
446. This, if it had been true, would have aflordcd a good pretcnce for not vifitinlg

Vo,. I. X x hims

BOOK IV. utmofl danger; but after languishing for some weeks, the vigour

óB"Y"" of his constitution surmounted the malignity of the disease.

P567.

Neglefted by MVARY'S neglec of the King, on this occasion, was equal to
Mary. that with which he had treated her during her illness at Jedburgh.

She no longer felt that warmth of conjugal affection which prompts
to sympathy, and delights in all those tender offices which sooth
and alleviate sickness and pain. At this juncture, she did not even
put on the appearance of this paflion. Notwithflanding the King's
danger, ile amused herself with excursions to different parts of the
country, and suffered near a month to elapse before fie visited him
at Glasgow. By that time, the violence of the distemper was over,
and the King, though weak and languishing, was out of all danger.

The breach THE breach between Mary and her husband was not occasioned
between them
irreparable. by any of those flight disgusts, which interrupt the domestic union,

without altogether dissolving it. Almost all the paflions, which ope-
rate with greatest violence on a female mind, and drive it to the
most dangerous extremes, concurred in raising and fomenting this
unhappy quarrel. Ingratitude for the favours she had bestowed,
contempt of her person, violations of the marriage-vow, encroach-
ments on her power, conspiracies againfi her favourites, jealousy,
insolence, and obflinacy, were the injuries of which Mary had great
reason to complain. She felt them with the utmost sensibility; and
added to the anguiiflof disappointed love, they produced those fymp-
toms of despair which we have already dcferibed. Her refentmelnt
againfi: the King seems not to have abated from the time of his leav-
ing Stirling. In a letter written with her own hand, to her ambafa-

lhii roonlr; blut Mary had the finall pox in her infancy, Sadler's Lettcrs. 3. Bifiop
Lcfly aftlims, that tli King's difcalfc was the French pox, Keith, 36.:]. Note (/).
In that age, this dlifcalf was eficemcd lo contagious, that pcrlons iillc-e1cl with it
were removcd withoult the walls of cities.

dor

dor in France, jufi before she set out for Glasgow, no tokens of BOOK IV.
sudden reconcilement appear. On the contrary, ihe mentions, with '" -'

i567.

tome bitterness, the King's ingratitude, the jealousy with which he Janury .
observed her actions, and the inclination he discovered to disturb
her government, and at the fame time talks of all his attempts
with the utmost scorn *.

AFTER this discovery of Mary's sentiments, it was scarce to be Visits the

expected that fle would visit the King, or that any thing but gK, a

Olw

marks ofjealoufy and distrust should appear in such an interview.
This, however, was far from being the cafe; she not only visited
Henry, but, by all her words and actions, endeavoured to express
an uncommon affection for him: And though this made impression
on the credulous spirit of her husband, no less flexible, on tome
occasions, than obflinate on others; yet, to those who are ace
quainted with the human heart, and who know how seldom and
how slowly such wounds in domeflic happiness are healed, this
sudden transition will appear with a very suspicious air, and will
be confidered by them as the effec of artifice.

BUT it is not on suspicion alone, that Mary is charged with Herdifflmula-

diflimulation in this part of her conduct. Two of her famous let- tion.
tcrs to Bothwell were written during her stay at Glasgow, and
fully lay open this scene of iniquity. He had so far succeeded
in his ambitious and criminal design, as to gain an absolute afcen-
dant over the Queen. And in a situation, such as Mary's, merit not
so conspicuous, services of far inferior importance, and address much
lets insinuating than Botlwell's, may be supposcd to fical imper-
ceptibly on a female heart, and entirely to overcome it. Among
tlhofe in the higher ranks of life, scruples with regard to conjugal

:* Keith, Pref. viii.

Xx 2 fidelity

BOOK IV. fidelity are, unhappily, neither many, nor strong. Nor did the man,

ners of that court, in which Mary had been educated, contribute to
567 increase orto fortify them. The amorous turn of Francis I. and Hen-

ry II. the wildness of the military characer in that age, and the
liberty of appearing in all companies, which began to be allowed
to women, who had not yet acquired that delicacy of sentiment,
and those polished manners, which alone can render this liberty
innocent, had introduced, among the French, a licentiousness of
morals that rose to an aftonimhing height. Such examples, which
were familiar to Mary from her infancy, could hardly fail of dimi-
nifhing that horror of vice which is natural to a virtuous mind.
The King's behaviour would render the first approach of forbid-
den sentiments less shocking; resentment, and disappointed love,
would be apt to represent whatever soothed her revenge, as jufti-
fiable on that account; and so many concurring causes might, al-
most imperceptibly, kindle a new pafion in her heart.
The motives BUT whatever opinion we may form with regard to the rife and

progress of this passion, the letters themselves breathe all the ar-
dour and tenderness of love. The affecion which Mary there ex-
presses for Bothwell, fully accounts for every subsequent part of her
conduct; which, without admitting this circumstance, appears al-
together mysterious, inconfifent, and inexplicable. That recon-
cilement with her husband, of which, if we allow it to be genuine,
it is impoflible to give any plausible account, is discovered, by the
Queen's own confefiion, to have been mere artifice and deceit.
As her aversion for her husband, and the suspicious attention with
which she observed his conduct, became universally known, her
ears were officiously filled, as is usual in such cafes, with groundless
or aggravated accounts of his actions. By some, she was told, that
the King intended to fcize the person of the Prince his son, and

in

in his name to usurp the government; by others the was assured, BOOK IV.
that he resolved instantly to leave the kingdom; that a vessel was
hired for this purpose, and lay in the river Clyde ready to receive 5
him *. The last was what Mary chiefly dreaded. Henry's retiring
into a foreign country murl have been highly dishonourable to the
Qeen, and would have entirely dicfoncerted Bothwell's measures.
While he resided in Glasgow, at a distance from her, and in that
part of the kingdom where the intereit of his family was greatest,
he might, with more facility, accomplish his designs. In order, there-
fore, to prevent his executing any such wild scheme, it was necessary
to bring him to some place, where he would be more immediately
under her own eye. For this purpose, l(e first employed all her Prevails on
art to regain his confidence, and then proposed to remove him to him to come
the neighbourhood of Edinburgh, under pretence, that there he to Edinbur.
would have easier access to the advice of physicians, and that flhe
herself could attend him without being absent from her son t. The
King was weak enough to susser himself to be persuaded; and
being still feeble and incapable of bearing fatigue, was carried in
a litter to Edinburgh.

THE place prepared for his reception was a house, belonging to

the Provost of a collegiate church, called Kirk of Field. It flood
almost upon the fame spot where the house belonging to the Prin-
cipal of the University now stands. Such a situation, on a rising
ground, and at that time in an open field, had all the advantages
of healthful air to recommend it; but, on the other hand, the so-
litude of the place rendered it extremely proper for the commis-
sion of that crime, with a view to which, it seems manifeflly to
have been chosen.

MARY continued to attend the King with the most assiduous He- is mr
care. She seldom was absent from him through the day, hie slept dcred thcrec

* Keith, Pref. viii. 1. Good. vol. ii. 8.

fevcral

BOOs IV. ifeeral nights in the chamber under his apartment. She heaped

on him so many marks of tenderness and confidence, as, in a great
1567. mnealure, quieted lhofe suspicions which had so long disturbed him.

nBt while he was fondly indulging in dreams of the return of his
former happiness, he flood on the very brink of deftrution. On
Sunday the ninth of February, about eleven at night, the Queen
left the Kirk of Field, in order to be present at a masque in the
palace. At two next morning, the house in which the King lay
was blown up with gun-powder. The noise and filock, which
this sudden explosion occasioned, alarmed the whole city. The in-
habitants ran to the place whence it came. The dead body of the
King, with that of a servant who slept in the fame room, were
found lying in an adjacent garden, without the city wall, untouched
by fire, and with no bruise or mark of violence.
Hischarater. SUCIT was the unhappy fate of Henry Stewart Lord Darnly,

in the twenty first year of his age. The indulgence of fortune, and
his own external accomplishments, without any other merit, had
raised him to an height of dignity, of which he was altogether
unworthy. By his folly and ingratitude, he loft the heart of a
woman who doated on him to diftration. His insolence and in-
conflancy alienated from himthofe nobles who had contributed most
zealously towards his elevation. His levity and caprice exposed
him to the scorn of the people, who once revered him as the de-
fcendant of their ancient Kings and heroes. Had he died a natural
death, his end would have been unlamented, and his memory
have been soon forgotten; but the cruel circumflcances of his mur-
der, and the remincfs with which it was afterwards avenged,
have made his name to be remembered with regret, and have
rendered him the o)bjct of pity to which he had otherwise no
title.

EVERY

EVERYP one's imagination was at work to guess who had con- BooI IV.

trived and executed this execrable deed. The suspicion fell, w;ith 5
almost a general content, on Bothwell *; and some refledions Bothwel7and
were thrown out, as if the Queen herself were no stranger to the the Queen sus-
crime. Of Bothwell's guilt there remains the fullest evidence, ured ther
that the nature of the ation will admit. The Queen's known
sentiments with regard to her husband, gave a great appearance
of probability to the imputation with which /he was loaded -.

Two days after the murder, a proclamation was issued by the

Queen, offering a considerable reward to any person who should
discover those who had been guilty of such a horrid and detestable
crime +. And though Bothwell was now one of the greatest sub-
jeds in the kingdom, formidable on account of his own power,
and protected by the Queen's favour, it was impoflible to suppress
the sentiments and indignation of the people. Papers were affixed
to the most public places of the city, accusing him of the murder,
and naming his accomplices; pictures appeared to the fame pur-
pose, and voices were heard, in the middle of the night, charging
him with that barbarous action. But the authors of there rumours:
did not confine their accusations to Bothwell alone, they insinuated
that the Queen herself was accessory to the crime )I. This bold ac-
cufation, which so direcly attacked Mary's reputation, drew the at-
tention of her council; and by engaging them in an inquiry after the
authors of thfee liblls, diverted them fiom searching after the mur-
derers of the K.ing ';. It could scarce be expeted that Mary herself
would be extremely solicitous to discove:r those who had rid her of an
husband, whom fli had so violently hated. It was Bothwcll's in-

* Mc!v. 155. Andlcrf. vol. i. 156.

-' Set: Disltrt;atIol con;ccrilhg the murel r o f Ilcll.ry Darlnly, and the (cnuinlcncfs
of Mlary' s lettIc to Igothllv . A lppendix.

:1. Anci rs. vol. i. 36. I,. vol, ii. s56. 6 x Id. vol,. 1. ' -

tcre f-,

BOOK IV. terest, who had the supreme diretion of this, as well as of all other
Q1y^^ alsairs, to tlifle and suppress whatever evidence should be offered,

and to cover, if pofible, the whole tranfsition under the veil of
darkness and of silence. Some inquiry, however, was made, and
some persons called' before the council; but the examination was
conducted with the most indecent remiflnefs, and in such a man-
ner, as to let in no light upon that scene of guilt *

It was not her own fubjecs alone who fufpeded Mary of being

accefbory to this unnatural crime; nor did an opinion, so difllonour-
able to her character, owe its rife and progress to the jealousy and
malice of her faTious nobles. The report of the manner and
circumflances of the King's murder spread quickly over all Europe,
and, even in that age, which was accuflomed to deeds of violence,
it excited universal horror. As her unhappy breach with her
husband had long been matter of public discourse, the first con
jftures which were formed with regard to his death, were ex-
tremely to her disadvantage. Her friends, at a loss what apology
to offer for her conduct, called on her to prosecute the murderers
with the utmost diligence, and expeted that the rigour of her
proceedings would prove the best and fullest vindication of her
innocence t.

Lennox nc- LEN N OX, at the fame time, incited Mary to vengeance with in-
cf' tuie rir s cefilat importunity. This nobleman had shared in his son's dif-
mnurdcr. grace, and being treated by Mary with neglect, usually resided at

a diftancc from court. Rouzed, however, by an event no lets filock-
ing to the heart of a father, than fatal to all his schemes of anbi-
F-rbruary ^. tion, he ventured to write to the Queen, and to offer his advice

* Andcrf. vol. iv. 167, 168. + Keith, Pref. ix.

with

with refped to the molt effectual method for discovering and con- Boo-I IV.
viaing those who had so cruelly deprived him of a son, and her of ó"v
a husband. He urged her to prosecute those who were guilty, with 7
vigour, and to bring them to a speedy trial; he declared his own
suspicion of Bothwell, and of those who were named as his accom-
plices; he required that, out of regard to decency, and in order to
encourage evidence to appear againit them, the persons accused of
such an atrocious crime should be committed to cultody, or at least
excluded from her court and pretence *.

MARY was then at Seaton, whither fle had retired after the bu-

rial of the King, whose body was deposited among the Monarchs
of Scotland, in a private, but decent manner '. The former part
of the Earl's demand, could not, on any pretence, be eluded; and
it was resolved to bring Bothwell immediately to trial. But, inflead
of confining him to any prison, Mary admitted him into all her Mary contl-

nues to fa-

councils, and allowed a person, universally reputed the murderer vour him.
of her husband, to enjoy all the security, the dignity, and the power
of a favourite :. The offices which Bothwell already possessed,
gave him the command of all the south of Scotland. The castle
of Edinburgh, however, was a place of too much consequence, not
to wish it in his own power. The Queen, in order to prevail on
the Earl of Mar to surrender it, consented to put the person of
the young Prince in his hands, and immediately beflowed the March .9.
government of that important fortress upon Bothwell 1I. So many
fleps in her conduc, inconfiflent with all the rules of prudence,
and of decency, muff be imputed to an excels either of folly or
of love. Mary's known character fully vindicates her from the for-
mer; of the latter, many and firiking proofs soon appeared.

KeIith, 369. I' Anders. vol. i. 23, :1: Id. ibid. 40, &c.

II Id. ibid. Prcf. 64. Keith, 379.
VOL. 1. Y y No

BOOK IV. No diret evidence had yet appeared againfi Bothwell; but as

ó/7 time might bring to light the circumflances of a crime, in which

1567.
March g9. so many accomplices were concerned, it was of. great importance
Iaiens o" to haften on the trial, while nothing more than general suspicions,
his trial.

and uncertain surmises, could be produced by his accusers. For
this reason, in a meeting of Privy Council held on the 28th of
March, the 12th of April was appointed for the day of trial. And
tho' the law allowed, and the manner in which criminal causes were
carried on in that age required a much longer interval, it appears,
from several circumstances, that this short space was considerably
contraced, and that Lennox had only eleven days warning to prepare
for accusing a person, so far superior to himself, both in power and
in favour *. No man could be less in a condition to contend with
an antagonist who was thus supported. Tho' Lennox's paternal
estate had been restored to him, when he was recalled into Scotland,
it seems to have been considerably impaired during his banishment.
His vasals, while he resided in England, had been accustomed to

- The ala of Privy Council, appointing the day of Bothwell's trial, bears date

March the 28th, which happened on a Thursday, Anders. vol. i. 50. The Queen's
warrant to the meungers, impowering them to summon Lennox to be present, is
dated on the 29th. Anders. vol. ii. 97. He was summoned by public proclamation
at the cross of Edinburgh on the fame day. Ibid. 1oo. He was summoned at his
dwelling-houfes in Glasgow and Dunbarton the 3oth of March, the Ift and 2d days
of April. Ibid. ioi. He was summoned at Perth, April ift, Ibid. 102. T'hough
Lennox resided at that time 40 miles from Edinburgh, the citation might have been
given him sooner. Such an unneccflary delay affords some cause for suspicion.
'Tis true, Mary, in her letter, March 24th, invited Lennox to come to Edinburgh
the ensuing week; this gave him warning some days sooner, that fle intended to
bring on the trial without delay. But the prccifc time could not be legally, or cer-
tainly known to Lennox sooner than i or 12 days, before the day on which he
was rc(luired to appear. By the law and pratrice of Scotland, at that time, parties
were summoned in calils of trcafon 40 days previous to the trial.

some

some degree of independance, and he had not recovered that ab- Booicc IV.
solute ascendant over them, which a feudal chief usually poflfefed. -"v
He had no reason to expect the concurrence of any of thol faitions '
into which the nobles were divided. During the short period of his
son's prosperity, he had taken such fleps as gave rife to an open
breach with Murray and all his adherents. The partizans of the
house of Hamilton were his hereditary and mortal enemies. Huntly
was linked in the closest confederacy with Bothwell; and thus, to
the disgrace of the nation, Lennox flood alone in a cause, where
both honour and humanity called so loudly on his countrymen to
second him.

IT is remarkable too, that Bothwell himself was present, and fat

as a member in that meeting of Privy Council, which 'gave direc-
tions with regard to the time and manner of his trial. And he still
enjoyed not only full liberty, but was received into the Queen's pre-
fence with the fame distinguished familiarity as formerly *.

NOTHING could be a more cruel disappointment to the wishes Lennox

and resentment of a father, than such a premature trial; every ftep lve a de
towards which seemed to be taken by directions from the person
who was himself accused of the crime, and calculated on purpose
to conceal rather than to detet his guilt. Lennox foresaw what
would be the issue of this mock inquiry, and with how little safety
to himself, or success to his cause, he could venture to appear on
the day prefixed. In his former letters, though under expressions
the most refpetfil, some symptoms of his diftrufling the Queen
may be discovered. He spoke out now, in plain language. He
complained of the injury done him, by hurrying on the trial with
such illegal precipitation. He represented once more, the indecen-

* Andcrf. vol. i. 50, 52.

Yy 2 cy

Book IV. cy of allowing Bothwell, not only to enjoy personal liberty, but to

retain his former influence over her councils. He again required her,
>57' as she regarded her own- honour, to give some evidence of her

sincerity in prosecuting the murder, by confining the person who
was fufpeded, on good grounds, to be the author of it; and, till
that were done, he signified his own resolution not to be present at
a trial, the manner and circumstances of which were so irregular,
and unfatisfadory .

Applies for HE seems, however, to have expected little success from this
this r.urpose
toEliizabeth. application to Mary; and therefore, at the fame time, besought

Elizabeth to interpose, in order to obtain such a delay as he de-
manded i. Nothing can be a fironger proof, how violently he
fufpedled the one Qeen, than his submitting to implore the aid of
the other, who had treated his son with the utmost contempt, and
himself and family with the greatest rigour. Elizabeth, who was
never unwilling to interpose in the affairs of Scotland, wrote insfantly
to Mary, advised her to delay the trial for some time, and urged, in
such firong terms, the fame arguments which Lennox had used, as
might have convinced her to what an unfavourable conftrudion her
conduAc would be liable, if dhe persisted in her present method of
proceeding +.

The trial pro. NEITHER her intreaties, however, nor those of Lennox, could
ceeds. prevail to have the trial put off. On the day appointed, Bakewell

appeared, but with such a formidable retinue, that it would have
been dangerous to condemn, and impossible to punish him. Be-
fides a numerous body of his friends and vassals assembled, accord-
ing to custom, from different parts of the kingdom, he was attended

I' Andlcrf. vol. i. 52. 1' Good. vol. ii. 352, 1: Andcrf, Pref. 60.
See Appendix, N1 XIX.

I by

by a band of hired soldiers, who marched with flying colours along BOOK IV.
the streets of Edinburgh *. A court of justice was held, with the ie
accustomed formalities. An indidment was presented against
Bothwell, and Lennox was called upon to make good his accu-
fation. In his name appeared Robert Cunningham, one of his de-
pendants. He excused his Master's absence, on account of the
hortnefs of e

he time, which prevented his assembling his friends and

vassals, without whole allftance he could not, with safety, venture
to set himself in opposition to such a powerful antagonist. For this
reason, he desired the court to stop proceeding, and protested, that
any sentence which flould be passed, at that time, ought to be
deemed illegal and void. Bothwell, on the other hand, insisted, that
the court should instantly proceed to trial. One of Lennox's own
letters, in which he craved of the Qeen to prosecute the murderers
without delay, was produced. Cunningham's objeaions were over-
ruled; and the jury, confifling of Peers and Barons of the sirs
rank, found Bothwell not guilty of the crime.

No person appeared as an accuser, not a single witness was ex' Bothwell is

amined, nor any evidence produced against him. The jury, under aquited.
there circumstances, could do nothing else but acquit him. Their
verdic, however, was far from gratifying the wifles, or silencing
the murmurs of the people. Every circumstance in the trial gave
grounds for suspicion, and excited indignation; and the judgment
pronounced, instead of being a proof of Bothwell's innocence, was
esteemed an argument of his guilt. Pasquinades and libels were
affixed to different places, expressing the sentiments of the public,
with the utmoit virulence of language.

* Anders. vol. i. 135.

TH-

BOOK IV. THE jury thenimelves seem to have been aware of the censure, to
i_-x----. whiich their proceedings would be expoied ; and, at the fame time,

7 that they returned their verdict acquitting Bothwell, the Earl of

Caithness protefled, in their name, that no crime should be imputed
to them on that account, because no accuser had appeared, and no
proof was brought of the indictment. He took notice, likewise,
that the ninth instead of the tenth of February was mentioned in
the inditmnnt, as the day on which the murder had been commit-
ted. A circumstance, which discovers the extreme inaccuracy of
those who prepared the indictment; and at a time when men were
disposed, and not without reason, to be suspicious of every thing,
this finall matter contributed to confirm and to increase their sus-
picions .

EVEN Bothwell himself did not rely on the judgment which he

had obtained in his favour, asa full vindication of his innocence. Im-
mediately after his acquittal, he, in compliance with a cufiom which
was not then obsolete, published a writing, in which he offered to
fight, in single combat, any Gentleman of good fame, who should
presume to accuse him of being accessory to the murder of the King.

MARY, however, continued to treat him, as if he had been

cleared by the most unexceptionable and fatisfadory evidence. The
ascendant he had gained over her heart, as well as over her coun-
cils, was more visible than ever; and Lennox, who could not ex-
pe&t that his own person would be safe in a country where themur-
derer of his son had been absolved, without regard to justice; and
loaded with honours, in contempt ofdecency; fled with precipita-
tion towards England '-.

: Bothw. Trial. Andcrf. vol. i. 97, &c. t Keith, 378. Note (d).

Two

Two days after the trial, a Parliament was held, at the opening BOOK IV.
of which the Queen distinguished Bothwell, by appointing him to

I 567.

carry the sceptre before her *. Most of the Ads passed in this As- A Parliament
fembly, were calculated on purpose to firengthen his party, and to held.
promote his designs. He obtained the ratification of all the posses-
sions and honours which the partiality of the Queen had conferred
upon him; and the act to that effect contained the itrongeft decla-
rations of his faithful services to the Crown, in all times past. The
surrender of the castle of Edinburgh by Mar was confirmed. The
law of attainder against Huntly was repealed, and he, and his ad-
herents, were restored to the estates and honours of their ancestors.
Several of those who had been on the jury which acquitted him,
obtained the ratifications of the grants made in their favour. And
as pasquinades daily multiplied, a law passed, whereby those, into
whose hands any paper of that kind fell, were commanded instantly
to destroy it; and if, through their negled, it should be allowed to
spread, they were fubjeded to a capital punishment, in the fame
manner as if they had been the original authors A.

BUT the absolute dominion, which Bothwell had acquired over Remarkable
Mary's mind, appeared in the clearest manner, by an act in favour law in favour

of the Refor-

of the Protestant religion, to which, at this time, ihe gave her as- mation.
sent. Mary's attachment to the Romiilh faith was uniform and fu-
perftitious; (he had never laid aside the design, nor loft the hopes
ofreftoring it. She had, of late, come under new engagements to
that purpose, and in consequence of these, had ventured upon
some steps more public and vigorous than any fle had formerly
taken. But Bothwell was prompted, by powerful motives, to pro-
mote this law. Hie had been guilty of crimes, which rendered him
the objet ofjuft and universal deteflation. He was meditating

* Keith, 378. Note (d.) 1 Ibid. 280.

others,

BooR IV. others, which he easily foresaw would heighten the public indigna-

ó^^ ^ tion against him. By this popular law, he might hope to divert, or
567. to delay the resentment of the nation, and flattered himself, that the

obtaining this unexpected and legal security for the Protestant reli-
gion, would atone for much guilt, silence the clamours of the clergy,
and induce the people to connive at, or to tolerate his crimes. The
act itself was so favourable to the dotrine of the Reformers, that
the Parliament, which met next year, under very different leaders,
could substitute nothing fironger or more explicit in its place; and
thought it sufficient to ratify it word for word *. To pass such an
ad, was utterly inconfiient with all the maxims which Mary fol-
lowed in every other period of her life; but what could never be
extorted from her by the solicitations of the Assemblies of the
church, or by the intreaties of her people, the more powerful in-
fluence of Bothwell now obtained -.

Bothwell pre- EVERY ftep taken by Bothwell had hitherto been attended with
obies to re- all the success which his most sanguine wiflies could expe&. He
commendhim had entirely gained the Qeen's heart; the murder of the King had
as an husband
to the Queen. excited no public commotion; he had been acquitted by his peers

of any flare in that crime; and their decision had been, in Ibme

* Parl. I. Jac. VI. c. 31.

- Buchanan, SHill. 355, not only omits taking any notice of this law, but aflerts,

that the Qicen, though she had given promises in fatvour of the reformed religion,
rcfufcd to permit any a&t to pass in support of it, and even difiniifed the deputies of
the church with contempt. Spotfwoodt, 202. and Calderwood, vol. iii. 41. both as-
firm the fame thing. It would not have been necefiary to obfervc this intfance of
Euchanan's inaccuracy ; but that an author so convcrifant in our laws as Spotfwood,
and one so iindlftriious as Calderwood, flould commit such an error, when not only
the original flatute was extant in the records of Mary's Parliament, but even when
the printed at of Murray's Parliament was before their eyes, is remarkable. Even
Buchanian himflif has taken notice of this adt. Dctcdio, p. 8.

fort

fort, ratified in Parliament. But in a kingdom, where the regal au- BOOK IV.
thority was so extremely limited, and the power of the nobles so ''
formidable, he durst not venture on the last action, towards which 567
all his ambitious projects tended, without their approbation. In or- April 19.
der to secure this, he, immediately after the dissolution of Parlia-
ment, invited all the nobles who were present to an entertainment.
Having filled the house with his friends and dependants, and fur-
rounded it with armed men *, he opened to the company his inten-
tion of marrying the Queen, whose content, he told them, he had
already obtained; and demanded their approbation of this match,
which, he said, was no less acceptable to their Sovereign, than ho-
nourable to himself -. Huntley and Seaton, who were privy to all
Bothwell's schemes, and promoted them with the utmost zeal; the
Popish ecclesiastics, who were absolutely devoted to the Queen, and
ready to sooth all her passions, instantly declared their fatisfadion
with what he had proposed. The reft, who dreaded the exorbitant
power which Bothwell had acquired, and observed the Queen's
growing affection towards him in all her actions, were willing to
make a merit of yielding to a measure, which they could neither op-
pose, nor defeat. Some few were confounded and inraged. But, in
the end, Bothwell, partly by promises and flattery, partly by terror
and force, prevailed on all who were present to subscribe a paper,
which leaves a deeper l-ain than any occurrence in that age, on the
honour and character of the nation.

THIS paper contained the ifrongeft declarations of Bothwell's in-

nocence, and the most ample acknowledgment of his good services
to the kingdom. If any future accusation should be brought against
him, on account of the King's murder, the subscribers promised to

* Good. vol. ii. 141. .n Andcrf. vol. i. 94.
VOL, I. Z z fland

BOOK IV. fland by him as one man, and to hazard their lives and fortunes in

`"11` his defence. They recommended him to the Queen, as the most
I567' proper person f{ie could chufe for a husband; and if she flould con-

descend to bestow on him that mark of her regard, they undertook
to promote the marriage, and to join him with all their forces, in
opposing any person who endeavoured to obftruA it *. Among the
subscribers of this paper, we find some who were the Queen's chief
confidents, others who were itrangers to her counsels, and ob-
noxious to her displeasure ; some who faithfully adhered to her,
through all the vicissitudes of her fortune, and others who became
the principal authors of her sufferings; some passionately attached
to the Romish superstition, and others zealous advocates for the
Protestant faith --. No common interest can be supposed to have
-united men of such opposite principles and parties, in recommend-
ing to their Sovereign a ftep so injurious to her honour, and so fa-
tal to her peace. This strange coalition was the effect of much ar-
tifice, and mufl be confidered as the boldest and most masterly
stroke of Bothwell's address. It is observable, that amidst all the
altercations and mutual reproaches of the two parties which arose
in the kingdom, this unworthy transaction is seldom mentioned.
Conscious on both fides, that in this particular, their condu&t could
ill bear examination, and would redound little to their fame, they
always touch upon it unwillingly, and seem desirous that it fmould
remain in darkness, or be buried in oblivion. But as so many per-
solns, who, both at that time, and ever after, poflffned the Queen's
favour, subscribed this p.pcr, the suspicion becomes strong, that
Bothwell's ambitious hopes were neither unknown to Mary, nor
dliapproved by her -4.

rTHESE

E Andcrf. vol. i. 177. -1i Keith, 382.

:: Of all the diflfrentl fyftcms with regard to this tranfalction, that of Camdenl
fccms to be the least accuratc, and the worlf founded. He fuppofcs that Bothwell

was

THESE suspicions are confirmed by the mol direRproof. Melvil, BOOK IV,
at that time, enjoyed a considerable flare in her f:vour. He, as well L ó'"-

I567.

as his brother, kept a secret correspondence in England, with those
who favoured her pretensions to that Crown. The rumour of her
intended marriage with Bothwell having early spread in that kingdom,
excited the utmofl indignation; and he received a letter from thence,
which represented, in the strongest terms, what would be the fatal es-
feds of fuchan imprudent siep. Melvil put this letter into the Queen's
hands, and inforced it with the utmost warmth. She not only difre-
garded these remonstrances, but communicated the matter to Both-

was hated by Murray, Morton, &c. who had been his associates in the murder
of the King, and that they now wanted to ruin him. He affirms, at the fame time,
that the subscriptions to this paper were obtained by them, out of fear that Both-
well might fink in his hopes, and betray the whole bloody secret. 404. But besides
the absurdity of supposing, that any man's enemies would contribute towards raising
him to such high dignity, on the uncertain hopes of afterwards depriving him of
it; besides the impofibility of accompliflling such a marriage, if it had been either
unknown to the Queen, or disagreeable to her; we may observe that this supposition
is destroyed by the direct testimony of the Queen herself, who ascribes the content
of the nobles to Bothwell's artifices, who purchascd it by giving them to underfland
that we were content therewith. Anders. vol. i. 94. It would have been no finall ad-
vantage to Mary, if she could have represented the content of the nobles to have
been their own voluntary deed. It is rill more surprising to find Lefly ascribing
this paper to Murray and his faction. Anders. vol. i. 26. The Bishop himself was
one of the persons who subscribed it. Keith, 383. The King's commissioners, at
the conference held at York I568, pretended that none of the nobles, except the
Earl of Huntly, would subscribe this paper till a warrant from the Queen was pro-
duced, by which they were allowed to do so ; this warrant they had in their custody,
and exhibited. Andcr. vol. iv. Part ii. 59. This differs fiom Buchanan's account,
who supposes that all the nobles prefcnt subscribed the paper on the i9th, and that,
next day, they obtained the approbation of what they had done, by way of iccu-
ricy to themselves, 355.

Z Z 2 vwell

BOOK IV. well. Melvil, in order to save his life, was obliged to fly from

%.^^ ^ court, whither he durIt not return, till the Earl's rage began to
1567. abate *. At the fame time, Elizabeth warned Mary of the danger

and infamy to which she would expose herself, by such an indecent
choice; but an advice from her met with fill less regard +-.

Bothwell car- THREE days after the rising of Parliament, Mary went from
ries rheQieen Edinburgh to Stirling, in order to visit the Prince her son. Both-
by force to
Dunbar. well had now brought his schemes to full maturity, and every pre-

caution being taken, which could render it safe to venture on the last
and decisive ftep, the natural impetuosity of his spirit did not susser
him to deliberate any longer. Under pretence of an expedition
against the free-booters on the borders, he assembled his followers;
and marching out of Edinburgh with a thousand horse, turned
pril 24. suddenly towards Linlithgow, met the Queen on her return near

that place, dispersed her slender train without refilance, seized on
her person, and conduted her, together with a few of her cour-

* Melv. 156. According to Melvil, Lord Herreis likewise remonstrated against

the marriage, and conjured the Queen, on his knees, to lay aside all thoughts of
such a dishonourable alliance. I56. But it has been observed, that Herreis is one of
the nobles who subscribed the bond, April I9. Keith, 383. 2. That he is one
of the witnesses to the marriage articles between the Qtueen and Bothwell, May 14.
Good. vol. ii. 61. 3. That he fat in council with Bothwell, May 17. Keith, 386.
But this remonstrance of Lord Herreis against the marriage happened before thcfe,
made by Melvil himself, 157. Melvil's rcmonflrance must have happened some
time before the meeting of Parliament; for after offending Bothwell, he retired
from court; he allowed his rage time to fubfidc, and had again joined the Qlcen,.
when fhi was seized, April 24. 158. The time which muff have clapsed, by this
account of the matter, was perhaps sufficient to have gained Herreis, from being an
oppofcr, to become a promoter of the marriage. Perhaps Mclvil may have com-
mitted some mistake with regard to this fadt, so far as relates to Lord Herreis. He
could not well be mistaken with regard to what himself did.

t Andcrf. vol. i. Io6.

tiers,

tiers, as a prisoner to his cattle of Dunbar. She expreted neither BOOK IV.
furprize, nor terror, nor indignation, at such an outrage committed "
on her person, and such an insult offered to her authority, but seemed 567
to yield without itruggle or regret *. Melvil was, at that time, one
of her attendants; and the officer by whom he was seized in-
formed him, that nothing was done without the Queen's own con-
sent --. If we may rely on the letters published in Mary's name,
the scheme had been communicated to her, and every ftep towards
it was taken with her participation and advice .

BOTH the Queen and Bothwell thought it of advantage to em-

ploy this appearance of violence. It afforded her a decent excuse
for her conduct; and while (he could plead that it was owing to
force rather than choice, the hoped that her reputation, among so-
reigners at least, would escape without censure, or be exposed to
less reproach. Bothwell could not help distrusting all the methods
which had hitherto been used, for vindicating him from any con-
cern in the murder of the King. Something was flill wanting for
his security, and for quieting his guilty fears. This was a pardon
under the Great Seal. By the laws of Scotland, the most heinous
crime must be mentioned by name in a pardon, and then all lesser
offences are deemed to be included under the general clause, and
all other crimes wvhatfoever 11. To seize the person of the Prince, is
high treason; and Bothwell hoped, that a pardon obtained for this,
would extend to every thing of which he had been accused *-*

BOTHWELL, having now got the Queen's person into his hands, ri divorced
it would have been unbecoming either a politician or a man of fromhis own

wife.
gallantry to have delayed coniummating his schemes. For this

-* Keith, 383. 1- Melv. 158. :. Good. vol. ii. 37.
1i Parl. 6. Jac. IV. c. 62. *'* Anders. vol. iv. Part ii. 6i.

purpose,

BoOKc IV. purpose, he instantly commenced a fiiit, in order to obtain sentence

'L'" of divorce from his wife Lady Jean Gordon, the Earl of Huntly's
April 4. fiter. This process was carried on, at the fame time, both before

Pro:eftant and Popifl judges; before the former, in the court of
Conmiffiries; and before the latter, in the spiritual court of the
Archbifihop of St. Andrew's, whofejurifdidtion the Queen had lately
reflored. The pretexts which he pleaded were trivial, or fcanda-
lous. But his authority had greater weight than the juflice of his
caue ; and in both courts, sentence of divorce was pronounced, with
the fame indecent and suspicious precipitancy ".

WHILE this infamous transaction was carrying on, the Queen

resided at Dunbar; detained as a prisoner, but treated with the ut-
May 3. most refpea. Soon after Bothwell, with a numerous train of his

dependants, conducted her to Edinburgh; but inflead of lodging
her in the palace of Holy-rood-houle, he conveyed her to the
cable, of which he was governor. The discontent of the nation
rendered this precaution necessary. In an house unfortified, and of
easy access, the Queen might have been rescued without difficulty
out of his hands. In a place of firength, she was secured from
all the attempts of his enemies.

ONE small difficulty fill remained to be surmounted. As the

Queen was kept in a fort of captivity by Bothwell, a marriage
concluded in that condition might be imputed to force, and be held
May 12. invalid. In order to obviate this, Mary appeared in the court of

session, and in presence of the Chancellor, the other judges, and
several of the nobility, declared that fie was now at full liberty;
and though Bothwell's violence in seizing her person had, at first,
excited her indignation, yet his refpedful behaviour since that time

And. . I32.

had

had not only appeased her resentment, but determined her to raise BOOK IV.
him to higher honours *. 56

1567.

WHAT these were soon became public. The title of Duke Ts married to

of Orkney was conferred upon Bothweil; and on the Isth oftheeen
May his marriage with the Queen, which had so long been the
obje& of his.wifes, and the motive of his crimes, was solemnized.
The ceremony was performed, in public, according to the rites of
the Protestant Church, by Adam Bothwell bithop of Orkney, one
of the few prelates who had embraced the Reformation, and
on the fame day, was celebrated in private, according to the
forms prescribed by the Popifl religion t. The boldness with
which Craig, the Minister who was commanded to publish the
banns, testified against the design; the finall number of the nobles,
who were present at the marriage ; and the fullen and difrefpedful
silence of the people, when the Qeen appeared in public; were
Inanifeft fymiptoms of the violent and general diffatisfadion of her
own fubjeds. The refiufal of Du Croc the French ambassador to be
present at the nuptial ceremony or entertainment discovers the fen-
timents of her allies, with regard to this part of her conduct. And
although every other aAion in Mary's life could be justified by the
rules of prudence, or reconciled to the principles of virtue, this fatal
marriage would remain an inconteftible proof of her rashness, if not
of her guilt.

MARY's first care was to offer some apology for her condut, to

the courts of France and England. The infhluiions to her am-
bafladors still remain, and are drawn by a masterly hand. But
under all the artificial and false colouring fle employs, it is easy to
discover not only that many of the fleps fie had taken were un-

*n And.1.. 87. And. . I36. 2. 276.

jutifiablc,

BooK IV. juflifiable, but that she herself was conscious that they could not
d^t-"$ be jutlified '~

I67.

THE title of King was the only thing, which was not bellowed

upon Bothwell. Notwithstanding her attachment to him, Mary
remembered the inconveniencies, which had arisen from the rash
advancement of her former husband to that honour, She agreed,
however, that he should sign, in token of consent, all the public
writs issued in her name -. This was nothing more than mere
form, but, together with it, he possessed all the reality of power.
The Queen's person was in his hands; ihe was surrounded more
closely than ever by his creatures; none of her fubjeas could ob-
tain audience without his permission; and, unless in his own pre-
fence, none but his confidents were permitted to converse with
her T~. The Scotch Monarchs were accustomed to live among their
fubjeds as fathers or as equals, without difRruft, and with little
state; armed guards standing at the doors of the royal apartment,
difficulty of access, difiance and retirement, were things unknown,
and unpopular.

Endeavoursto THESE precautions were neceflary for securing to Bothwell the
become maf- power, which he had acquired. But, without being mafler of
Prince 'er- the person of the young Prince, he esteemed all that he had gained
son. to be precarious and uncertain. The Queen had committed her

son to the care of the Earl of Mar. The fidelity and loyalty of
that nobleman were too well known to expect that he would be
willing to put the prince into the hands of the man, who was so
violently iufpeAed of having murdered his father. Bothwell, how-
ever, laboured to get the Prince into his power, with an anxiety,

· And. I. 89. - Good. 2. 60. t And. i. 136.

which

which gave rife to the blackest suspicions. All his address as well BOOK IV.
as authority were employed to persuade, or to force Mar, into a
compliance with his demands *. And it is no flight proof both 567
of the firmness and dexterity of that nobleman, that he preserved
a life of so much importance to the nation, from lying at the mercy
of a man, whom fear or ambition might have prompted to vio-
lent attempts against it.

THE eyes of neighbouring nations were fixed, at that time, General in-

upon the great events, which had happened in Scotland, during hgnti the
three months. A King murdered, with the utmost cruelty, in Queen's con-

dutl excited.

the prime of his days, and in his capital city ; the person fufpeded
of that odious crime suffered not only to appear publickly in every
place, but admitted into the presence of the Queen, distinguished
by her favour, and entrusted with the chief direction of her affairs ;
subjeCted to a trial, which was carried on with most shameless par-
tiality, and acquitted by a sentence, which served only to confirm
the suspicions of his guilt; divorced from his wife, on pretences
frivolous, or indecent; and after all this, inflead of meeting with
the ignominy due to his actions, or the punishment merited by his
crimes, permitted openly, and without opposition, to marry a
Queen, the wife of the Prince whom he had aflaflinated, and
the guardian of those laws which he had been guilty of violating.
Such a quick fucceflion of incidents, so singular, and so detestable,
is not to be found in any other history. They left, in the opinion
of foreigners, a mark of infamy on the charater of the nation.
The Scots were held in abhorrence all over Europe; they durit scarce
appear any-where in public ; and after suffering so many atrocious
deeds to pass with impunity, they were universally reproached as

* Melv. i60. Buch. 361.
VOL. I. A aa men

BooIz IV. men void of courage, or of humanity, as equally regardless of the

ó^1-^ reputation of their Queen, and the honour of their country *.

1567.

The nobles THESE reproaches rouzed the nobles, who had been hitherto
,combine a- amused by Bothwell's artifices, or intimidated by his power. The
gainfi her and
Both^e.and manner in which he exercised the authority which he had acquired,

his repeated attempts to become master of the Prince's person, to-
gether with omen rail threatenings against him, which he let fall -,
added to the violence and promptness of their resolutions. A con-
fiderable body of them assembled at Stirling, and entered into an as-
fociation for the defence of the Prince's person. Argyll, Athol,
Mar, Morton, Glencairn, Home, Lindsay, Boyd, Murray of Tul-
libardin, Kirkaldy of Grange, and Maitland the Secretary, were the
heads of this confederacy +. Stewart Earl of Athol was remarkable
for an uniform and bigotted attachment to popery, but his indigna-
tion on account of the murder of the King, to whom he was nearly
allied, and his zeal for the safety of the Prince, overcame, on this
occasion, all considerations of religion, and united him with the
most zealous Protestants. Several of the other nobles aaed, with-
out question, from a laudable concern for the safety of the Prince,
and tie honour of their country. But the spirit which some of
them discovered, during the fibfequent revolutions, leaves little
room to doubt, that ambition or resentment were the real motives
of their condut-; and that, on many occasions, while they were
purfiuing ends just and necessary, they were actuated by principles
and paflions altogether unjufrifiable.

TH-r first accounts of this league filled the Queen and Bothwell
with great conflernation. They were no firangers to the sentiments

' Andcrf. vol. i. I28, 134. Mclv. 163. See Appendix, N". XX.

'i Ibid. 161. 4: Keith, 394.

of

of the nation, with refped to their condu:; and though their mar- BooK IV.
riage had not met with public opposition, they knew that it had -x.ó
not been carried on without the secret difguff and murmurings of 5
all ranks of men. They foresaw the violence with which this in-
dignation would burit out, after being so long suppressed. And in
order to.prepare for the storm, Mary issued a proclamation, requir- May 28.
ing her fubjeas to take arms, and to attend her husband by a day
appointed. At the fame time, the published a fort of manifesto, in
which she laboured to vindicate her government from those impu-
tations with which it had been loaded, and employed the strongest
terms to express her concern for the safety and welfare of the Prince
her son. Neither of these produced any considerable effea. Her
proclamation was ill obeyed, and her manifesto met with little
credit *.

THE confederate Lords carried on their preparations with no less The Queen

acivity, and with much more success. Among a warlike people, anetietoDun-
men of so much power and popularity found it an easy matter to bar.
raise an army. They were ready to march before the Queen and
Bothwell were in a condition to resist them. The castle of Edin-
burgh was the place whither the Qeen ought naturally to have
retired, and there her person might have been perfectly safe. But
the confederates had fallen on means to shake, or corrupt the fide-
lity of Sir James Balfour the deputy governor, and Bothwell durif
not commit to him such an important trufl. He conducted the Queen
to the catfle of Borthwick, and on the appearance of Lord Home, June 6;
with a body of his followers, before that place, he fled with pre-
cipitation to Dunbar, and was followed by the Queen, disguised in
men's cloaths. The confederates advanced towards Edinburgh,

IKeith, 387, 395, 396.

A a a where

BooK IV. where Huntly endeavoured, in vain, to animate the inhabitants to

' ó^ defend the town againit them. They entered without opposition,

and were initantly joined by many of the citizens, whose zeal be-
came the firmest support of their cause *.

IN order to set their own conduct in the most favourable light,

and to rouze the public indignation against Bothwell, the nobles
published a declaration of the motives which had induced them to
take arms. All Bothwell's past crimes were enumerated, all his
wicked intentions displayed and aggravated, and every true Scots-
man was called upon to join them in avenging the one, and in pre-
venting the other -.

MEAN while, Bothwell assembled his forces at Dunbar, and as

he had many dependants in that corner, he soon gathered such
strength, that he ventured to advance towards the confederates.
Their troops were not numerous; the suddenness and secrecy of their
enterprize gave their friends at a distance no time to join them;
and as it does not appear that they were supported either with mo-
ney or fed with hopes by the Queen of England, they could not
have kept long in a body. But on the other hand, Bothwell durst
not rifque a delay I. His army followed him with reluctance in
this quarrel, and served him with no cordial affection ; so that his
only hopes of success was in furprizing the enemy, or in firiking
the blow before his own troops had leisure to recolled themselves,
or to imbibe thefame unfavourable opinion of his actions, which had
spread over the reft of the nation. These motives determined the
Queen to march forward, with an inconsiderate and fatal speed.

' Keith, 398. t Anders. vol. i. I28. : Keith, 401.

ON

ON the first intelligence of her approach, the confederates ad- BOOK IV.

vanced to meet her. They found her forces drawn up on the fame "o"
ground which the English had occupied at the battle of Pinkie. Thenobles
The numbers on both fides were nearly equal; but there was march agaias

them.

no equality in point of discipline. The Queen's army consisted June s5.
chiefly of a multitude, hastily assembled, without courage or expe-
rience in war. The troops of the confederates were composed of
Gentlemen of rank and reputation, followed by their moit trusty
dependants, who were no less brave than zealous *.

Du Croc the French Ambassador, who was in the field, la- An acconm-

boured, by negociating both with the Queen and the nobles, to tempted.
put an end to the quarrel without the effusion of blood. He re-
presented to the confederates the Queen's inclinations towards peace,
and her willingness to pardon the offences which they had commit-
ted. Morton replied, with warmth, that they had taken arms not
against the Queen, but againif the murderer of her husband, and
if he were given up to justice, or banished from her pretence, she
should find them ready to yield the obedience which is due from
fubjeds to their Sovereign. Glencairn added, that they did not
come to ask pardon for any offence, but to punish those who had
offended. These haughty answers convinced the Ambassador, that
his mediation would be ineffectual, and that their paflions were too
high to allow them to liften to any pacific propositions, or to think
of retreating after having proceeded so far -.

THE Queen's army was ported to advantage, on a rising ground.

The confederates advanced to the attack resolutely, but slowly, and
with the caution which was natural on that unhappy field. c--Ir

* Cald. vol. ii. 48, 49. -I Keith, 401.

troops

BoOKs IV. troops were alarmed at their approach, and discovered no inclina-

óbV u tion to fight. Mary endeavoured to animate them; she wept,
1567. the threatened, fle reproached them with cowardice, but all in

vain. A few of Bothwell's immediate attendants were eager for the
encounter; the reft flood wavering and irresolute, and some began
to fleal out of the field. Bothwell attempted to inspirit them, by
offering to decide the quarrel, and to vindicate his own innocence
in single combat with any of his adversaries. Kirkaldy of Grange,
Murray of Tullibardin, and Lord Lindsay contended for the honour
of entering the lilts against him. But this challenge proved to be a
mere bravade. Either the consciousness of guilt deprived Bothwell
of his wonted courage, or the Queen, by her authority, forbade
the combat *.

AFTER the symptoms of fear discovered by her followers, Mary

would have been inexcusable, had she hazarded a battle. To
have retreated in the face of an enemy, who had already surrounded
the hill on which she flood, with part of their cavalry, was utterly
impracicable. In this situation, she was under the cruel necessity
of putting herself into the hands of those subje&s who had taken
arms againil her. She demanded an interview with Kirkaldy, a
brave and generous man, who commanded an advanced body of the
enemy. He, with the content and in name of the leaders of the
party, promised that, on condition she would dismiss Bothwell
from her presence, and govern the kingdom by the advice of her
nobles, they would honour and obey her as their Sovereign t.

Bothwell ob- DURING this parley, Bothwell took his last farewell of the Queen,
liged to y and rode off the field with a few followers. This dismal reverse

happened exactly one month after that marriage, which had colt him

* Cald. vol. ii. 50. -t Good. vol. ii. 164. Mclv. I65.

so
I

so many crimes to accomplish, and which leaves so foul a slain on BOOK IV.
Mary's memory. - -.

1567.

As soon as Bothwell retired, Mary surrendered to Kirkaldy, who Mary furren.

conduced her toward the confederate army, the leaders of which deobl the
received her with much refpe c; and Morton, in their name, made
ample professions of their future loyalty and obedience *. But he
was treated by the common soldiers with the utmost insolence and
indignity. As she marched along, they poured upon her all the op-
probrious names, which are beflowed only on the lowest and most
infamous criminals. Wherever the turned her eyes, they held up
before her a standard, on which was painted the dead body of the
late King, firetched on the ground, and the young Prince kneeling
before it, and uttering these words, C" Judge and revenge my cause,
0 Lord !" Mary turned with horror from such a shocking fight.
She began already to feel the wretched condition to which a captive
Prince is reduced. She uttered the most bitter complaints, ile
melted into tears, and could scarce be kept from finking to the
ground. The confederates carried her towards Edinburgh, and, in
spite of many delays, and after looking with the fondness and cre-
dulity natural to the unfortunate for some unexpected relief, ihe arri-
ved there. The itreets were covered with multitudes, whom zeal
or curiosity had drawn together, to behold such an unusual scene.
The Queen, worn out with fatigue, covered with duff, and be-
dewed with tears, was exposed as a spectacle to her own fubjedts,
and led to the Provoif's house. Notwithstanding all her argu-
ments and intreaties, the fame standard was carried before her, and
the fame infilts and reproaches repeated. A woman, young, beau-
tiful, and in difrefs, is naturally the objeL of compaflion. The

' GCood. vol. ii. 165.

co0111-

BOOK IV. comparion of their present misery with their former splendour,

ó^^-^ usually softens us in favour of illustrious sufferers. But the people
567' beheld the deplorable situation of their Sovereign with insensibility;

and so strong was their persuasion of her guilt, and so great the vio*
lence of their indignation, that the sufferings of their Queen did not,
in any degree, mitigate their resentment, or procure her that sym-
pathy, which is seldom denied to unfortunate Princes ".

e Melvil. I66. Buch. 364.

THE

# THE HISTORY OF SCOTLAND. BOOK V.

THE
T HT Es
H I S- T O R Y

O F

S CQT L
FA N D.

BOOK V.
T HI E confederate Lords had proceeded to such extremities, BOOK V.

againfs their Sovereign, that it now became almost impof- .,
fible for them either to flop ihort, or to pursue a course 5Deli6a7.

Deliberationa

less violent. Many of the nobles had refused to concur with them of the nobles
in their enterprize; others openly condemned it. A small circum- tClec ueen.
stance might abate that indignation with which the multitude were,
at present, animated against the Queen, and deprive them of that
popular applause which was the chief foundation of their power.
These considerations inclined some of them to treat the Qeien
twith great lenity.

Bu r, on the other hand, Mary's affeetion for Bothwell continued

as violent as ever; fie obflinately refused to hearken to any pro-
pofal for. diflblving their marriage, and determined not to abandon
a manl, for whose love flbe had already sacrificed so much*" . If they
flould allow her to recover the filpleme power, the firfn exertion of
it would be to recall Bothwell; and they had rcafon, both fiom his

' Kcith, 419, 446, 4.19. Melv. 167. Sce Append. NO XXI.
VOL. , B b b resent-

BOOK V. resentment from her condu&, and from their own, to exped the

ó'-" ifevereft effeCs of her vengeance. These considerations surmount-
156 ed every other motive; and reckoning themselves absolved, by

Mary's incurable attachment to Bothwell, from the engagements
which they had come under when she yielded herself a prisoner,
they, without regarding the duty which they owed her as their
Queen, and without consulting the reft of the nobles, carried her

They impri- next evening, under a strong guard, to the castle of Lochlevin, and
son her in signed a warrant to William Douglas the owner of it, to detain her
Lochlevin.

as a prisoner. This castle is situated in a small island, in the middle
of a lake. Douglas, to whom it belonged, was a near relation of
Morton's, and had married the Earl of Murray's mother. In this
place, under ftrid custody, with a few attendants, and fubjeded to
the insults of a haughty woman, who boasted daily of being the
lawful wife of James V. Mary suffered all the rigour and miseries
of captivity *.

IMMEDIATELY after the Queen's imprisonment, the confederates

were at the utmost pains to strengthen their party; they entered into
new bonds of association; they assumed the title of Lords of the
Secret Council, and without any other right, arrogated to them-
selves the whole regal authority. One of their first ads of power
was to search the city of Edinburgh for those who were concerned
in the murder of the King. This lhew of zeal gained reputation to
themselves, and threw an oblique refleCtion on the Queen for her
remissness. Several fufpeded persons were seized. Captain Black-
adder and three others were condemned and executed. But no dif-
covery of importance was made. If we believe some hiRforians,
they were convidted by sufficient evidence. If we give credit to
others, their sentence was unjust, and they denied, with their last
breath, any knowledge of the crime, for which they suffered -I-.

* Keith, 403. Note (b). - Cald. vol. ii. 53. Crawf. Mem. 35.

AN

AN unexpeted accident, however, put into the hands of Mary's BooK V.

enemies what they deemed the fullest evidence of her guilt. Both-
well having left, in the cafle of Edinburgh, a casket, containing fe- 567.
veral sonnets and letters written with the Queen's own hand; he
now sent one of his confidents to bring to him this precious depofite.
But as his messenger returned, he was intercepted, and the casket
seized by Morton *. The contents of it were always produced by
the party, as the most ample justification of their own conduct, and
the mods unanswerable proof of their not having loaded their So-
vereign with the imputation of imaginary crimes -.

BUT the confederates, notwithstanding their extraordinary fuc- Some of the

cess, were still far from being perfecly at ease. That so small a part tbles favour
of the nobles should pretend to dispose of the person of their Sove-
reign, or to assume the authority which belonged to her, without the
concurrence of the reft, appeared to many of that body to be unpre-
cedented, and presumptuous. Several of these were now assembled
at Hamilton, in order to deliberate what course they should hold,
in this difficult conjuncture. The confederates made some attempts
towards a coalition with them, but without effect. They employed
the mediation of the Assembly of the Church, to draw them to a
personal interview at Edinburgh, but with no better success. That
party, however, though its numbers were formidable, and the
power of its leaders great, soon loft reputation by the want of una-
namity and vigour; all its consultations evaporated in murmurs
and complaints, and no scheme was concerted for obftrucding the
progress of the confederates 4+.

THERE appeared some profpet of danger from another quarter. Elizabeth i,

This great revolution in Scotland had been carried on without any tclpol:.; i: A,;::
aid from Elizabeth, and even without her knowledge IJ. And bl'

*- Andcrf. vol. ii. 92. Good. vol. ii. 90.
-1' Sec Diflirtation at the end of the Appendix. :: Keith, 407. Id. 415.

B b b 2 though

BOOK V. though flte was far from being displeased to fee the affairs of that

ó4"^" kingdom embroiled, or a rival, whom fie hated, reduced to dif-

trefs; file neither withed that it hlould be in the power of-the one
faction entirely to suppress the other, nor could ihe view the fleps
taken by the confederates without great offence. Notwithfi-anding
the popular maxims by which ahe governed her own fubjeds, her
notions of royal prerogative were very exalted. The confederates
had, in her opinion, encroached on the authority of their Sove-
reign, which they had no right to controul, and had offered vio-
lence to her person, which it was their duty to esteem sacred. They
had set a dangerous example to other fubjeds, and Mary's cause be-
came the common cause of Princes *. If ever Elizabeth was in-
fluenced with regard to the affairs of Scotland, by -the feelings of
her heart, rather than by considerations ofintereft, it was on this oc-
June 0o, cation. She instantly dispatched Throgmorton into Scotland, with

powers to negociate both with the Qtieen, and with the confede-
rates. In his inftruaions there appears a remarkable solicitude for
Mary's liberty, and even for her reputation -. And the choice of
an Ambassador, so devoted to the interest of the Scotifh Queen,
proves this solicitude to have been sincere. But neither Elizabeth's.
friendship, nor Throgmorton's zeal, were of much avail to Mary..
The confederates foresaw what would be the effects of these good
offices; and that the Queen, elated by the profped of protection,
would rejea with scorn the overtures which they were about to
make her. They, for that reason, peremptorily denied Throgmorton
access to their prisoner. And what propositions he made to them in
her behalf, they either refused, or eluded T.

?1,.inc: of M/IEAN while they deliberated with the utmost anxiety, con-
tl~t cous'c 2c-
,,: ,,L1c. cerniug the fcttlement of the nation, and the future disposal of the

Q.ecn's pcrfon. Elizabeth, observing that Throgmorton made no

: Kecith, 4.12, 415. * Id. 411. Id. 41 i7, 427.

progress

progress in his negociations with them, and that they would lifen BOOK V..
to none of his demands in Mary's favour, turned towards that party "- '
of the nobles who were assembled at Hamilton, incited them to take I 567
arms in order to restore their Queen to liberty, and promised to as-
sift them in such an attempt, to the utmost of her power *. But
they discovered no greater union or vigour than formerly, and be-
having like men who had given up all concern either for their
Queen or their country, tamely allowed an inconsiderable part of
their body, whether we confider it with refped to numbers, or to
power, to fettle the government of the kingdom, and to dispose of
the Quen's person at pleasure. Many consultations were held, and
various opinions arose with regard to each of these. Some seemed.
desirous of adhering to the plan on which the confederacy was at
first formed; and after punifling the murderers of the King, and
dissolving the marriage with Bothwell; after providing for the safety
of the young Prince, and the security of the Protestant religion ; they
proposed to re-eftabliflb the Qeen in the possession of her legal au-
thority. The success with which their arms had been accompanied,.
inspired others with bolder and more desperate thoughts, and no-
thing lets would satisfy them than the trial, the condemnation and
punishment of the Queen herself, as the principal conspirator against
the life of her husband and the safety of her son t: the former was
Maitland's system, and-breathed too much of a pacific and moderate
spirit, to be agreeable to the temper or wishes of the party. The
latter was recommended by the clergy, and warmly adopted by
many laics ; but the nobles dulrIt not, or would not venture on
such an unprecedented and audacious deed 4.

' Sec Appendix, N° XXI. -. Keith, 420, 421, 422, 582..

[: Thec intention of putting the Q!ccn to death fccms to have been carried on

by fonie of her fitbjcls: at- this time we often find Elizabcth boafling that Mary
owle her life to her intcrpofition. Digges's Compl. anib. 14, &c. Scc Appendix,
N,, XVIIl.

BOTI-

BOOK V. BOTH parties agreed at last upon a scheme, neither so moderate as
'"~' the one, nor so daring as the other. Mary was to be perfuaden or

They obige forced to rfgn the Crown; the young Prince was to be proclaimed
They oblige forced to resign the Crown; the young Prince was to be proclaimed
the Queen to King, and the Earl of Murray was to be appointed to govern the
resign the g ga-
lvernment. kingdom during his minority, with the name and authority of Re-

.gent. With regard to the Queen's own person, nothing was de-
:termined. It seems to have been the intention of the confederates,
to keep her in perpetual imprisonment; but in order to intimidate
herself, and to overawe her partizans, they frill reserved to themselves
,the power of proceeding to more violent extremes.

IT was obvious to foresee difficulties in the execution of this

plan. Mary was young, ambitious, high-fpirited, and accustomed
to command. To induce her to acknowledge her own incapacity
for governing, to renounce the dignity and power which ihe was
born to enjoy, to become dependant on her own fubjeds, to con-
sent to her own bondage, and to invest those persons, whom she
confidered as the authors of all her calamities, with that honour and
authority of which the herself was stripped, were points hard to be
gained. These, however, the confederates attempted, and they did
not want means to insure success. Mary had endured, for several
weeks, all the hardships and terror of a prison; no profped of liberty
appeared; none of her fubjets had either taken arms, or so much
as solicited her relief *; no person in whom she could confide was
.admitted into her pretence; even the Ambassadors of the French
King and Q(een of England were refused access to her. In this
solitary state, without a counsellor or a friend, under the pressure
of diflrcfs, and the apprehension of danger, it was natural for a
woman to hearken almoll to any overtures. The confederates took

* Keith, 425.

advan-

advantage of her condition, and of her fears. They employed Lord BOOK V.
Lindsay, the fiercest zealot in the party, to communicate their ó.---
scheme to the Queen, and to obtain her subscription to those pa-
pers which were necessary for rendering it effectual. He executed
his commission with harshness and brutality. Certain death was
before Mary's eyes, iffhe refused to comply with his demands. At
the fame time, she was informed by Sir Robert Melvil, in name
of Athol, Maitland, and Kirkaldy, the persons among the confe-
derates who were most attentive to her interest, that a resignation
extorted by fear, and granted during her imprisonment, was void in
law, and might be revoked so soon as ihe recovered liberty. Throg-
morton,. by a note which he found means to convey to her, fug-
gested the fame thing . Deference to'their opinion, as well as con-
cern for her own safety, obliged her to yield to every thing which
was required, and to sign all the papers which Lindsay presented
to her. By one of these, she resigned the Crown, renounced all
share in the government of the kingdom, and consented to the co-
ronation of the young King. By another, ihe appointed the Earl July 24..
of Murray Regent, and conferred upon him all the powers and
privileges of that high office. By a third, the fubitituted some
other nobleman in Murray's place, if he ihould refuse the honour
which was designed for him. Mary, when lhe subscribed these
deeds, was bathed in tears; and while she gave away, as it were
with her own hands, the sceptre which fle had swayed so long,
she felt a pang of grief and indignation, one of the feveretr, perhaps,
which can touch the human heart t.

THE confederates endeavoured to give this resignation all the Jamesvr.
weight and validity in their power, by proceeding without delay to cMuned, acond

fen Regent.
Keith, 425. Note (b). Mclv. 169, t Ibid. 4.30. Crawf. Mem. 38.

crown,

BooK V. crown the young Prince. The ceremony was performed at Stirling,

t3-. on the 29th of July, with much solemnity, in pretence of all the
567. nobles of the party, a considerable number of lesser Barons, and a

great assembly of the people. From that time, all public writs were
issued, and the government carried on, in name of James VI *.

No revolution so great was ever effeted with more ease, or by

means so unequal to the end. In a warlike age, and in less time
than two months, a part of the nobles, who neither poffeIfed the
chief power, nor the greatest wealth in the nation, and who never
brought 3000 men into the field, seized, imprisoned, and dethroned
their Q.een, and without sledding a single drop of blood, set her
son, an infant of a year old, on the throne.

Reafoningsof DURING this rapid progress of the confederates, the eyes of all
both parcs. the nation were turned on them, with aRtonifhment; and various

and contradicory opinions were formed, concerning the extraordi-
nary steps which they had taken.

EVEN under the ariftocratical form of government, which pre-

vails in Scotland, said the favourers of the Queen, and notwith-
standing the exorbitant privileges of the nobles, the Prince possesses
considerable power, and his person is treated with great veneration.
No encroachments ffiould be made on the former, and no injury of-
sered to the latter, but in cafes where the liberty and happiness of
the nation cannot be secured by any other means. Such cafcs fel-
don exit, and it belongs not to any part, but to the whole, or at
leafi to a majority of the society, to judge of their exiflence. By
what action could it be pretended, that Mary had invaded the rights

* IKith, 437.

or

or propertyof her fubjeds, or'what.fcheme had /he formed againit BOOK V.
the liberty and constitution of the kingdom? Were fears, and sus- óV
picions, and surmises, enough to juitify the imprisoning, and the 5
deposing a Queen, to whom the Crown descended from so long a
xace of Monarchs ? The principal author of whatever was reckoned
culpable in her conduat, was now driven from her pretence. The
murderers of the King might have been brought to condign punish-
ment, the safety of the Prince have been secured, and the Prote-
itant religion have been established, without wreiting the sceptre
out of her hands, or condemning her to perpetual imprisonment.
Whatever right a free Parliament might have had to proceed to
such a rigorous conclusion, or whatever name its determinations
might 'have merited, a sentence of this nature, passed by a few
nobles, without acknowledging or consulting the reft of the nation,
muff be deemed a rebellion againit the government, and a confpi-
racy against the person of their Sovereign.

THE partizans of the confederates reasoned very differently. 'Tis

evident, said they, That Mary either previously gave content to the
King's murder, or did afterwards approve of that horrid action.
Her attachment to Bothwell, the power and honours with which
ihe loaded him, the manner in which the suffered his trial to be
carried on, and the indecent speed with which (he married a man,
stained with so many crimes, raise trong suspicions of the former,
and put the latter beyond all doubt. To have suffered the supreme
power to continue in the hands of an ambitious man, capable of
the most atrocious and desperate ations, would have been disgrace-
ful to the nation, diflonourable to the Queen, and dangerous to
the Prince. Recourse was, therefore, had to arms. The Queen
had been compelled to abandon a husband, so unworthy of herself.
But her affection toward him flill continuing unabated; her in-

VoL. I. Cc c dignation

BooK V. dignation againlt the authors of this reparation being visible, and
h~' often exprefled in the strongest terms ; they, by restoring her to her

15ó7'

ancient authority, would have armed her with power to defsroy
themselves, have enabled her to recall Bothwell, and have afforded
her an opportunity of purluing schemes fatal to the nation, with
greater eagerness, and with more success. Nothing, therefore, re-
inained, but by one bold adion to deliver themselves and their coun-
try from all future fears. The expedient they had chosen was no
less reipedful to the royal blood, than necessary for the public safety.
While one Prince was set aside as incapable of governing, the
Crown was placed on his head, who was the undoubted reprefen-
tative of their ancient Kings.

WHATEVER opinion poiferity may form on comparing the ar-

guments of the two contending parties, whatever sentiments we
may entertain concerning the justice or necessity of that course
which the confederates held, it cannot be denied that their conduct,
so far as regarded themselves, was extremely .prudent. Other expe-
dients, less rigorous towards Mary, might have been found for sett-
ling the nation; but, after the injuries they had already offered the
Queen, there was none so effeAual for securing their own safety, or
perpetuating their own power.

To a great part of the nation, the conduc of the confederates

appeared not only wife, but just. The King's acceflion to the
throne was every-where proclaimed, and his authority submitted
to without opposition. And though several of the nobles were fill
assembled at Hamilton, and seemed to be entering into some combi-
nation against his government, an association for supporting it was

formed,

formed, and signed by so many persons of power and influence BOOK V.
throughout the nation, as entirely discouraged the attempt *. 67

i 67.
THE return of the Earl of Murray, about this time, addedMurray as-

- ~~~~~~~' - ~fumes the go-

firength to the party, and gave it a regular and finished form. Soon vernment.
after the murder of the King, this nobleman had retired into France,
upon what pretence hiflorians do not mention. During his residence
there, he had held a close correspondence with the chiefs of the con-
federacy, and, at their desire, he now returned. He seemed, at firfb
unwilling to accept the office of Regent. This hesitation cannot
be ascribed to the scruples either of diffidence, or of duty. Mur-
ray wanted neither abilities to entitle him, nor ambition to aspire
to this high dignity. He had received the first accounts of his pro-
motion with the utmoaf fatisfaaion; but by appearing to continue
for some days in fufpence, he gained time to view with attention the
ground on which he was to adt; to ballance the strength and re-
sources of the two contending fadions, and to examine whether the
foundation on which his future fame and success must reft, were
found and firm.

BEFORE he declared his final resolution, he waited on Mary at

Lochlevin. This visit, to a filter, and a Q/een, in a prison, from
which he had neither any intention to relieve her, nor to mitigate
the rigour of her confinement, may be mentioned among the cir-
cumftances, which discover the great want of delicacy and refine-
ment in that age. Murray, who was naturally rough and uncourtly
in his manner f, expoftulated so warmly with the Queen concern- .
ing her, paif condut, and charged her faults so home upon her,
that Mary, who had flattered herself with more gentle and brother-

* Andcrf. vol. ii. 231. t Keith, 96.

CccC 2 ly

BOOK V. ly treatment from him, melted into tears, and abandoned herself

ó'7'-' entirely to despair *. This interview, from which Murray could
567'

reap no political advantage, and wherein he discovered a spirit so fe-
vere and unrelenting, may be reckoned among the most bitter cir-
cumrfances in Mary's life, and is certainly one of the most unjufti-
fiable in his condut.

SOON after his return from Lochlevin, Murray accepted the of-

August z2. fice of Regent, and began to ad in that charater without opposition.
Fate of Both- AMIDST so many great and unexpeced events, the fate of Both-

well, the chief cause of them all, hath been almost forgotten. As-
ter his flight from the confederates, he lurked for some time among
his vassals in the neighbourhood of Dunbar. But finding it impof-
fible for him to make head, in that country, againif his enemies, or
even to secure himself from their pursuit, he fled for flelter to his
kinsman the Bishop of Murray; and when he, over-awed by the
confederates, was obliged to abandon him, he retired to the Ork-
ney isles. Hunted from place to place, deserted by his friends,
and accompanied by a few retainers, as desperate as himself, he sus-
sered at once the miseries of infamy, and of want. His indigence
forced him upon a course which added to his infamy. He armed
a few finall flips, which had accompanied him from Dunbar, and
attacking every vessel which fell in his way, endeavoured to procure
subsistence for himself and followers by piracy. Kirkaldy and Mur-
ray of Tullibardin were sent out against him by the confederates;
and surprising him while he rode at anchor, scattered his small fleet,
took a part of it, and obliged him to fly with a single ship towards
Norway. On that coast he fell in with a vessel richly laden, and
immediately attacked it; the Norwegians failed with armed boats

' Keith, 445, 446.

to its afiifance, and after a desperate fight, Bothwell and all his BooK V.
crew were taken prisoners. His name and quality were both un-

i567.

known, and he was treated at first with all the indignity and ri- 1
gour, which the odious crime of piracy merited. His real charac-
ter was soon discovered; and though it saved him from the infa-
mous death to which his aifociates were condemned, it could nei-
ther procure him liberty, nor mitigate the hardships of his impri-
fonmenc. He languished ten years in this unhappy condition;
melancholy and despair deprived him of reason, and at last he ended
his days, unpitied by his countrymen, and unassisted by firangers *.
Few men ever accomplished their ambitious projects by worse means,
or reaped from them less fatisfaaion. The early part of his life
was restless and enterprising, full of danger and of vicissitudes. His
enjoyment of the grandeur, to which he attained by so many crimes,
was extremely short; imbittered by much anxiety, and disquieted
by many fears. In his latter years, he suffered the most intolerable
calamities, to which the wretched are subjed, and from which
persons who have moved in so high a sphere are commonly ex-
empted.

THE good effects of Murray's accefflon to the regency were success of the

quickly felt. The party forming for the Queen was weak, irre- Regent's ad-
nj 1*/ * i i s' ministration.
solute, and disunited; and no sooner was the government of the
kingdom in the hands of a man, so remarkable both for his abili-
ties and popularity, than the nobles of whom it was composed loft
all hopes of gaining ground, and began to treat separately with the
Regent. So many of them were brought to acknowledge the King's
authority, that scarce any appearance of opposition to the eftablifled
government was left in the kingdom. Had they adhered to the

' Melv. x68.

jueen

BOOK V. Queen with any firmness, it is probable, from Elizabeth's difpofi-

tion at that time, that she would have afforded them such affilf-
I507. ance as might have enabled them to face their enemies in the field.

But there appeared so little vigour or harmony in their councils,
that fle was discouraged from espousing their cause 3 and the Re-
gent taking advantage of their situation, obliged them to submit to
his government, without granting any terms, either to themselves,
or to the Qteen '.

THE Regent was no less successful in his attempt, to get into his

hands the places of strength in the kingdom. Balfour, the deputy-
governor, iurrendered the cabtle of Edinburgh; and as the reward
of his treachery, in deserting Bothwell his patron, obtained terms
of great advantage to himself. The Governor of Dunbar, who
discovered more fidelity, was soon forced to capitulate; ftome other
fimall forts surrendered without resistance.

A Parliament. THIS face of tranquillity in the nation encouraged the Regent to
Dcem. 5. call a meeting of Parliament. Nothing was wanting to confirm the

King's authority, and the proceedings of the confederates, except
the approbation of this supreme court; and after the success which
had attended all their measures, there could be little doubt of ob-
taining it. The numbers that resorted to an Assembly, which was
called to deliberate on matters of so much importance were great.
The meeting was opened with the utmost solemnity, and all its ads
passed with much unanimity. Many, however, of the Lords who
had difcovcred the warmest attachment to the Queen, were present.
But they had made their peace with the Regent. Argyll, Huntly,
and Herreis acknowledged, openly, in Parliament, that their beha-

*t Keith, 447, 450, 463.

viour
I

viour towards the King had been undutiful and criminal '. Their BooK V.
compliance, in this manner, with the meatures of the Regent's ''
party, was either the condition on which they were admitted into 567
favour, or intended as a proof of the sincerity of their reconcile-
ment.

THE Parliament granted every thing the confederates could de- Confirms the

mand, either for the lfaety of their own persons, or the security of o^rTlccoJfl.g
that form of government which they had efCablifhed in the king- derates
dom. Mary's refignation-of the Crown was accepted, and declared
to be valid. The King's authority, and Murray's election, were
recognized, and confirmed. The imprisoning the Queen, and all
the other proceedings of the confederates, were pronounced lawful.
The letters which Mary had written to Bothwell were produced,
and she was declared to be accessory to the murder of the King T,
At the fame time, all the acs of Parliament 1560, in favour of the
Protestant religion were publickly ratified ; new flatutes to the fame
purpose were enacted. And nothing that could contribute to root
out the remains of Popery, or to encourage the growth of the Re-
formation, was neglected.

IT is observable, however, that the fame parsimonious spirit pre-

vailed in this Parliament, as in that of 1560. The Protestant clergy,
notwithstanding many discouragements, and their extreme pover..
ty, had, for seven years, performed all religious offices in the king-
dom. The expedients fallen upon for their fubfiftance had hi-
therto proved ineffectual, or were intended to be so. But, not-
withstanding their known indigence, and the warm remonstrances
of the Assembly of the church, which met this year, the Parlia-

' Anders. vol. iv. I53. See Append. N° XXIII
'1 Good. vol. ii. 66. Andcrf, vol. ii. 206.

ment

BOOK V. ment did nothing more for their relief, than prescribe some new re-
(Wv ósr gulations concerning the payment of the thirds of benefices, which

I567' did not produce any considerable change in the situation of the

clergy.

56S. A FEW days after the diflilution of Parliament, four of Bothwell's
January 3 dependants were convicted of being guilty of the King's mure

der, and suffered death as traitors. Their. confessions brought to
light many circumstances relative to the manner of committing
that barbarous crime; but they were persons of a low rank,
and seem not to have been admitted into the secrets of the
conspiracy -.

NOTWITHSTANDING the universal fubmifilon to the Regent's

authority, there fiill abounded in the kingdom many secret mur-
murs and cabals. The partizans of the house of Hamilton reckoned
Murray's promotion an injury to the Duke of Chatelherault, who, as
first Prince of the blood, had, in their opinion, an undoubted right to
be Regent. The length and rigour of Mary's sufferings began to move
many to commiserate her cafe. All who leaned to the ancient opi-
nions in religion dreaded the effeEts of Murray's zeal. And he, tho'
his abilities were great, did not possess the talentsrequifite for sooth-
ing the rage or removing the jealousies of the different fadtions.
By insinuation, or address, he might have gained or softened many,
who had opposed him; but he was a stranger to these gentle arts.
His virtues were severe; and his deportment towards his equals,
especially after his elevation to the regency, distant and haughty.
This behaviour offended some of the nobles, and alarmed others. The
Qeen's faction, which had been so easily dispersed, began again to

* Andcrf. vol. ii. 165.

gather,

gether, and to unite, and was secretly favoured by some who had BoorcV.
hitherto zealously concurred with the confederates . ó8·s

1568'
SUCH was the favourable disposition of the nation towards the Mary efeapes

- from Loch-

Queen, when she recovered her liberty, in a manner no less fur- levin.
prifing to her friends, than unexpected by her enemies. Several
attempts had been made to procure her an opportunity of escaping,
which some unforeseen accident, or the vigilance of her keepers,
had hitherto disappointed. At last, Mary employed all her art to
gain George Douglas her keeper's brother, a youth of eighteen.
As her manners were naturally affable and insinuating, the treated
him with the mot flattering difinction; /he even allowed him to
entertain tie most ambitious hopes, by letting fall some exprefilons,
as if she would chufe him for her husband' . At his age, and
in such circumstances, it was impossible to resist such a temptation.
He yielded, and drew others into the plot. On Sunday the 2d of
May, while his brother fat at supper, and the reft of the family
were retired to their devotions, one of his accomplices found means
to steal the keys out of his brother's chamber, and opening the
gates to the Queen and one of her maids, locked them behind her,
-and then threw the keys into the lake. Mary ran with precipita-
tion to the boat which was prepared for her, and on reaching the
thore, was received with the utmost joy, by Douglas, Lord Seaton,
and Sir James Hamilton, who, with a few attendants, waited for
her. She instantly mounted on horseback, and rode full speed to-
wards Niddrie, Lord Seaton's feat in Weft-Lothian. She arrived
there that night, without being pursued, or interrupted. After halt-
ing three hours, she set out for Hamilton; and travelling at the fame
pace, fle reached it next morning.

Melv. 179. -I. Keith, 469.
VOL. I. , D d d ON

BOOK V. ON the firit news of Mary's escape, her friends whom, in their°

ó'8' present disposition, a much smaller accident would have rouzed,

Ar:ives acHa- ral to arms. In a few days, her court was filled with a great
milton, and and splendid train of nobles, accompanied by such numbers of fol-
raifesa nunme-
rousanrmy. lowers, as formed an army above 6000 firong. In their presence,

the declared that the resignation of the Crown, and other deeds
the had signed during her imprisonment, were extorted from her
by fear. Sir Robert Melvil confirmed her declaration; and on that,
as well as on other accounts, a council of the nobles and chief men
of her party pronounced all these tranfations void and illegal. At
May 8. the fame time, an association was formed for the defence of her per-

son and authority, and subscribed by nine Earls, nine Bishops,
eighteen Lords, and many gentlemen of diffindion *. Among
them, we find several who had been present in last Parliament,
and who had signed the counter-affociation in defence of the King's
government; but such sudden changes were then so common, as
to be no matter of reproach.

Conflernation AT the time when tle Queen made her escape, the Regent was
of the Re- at Glasgow, holding a court of justice. An event so contrary to
gent's adhe-
rents. their expetations, and so fatal to their schemes, gave a great shock

to his adherents. Many of them appeared wavering and irresolute;
others began to carry on private negociations with the Queen ; and
some openly revolted to her fide. In so difficult a juncture, where
his own fame, and the being of the party depended on his choice,
the regent's most faithful associates were divided in opinion. Some
advised him to retire, without loss of time, to Stirling. The Queen's
army was already frong, and only eight miles diflant; the adjacent
country was full of the friends and dependants of the house of Ha-
milton, and other Lords of the Queen's faction ; Glasgow was a
large and unfortified town; his own train confifed of no greater

' : Keith, 1 75.

number

number than was usual in times of peace; all these reasons pleaded BOOK V.
for a retreat. But on the other hand, arguments were urged of no

i$68.

inconsiderable weight. The citizens of Glasgow were well as-
feded to the cause; the vassals of Glencairn, Lennox, and Semple
lay near at hand, and were both numerous, and full of zeal; fuc-
cours might arrive from other parts of the kingdom in a few days;
in war, success depends upon reputation, as much as upon num-
bers; reputation is gained, or loft, by the first flep one takes; in
his circumstances, a retreat would be attended with all the igno-
miny of a flight, and would at once dispirit his friends, and inspire His prudent
his enemies with boldness. In such dangerous exigencies as this, condua.
the superiority of Murray's genius appeared, and enabled him both
to chufe with wisdom, and to at with vigour. He declared against
retreating, and fixed his head quarters at Glasgow. And while he
amused the Queen for some days, by pretending to hearken to some
overtures, which she made for accommodating their differences,
he was employed, with the utmost industry, in drawing together his
adherents, from different parts of the kingdom. He was soon in a
condition to take the field; and though far inferior to the enemy
in number, he confided so much in the valour of his troops, and
the experience of his officers, that he broke off the negociation, and
determined to hazard a battle *.

AT the fame time, the Qeen's generals had commanded her May 13.

army to move. Their intention was, to conduct her to Dunbar-
ton castle, a place of great strength, which the Regent had not been
able to wrest out of the hands of Lord Fleming the governor; but
if the enemy should endeavour to interrupt their march, theyrefolved

' Buchan. 369.

D dd 2 not

BooK V. not to decline an engagement. In Mary's situation, no resolution

could be more imprudent. A part only of her forces was assem-
bled. Huntly, Ogilvie, and the northern clans were foonexpeced;
her sufferings had removed, or diminished the prejudices'of many
among her fubjeds; the address with which lhe furmbunted the
dangers that obftruced her escape, dazzled and interested the
people; the sudden confluence of so many nobles added lustre to her
cause; file might assuredly depend on the friendfhip-and counte-
nance of France ; (he had reason to expect the protection of Eng-
land; her enemies could not possibly look for support from that
quarter. She had much to hope from pursuing flow and cautious
measures; they had every thing to fear.

BUT Mary, whose hopes were naturally sanguine, and her pas-

sions impetuous, was so elevated by her sudden transition from the
depth of distress, to such an unusual appearance of prosperity, that
she never doubted of success. Her army was almost double to the
enemy in number, and confited chiefly of the Hamiltons, and their
dependants. The archbiflop of St. Andrsewt's had the chief direc-
tion of these, and hoped, by a vitory, not only to crufl Murray,
the ancient enemy of his house, but to get the person of the Queen
into his hands, and to oblige her, either to marry one of the Duke's
sons, or at lealt to commit the chief direcion of her affairs to him-
self. His ambition proved fatal to the Queen, to himself, and to
his family *.

Battle of MARY'S imprudence, in resolving to fight, was not greater
Lan"fide. than the ill condut of her generals in the battle. Between the

* Anders. vol. iv. 32, Mclv. 18i.

two

two armies, and on the road towards Dumbarton, there was an BooK V.
eminence called Langfide-Hill. This the Regent had the precau-

1568.

tion to seize, and poited his troops in a small village, and among
some gardens and inclofures adjacent. In this advantageous fitua-
tion he waited the approach of the enemy, whose superiority in
cavalry could be of no benefit to them, on such broken ground.
The Hamiltons, who composed the vanguard, ran so eagerly to
the attack, that they put themselves out of breath, and left the main
battle far behind. The encounter of. the fpearmen was fierce and
desperate; but as the forces of the Hamiltons were exposed, on
the one flank, to a continued fire from a body of mufqueteers, at-
tacked on the other by the Regent's most choice troops, and not
Supported by the reft of the Qeen's army, they were soon obliged The Queen's
to give ground, and the rout immediately became universal. Few army defeat-
vicories, in a civil wat, and among a barbarous people, have been
pursued with less violence, or attended with less bloodshed. Three
hundred fell in the field; in the flight scarce any were killed,
The Regent and his principal officers rode about, beseeching the
soldiers to spare their countrymen. The number of prisoners was
great, and among them many persons of diftindion. The Regent
marched back to Glasgow, and returned public thanks to God for
this great, and, on his fide, almost bloodless vicory %.

DURING the engagement, Mar:y flood on a hill, at no great dif- IHcr flight.

tance, and beheld all that passed in the field, with such emotions
of mind as are not easily described. When file saw the army, which
was her last hope, thrown into irretrievable confusion, her fpirir,
which all her past misfortunes had not been able entirely to subdue,

* Keith, 477.

funk

EooK V. funk altogether. In the utnmotf conflernation, flle. began her flight,

6~8 and so lively were her impreflions of fear, that she never closed her

eves till (he reached the abbey of Dundrenan in Galloway, full sixty
Scotifi miles from the place of battle '.

THESE revolutions in Mary's fortune had-been no Iefs rapid, than

iingular. In the short space of eleven days, she had been a prisoner
at the mercy of her mpft inveterate enemies; /he had seen a power-
ful army under her command, and a numerous train of nobles at
her devotion; and now the was obliged to fly, in the utmost dan-
ger of her life, and to lurk, with a few attendants, in a corner of
her kingdom. She did not think herself safe, even in that retreat;
and her fears impelled her to an ation, the most unadvised, as well
as the most unfortunate in her whole life. This was her retiring
into England, a tfep, which, on many accounts, ought to have
appeared to her rash and dangerous.

Resoles on BEFORE Mary's arrival in Scotland, mutual distrust and jea-
rtirg"ig loufies had arisen between her and Elizabeth. All their fubfe-

quent tranfaaions had contributed to exasperate and inflame these
passions. She had endeavoured, by secret negociations and intrigues,
to disturb the tranquillity of Elizabeth's government, and to advance
her own pretensions to the English Crown. Elizabeth, who pof-
selfed greater power, and acaed with less reserve, had openly sup-
ported Mary's rebellious subjeCts, and fomented all the diflenfions
and troubles in which her reign had been involved. The maxims of
policy still authorized that Queen to pursue the fame course; as by
keeping Scotland in confusion, she effectually secured the peace of
her own kingdom. The Regent, after his victory, had marched

' Keith, 481.

to

to Edinburgh, and not knowing what course the Queen had taken, BOOK V.
it was several days before he thought of pursuing her *. She might ó8'
have been concealed in that retired corner, among fubjeds devoted
to her interest, till her party, which was dispersed rather than
broken by the late defeat, should gather such strength, that she
could again appear with safety at their head. There was not any
danger, which Ihe ought not to have run, rather than throw her-
self into the hands of an enemy, from whom lhe had already sus-
sered so many injuries, and who was prompted both by inclination)
and by interest, to renew them.

BUT, on the other hand, during Mary's confinement, Elizabeth

had declared against the proceedings of her fubjets, and solicited
for her liberty, with a warmth which had all the appearance of
sincerity. She had invited her to take refuge in England, and had
promised to meet her in person, and to give her such a reception
as was due to a Queen, and an ally -. Whatever apprehension
Elizabeth might entertain of Mary's designs, while he had power
in her hands, fie was, at present, the object, not of fear, but of
pity; and to take advantage of her situation, would be both un-
generous and inhuman. The horrors of a prison were fresh in
Mary's memory, and if she should fall a second time into the hands
of her subjects, there was no injury to which the presumption of
success might not embolden them to proceed. To attempt escaping
into France, was dangerous; and, in her situation, almost impof-
fible; nor could she bear the thoughts of appearing as an exile, and
a fugitive, in that kingdom, where she had once enjoyed all the
splendor of a Queen. England remained her only asylum ; and, in
spite of the intreaties of Lord Herreis, Fleming, and her other at-

Crawf. Mmcln. 59. 1 Carmd. 489. Andcrf. vol, i, 99 2. Mz. urdin, 369,

tendants,

BOOK V. tendants, who conjured her, even on their knees, not to confide

8-d i1in Elizabeth's promises or gencrofity, her infatuation was invincible,

and she resolved to fly thither. Herreis, by her command, wrote

Her rcreption to Lowther the deputy-governor of Carlisle, to know what recep-
at Cail.ile.

tion he would give her; and, before his answer could return, her
fear and impatience were so great, that she got into a fifher-boat,
May i6. and with about twenty attendants, landed at Wirkington in Cum-

berland, and thence ihe was conducted with many marks of refped
to Carlifie .

Elizabeth de- So soon as Mary arrived in England, (he wrote a long letter to
liberates con- the Qneen, representing, in the strongest terms, the injuries which
cerning the
manner of she had suffered from her own fubjeds, and imploring that pity
reating her. and affifcance which her present situation demanded -. An event

so extraordinary, and the conduc which might be proper in con-
sequence of it, drew the attention, and employed the thoughts of
Elizabeth and her council. If their deliberations had been influen-
ced by considerations of jurfice or generosity alone, they would not
have found them long or intricate. A Queen, vanquished by her
own fubjeats, and threatened by them with the loss of her liberty,
or of her life, had fled from their violence, and thrown herself into
the arms of her nearest neighbour and ally, from whom fie had
received repeated assurances of friendship and protection. These
circumfi-ances entitled her to refped and to compaflion, and re-
quired that fle flould either be reflored to her own kingdom, or
at Icaft be left at full liberty to seek aid from any other quarter.
But with Elizabeth and her counsellors, the question was not,
what was most just or generous, but what was most beneficial to
herself, and to the English nation. Three different resolutions might

- Keith, 483. Anders. vol. iv. 2. 'i- Id. 29.

have

have been taken, with regard to the Queen of Scots. To re-instate BooK V.
her in her throne, was one; to allow her to retire into France, ó""
was another; to detain her in England, was a third. Each of
there drew consequences after it, of the utmost importance, which
were examined, as appears from papers still extant *, with that mi-
nute accuracy, which Elizabeth's Ministers employed in all their
consultations upon affairs of moment.

To restore Mary to the full exercise of the royal authority in

Scotland, they observed, would render her more powerful than
ever. The nobles who were most firmly attached to the Englifl
interest, would quickly feel the utmost weight of her resent-
ment. And as the gratitude of Princes is seldom strong or lasting,
regard to her own interest might fobn efface the memory of her
obligations to Elizabeth, and prompt her to renew the alliance of
the Scotifh nation with France, and revive her own pretensions to
the English Crown. Nor was it possible to fetter and circumscribe
the Scotifh Queen, by any conditions that would prevent these
dangers. Her party in Scotland was numerous and powerful. Her
return, even without any support from England, would inspire her
friends with new zeal and courage; a single victory might give them
the fiuperiority, which they had loft by a single defeat, and render
Mary a more formidable rival than ever to Elizabeth.

THE dangers arising from suffering Mary to retire into France,

were no less obvious. The French King could not refuse his as-
fiftance towards restoring his sifter and ally to her throne. Eliza-
beth would, once more, fee a foreign army in the island, over-
awing the Scots, and ready to enter her kingdom; and if the com-

§ Anders. vol. iv. 34, 99, o02.
VOL. 1. E e e motions

BoOK V. motions in France, on account of religion, were fettled, the Princes

ó8s of Lorrain might resume their ambitious projects, and the united
-ó forces of France and Scotland might invade England, where it is

weakefn and most defenceless.

Resolves to NOTHIN G therefore remained but to detain her in England; and
detain her in
England. to permit her either to live at liberty there, or to confine her in a

prison. The former was'a dangerous experiment. Her court would
become a place of reort to all the Roman Catholics, to the difaffet-
ed, and to the lovers of innovation. Though Elizabeth affected to
represent Mary's pretensions to the English Crown as altogether ex-
travagant and ill-founded, she was not ignorant that they did not
appear in that light to the nation, and that many thought them pre-
ferable even to her own title. If the acivity of her eminfaries had
gained her so many abettors, her own personal influence was much
more to be dreaded; her beauty, her address, her sufferings, by the
admiration and pity which they would excite, could not fail of
making many converts to her party*.

'TWAS indeed to be apprehended, that the treating Mary as a

prisoner would excite universal indignation against Elizabeth, and
that by this unexampled severity towards a Queen, who implored,
and to whom she had promised her protection, fie would forfeit the
praise of justice and humanity, which was hitherto due to her ad-
ministration. But the English Monarchs were often so solicitous to
secure their kingdom against the Scots, as to be little scrupulous about
the means which they employed for that purpose. Henry IV. had
seized the heir of the Crown of Scotland, who was forced, by the

! Anders; vol; iv. 56, 6o;

violence

violence of a florm, to take refuge in one of the ports of his Booi V.
kingdom; and, in contempt of the rights of hospitality, without ° .
regarding his tender age, or the tears and intreaties of his father, de- 5'
tained him a prisoner for many years. This adion, though detefled
by posterity, kElizabeth resolved now to imitate. Her virtue was
no more proof than Henry's had been, against the temptations of
interest; and the possession of a present advantage was preferred to
the profped of future fame. The fatisfadion which ihe felt in mor-
tifying a rival, whose beauty and accomplishments she envied, had,
perhaps, no less influence than political considerations, in bringing
her to this resolution. But, at the fame time, in order to screen
herself from the censure which this conduct merited, and to make
her treatment of the Scotifh Queen look like the effeEt of necessity,
rather than of choice, ihe determined to put on the appearance of
concern for her interest, and of deep sympathy with her susser-
ings.

WITH this view, she inflantly dispatched Lord Scroope warden May 2 6

of the weft marches, and Sir Francis Knollys her Vice-chamber-
lain, to the Queen of Scots, with letters full of expressions of kind-
ness and condolence. But, at the fame time, they had private in-
ftructions to watch all her motions, and to take care that she ihould
not escape into her own kingdom *. On their arrival, Mary de- Mar) de-

mands admit-

manded a personal interview with the Queen, that she might lay tanrceintoEli
before her the injuries which she had suffered, and receive from zabeth's pre-
her those friendly offices which she had been encouraged to expect
They answered, that it was with reluctance this honour was at
present denied her; that while she lay under the imputation of a
crime so horrid, as the murder of her husband, their Miflrefs, to

; Andeif. vol. iv. 36, 7o, 92.

E e e 2 whom

BOOK V. whom hie was so nearly allied, could not, without bringing a iain

C 6S. upon her own reputation, admit her into her presence ;- but as soon

as ihe had cleared herself from that aspersion, they promised her a
reception suitable to her dignity, and aid proportioned to her dif-
trefs .

Sle offrs to NOTHING could be more frivolous than this pretence. It was
vindicate her the occasion, however,of leading the Queen of Scots into the snare, in
condu&.

which Elizabeth and her Ministers wiled to intangle her. Mary ex-
prefled the utmost furprize at this unexpeced manner of evading her
request 3 but as (he could not believe so many professions offriendflhip
to be void of sincerity, she frankly offered to submit her cause to the
cognizance of Elizabeth, and undertook to produce such proofs of her
own innocence,and of the fallhood of the accusations brought against
her, as should fully remove the fcruples,and satisfy the delicacy of the

Elizabeth English Queen. This was the very point to which Elizabeth la-
takes advan-
tage of this boured to bring the matter. By this appeal of the Scotifh Queen,
offer. he became the umpire between her and her fubjeas, and hadit en-

tirely in her own power to protract the inquiry to any length, and
to perplex and involve it in endless difficulties. In the mean time,
ihe was furnished with a plausible pretence for keeping her at a dif-
tance from court, and for refuting to contribute towards replacing
her on her throne. As Mary's condud had been extremely incau-
tious, and the presumptions of her guilt were many and strong, it
was possible her subjeCts might make good their charge against her;
and if this should be the result of the inquiry, fie would, thence-
forth, cease to be the objea of regard, or of compafion, and the
treating her with coldness and neglect would merit little censure.

* Anders. vol. iv. 8, 55.

In

In a matter so dark and myflerious, there was no probability that Booic V.
Mary could-bring proofs of her innocence, so incontefted, as to v.T-. O

1568.

render the conduct of the English Queen altogether culpable. And
perhaps, her impatience under refiraint, her suspicion of Elizabeth's
partiality, or her discovery of her artifices, might engage her in such
cabals, as wouldjuifify the using her with greater rigour.

ELIZABETH early foresaw all those advantages, which would

arise from an inquiry into the conducE of the Scotifh- Queen, car-
ried on under her diretion. There was some danger, however, that
Mary might discover her secret intentions too soon, and by reced-
ing from the offer which fle had made, endeavour to disappoint
them. But even in that event, she determined not to drop the in-
quiry, and had thought of several different expedients for carrying
it on. The Countess of Lennox, convinced that Mary was accef-
fory to the murder of her son, and thirsting for that vengeance
which it was natural for a mother to demand, had implored Eliza-
beth's justice, and solicited her, with many tears, in her own name,
and in her husband's, to bring the Scotifh Queen to a trial for that
crime *. The parents of the unhappy Prince had a just right to
prefer this accusation; nor could fle, who was their nearest kinf-
woman, be condemned for listening to so equitable a demand. Be-
fides, as the Scotifh nobles openly accused Mary of the fame crime,
and pretended to be able to confirm their charge by sufficient proof;
it would be no difficult matter to prevail on them, to petition the
Qeen of England to take cognizance of their proceedings against
their Sovereign; and it was the opinion of the Englifl council, that
it would be reasonable to comply with the request t. At the fame

* Camd. 412. Hayncs, 469. - Anders. vol. iv. 37.

time,

BooK V. time, the obsolete claim of the superiority of England over Scot-

A
L " J land began to be talked of; and, on that account, it was pretended
J568- that the decision of the contest between Mary and her fubjeds be-

longed of right to Elizabeth. But though Elizabeth revolved all
these expedients in her mind, and kept them in reserve, to make use
of as occasion might require, she wished that the inquiry into Mary's
conduct should appear to be undertaken purely in compliance with
her own demand, and in order to vindicate her innocence and so
long as that appearance could be preserved, none of the other expe-
dients were to be employed.

WVHEN Mary consented to submit her cause toElizabeth, she was

far from fufpedting that any bad consequences could follow, or that
any dangerous pretensions could be founded on her offer. She ex-
pected that Elizabeth herself would receive, and examine her de-
fences ; ihe meant to confider her as an equal, for whose fatisfac-
tion (he was willing to explain any part of her conduct, that was
liable to censure; not to acknowledge her as a superior, before
whom ihe was bound to plead her cause. But Elizabeth put a very
different sense on Mary's offer. She confidered herself as chosen
to be judge in the controversy between the Scotifl Queen and her
fubjeds, and began to ad in that capacity. She proposed to ap-
point commiflioners to hear the pleadingsof both parties, and wrote
to the Regent of Scotland, to impower proper persons to appear be-
fore them, in his name, and to produce what he could alledge in
vindication of his proceedings againfl his Sovereign.
Malry grcatly MARY had, hitherto, relied with unaccountable credulity on

.liza 't Elizabeth's profeflions of regard, and expected that so many kind
condud. * Andcrf. vol. iv. Io.

fpecches

speeches would, at last, be accompanied with some suitable actions. BoOK V.
But this proposal entirely undeceived her. She plainly perceived 6
the artifice of Elizabeth's conduct, and saw what'a diminution it
would be to her own honour, to appear on a level with her re-
bellious subjects, and to fland together with them at the bar of a
superior and a judge. She retracted the offer which {he had made,
and which had been perverted to a purpose so contrary to her in-
tention. She demanded, with more earnetlnefs than ever, to be
admitted into Elizabeth's presence; and wrote to her, in a firain June 30.
very different fiom what ihe had formerly used, and which fully
discovers the grief and indignation that preyed on her heart. '" In
" my present situation, fays {he, I neither will, nor can reply to
,c the accusations of my subjects. I am ready, of my own accord,
( and out of friendflip to you, to satisfy your scruples, and to
" vindicate my own conduct. My subjects are not my equals;
" nor will I, by submitting my cause to a judicial trial, acknow-
"ledge them to be so. I fled into your arms, as into those of my
" nearest relation, and mofi perfect friend. I did you honour,

as I imagined, in chufing you preferably to any other Prince, to

" be the restorer of an injured Q.een. Was it ever known that
" a Prince was blamed for hearing, in person, the complaints of
C( those who appealed to his justice, against the false accusations of
" their enemies? You admitted into your pretence my bastard-

brother, who had been guilty of rebellion; and you deny me

"that honour ! God forbid that I should be the occasion of bring-
" ing any stain upon your reputation. I expected that your manner

of treating me would have added lustre to it. Suffer me either to
' implore the aid of other Princes, whose delicacy on this head,
" will be less, and their resentment of my wrongs greater; or let
' me receive from your hands that aflifance, which it becomes yo,,

" more

BooKr V. < more tlhan any other Prince, tojgrant; and by that benefit, bind

1^ 68." me to yourself in the indissoluble ties of gratitude *."
i560.

jtne o. THIS letter somewhat disconcerted Elizabeth's plan, but did
irecabeiths not divert her from the prosecution of it. She laid the matter be-
a,,inft hcr. fore the Privy Council, and it was there determined, notwithftand-

ing the intreaties and remonstrances of the Scotifh Queen, to go on
with the inquiry into her conduc, and till that were finished, it
was agreed that Elizabeth could not, consistently with her own
honour, or with the safety of her government, either give her. the
aflitance which [he demanded, or permit her to retire out of the
kingdom. And left i.e flould have an opportunity of escaping,
while ihe resided so near Scotland, it was thought advifeable to
remove her to some place, at a greater distance from the bor-
ders t.

Proceedings WHILE the Engliflh court was occupied in these deliberations,
of the Regent
against the the Regent did not neglect to improve the victory at Langfide.
Queen's ad- That event was of the utmost importance to him. It not only
herent.

drove the Queen herself out of the kingdom, but left her adherents
dispersed, and without a leader, at his mercy. He seemed resolved,
at first, to proceed againit them with the utmost rigour. Six per-
sons of some diftintion, who had been taken prisoners in the battle,
were tried, and condemned to death as rebels against the King's
government. They were led to the place of execution, but by the
powerful intercession of Knox they obtained a pardon. Hamilton
of Bothwellhaugh was one of the number, who lived to give both
the Regent and Knox reason to repent of this commendable at of
lenity 4.

^ Anders. vol. iv. 94. t Id. ibid. o02. t Cald. vol. ii. 99.

SOON

SOON after, the Regent marched with an army, confifling of 4000 BOOK V.
horse and iooo foot, towards the weft borders. The nobles in this -'s

x568.

part of the kingdom were all of the Queen's faction; but as they 5
had not force sufficient to obftru&t his progress, he mufr either
have obliged them to submit to the King, or would have laid waffe
their lands with fire and sword. But Elizabeth, whose interest it
was to keep Scotland in confusion, by preserving the balance be-
tween the two parties, and who was endeavouring to sooth the Scot-
tifl Queen by gentle treatment, interposed at her desire. After
keeping the field two weeks, the Regent, in compliance to the Eng-
lifh Ambaifador, dismissed his forces; and an expedition, which
might have proved fatal to his opponents, ended with a few ats
of severity *.

THE resolution of the English Privy Council with regard to Mary's Mary carried

to Bolton.

person, was soon carried into execution; and, without regarding her
remonstrances or complaints, she was conduAed to Bolton, a caffle July 13.
of Lord Scroop's, on the borders of Yorkshire -. In this place,
her correspondence with her friends in Scotland became more diffi-
cult, and any profpea of making her escape was entirely cut off. She
now felt herself to be entirely in Elizabeth's power, and though treated
as yet with the refpec due to a Queen, her real condition was that of
a prisoner. Mary knew what it was to be deprived of liberty, and
dreaded it as the worf of all evils. While the remembrance of her
late imprisonment was frill lively, and the terror of a new one filled
her mind, Elizabeth thought it a proper juncture to renew her for-
mer proposition, that fie would susser the Regent and his adherents July z.
to be called into England, and content to their being heard in de-

'* Cald. vol. ii. 99. 1 Anders. vol. iv. I4.
VOL. I. Sss fencl

BOOK V. fence of their own condu&. And on her part, (he promised, what-

ever flould be the issue of this inquiry, to employ all her power

5 8' and influence towards replacing Mary on her throne, under a few

Agrees that limitations, which were far from being unreasonable. Fear, im;
an inquiry be
made into he patience, despair, as well as this soothing promise, with which the
condu&t. proposition was accompanied, induced the Scottish Queen to com-

ply *.

HIer difiimu- IN order to persuade Elizabeth that file desired nothing so much
lation with as to render the union between them as close as possible, (he shewed
regard to re-
ligion. a disposition to relax somewhat in one point, with regard to which,

during all her pass and subsequent misfortunes, she was uniformly
inflexible. She expressed a great veneration for the liturgy of the
church of England; (he was often present at religious worship, ac-
cording to the rites of the reformed church; made choice of a Pro-
teftant clergyman to be her chaplain; heard him preach against the
errors of Popery with attention and seeming pieafire; and discover-
ed all the symptoms of an approaching conversion A. Such was
Mary's known and bigotted attachment to the Pbpifh religion, that
it is impo(iible to believe her sincere in.this part of her conduct; nor
can any thing mark more ifrongly the wretchedness of her condi-
tion, and the excess of her fears, than that they betrayed her into
di-fimulation in a matter, concerning which her sentiments were, at
all other times, scrupulously delicate.

AuguAl i. AT this time the Regentcalled a Parliament, in order to pro-
A Padiiamcert ceed to the forfeiture of those who refuted to acknowledge the
in Scotland.

Kiin gand. ihoty. The Qucen's fation was alarned, and Argyll
andi I Iuntly. whom Mary had appointed her lieutenants, the one

* Anders, vol. iv. 1o9. I-ayncs, 468. t- Andcrf. vol. iv. 113. IIayncs, 509.

.111

in the south, and the other in the north of Scotland, began to as- BooK V.
femble forces to obftriua this meeting. Compassion for the Queen, 6
and envy at those who governed in the King's name, had added so
much strength to the party, that the Regent would have Lund it
difficult to withitand its efforts. But as Mary had submitted her
cause to Elizabeth, ihe could not refute, at her desire, to command
her friends to lay down their arms, and to wait patiently till mat-
ters were brought to a decision in England. By procuring this
cessation of arms, Elizabeth afforded as seasonable relief to the Re-
gent's fation, as She had formerly given to the Queen's .

THE Regent, however, would not content, even at Elizabeth's

request, to put off the meeting of Parliament. But we may ascribe
to her influence, as well as to the eloquence of Maitland, who la-
boured to prevent-the one half of his countrymen from exterminat-
ing the other, any appearances of moderation which this Parliament
discovered in its proceedings. The most violent opponents of the
King's government were forfeited; the reft were allowed still to
hope for favour +.

No sooner did the Queen of Scots fubinit her cause to lhe rival, Elizabeth re-

than Elizabeth required the Regent to fend to York, deputies pro- gqie t''de e-
perly infiruaed for vindicating his conduct, in pretence of her corn- fnd his con-
miflioners. It was not without hesitation and anxiety, that the
Regent consented to this measure. His authority was already efla-
blified in Scotland, and' confirmed by Parliament. To susser its
validity now-to be called in quellion, and fubjlcted to a foreign ju-.
ritlidtion, was extremely mortifying. To accuse his Sovereign bc-

' Andcrf. vol. iv. 125. i 3 Buch. 371.

1F f f z .tore

BOOK V. fore firangers, the ancient enemies of the Scottif name, was an

^^^83 odious task. To fail in this accusation was dangerous; to fiucceed

in it was disgraceful. But the strength of the adverse faction daily
increased. He dreaded the interposition of the French King in its
behalf. In his situation, and in a matter which Elizabeth had so
much at heart, her commands were neither to be disputed, nor dif-
obeyed *.
Both the THE necessity of repairing in person to York added to the ignominy

ueen an of the ep which he was obliged to tae. All his aociates declined
appoint com- of the fep which he was obliged to take. All his afflociates declined
mifioners. the office; they were unwilling, it would seem, to expose them-

selves to the odium and danger with which it was easy to foresee that
the discharge of it would be attended, unless he himself consented to
Sep:em. 18. share these in common with them. The Earl of Morton, Bothwell

Bishop of Orkney, Pitcairn Commendator of Dunfermling, and
Lord Lindsay were joined with him in commiflion. Macgill of
Rankeilor and Balnaves of Halhill, two eminent Civilians, George
Buchanan his faithful adherent, a man whose genius did honour to
the age, Maitland, and several others, were appointed to attend them
as assistants. Maitland owed this distinction to the Regent's fear,
rather than to his affection. He had warmly remonfirated against
this measure. He wished his country to continue in friendship with
England, but not to become dependant on that nation. He was de-
firous of re-eflablifhing the Queen in some degree of power, not in-
confiifent with that which the King possessed; and the Regelt could
not, with safety, leave behind him a man, whose views were so con-
trary to his own, and who, by his superior abilities, had acquired
an influenlce in the nation, i.cqal to that, which others derived from
the antiquity and power of their families --.

B* Rch. 372. SccA,pcnd. No. XXV.
t Id. ibid, Andcl-r vol. iv. 35. Mclv. x86, i88.

MARY

MARY impowered Lefly Bishop of Ross, Lord Livingflon, Lord BOOK V..
Boyd, Lord Herreis, Gavin Hamilton Commendator of Kilwinning, ' 1. 6

1568. '

Sir John Gordon of Lochinvar, and Sir James Cockburn of Skir-
ling, to appear in her name *.

ELIZABETH nominated Thomas Howard Duke of Norfolk,

Thomas Ratcliff Earl of Suffex, and Sir Ralph Sadler, her Com-
miflioners to hear both parties.

THE fourth of O&ober was the day fixed for opening the Con- The confe-

ference. The great abilities of the deputies on both fides, the dig- rene atYork.
nity of the judges before whom they were to appear, the high rank
of the persons whose cause was to be heard, and the importance of
the points in dispute, rendered the whole tranfaacion no less. illuftri-
ous, than it was singular. The situation in which Elizabeth ap-
peared, on this occasion, strikes us with an air of magnificence.
Her rival, an independant Queen, and the heir of an ancient race
of monarchs, was a prisoner in her hands, and appeared, by her
ambassadors, before her tribunal. The Regent of Scotland, who
represented the majesty, and possessed the authority of a King, flood
in person at her bar. And the fate of a kingdom, whose power her
anceflors had often dreaded, but could never subdue, was now ab-
folutely at her disposal.

THE views, however, with which the several parties coniented

to this conference, and the issue to which they expeced to bring it, different pa,'
were extremely different. ties.

- Anders. vol. iv. 33, t Id. 3.

MARY'S

BooK V. MARY's chief objet was the recovering her former authority.

.-vl~ This induced her to consent to a measure, against which the had
56S' 1long firuggled. Elizabeth's promises gave her ground for enter-

taining hopes of being restored to her kingdom; in order to which,
she would have, willingly, made many concessions to the King's
party; and the influence of the Englifli Qeeen, and her own impa.
tielice under her present situation, might have led her to many
more ~. The Regent aimed at nothing but securing Elizabeth's
protection to his party, and seems not to have had the mofi
diltant thoughts of coming to any composition with Mary. Eliza-
beth's views were more various, and her schemes more intricate.
She seemed to be full of concern for Mary's honour, and folicitois
that lhe fiould wipe off the aspersions which blemished her cha-
ra&er. This she pretended to be the intention of the conference
amusing Mary, and eluding the solicitations of the French and
Spanifi ambassadors in her behalf by repeated promises of afifting
her, as soon as she could venture to do so, without bringing disgrace
on herself. But, under this veil of friendflhip and generosity, Elizabeth
concealed fentiinents of a different nature. She expected that the Re-
gent would accuse Mary of being accessory to the murder of her
husband. She encouraged him, as far as decency would permit, to
take this desperate frep -. And as this accusation might terminate
two different ways, fle had concerted measures for her future conduct
Iuitable to each of these. If the charge against Mary should appear
to he well founded, flhe resolved to pronounce her unworthy of
wearing a Crown, and to declare that fle would never burthen her
own confcieiice with the guilt of an a'tion so detestable, as the re-
storing her to her kingdom 1:. If it ihould happen, that what her

' A\ndcrfl . vol. iv. 33. Good. vol. ii. 337. 1- Anlderf. vol. iv. 11, 45.
Ili',ncs, 4 7. : Anders. vol. iv. i1.

;accul crs

accusers alledged, did not amount to a proof of guilt, but only ofBooK V.
mal-adminifiration, ihe determined to set on foot a treaty for re- '
storing her, but on such conditions, as would render her for ever
dependant on England, and the slave of her own fubjeds *. And
as every ftep in the progress of the conference, as well as the final
result of it, was in her own power, she would still be at liberty to
chufe which of these courses fle would hold ; .or if there appeared
to be any danger or inconveniency in pursuing either of them, the
might protrac the whole cause by endless delays, and involve it in
inextricable perplexity.

THE conference, however, was opened with much solemnity. Complaint of
But the very first ftep discovered it to be Elizabeth's intention to in- the Queen's

-

-l ^^* ^ _ commiifloners

flame, rather than to extinguish the difiinfions and animofities againt tlhe
among the Scots. No endeavours were used to reconcile the con- egent.
tending parties, or to mollify the fierceness of their hatred, by bring-
ing the Queen to offer pardon for what was pair, or her fubjeds to
promise more dutiful obedience for the future. On the contrary, oaober 8.
'Mary's commifioners were permitted to prefer a complaint againit
the Regent and his party, containing an enumeration of their trea-
fonable actions, of their seizing her person by force of arms, com-
mitting her to prison, compelling her to resign tie Crown, and
making use of her son's name to colour their usurpation of the
whole royal authority. And of all these enormities, they required
such speedy and efl-ctual redrels, as the injuries of one Queen de-
manded from the juilice of another -.

IT was then expeRed .tb;it the Regent would have disclosed the
whole circumstances of that unnatural crime, to which he pre-

* Andcrf. vol. iv. 16. - Id. ibid. 5?..

tende d

BooK V. pretended the Q/een had been accessory, and would have produced

ó^rS evidence in support of his charge. But far from accusing Mary,

the Regent did not even answer the complaints brought against
himself. He discovered a relutance at the undertaking that office,
and ltarted many doubts and fcrtples, with regard to which, he
demanded to be resolved by Elizabeth herself *. His reserve and
hesitation were no less surprising to the greater part of the English
commissioners than to his own afiociates. They knew that-he could
not vindicate his condua without charging the murder upon the
Q(een, and he had not hitherto shown any extraordinary delicacy
on that head. An intrigue had been secretly carried on, since his
arrival at York, which explains this nmyfiery.

Intrigues of THE Duke of Norfolk was, at that time, the most powerful and
Norfolk with
the Regent. most popular man in England. His wife was lately dead; and he be-

gan already to form a project, which he afterwards more openly avow-
ed, of mounting the throne of Scotland, by a marriage with the Queen
of Scots. He saw the infamy which would be the consequence of a
public accusation against Mary, and how prejudicial it might be to her
pretensions to the English succession. In order to save her this cruel
mortification, he applied to Maitland, and expressed his aftonifli-
ment at feeing a man of so much reputation for wisdom, concurring
with the Regent in a measure so difmonourable to themselves, to
their Queen, and to their country; submitting the public tranfadions
of the nation to the judgment of foreigners; and publishing the
ignominy, and exposing the faults of their Sovereign, which they
were bound, in good policy, as well as in duty, to conceal and
to cover. It was easy for Maitland, whose sentiments were the
fame with the Duke's, to vindicate his own condud. He assured

* Haynes, 478.

him,

-him, that he had employed all his credit, to diflwade his country- BOOK V.
men from this measure; and would still contribute, to the utmost
of his power, to divert them from it. This encouraged Norfolk to
communicate the matter to the Regent. He repeated and enforced
the fame arguments which he had used with Maitland. He warned
him of the danger to which he must expose himself, by such a vio-
lent action, as the public accusation of his Sovereign. Mary would
never forgive a- man, who had endeavoured to fix such a brand of
infamy on her character. If the ever recovered any degreeof power,
his destruction would be inevitable, and he would justly merit it at
her hands. Nor would Elizabeth screen him fr om this, by a pub-
lic approbation of his conduct. For whatever evidence of Mary's
guilt he might produce, the was resolved to give no definitive fen-
tence in the cause. Let him only demand that the matter should
be brought to decision, immediately after hearing the proof, and
he would be fully convinced how false and insidious her intentions
were, and, by consequence, how improper it would be for him to
appear as the accuser of his own Sovereign . The candour which
Norfolk seemed to discover in these remonstrances, as well as the
truth which they contained, made a deep impression oh the Re.
gent. He daily received the strongest assurances of Mary's willing-
ness to be reconciled to him, if he abstained from accusing her of
such an odious crime, together with denounciations of her irrecon-
cileable hatred, if he a&ed a contrary part j-. All these confidera-
tions concurred in determining him to alter his purpose, and to make
trial of the expedient which the Duke had fuggefled.

HE demanded, therefore, to be informed, before he proceeded far- Oiober 9.
ther, whether the English commissioners were impowered to declare

* Melv. I87. Haynes, 573. - Anders. vol. iv. 77. Good, vol. ii. 157.
See Appendix, NO XXVI.

VOL. I. G g g the

BOOK V. the Queen guilty, by a judicial ad'; whether they would promise to

5ó8Md ypafs sentence, without delay; whether the Queen flould be kept

under such restraint, as to prevent her from disturbing the govern-
ment now established in Scotland ; and whether Elizabeth, if ihe
approved of the proceedings of the King's party, would engage to
protet it for the future *. The paper containing these demands
was signed by himself alone, without communicating it to any of
his attendants, except Maitland and Melvil -. Nothing could ap-
pear more natural than the Regent's solicitude, to known on what
footing he flood. To have ventured on a flep so uncommon and
dangerous, as the accusing his Sovereign, without previously afcer-
taining that he might take it with safety, would have been unpar-
donable imprudence. But Elizabeth, who did not expec that he.
would have moved any such difficulty, had not impowered her
commissioners to give him that fatisfaftion which he demanded, It
became necessary to transmit the articles to herself, and by the light
in which Norfolk placed them, it is easy to fee that he wished that
they mhould make no flight impreflion on Elizabeth and her Minis-
ters. " Think not the Scots, said he, over-fcrupulous or precise,
6" Let us view theirconduct, as we would with our own to'be view-
"ed, in a like situation. The game they play is deep; their estates,
" their lives, their honour are at flake. It is now in their own
"power to be reconciled to their Queen, or to offend. her irreco-
"verably, and in a matter of so much importance, the utmost de-
" gree of caution is not excessive +"

WHILE the English commiflloners waited for fuller inflruc-

tions with regard to the Regent's demands, he gave in an answer
to the complaint, which had been offered in name of the Scottifl

* Anders. vol. ivId 6.
.Melv., g, :I Andcrf. vol. iv. 77.

Queen.

Qeen. It was expressed in terms perfectly conformable to the sys- BOo-K V.
tern which he had at that time adopted. It contained no infinua- t.~
tion of the Qaeen's being accessory to the murder of her husband ;
the bitterness of stile peculiar to the age was considerably abated;
and though he pleaded, that the infamy of the marriage with
Bothwell, made it necessary to take arms in order to difolve it;
though Mary's attachment to a man so odious justified the keeping
her for some time under restraint; yet nothing more was said on
these fubjeds than was barely requisite in his own defence. The
Queen's commiffloners did not fail to reply *. But while the ar- OFtober 17'
tide with regard to the murder remained untouched, these were
only skirmishes at a distance, of no consequence towards ending the
contest, and were little regarded by Elizabeth or her commis-
fioners.

THE conference had, hitherto, been conduced in a manner The confer-

which disappointed Elizabeth's views, and produced none of these encwremoivne
discoveries which she had expected. The distance between York ser.
and London, and the necessity of consulting her upon every difficulty
which occurred, consumed much time. Norfolk's negociation with
the Scottish Regent, however secretly carried on, was not, in all
probability, unknown to a Princess so remarkable for her sagacity
in penetrating the designs of her enemies, and feeing through their
deepest schemes -. Instead, therefore, of returning any answer to
the Regent's demands, (he resolved to remove the conference to
Westminster, and to appoint new commissioners, in whonl he could
more absolutely confide. Both the Scottish Queen and the Regent
were brought, without difficulty, to approve of this resolution :.

: Andcrf. vol. iv. 64, 80. - Good. vol. ii. I60. And. vol.iii, 24.

:: Hayncs, 484. Anders. vol. iv. 94.

Ggg2 WE

BOOK V. WE often find Mary boasting of the superiority of her commis-
~',-'4ó fioners during the conference at York, and how, by the strength of

their arguments, they confounded her adversaries, and silenced all
their cavils *. The dispute stood, at that time, on a footing, which
rendered her victory not only apparent, but easy. Her participa-
tion of the guilt of the King's murder was the only circumstance,
which could justify the violent proceedings of her fubjeds. And
while they indufirioufly avoided mentioning that, her cause gained as
much as that of her adversaries by suppressing this capital argument.

ELIZABETH resolved that Mary fl ould not enjoy the fame ad-

vantage in the conference to be held at Weftminiter. She deli-
berated with the utmost anxiety, how the might overcome the Re-
gent's scruples, and persuade himrto accuse the Queen. She con-
fidered of the most proper method for bringing Mary's commission-
ers to answer such an accusation; and as the foresaw that the pro-
mises with which it was neceflary to allure the Regent, and which
it was impossible to conceal from the Scottish Queen, would natu-
rally exasperate her to a great degree, she determined to guard her
more narrowly than ever; and though Lord Scroop had given her
no reason to distrust his vigilance or fidelity, yet because he was the
Duke of Norfolk's brother-in-law, fle thought it proper to remove
the Queen as foonas possible to Tuthbury in Staffordshire, and com-
mit her to the keeping of the Earl of Shrewsbury, to whom that
castle belonged --.

Mary's ffpi- MARY began to fufped the design of this second conference;
ci. oSs -li- and nlotwithftancing the fatisfadion she expressed at feeing her cause
tention,. taken more immediately under the Qteen's own eye $, lhe framed
O tobcr 2 i.

* Good. vol. ii. I86, 284, 350. 1 Hayncs, 487. :tAnderf. vol. iv. 95.

her

her intruations to her commitfloners, in such a manner, as to avoid BOOK-V.
being brought under the necessity of answering the accusation of
her fubjets, if they (hould be so desperate as to exhibit one against
her*. These suspicions were soon confirmed by a circumstance
extremely mortifying. The Regent having arrived at London, in
order to be present at the conference, was immediately admitted
into Elizabeth's presence, and received by her, not only with re-
spec, but with affection. This Mary justly confidered as an open
declaration of that Queen's partiality towards her adversaries. In Novem. 22.
the firR emotions of her resentment, she wrote to her commis- olaim audier
fioners, and commanded them to complain, in the presence of the enceofEliza-
English nobles, and before the ambassadors of foreign Princes, of
the usage she had hitherto met with, and the additional injuries
which she had reason to apprehend. Her rebellious fubjeas were
allowed access to the Qeen, the was excluded from her pretence;
they enjoyed full liberty, she languished under a long imprison-
ment; they were encouraged to accuse her, in defending herself
the laboured under every disadvantage. For these reasons ihe once
more renewed her demand, of being admitted into the Queen's pre-
fence; and if that were denied, fie inftruted them to declare, that
she recalled the consent the had given to the conference at Weft-
minster, and protetfed, that whatever was done there, should be
held to be null and invalid -f

THIS, perhaps, was the molt prudent resolution Marycould have

taken. The pretences on which die declined the conference were
plausible, and the juncture for offering them well chosen. But
either the Q2een's letter did not reach her commiflioners in due
time, or they suffered themselves to be deceived by Elizabeth's

* Good. vol. ii. 319. t Id.. ibid. 184.

pro-

·BoorK V. professions of regard for their Mistress, and consented to the open-

' 7"8 iing of the conference '
1568.
Novem. 25. To the commissioners who had appeared in her name at York,

Elizabeth now added Sir Nicholas Bacon keeper of the Great Seal,
the Earls of Arundel and Leicester, Lord Clinton, and Sir William
Cecil -[. The difficulties which obftruted the proceedings at York
were quickly removed. A satisfying answer was given to the Re-
gent's demands; nor was he so much disposed to hesitate, and
raise objections as formerly. His negociation with Norfolk had
been discovered to Morton by some of Mary's attendants, and he
had communicated it to Cecil +. His personal safety, as well as the
continuance of his power, depended on Elizabeth. By favouring
Mary, file might, at any time, ruin him, and by a question which
the artfully started, concerning the person who had a right, by the
law of Scotland, to govern the kingdom during a minority, she let
him fee, that even without restoring the Queen, it was an easy mat-
ter for her to deprive him of the supreme direction of affairs j[.
These considerations, which were powerfully seconded by most of
his attendants, at length determined the Regent to produce his ac-
cufation against the Queen.

The Regent HE endeavoured to lessen the infamy, with which he was fen-
accuses the
Queen of be- fible this action would be attended, by protesting, that it was with
ing acclflory the utmost reluctance he undertook this disagreeable taflc; that his
to her ltif-
land's inur- party had long suffered their conduct to be misconstrued, and had
!cr. borne the worst imputations in silence, rather than expose the

crimes of their Sovereign to the eyes of strangers; but that now
the insolence and importunity of the adverse faction forced them

:f Andcrf. vol. iii. 25. f Id. vol. iv. 99. :1: Mclv. 191. U Haynes, 484.

to

to publilh, what they had hitherto, though with loss to themselves, BooK V.
endeavoured to conceal *. T; hefe .pretexts are decent; and had ~-r"~"
the party discovered any delicacy or reserve, with regard to the
Queen's actions, in the reft of their conduc, might have passed for
the real principles by which they were influenced. But their former
treatment of the Queen renders it impoflible to give any credit to
these professions. And the Regent, it is plain, was drawn by the
neceflity of his affairs, and Elizabeth's artifices, into a situation,
where no liberty of choice was left him; and was obliged either to
acknowledge himself to be guilty of rebellion, or to charge Mary
with having committed murder.

-THE accusation itself was conceived in the ftrongefl terms. Mary

was charged, not only with having consented to the murder, but
with being accessory to the contrivance and execution of it. Both-
well, it was pretended, had been screened from the pursuits of
justice by her favour ; and the had formed designs no less dan-
gerous to the life of the young Prince, than subversive of the li-
berties and conltitution of the kingdom. If any of there crimes
should be. denied, an offer was made, to produce the most ample
and undoubted evidence in confirmation of the charge -.

AT the next meeting of the commissioners, the Earl of Len- Novem. 20

nox appeared before them; and after bewailing the tragical and
unnatural murdei of his son, he implored Elizabeth's justice against
the Queen of Scots, whom he accused, upon. oath, of being the
author of that crime, and produced papers, which, as he pretended,
would make good what he alledged. The entrance of a new ac-
tor on the stage, so opportunely, and at ajuncture so critical can

" Andcrf. vol. iv. 115. -1 Id. ibid. xl9..

scarec

BOOK V. scarce be imputed to chance. This contrivance was manifeffly
('v'Y^ Elizabeth's, in order to encreafe, by this additional accusation, the

I 568. infamy of the Scottifhl Qeen .

llercomnif- MARY'S commissioners expressed the utmorf furprize and indig-
sioner3 r2fufe
to anfc.f nation at the Regent's presumption, in loading the Quueen with ca-
Dccenm.4. lumnies, which, as they affirmed, fle had so little merited. But,

instead of attempting to vindicate her honour, by a reply to the-
charge, they had recourse to an article in their initruflions, which
they had formerly neglected to mention in its proper place. They'
demanded an audience of Elizabeth; and having renewed their Mif-
tress's request, of a personal interview, they protested, if that were
denied her,againft all the future proceedings of the commissioners t.
A proteflation of this nature, offered just at the critical time, when
such a bold accusation had been preferred against Mary, and when
the proofs in support of it were ready to be examined,. gave reason
to fufped that ihe dreaded the event of that examination. This
suspicion received the strongest confirmation from another circum-
tfance; Ross and Herreis, before they were introduced to Eliza-
beth, in order to make this proteflation, privately acquainted Lei-
cefter and Cecil, that as their Mistress had, from the beginning,
discovered an inclination towards bringing the differences between
herself and her fubjeds to an amicable accommodation, so she was
ifill deiirous, notwithifanding the Regents audacious accusation, that
they should be terminated in that manner .

SUCH moderation is scarce compatible with the firong resent-

ment, which callumniated innocence naturally feels; or with that
eagerness to vindicate itself, which it always difcovcrs. In Mary's

* Anderson, vol. iv. 122. liId. 133, 158. : Ibid.iv. 134. Cabbala, 157.

situation,

situation, an offer so ill-timed must be confidered as a confession of BooK V.
the weakness of her cause. The known charater of her commis- ' o

i568.

fioners exempts them from the imputation of folly, or the suspicion
of treachery. Some secret convition, that the conduct of their
Mistress could not bear so friEt a scrutiny, seems to be the most
probable motive of this imprudent proposal, by which they endea-
voured to avoid it.

IT appeared in this light to Elizabeth, and afforded her a pre-

tence for rejeding it. She told Mary's commissioners, that, in the Decem. 4
present juncure, nothing could be so dishonourable to their Mif-
trefs, as an accommodation; and that the matter would seem to
be huddled up in this manner, merely to suppress discoveries, and
to hide her lhame; nor was it possible that the could be admitted,
with any decency, into her presence, while (he lay under the in-
famy of such a public accusation.

UPON this repulse, Mary's commifioners withdrew; and as they

had declined answering, there seemed now to be no further rea-
son for the Regent's producing the proofs in support of his charge.
But without getting these into her hands, Elizabeth's schemes were
incompleat. And her artifice for this purpose was as mean, but as
successful as any fle had hitherto employed. She commanded her
commissioners to testify her indignation and displeasure at the Re-
gent's presumption, in forgetting so far the duty of a subjed, as to
accuse his Sovereign of such atrocious crimes. He, in order to
regain the good opinion of such a powerful protedrefs, offered to
flew that his accusations were not malicious, nor ill-grounded.
Then were produced, and delivered to the Englflh commissioners,
the ads of the Scottish Parliament in confirmation of the Regent's

VOL. . H h h authority,

a

BooK V. authority, and of the Queen's resignation; the confffions of the

S-r ,persons executed for the King's murder ; and the fatal casket which
2 contained the letters, sonnets, and contracts, that have been already

mentioned.

E!izabeth ELIZABETH having got these into her possession, began to lay
treats Mary
vaith greater aftde the exprefions of friendship and refped which She had hither-
rigour. to used in all her letters to the Scottibh Queen. She now wrote to her

in such telms, as if the presumptions of her guilt had amounted al-
most to certainty; flhe blamed her for refuting to vindicate herself
from an accusation which could not be left unanifwered, without a
nianifeft injury to her charadter; and plainly intimated, that unless
that were done, no change would be made in her present situation *.
She hoped that such a discovery of her sentiments would intimidate
Mary, who was scarce recovered from the flock of the Regent's
attack on her reputation, and force her to confirm her resignation of
the Crown, to ratify Murray's authority as Regent, and to content
that both herself and her son should reside in England, under her
protection. This scheme Elizabeth had much at heart; (he pro-,
posed it both to Mary and to her commissioners, and neglected no
argument, nor artifice, that could poflibly recommend it. Mary
saw how fatal this would prove to her reputation, to her preten-
sions, and even to her personal safety. She rejected it without hefita-
tion. (' Death, said fle, is less dreadful than such an ignomi.
"nious ftep. Rather than give away, with my own hands, the
"Crown which descended to me from my ancestors, I will. part
" with life; but the last words I utter, shall be those of a Queen
" of Scotland t."

W Andrf. vol.iv. 179, 183. Good. vol. ii. 26o.
' - Hayncs, 497. See Append. N0 XXVII, Good. vol. ii. 274? 30x.

AT

AT the fame time she seems to have been sensible how open her BOOK V.
reputation lay to censure, while the suffered such a public accufa- ""'

if68.

tion to remain unanswered; and though the conference was now
dissolved, she impowered her commissioners to present a reply to
the allegations of her enemies, in which she denied, in the strongest
terms, the crimes imputed to her; and recriminated upon the Re- Decem. 240
gent and his party, by accusing them of having devised and exe-
cuted the murther of the King s. The Regent and his aflociates
aferted their innocence with great warmth. Mary continued to
insist on a personal interview, a condition which she knew would
never be granted -. Elizabeth urged her to vindicate her own
honour. But it is evident from the delays, the evasions, and sub-
teirfuges, to which both Queens had recourse by turns, that Mary
avoided, and Elizabeth did not desire to make any further progPefs
in the inquiry.

THE Regent was now impatient to return into Scotland, where' I569.
his adversaries were endeavouring, in his absence, to raise some Febr. z.

Dismisses the

commotions. Before he set out, he was called into the Privy Regent with-
Council,! to. receive a. final declaration of Elizabeth's sentiments. Out eitherap-

proving or

Cecil acquainted him, in her name, that on one hand nothing had-condemning
been objected to his coidu&, which ile could reckon detrimental' hiscondluM.
to his honour, or inconfiflent with his duty; nor had he, on the
other hand, produced any thing against his Sovereign, on which
she :could found an unfavourable opinion of her adions ; and for
tliisrreafoni, she. resolv/ed to-leave tll the affairs of Scotland, precisely
in :the. -faime fituatidii, inM which fle had fourid tliemi, at the be-

* Good, 2. 285.- -1 Ibid. 283. Cabbala, I57.

: I-I h h 2 ginning

BOOK V. ginning of the conference. The Queen's commiflioners were dif-
b ""^" miffed much in the fame manner .

1569.

AFTER the attention of both nations had been fixed so earnestly

on this conference, upwards of four months, such a conclusion of
the whole appears, at first fight, trifling and ridiculous. Nothing,

But secretly however, could be more conformable to Elizabeth's original views,
supports his or more subservient to her future schemes. Notwithflanding her
arty.

seeming partiality, (he had no thoughts of continuing neuter;
nor was the at any loss on whom to bestow her protetion. Be-
fore the Regent left London, {he supplied him with a con-
fiderable fum of money, and engaged to support the King's
authority, to the utmost of her power -. Mary, by her own
condut, fortified this resolution. Enraged at the repeated in-
itances of Elizabeth's artifice and deceit, which she had discover-
ed during the progress of the conference, and despairing of ever
obtaining any succour from her, fie endeavoured to rouze her own
adherents in Scotland to arms, by imputing such designs to Eliza-
beth and Murray, as could not fail to inspire every Scotchman with
indignation. Murray, (he pretended, had agreed to convey the
Prince her son into England; to surrender to Elizabeth the places
of greatest strength in the kingdom; and to acknowledge the de-
pendance of the Scotch upon the Englifl nation. In return for
this, he was to be declared the lawful heir of the Crown of Scot-
land; and, at the fame time, the queflion with regard to the Eng-
lifh succession was to be decided in favour of the Earl of Hartford,
who had promised to marry one of Cecil's daughters. An account

" Good. 2. 315. 333- ' Id. 213. Carte, 3. 478.

of

of there wild and chimerical projecs was spread induflrioufly among BOOK V.
the Scots. Elizabeth, perceiving it was calculated of purpose to

1'569°

bring her government into difreputation, laboured to destroy its es-
feds, by a counter-proclamation, and became more disgusted than
ever with the Scottish Queen *.

THE Regent, on his return, found the kingdom in the utmost Efforts of
tranquillity. But the rage of the Queen's adherents, which had Mary's adhe-

· '.3 rents againil

been suspended in expetation that the conference in England would him.
terminate to her advantage, was now ready to break out with all
the violence of civil war. They were encouraged, too, by the ap-
pearance of a leader, whose high quality and pretensions intitled
him to great authority in the nation. This was the Duke of Cha-
telherault, who had resided for some years in France, and was now
Lent over by that court, with a small supply of money, in hopes
that the presence of the first nobleman in the kingdom would
fArengthen the Queen's facion. Elizabeth had detained him in
England, for some months, under various pretences, but was obliged
at last to susser him to proceed on his journey. Before his depar-
ture, Mary inveRed him with the high dignity of her Lieutenant Feb. 25.
General in Scotland, together with the fantastic title of her adopt-
ed father.

THE Regent did not give him time to form his party into any His vigorous

conduct

regular body. He assembled an army, with his usual expedition, breaks her
and marched to Glasgow. The followers of Argyll and Huntly, party.
who composed the chief part of the Queen's fadion, lying in very
distant corners of the kingdom, and many of the Duke's depen-

d Haynes, 500, 503. See Append. No XXVIII.

dants

BOOK V. dants having fallen, or having been taken in the battle of Langfide,

óWg BJ the spirit and strength of his adherents was totally broken, and an
569' accommodation with the Regent was the only thing, which could

prevent the deffrudion of his estate and vassals. This was effeted
without difficulty; and on no unreasonable terms. The Duke
promised to acknowledge the authority both of the King and of
the Regent; and to claim no jurifdidion in consequence of the
commission, which he had received from the Queen. The Re-
gent bound himself to repeal the ad, which had passed for attain-
ting several of the Queen's adherents; to restore all, who would
submit to the King's government, to the poffeflion of their estates
and honours; and to hold a Convention, wherein all the differences
between the two parties flould be fettled by mutual content. The.
Duke gave hostages for his faithful performance of the treaty; and,:
in token of their sincerity, he and Lord Herreis accompanied the'
Regent to Stirling, and visited: the young King. The Regent-see
at liberty the prisoners taken at Langfide . -

ARGYLL and Huntly refused to be included in this treaty. A fe-

cret negociation was carrying on, in England, in favour of the
captive Queen, with so. much. success, that her affairs began to wear'
a better asped, and her return into her own kingdom seemed to be)
an event not very distant. The French King had lately obtained
such advantages over the Hugonots, that the extincdion of that
party appeared to be inevitable, and, France, by recovering do--
meftic tranquillity, would be no longer prevented from protecting
her friends in Britain. These circumflances not only influenced
Argyll and Hil ntly, but made so deep an impreflion on. tle Duke;

* Cabbalak, i6. Crawf.,Mcm., io6,

that

that he appeared to be wavering and irresolute, and plainly difcot'dre'd BooK V.
that he wished to evade the accomplilhment of'the treaty. The Re- --
gent saw the danger of allowing the Duke to flake himself loose, 159.
in this manner, from his engagements ; and inflantly formed a refo-
lution equally bold, and politic. He commanded his guards to seize
Chatelherault in his own house in Edinburgh, whither he had come,
in order to, attend the Convention agreed upon; and, regardless
either of his dignity as the first nobleman in the kingdom, and next
heir to the Crown, or of the promises of personal security, on which
he had relied, committed him and Lord Herreis, prisoners to the April 16.
cafle of Edinburgh *. A blow so fatal and unexpeced dispirited
the party. Argyll submitted to the King's government, and made
his peace with the Regent, on very easy terms; and Huntly, being
left alone, was at last obliged to lay down his arms.

SOON, after, Lord Boyd returned into Scotland, and brought let- July 21.

ters to the Regent both from the English and Scottifih (teens. A fA propuof
Convention was held at Perth, in order to confider them. Eliza- Maryrejelted.
beth's letter contained. three different proposals with regard to
Mary; that she should either be reflored to the full poIffefion of
her former authority; or be admitted to reign jointly with the
King her son; or at, least be allowed to reside in Scotland, in
fore decent retirement, without. any. aare in the administration of
government, These overtures, were extorted by the importunity
of Fenelon the French ambassador, and have some appearance of
being favourable to the captive Queen. They were, however,
perfedlyfuitable to. Elizabeth's generalfyfiem with regard to Scottish
affairs.. Among propositions so inequal and disproportionate, mhe

* Crawf, Mem, il. Melv. 2o2e

easily

BOOK V. easily saw where the choice would fall. The two former were re-

--v." jeted; and long delays must necessarily have intervened, and many
1569' difficulties have arisen, before every circumstance relative to the last

could be finally adjusted *.

MARY, in her letter, demanded that her marriage with Both-

well should be reviewed by the proper judges, and if found in-
valid, should be dissolved by a legal sentence of divorce. This
fatal marriage was the principal source of all the calamities she had
endured for two years; a divorce was the only thing which could
repair the injuries, her reputation had suffered by that flep. It was-
her interetl to have proposed it early; and it is not easy to account

Norfolk's for her long silence with refpet to this point. Her particular mo-
scheme for -
marrying the tive for proposing it, at this time, began to be so well known, that the
sQuen of demand was rejeted by the Convention of estates. They imputed

it not so much to any abhorrence of Bothwell, as to her eagerness
to conclude a marriage with the Duke of Norfolk.

THIS marriage was the object of that secret negociation in Eng-

land, which we have already mentioned; but, like all those con-
certed for the relief of the Queen of Scots, it ended tragically.
The fertile and projecting genius of Maitland first conceived this
scheme. During the Conference at York, he communicated it to
the Duke himself, and to the Bishop of Ross. The former readily
closed with a scheme, so flattering to his ambition. The latter
confidered it as a probable device for restoring his Mistress to li-
berty, and replacing her on her throne. Nor was Mary, with
whom Norfolk held a correspondence, by means of his sifter Lady
Scroop, averse from a measure, which would have reflored her to

* Spots. 230.

her

her kingdom, with so much splendor *. The sudden remoival of BooK V.
the conference from York to Westminster suspended, but did not
break off this intrigue. Maitland and Ross were flill the Duke's
prompters, and his agents; and many letters and love-tokens were
exchanged between him and the Queen of Scots.

BUT as he could not hope, that under an adminifsration so vigi Conceals it
lant as Elizabeth's, such an intrigue could be kept long concealed, from Eliza-

o beth.

he attempted to deceive her by the appearance of openness and can-
dor, an artifice which seldom fails of success. He mentioned to her
the rumour, which was spread of his marriage with the Scottihfi
Queen; he complained of it as a groundless calumny; and dif-
claimed all thoughts of that kind, with many expressions full of
contempt, both for Mary's character, and dominions. Jealous as
Elizabeth was of every thing relative to the Queen of Scots, she
seems to have credited these profeflions -. But, instead of difcon-
tinuing the negociation, he renewed it with greater vigour, and ad-
mitted into it new aifociates. Among these was the Regent of Scot-
land. He had given great "offence to Norfolk, by his public accufa-
tion of the Queen, in breach of the concert into which he had en-
tered at York. He was then ready to return into Scotland. The
influence of the Duke, in the North of England, was great. The
Earls of Northumberland and Westmorland, the mofl powerful
noblemen in that part of the kingdom, threatened to revenge upon
the Regent, the injuries which he had done his Sovereign. In or-
der to secure his safe retreat, he addrefled himself to Norfolk, and,
after some apology for his past condut, he insinuated that the

* Caned. 419. Haynes, 573, State Trials, I. 73.
- I-Iaynes, 574. State 'Irials,. I. 79, 80.
VOL. I. Ii Duke's

BOOK V. Duke's scheme of marrying the Queen his sifter was no less accept-

ó" - able to him, than beneficial to both kingdoms and that he would
569. concur, with the utmost ardor, in promoting so defireable an

event *. Norfolk heard him with the credulity, natural to those,
who are passionately bent upon any design. He wrote to the two
Earls to defifl fiom any hostile attempt against Murray, and to that
he owed his passage through the Northern Counties, without dif-
turbance.

Gains the ENCOURAGED by his success in gaining the Regent, he next at-
content of the tempted to draw the Englifi nobles to approve his design. The
nglifh no nation began to despair of Elizabeth's marrying. Her jealousy kept

the question with regard to the right of fuccefilon undecided.
The memory of the civil wars, which had desolated England for
more than a century, on account of the disputed titles of the
houses of York and Lancaster, was fill recent. Almost the whole
ancient nobility had perished, and the nation itself had been brought
to the brink of deifrudion, in that unhappy contest. The Scottish
Queen, though her right of succession was generally held to be
undoubted, might meet with formidable competitors. She might
marry a foreign and a Popish Prince, and bring both liberty and
religion into danger. But, by marrying her to an Englishman,
a zealous Protestant, the most powerful and most universally be-
loved of all the nobles, an effectual remedy seemed to be provided
against all there evils. The greater part of the Peers, either di-
redly, or tacitly, approved of it, as a salutary projet. The Earls
of Arundel, Pembroke, Leicester, and Lord Lumley subscribed a
letter to the Scottish Q.een, written with Leice(ter's hand, in which

' And. 3. 314

they

they warmly recommended the match, but infixed, by way of pre- Booc V.
liminary, on Mary's promise, that fle should attempt nothing, in v
consequence of her pretensions to the Englifll Crown, prejudicial 1S69'
to Elizabeth or to her posterity; that the flould consent to a league
offensive and defensive between the two kingdoms; that she should
confirm the present efiablifhment of religion in Scotland; and re-
ceive into favour such of her fubjets as had appeared in arms against
her. Upon her agreeing to the marriage, and ratifying these ar-
ticle?, they engaged that the English nobles would not only con-
cur in reltoring her, immediately, to her own throne, but in fe-
curing to her that of England, in reversion. Mary readily con-
sented to all there proposals, except the second, with regard to
which, (le demanded some time for consulting her ancient ally the
French King *.

THE whole of this negociation was induflrioufly concealed fromn

Elizabeth. Her jealousy of the Scottish Queen was well known,
nor could it be expected, that she would willingly come into a
measure, which tended so visibly to save the reputation, and to in-
crease the power of her rival. But, in a matter of so much confe-
quence to the nation, the taking a few steps without her knowledge,
could scarce be reckoned criminal; and while every person con-
cerned, even Mary and Norfolk themselves, declared that nothing
should be concluded without obtaining her content, the duty and
allegiance of fubjeds seemed to be fully preserved. The greater
part of the nobles regarded the matter in this light. Those who
conducted the intrigue, had farther and more dangerous views. They
saw the advantages which Mary procured by this treaty, to be pre-
sent and certain; and the execution of the promises which file came

* Andcrf. vol. iii. 5I. Camd. 420.

Ii i 2 under,

BOOK V. under, to be distant and uncertain. They had early communi-

^
" ccated their scheme to the Kings of France and Spain, and obtained

69.' their approbation `. A treaty, concerning which they consulted

foreign Princes, while they concealed it from their own Sovereign,
could not be deemed innocent. They hoped, however, that the
union of so many nobles would render it neceflary for Elizabeth to
comply; they flattered themselves, that a combination so strong
would be altogether irresistible; and such was their confidence of
success, that when a plan was concerted, in the north of England,
for rescuing Mary out of the hands of her keepers, Norfolk, who
was afraid that if ihe recovered liberty, her sentiments in his favour
might change, used all his interest to diffwade the conspirators from.
attempting it --.

IN this situation did the affair remain, when Lord Boyd arrived

from England; and, betides the letters which he produced pub-
lickly, brought others in cyphers from Norfolk and Throgmorton.
to the Regent, and to Maitland. These were full of the most fan-
guine hopes. The whole nobles of England concurred, said they,,
in favouring the design. Every preliminary was adjusted; nor was
it possible that a scheme so deep laid, conduted with so much art,
and supported both by power and by numbers, could miscarry, or
be defeated in the execution. Nothing now was wanting, but the:
concluding ceremony. It depended on the Regent to haiten that,
by procuring a sentence of divorce, which would remove the only
obflacle that flood in the way. This was expeted of him, in con-
sequence of his promise to Norfolk; and if he regarded either his.
interest or his fame, or even his safety, he would not fail to fulfil
there engagements +.

* Andcrf. vol. iii. 63. 1. Camd, 420.. : H-ayncs, 520. Spots. 230.
See Appcndix, N° XXIX.

BUT,

BUT the Regent was now in very different circuinftahics, from Bo:K V.

those which: had formerly induced him to affect an approbation of
Norfolk's schemes. He saw that the downfal of his own power mufft 9
be the first conriequence of the Duke's faceefs. And if the Quteen,
who confidered. him as the chief author of all her misfortunes, should
recover her ancient authority, he could never expec favour, not
scarce hope for impunity. No wonder he declined a flep so fatal
to himself, and which would have established the grandeur of ano-
ther on the ruins of his own. This refusal occasioned a delay. But,
as every other circumstance was fettled, the Bishop of Ross, in name
of his Mistress, and the Duke, in peroln, declared, in presence of
the French Amb/assador, their mutual consent to the marriage, and,
a contra&t to this purpose wvas signed, anud entruied to the keeping
of the AmbaiTador *.

THE intrigue was now in so many hands; that it couldi not long AugufR r .
remain a secret. It began to be whispered at court; and Elizabeth Elizabeth dif

covers the

calling the Duke into her pretence, expressed the utmost indigna- Duke's de-
t:ion at his' condu-t, and- charged him to lay aside all thoughts offgs ind
prosecuting such a dangerous-defign. Soon after, Leicester, who'
perhaps had countenanced the project with no other intention, re-
vealed the whole circumitances of it to the Queen. Pembroke, Arun-
del, Lumly, and Throgmorton were confined, and examined,
Mary was watched more narrowly than ever; and Hatfings Earl
of Huntington, who pretended to dispute with the Scottish Queen,
her right to the succession, being joined in commiflion with Shrews-
bury, rendered her imprisonment more intolerable, by the excels
of his vigilance and rigour --. The Scottish Regent, threatened

* Carte, vol. iii. 486. F Haynes, 525, 526, 530, 532.

weth

BOOK V. with Elizabeth's displeasure, meanly betrayed the Duke; put his
'"~"j letters in her hands; and furnished all the intelligence in his power *.

1569' The Duke himself retired first to Howard-houfe, and then, in con-

tempt of a summons to appear before the Privy Council, fled to
his feat in Norfolk. Intimidated by the imprisonment of his aflb-
ciates; coldly received by his friends in that county; unprepared for
a rebellion ; and unwilling perhaps to rebel; he hesitated for some
Ofober 3. days, and at iaft obeyed a second call, and repaired to Windsor..

He was first kept as a prisoner in a private house, and then sent to
the Tower. After being confined there upwards of nine months,
he was released upon his humble submission to Elizabeth, giving
her a promise, on his allegiance, to hold no farther correspondence
with the Scottish Queen -. During the progress of Norfolk's ne-
gociation's, the Queen's partizans in Scotland, who made no doubt.
of their ifluing in her restoration to the throne, with an increase of

Mairland im- authority, were wonderfully elevated. 'Maitland was the foul of that
th-ifoned by party, and the person, whole activity and abilities the Regent chief-
the Regent. Par

ly dreaded. He had laid the plan of that intrigue, which had
kindled such combustion in England. He continued to foment
the spirit of difaffecion in Scotland, and had seduced from the Re-
gent Lord Home, Kirkaldy, and several of his former associates.
While he enjoyed liberty, the Regent could not reckon his own
power secure. For this reason, he employed Captain Crawfurd, one
of his creatures, to accuse him of being accessory to the murder
of the King ; and under that pretence carried him a prisoner to
EIdinburgh. He would soon have been brought to trial, but was
savcd by the friendflip of Kirkaldy, governor of the castle, who,
by pretending a warrant for that purpose from the Regent, got him
out of the hands of the person, to whose care he was committed,

: Sec Append. N° XXX. *- Haynes, 520, 597.

and

and conduced him into the caflle, which, from that time, was en.B BoOK V.
tirely under Maitland's command. The loss of a place of To much
importance, and the defection of a man so eminent for military i569'
ikill as Kirkaldy, brought the Regent into some difreputation, for
which, however, the success of his ally Elizabeth abundantly com-
penfated.

THE intrigue carried on for restoring the Scottish Queen to Iiber- A rebellion

ty having been discovered, and disappointed, an attempt was made, against Eliza
to the fame purpose, by force of arms; but with no better fuc- ry'sadherents.
cess. The Earls of Northumberland and Westmorland, though
little distinguished by their personal merit, were two of the most
ancient and powerful of the English peers. Their estates in the
northern counties were great, and they possessed that influence over
the inhabitants, which was hereditary in the popular and martial
families of Percy and of Nevil. They were both attached to the
Popish religion, and discontented with the court, where new men,
and a new fyflem prevailed. Ever since Mary's arrival in England,
they had warmly espoused her interest, and zeal for popery, oppo-
fition to the court, and commiseration of her sufferings, had en-
gaged them in different plots for her relief. Notwithstanding the
vigilance of her keepers, they held a close correspondence with her,
and communicated to her all their designs *. They were privy to.
Norfolk's schemes, but the caution with which he proceeded did
not suit their ardor and !npetuofity. The liberty of the Scottifhi
Queen was not their sole objet. They aimed at bringing about a
change in the religion, and a revolution in the government of the
kingdom. For this reason, they solicited the aid of the King of
Spain, the avowed and zealous patron of Popery in that age. No-

H* Iayncs, 595. Murdin, 44, 62, &co

thing

BooK V. thing could be more delightful to the restless spirit of Philip, or

ót.~kV more necessary towards facilitating his schemes in the Netherlands,
69. than the involving England in the confusion and miseries of a civil

war. The Duke of Alva, by his direction, encouraged the two
Earls, and promised, so soon as they either took the field with their
forces, or surprised any place of strength, or rescued the Queen of
Scots, that he would supply them both with money, and a tfrong
body of troops. La Mothe, the governor of Dunkirk, in the dif-
guise of a sailor, founded the ports where it would be most pro-
per to land. And Chiapini Vitelli, one of Alva's ablest officers,
was dispatched into England, on pretence of fettling some commer-
cial differences between the two nations; but in reality, that the
rebels might be sure of a leader of experience, so Loon as they ven-
tured to take arms %
Defeated. THE condu&c of this negociation occasioned many meetings and

melTages between the two Earls. Elizabeth was informed of these ,
and though fthe fufpeated nothing of their real design, ihe con-,
cluded that they were among the number of Norfolk's confidents.
They were summoned, for this reason, to repair to court. Con-
fcious of guilt, and afraid of discovery, they delayed giving obedi-
ence. A second, and more peremptory order was issued. This
they could not decline, without flaking off their allegiance. And
Noven. 9. as no time was left for deliberation, they inftaatly ereced their

flandard against their Sovereign. The re.eftablifling the catho-
lic religion; the fettling the order of fucceflion to the Crown; the'
defence of the ancient nobility; were the motives they alledged to
justify their rebellion J. Many of the lower people flocked to
them, with such arms they could procure ; and had the capacity of

* Carte, vol. iii. 489, 490. CamTd. 421. .1- Strypc, vol. i. 547.

the

the leaders been, in any degree, equal to the enterprize, it muf BooK V.
have soon grown to be extremely formidable.. Elizabeth ated with
prudence and vigour; and was served by her fubjeEts with fidelity
and ardor. -On the first rumour of an infurreaion, Mary was re-
moved to Coventry, a place of strength, which could not be taken
without a regular siege; a detachment of the rebels, which was
sent to rescue her,- returned without'fuccefs. Troops were assem-
bled in differents parts of the kingdom.; as they advanced, the male-
contents retired. In their retreat their numbers dwindled away,
and their spirits funk. Despair and: uncertainty whither to direc
their flight, kept together, for some time,- a small body of them,
among the mountains of Northumberland, But they were at length Decemberz 2,.
obliged to disperse, and the chiefs took refuge among the Scottish
borderers. The two Earls, together with the Counters of Nor-
thumberland, wandering for some days in the waftes of Liddifdale,
were plundered by the banditti, exposed to the rigours of the sea-
son, and left deflitute of the necessaries of life. Westmorland was
concealed by Scot of Buccleugh and Ker of Ferniherft, and after-
wards conveyed into the Netherlands. Northumberland was seized
by tle Regent, who had marched with some troops towards the
borders, to prevent any impreflion the rebels might make on.thofe
mutinous provinces %.

AMIDST so many surprising events., the affairs of the church, Churchaffairs

for two years, have almost escaped our notice. Its General Aflem-
blies were held regularly ; but no business of much importance
employed their attentibn. As the number of the Protestant clergy
daily encreafed, the deficiency of the funds, set apart for their Sub-

* Cabbala, 171. Camd. 422..
VoL. L. K. k k iiflance,.

BooK V. fifnance, became greater. Many efforts were made towards recover.-

ó-r^-1 ing the ancient patrimony of the church, or at least so much of it,
56 9' as was possesed by the Popifl incumbents, a race of men, who

were, now, not only useless, but burdensome to the nation. But tho'
the manner in which the Regent received their addrefles and com-
plaints, was very different from that to which they had been ae-
cufomned, no effecual remedy was provided; and while they sus-
sered intolerable oppreflion, and groaned under the moR extreme
poverty, fair words, and liberal prornifes, were all they were able
to obtain -.

1570. ELIZABETH began now to be weary of keeping such a danger-

Elizabeth re- ous prisoner as the Scottish Qeen. During the former year, the
solves to give ryeain r
up Mary to tranquillity of her government had been disturbed, sris by a secret

e Regent. combination of some of her nobles, then by the rebellion of others;

and she often declared, not without reason, that Mary was the
bidden caife of both. Many of her own fubjets favoured, or
pitied the captive Queen; the Roman Catholic Princes on the con-
tinent were warmly interefled in her cause. The detaining her
any longer in England, she foresaw, would be made the pretext or
occasion of perpetual cabals and infurredions among the former, and
might expose her to the hotfile attempts of the latter. She re"
solved, therefore, to give up Mary into the hands of the Regent,
whose security, no less than her own, depended on preventing her
from re-afcending the throne. The negociation for this purpose
was carried some length, when it was discovered by the vigilance
of the Bifllop of Ross, who, together with the French and Spanish
Ambassadors, remonrtrated against the infamy of such an action,
and represented the surrendering the Qjeen to her rebellious sub-

* Cald. vol. ii. 80, &c.

jecds,

jeds, to be the fame thing, as if Elizabeth should, by her own au- BOOK V.
thority, condemn her to inflant death. This procured a delay; ^ -"-
and the murder of the Regent prevented the revival of that de- 570.
sign ..

HAMILTON of Bothwellhaugh was the person who committed Butheismuri

this barbarous acion. He had been condemned to death soon as- dered
ter the battle of Langfide, as we have already related, and owed
his life to the Regent's clemency. But part of his eflate had been
bellowed upon one of the Regent's favourites, who seized his house,
ahd turned out his wife naked, in a cold night, into the open fields,
where, before next morning, she became furiously mad. This injury
made a deeper impression on him, than the benefit he had re-
ceived, and from that moment he vowed to be revenged upon
the Regent. Party-rage strengthened and inflamed his private re-
fentment. His kinsmen the Hamiltons applauded the enterprizeo
The maxims of that age justified the most desperate course he could
take to obtain vengeance. He followed the Regent for some time,
and watched for an opportunity to strike the blow. He resolved
at last to wait till his enemy should arrive at Linlithgow, through
which- he was to pals in his way from Stirling to Edinburgh. He
took his fland in a wooden gallery, which had a window towards
the fireet; spread a feather-bed on the floor, to hinder the noise of
his feet from being heard; hung up a black cloth behind him,
that his shadow might not be observed from without; and after all
this preparation, calmly expected the Regent's approach, who
had lodged during the night in a house not far distant. Some in-
diftina information of the danger which threatened him, had been

* Carte, vol, iii. 49I. Anders. vol. iii. 84.

K k k conveyed.

BOOK V. conveyed to the Regent, and he paid so much regard to it, that
'"v"^ he resolved to return by the fame gate through which he had en-

tered, and to fetch a compass round the town. But as the croud
about the gate was great, and he himself unacquainted with fear,
he proceeded directlyalong the itreet; and the throng of the people
obliging him to move very slowly, gave the assassin time to take so
true an aim, that he shot him with a single bullet, through the lower
part of his belly, and killed the horse of a gentleman who rode on
his other fide. His followers instantly endeavoured to break into
the house whence the blow had come, but they found the door
firongly barricaded; and before it could be forced open, Hamilton
had mounted a fleet horse, which flood ready for him at a back-
pafiage, and was got far beyond their reach. The Regent died the
fame night of his wound.
isharat-er. THERE is no person, in that age, about whom historians have

been more divided, or whose charater has been drawn with such-
opposite colours. Personal intrepidity, military skill, sagacity and
vigour in the adminifiration of civil affairs, are virtues, which even
his enemies allow him to have possessed, in an eminent degree. His
m1oral qualities are more dubious, and ought neither to be praised,
nor censured, without great reserve, and many diffinctions. In a
fierce age, he was capable of using victory with humanity, and of
treating the vanquished with moderation. A patron of learning,
which, among martial nobles, was either unknown, or despised.
Zealous for religion, to a degree, which distinguished him, even
at a time, when professions of that kind were not uncommon. His
confidence in his friends was extreme, and inferior only to his libe-

t Biuchan, 385. Crawf. Mcm. I24.

rality

rality towards them, which knew no bounds. A disinterested pas- BooK V.
sion for the liberty of his country, prompted him to oppose the per- V..
nicious system, which the Princes of Lorrain had obliged the Queen- 570
mother to pursue. On Mary's return into Scotland, he served her
with a zeal and affection, to which he sacrificed the friendship of
those who were moRt attached to his person. But, on the other
hand, his ambition was immoderate; and events happened, that
opened to him vast profpets, which allured his enterprising genius,
and led him to ations, inconfitent with the duty of a subjet. His
treatment of the Queen, to whose bounty he was so much indebted,
was unbrotherly and ingrateful. The dependance on Elizabeth, un-
der which he brought Scotland, was disgraceful to the nation. He
deceived and betrayed Norfolk, with a baseness unworthy of a man
of honour. His elevation to such unexpected dignity, inspired him
with new passions, with haughtiness and reserve; and inflead of
his natural manner, which was blunt and open, he affected the
arts of dissimulation and refinement. Fond, towards the end of
his life, of flattery, and impatient of advice, his creatures, by sooth-
ing his vanity, led him afftray, while his ancient friends flood at
a distance, and predited his approaching fall. But, amidst the tur-
bulence and confusion of that fatious period, he dispensed justice
with so much impartiality, he repressed the licentious borderers with
so much courage, and eflablifhed such uncommon order and tran-
quillity in the country, that his adminifiration was extremely popu-
lar, and he was long and affectionately remembered among the
commons, by the name of the Good Regent.

The END of the FIRST VOLUMEo

# BOOKS printed for, and sold by A. MILLAR in the Strand, LONDON.

B O K S prined for, and ,old G y A. M I L LA R in the

Strand, LONDON.

SO L IO.
i. Pr° HE Hifory and Antiquities of Scotland, from the earliest Account of Time,

to the Death of James I. anno 1437. By kWilliam Maitland, F. R. S. And
from that Period to the AcceJion of 7ames VI. to the Cro'wn of England, Anno
1603. By another Hand. The whole compiled from themoft authentick Vouchers.

It ought to be observed, that as it zwas for many Centuries the Policy of both England and

France, to be allied 'with Scotland, Jo there is no underflanding the HiIories of those
Nations, zwithout a thorough Knozwledge of that of the Scots, 'which hbcwecvr cannot be
be obtainedfrom any Hilory of that People hitherto publijhed.

z. An Uni'versal Hi/Iory, from the earliest Account of Time to the present. Illustrated
with Maps, Cuts, Chronological and other Tables. In o1 vols. or 21 in 8vo.

3. The History of the Grocwth and Decay of the Othman Empire, in 2 Parts, adorned

with 22 Heads of the Turki#j Emperors. Translated from the Latin of Demetrius Can-
temir, late Prince of Moldavia. By N. Tindal, M. A.

4. A Complete Syflem of Geography: liluftrated with 70 Maps. In 2 vols.
5. Bi/hop Burnet's Hiflory of his own Times. In z vols. or 4 vols. 8vo.
BiJhop Burnet's HijIory of the Reformation of the Church of England. The 3d Part. Being
a Supplement to the z vols. formerly publiihed.

6. Britannia: Or, a Chorographical Description of Great-Britain and Ireland. Writtea

by William Camden Clarenceux, King at Arms; and translated into Engli/h, with Ad-
ditions and Improvements. Revised, digested, and published, with large Additions, by
Edm. Gibson, D. D. late Lord Bishop of London. The 3d Edition. Illustrated with Maps
of all the Counties, and Prints of the Britih, Roman, and Saxon Coins. In 2 vols.

7. The genuine Works of Flavius Josephus, the Jewijh Historian. Translated from the
Original Greek, according to Havercantp's accurate Edition, into Eng4ih.

With an Account of the JewiJh Coins, Weights, and Measures. In z vols. Royal

Paper. By kWilliam Whijion, M. A. some Time Professor of the Mathematicks in the
University of Cambridge.

The fame Book in i vol. on a smaller Paper, or in 4 vols. in 8vo.

2 U A R J o.
8. A New History of Great-Britain. In 2 vols. Vol. 1. Containing the Reigns of

* -. 7ames I. and Charles I. Vol. II. Containing the Commonwealth, and the
Reigns of Charles II. and James II. By David Hume, Efq;

9. Eflays and Treatises on several Subje&s, in i vol. By David Hume, Efq; To which
is added, an Index.

The fame, in 5 vols. 12mo.
to. AMemoirs of the Reign of .ieen Elizabeth, from the Year I58r, till ler Death.
Ey Thomas Birch, D. D. F. R. S. In z vols.

11. The History of Philosophy: Containing the Lives, Opinions, Adions, and Difcorfres

of the Philosophers of every Ses. By Thomas Stanley, Efq; The Fourth Edition. In which
the innumerable Miltakes, both in the Text and Notes of all former Editions are corrctfed;
the Citations and References cxadly adtjufled, and compared throughout with the Originals,
and with the Latin Tran./ation, printed at Leipfijk.

iz. An Historical Account of the BritiJh Trade over the Caspian Sea; with the Au-

thor's Journal of Travels from England through Ri'la into Petfia ; and back through
Rl/ia, Germany, and Holland. To which are added, the Revolutions of Per/ia during the
prcfent Century, with the Particular History of the Great Usurper Nadli Ao/i. 11-
lultrated with Maps and Copper-plates. The zd Edition, revised and corlectd. In
2 vols. By Jan. l]anunwy, Merchant.

2F O L 10u

FOLIO.

13. NCH. Augutil Thuani Hi/ioria fii Tenmporis. Edita per S. Buckley. In 7 vols.
14. The Works of the Hon. Robert Boyle. To which is prefixed, A new Account

of his Life, confifing partly of Memoirs, drawn up by himself. In 5 vols.

5. The Works of Francis Bacon, Lord High Chancellor of England. With several addi-

tional Pieces, never before printed in any Edition of his Works. To which is prefixed,.
a New Life of the Author. By Mr. Mallet. In three vols. The 3d Edition.

The Additional Pieces and Life may be had alone, to complete the firfI Edition of the
4 vols. in 1730.

16. The Oceana, and other Works of James Harrington, Efq; The 3d Edition. To
which is now added, an Index.

The Appendix may be had alone, to complete those Gentlemen's Books, who have
bought Mr. Toland's Edition.

17. An Hi forical and Political Difrotfe of the Laws and Government of England.

By Nathaniel Bacon of Grays-Inn, Efq; 1 he 4th Edition. Correaed and improved by
a Gentleman of the Middle-Temple.

18. The Wiorks of Edmund Ludlow. Containing his Memoirs and other Tralts, now
colleded into one vol. To which is prefixed, the Life of the Author, by the Editor.

19. Difroufes concerning Government. By Algernto Sidney. To which is added, some

Letters of Mr. Sidney's never before publified, and a Life of the Author, by Thomas
Birch, D. D. and S. R. S, With a copious Index.

There are a few of the above Seven Books printed on a superfine Writing-Paper.
o2. All the loriks of John Locke, Efq; with Alhabetical Tables. The 5th Edition. In
3 vols.

21. The Ruins of Palmyra, otherwise Tedmor in the Defart. This Work contains

59 Plates of the Ruins, and 3 of Inzfriptions, chiefly in the Greek and Pa/lmyrian Lan-
guages, with large Explications. To which are prefixed, the Publisher's Account of the
Undertaking. An Inquiry into the ancient State of Palmyra, and a Journal of the Pas-
sage through the Defart.

The above Work is elegantly printed in French.
22. The Ruins of Balbec, anciently Heliopolis. in Caslo/fyia, near the Source of the Orontes,

and within 5 Leagues of Damascus. This Work contains Views of the Ruins as they are at
present, with Plans and Elevations of the Buildings, from Drawings and Measures taken
on the Spot, by the Gentlemen who made the Tour of the Mediterranean in 1750 and
1751. And who have given the Publick the Ruins of Palmyra, as a Specimen of their
Labours. To which is prefixed, an Account of the ancient and present State of the
Place, such as the Materials colleded by thole Gentlemen aflord. The Plates are
equal to those of Palmyra in Number, and are engraved by the fame maflerly Hands, and
printed on the fame Size Paper.

The above Work is also elegantly printed in French.
23. Andeifoni rThefJaurus Diplomatum & Nuifitiatum Scotia, auixit & loripletavit Ru-
dirnmamntr.

24 A Ditionary of the Engli/h Language, in which the Words are deduced from their

Originals, and illuflrated in their different Significations, by Examples fiom the belt Wri-
ters. To which are prefixed, a Hilory of the Language, and an Engli/i Grammar. In
2 vols. By Samuel Johnson, A. M.

25. A General Dictionary, Hijlorical and Critical. By the Reverend Mr. John Peter

Bernard, the Rev. Dr. Thomas Birch, S. R. S. Mr. John Lockman, and other IandRs. In
10 vols, The Oriental Lives, by the late George Sale, Efq;
