THE

HIS TOR r

S CO T LA NDO
SCOTLAND.

Born s!' Dec! l542 JhFbacd
at IYotheringy b8LsR.

s~~~l '*
I-S~I

R'N' tQt' 8 C 'W ,I
E~~~~~A~~~~~ ~~1 d

(ror TIlr .'s or sci 00OL'.)

. N
AB R I n DGcE M E N T

OF THE
HIS TO R

OF
S C O T L A N D,

FROM
ROBERTSON, STUAR T, Lc.

IN THE MANNER OR
GOLDSMITH's ABRIDGEMENT

OF THE
hI7STORIES OF SANGLAND, PSOME, AND GREECE.

F.DINBJURGH:

l'RIN1TF I-oR ''. BROWN,
NOR'L 11 BHHR (;I' 3 1 REE I

Y,,io i 1793.
l',-.e T, ,. ' S ii/.'/,: , l,./,"'.v ,',., :.i.S.'x'.

# Chapter the First. ORIGIN of the Scots. - Sketch of the History from the death of Alexander the third to that of James the Fifth. - Invasion of Scotland by Edward the First. - Causes of the power of t ...

THE HISTORY

OF
SCO TLAND.

Chapter the Firfl.

ORIGIN of the Scots.-Sketch of the Hiflory from the death

of Alexander the third to that of James the Fifth.-Invafion
of Scotland by Edward the Firft.--Caufes of the power of the
nobility.-Reign of David the Second.-Os Robert the
Third.-Of James the Firfl.-Of James the Second.-Os
James the Third.-Of Janies the Fonrth.--Of J.mes the
Fifth.-Aggrandizes the Clergy, and difgults the nobles.-
They refuse to second his designs against England.-Thcir
difaffeAion.-Difappoiitment and death of James.-Account
of the Scortiflf parliament.-Conpofed of barons, ecelefiaf-
tics, and representatives of borough3.-Lords of articles.-
The political state of Europe.-Of Italy -Of France.-Ofl
Spain and Germany.--Of England.-Confcquence of Scot-
land to the contendirg partie.

T - IE first ages of the Scottifil history are hid in
the fame obscurity which!. involves the other na-
tions of Europe. Though, relying on the tradi-
tion; oftheir bards, the Scots reckon up a long
furies of kings'before the birth ofChrilt, yet the ear-

A lieft

lieft accounts on which we can depend, are not fiom
their own, but from the Roman iiuthors. The
A. D. 8r. Romarns, under Agricola, firit carried

their arms into the northern parts of

Britain: they found it pofcffed by the Caledoni-
ans, a fierce and warlike people ; and having re-
oulfed, rather than conquered them, they erected
a firong wall between the firths of Forth and
Clyde, and there they fixed the boundaries of their
empire. About the beginning of the fifth centu-
ry, the inroads of the Goths and other barbarians
obliged the Romans to quit their conquests in Bri-
tain, and to recall their forces to the defence of
the centre of their empire.

Their retreat left North Britain under the do-

minion of the Scots and PiEts; the former, who
were probably a colony of the Cclte, or Gauls,
are first mentioned about the end of the fourth
century. Their first fettltmenits are Lsid to have
been in Ireland, whcre, after gradually extendiii,
themfcivcs, they landed on the coast opposite to

that ifiand. Their conflicts with the
Pits were long, frLjuerit ,Ind bloody.

At length Kenneth the Second, tle lixty-ininth
king of the Scots ;iccordiiig to tl.;ir own fa.iu-
lus autlors) obtinicd a comptlce victory over the
Pi.( , and united ;idlc r o:ie inon)i;rcliy, all the
ccu;,.: v fro:i Nc-vc.![l: ;d:it C.iriiilz to the Nor-
thera Occair.

l rin tlli. p, i .I, tl.: lii. .ry of Scot.land, would
m'rit tolbe ait:':'.i m, 'Acrc it accop:mil.id xi th

any

any certainty ; but it ifill rcmained overwhelmct
Mwith imnpenetra.bi: darkness. The firfl. ara, which
niy be conlidered as defecnl.ing; from the origin
of the monoarLhy to the re;gi of Kennech the Se-
cond, is the rgioni of f.:b!e and conjecture, and
ought to be totally n'egleced ; the second from
Kenneth's conqucft of the Picts, to the death of
Alexandcr the '1 lird, is enligltened with a ray
of truth; in the third, whicli extends to the
leath of Jimes the Fifth, the li:ftory of Scotland,
hlicfly by mea;ns of rccords preserved in England,
becomes more authentic; and the fourth, which
comprises the interval from the fall of that mo-
narch, to the acceJlion of James tile-Sixth to the
throne of England, is peculiarly the object of this
iftorv.

Yet to introduce the reader properly to this

latter part, a flight sketch of the third sera may
not be deemed superfluous; it contains a period
of upwards of two cenluries and an half, and opens
with the famous controversy concerning the inde-
pendence of Scotla nd. The homnage mwhich had
been p:aid by the cot;iill kings for the pcflflions
wvliclh tley held in En l.a;rd, was infcifily at-
ten pted to be converted by the Enlifh momlrclls
into ilomage for tlie l:ingdom of t;otliand. Wil-
liim, furnained the Liion, being taken prifuner at
Alnwick, IlLnry the Second, then feated on the
thiont of Enl.and, refused to rcliafe him, but oni
the coiidition of his doing homon.ige for his whole
kingdom. Richard the Firit, a 'generous prince,

A z folclm:il

solemnly renounced this claim of homage, and ali-
solved Wii!iam from the hard conditions which
Henry had inipofed. But on the death of Alex-
ander the 'Ilrd, near a century afterwards, Ed-
ward the First vailed himself of the Situation of
afiairs in Scotland, and revived the claim of fove-
leignty to which Henry had made pretensions.
Maigaret, grand-daughter of Alexander, and heir
to his crown, did not long survive him. The right
of fucceflion belonged to the descendants of Da-
vid Earl of Huntington, third son of David First:
among these, Robert Bruce and John Baliol ap-
peared competitors for the crown; Bruce was
the son of Isabel, Earl David's second daughter;
Baliol the grand-son of Margaret the eldest daugh-
ter.

Their rival pretensions to the vacant throne

were favourable to the designs of Edward. The
competitors were prevailed upon to avert the mi-
series of civil war, and to submit their hopes to
the decision of the king of England. Under pre-
tence of examining the qutftion with the utmost
Iolemnity, Edward fummnoned the Scottish barons
to Norham.; and, by gaining some, and intimidat-
ing others, prevailed on all that were present to
acknowledge Scotland to be a fief of the Englifli
crown, and to fwtar fealty to him as their fove-
reign or liege lord. As it was in vain to prc-
nounce a fentencce which he had not the power
to execute, Edward dcm!ndidl poflieflon of the
kingdom, that he might dcliv'r it to him whose

right

right fihould be found preferable. Such was the
pusillanimity of the nobles, that Gilbert de Um-
fravile, earl of Angus, was the only man lwho re-
futed to surrender the castles in his cufiody to tile
enemy of his country, and the king of England
conferred the crown on B1liol, iwhom he judged
to be the moPi obsequious of the rival claimants.

But even tle paflive spirit of Baliol could not

longer 1p.tient!y bro',k the haughty language and
encroaching te nper of Edward ; anld the Englith
monarch, difiltisifcd with the idol that Ite had
r.iifcd, heilt.ated not to thrufl him from the throne,
and openl'y attemptcd to occupy it hinifelf. But
at that period arose Sir William Wallace, a hero,
to whom the tond admirition of his countrymen
lhas afkri;;d ;aits of fabulous prowA'fs, but xvhofe
real va:iour ;!-d vi-fd!ln revived the drooping fpi-
rits of his coul;trymcn, and checked the progress
of l'dw.ard. A t lt Robert Bruce, the grandson
of him who touod in competition with Baliol, ap-
peared to afel-t his own rights, and to vindicate
the honour cf his country. The nobles, enraged
at the indigiities oir-d to the nation, crowded
to -.is itandard. To crufi refiltance, the Englill
nionarch entered 'cotl nd at the head of a migh-
ty army. Many battles were fought, and the
Scots, though often v.inquiflied, were not fubdu-
ed. I'he prudent valour of Bruce batfled the re-
peated etibrts of Edward; and though the war
continued with little intkrmiflion upwards of fe-
*enty years, Bruce and his poflcri), kept ;poleffion

A 3 as

of the throne of Scotland, and reigned with 1I
authority not inferior to that of its former mo-

Durg te fuccefive liie, te

EgliS.liie, te Egli

During these fuccesnive hoflilities, the Eniglifl

confidered the Scots as vailhls who had presumed
to rebel; and the Scots, in their turn, regarded the
English as ufuipers who aimed at enfla-
ving their country. *When Robert
Bruce began his rcign,'the f.ime form of govern-
mtnt was efiblifecd in all the kingdoms of Eu-
rope. The feudal f)yt-r univtrfally prevailed;
the kings who had formerly been. eletive, were
indeed become hereditary ; but their revtiiues
were narrow, and the armies they lead into the field
were compof:.d of their fuljeEs, who held their
lands by the simple telure of arming in defence
of the public c-ufe. As they servcd without pay,
their obedience was precarious; and far from bc-
ing an engine at.the king's diflofa;l, they wereoften
no less fonnidable to him than to his enemies.

In the fame proportion that the king funk in

power, the nobles rose towardn indcpendennce:
-lot satisfied with obtaiining an hereditary right to
tbeirfiefs or landed poffeflrs, their ambition in-
tro.luced entails, which, as far as human ingenuity
could levife, rcndcred their eflates unalienable, as
they had full power to add to the inheritance
tranfinitted to them by their ancestors, but none
to diminish it; marriages, legacies, and other ac-
cidents; brought continual accessions of wealth and
dignity; a great famiPn like a river, became con-

fiderable

riderable from the length of its course ; and, as it
rolled on, new honours and new property fuccef-
fielve flowed into it.

Whatever influence isderived from titles of ho-

nour, the feudal barons pofleffcd likewise, in an
ample manner; the appellation by which the vir-
tues of the father had been distinguished, defeen-
ded to the son, however unworthy; and the pre-
fumption of the nobles soon aspired to annex to
their polterity the chief offices of the fiate. In
Scotland the important trust of lord justice gene-
ral, great chamberlain, high steward, high confta-
ble, earl marthal, and high admiral, were all here-
ditary ; and in many counties, the office of theriff
was held in the fame manner.

Nobles, whose power was so great, and whose

property was so extensive, could not fail of being
turbulent and formidable ; nor did they want in-
itruments for executing their boldest designs. 'I hat
portion of their lands which they parcelled out
among their followers, supplied them with a nu-
merous band of faithful and determined v.dflls,
while that which they retained in their own hands,
enabled them to live with a princely splendour.
The great hall of an ambitious baron was often
more crowded than the court of his sovereign;
the flrong castles in which they resided, afforded a
fecureretreat to the discontented and fcditious;
and a great part of their revenue was spent upon
multitudes of indigent, but bold retainers. Even
in times of peace, they were accompanied by a.

wa

vast train of armed followers; and tie usual re-
tirue of William the sixth earl of Douglas, coi-
1iked of tr.-o theufand lorfe.

1The nature of the country was one caufet of tie

power and independence of the Scottiflh nobiiity:
mountains, and fens, mand rivers, ft:tbounds to de-
fpoticpower; and in such places did the barons
of Scotland usually fix their rcfidulnce. The so-
vereign found it alinoft impracticable to lead an
army thrcugh a barren country, to places dilicuit
of access to a tingle man. 1 he fame eaufei ulich
had checked the progress of the RIoman arms, and
rendered all the efforts of I'du ard the ITirft abor-
tive, protcated the Scottifll nobles from the ven.
geance of tliir fovcreign, and foitified their perfo.
nal independence.

'The want of great cities in Scotland, contri-

luttd not a little to increase the power of the
nobility, a2d to wtaktn that of the priuce. I.aws
and subordinations take rife in cities; and where
there are few cities, there are few or no traces of
a well arranged police. The nobles, under a feu-
dal government, fcldom appeared at court where
they found a superior, or dwtlt in ititie whltre
they met with equals. The vaflals of every baron
occupied a diPtinlt portion of the kingdom, antl
formed a fcparatc and almost independent society.
lislead of joining to reduce the seditious chieftain,
they were all in arms for his defence; and the
prince was obliged to connive at criminals, who,

.oafcicul

conscious of their advantages, multiplied their of-
fences in assured impunity.

The division of the country into cl:ms, had no

small eflftc in rendering the nobles considerable.
The nations which over-ran Europe were origi-
nally divided into many finall tribes; and when
they came to parcel out the lands that they had
conquered, it was natural for every chieftain to
bestew a portion, in the first place, upon those of
his own tribe or family. These all held their
lands of him, were closely united together. and
were distinguished by some general appellation:
when that became common, the descendants and
relations of every chieftain assumed the fame name
and arms with him; other vassals were proud to
imitate their example; and by degrees they were
communicated to all those who held of the fame
superior. Thus clanfhips were formed; and in a
generation or two, that consanguinity which was
at first, in a great measure imaginary, was believed
to be real. An artificial union was converted in-
to a natural one. Men willingly followed a lead-
er whom they regarded both as the superior of their
lands, and the chief of their blood; and served.
him not only with the fidelity of vassals, but with
the affection of friends.

The smallness of their number may be men-

tioned among the causes of the grandeur of the
Scottish nobles. Scotland, a kingdom neither
cxtenfive nor rich, could not contain many over-
grown proprietors; but the power of an aristocracy

alwavs

always diminified in proportion to the increafr of
its numbers. \Whn nobles are numerous, their
operations nearly rcfcmble thofr of the people;
they are roused only by whit they feel, not by
what they apprehend ; and fiibnit to mani arbi-
trary and oppreflinv adts before they take arms a-
gainift their forereign. A fniall body, on the con-
trary, is more sensible and more impatient, quick
in discerning, and prompt in repelling danger.
tlince proceeded the extreme jealousy of the Scot-
tifh nobles, and the fierceness with which they op-
posed the incroachments of the crown ; besides
this, the near alliance of the great families by fre-
quent intermarriages, was the natural consequence
of their small number; and as confa.inuinity
was, in those ages, a powerful bond of union,
all the kindred of noblemen intertfted tlhem-
selves in his quarrel, as a common cause; and
every conteit the king had, though with a single
baron, drew upon him the arms of a whole confe-
deracy.

These natural connexions the Scottish nobles

firengthened by numerous alfci itions, x thich,
when formed with their equals, were call d l/eyrts
of mutuil defence ; and whln with their inferior,
londr of tinrart;. By the former, the contratt-
ing parties bound themselves mutually to alfil
each other in all causes, and againill' all perflins;
by the latter, protettion wais itipulated on the one
hand, and fidelity and perfuna;l fcrvic prormicd o0l
the other. By degrees these afbociations bec:ame

so

so ma;ny alliances, offensive and defenfiie, against
the throne; and as their obligation was held more
sacred than any tie whatever, they contributed not
a little to the power and independence of the no-
bility.

'hat power was also augmented by the fre-

quent wars between England and Scotland. Na-
ture has placed no barrier between the two king-
doms; a river almnoft every where fordable, di-
vides them towards the east; on the weft they are
separated by an imaginary line. The flendtr re-
venues of our kings prev nted them from fortify-
ing, or placing garrisons in the towns on the fron-
tiers ; nor would the jcaloufy of their lulbjcts
have permitted fuah a mode of defence. The
birons, whole eftites lay on the borders, were ge-
ncirally entruited with the warde nfTips of the dif-
f. rent nmarches. This g.iined them the leading of
the warlike counties in the Southj and as their
vall'is were inured to a state of perpetual hbftility,
the Scottilih mon,.rchs always found it iirpradii
c.,ble to fubiue the mutinous and ungovernable
sp;rit of the borlerers.

'I'The calanities which befcl the kings of Scot-

1,nd, contributed more than ;ny other cause to di-
minifli the royal authority; never was any race of
monarchs so unf,,rlun;te as the Scottilh. Of fix
fucccifive princcs, from Robert tl e 'Third, to James
the Sixth, not one died a ntur.l death; and the
rr inoriu s, during that time, were longer and more
frequent than c ver happened in any other king-

dc m

dom. From Robert Bruce to James the Sixth we
reckon ten princes, and seven of these were call-
ed to the throne while they were minors, and al-
mot infants. The most regular governments must
feel the bad efreas of a minority; but to the im-
perfet, and ill adjusted fyltem of government in
Scotland, those effects were still more fatal. The
fierce and mutinous spirit of the nobles, unreftrain-
ed by the authority of a king, scorned all subjec-
tion to the delegatedjurifdiction of a regent, or
to the feeble commands of a minor. The a-
riflocrical power, during these periods, rose upon
the ruins of the monarchial; and when the king
himself came to assume the reins of government,
he found his revenues wafted or alienated, the
crown lands seized or given away, and the nobles
so accustomed to independence, that, after the
struggles of a whole reign, he was seldom able to
reduce them to the fame Rtate in which they had
been at the beginning of his' minority, or to
wrest from them what they had usurped during
that time.

Thle minority of David the Se-
cond, the son of Robert Bruce, was

disturbed by the pretensions of Edward Baliol, who
obliged the young king to retire to France, and
took poffiffion himself of the throne. A small
body of nobles, faithful to thtir exiled prince,
drove Baliol out of Scotland, and, after nine years
absence, refcorcd the crown to David. The grati-
tude of David diltributed among such as had ad-

2 hcrcrd

hered to him, the befl pofleflrons which fell to the
crown by the forfeiture of his enemics. The fa-
iniiv of D)ouglas, which began to rife above the o-
ther nobles, in thle reign of his father, augment-
cd both i:s power and property during his mino-
rity.

James the First was seized by the

A. D. l4CS.

Eiglilh, i, violbtion of a truce, and
detained a prisoner near nineteen years. During
,hat pericd the kingdom was governed, first by
his uncle Robert, duke of Albany, and then by
Murdo, his son. Both these noblemen aspired to
ihe throne ; and their ambition was supposed to
have extiinuifhed the life of David, the king's
next brother, and to have prolonged the captivity
of James To soothe or bribe the nobles, they
Ilackened the reins of government; they allowed
,he prerogative to be encroached upon, and reduc-
e i the royal authority to a Itate of imbecility, from
which f'cceedingl monarchs laboured in vain to
raift it.

luring the minority of James the

SccoTnl, the adminitiration of affairs,
as well as the custody of the king's person, was
committed to Sir William Crichton, and Sir A-
l':xander Livingifon. Encouraged by their mu-
tual jealousy and enmity, the young earl of Dou-
glas ereacd a fort of independent principality with.
in the kingdom, and forbidding his valials to ac-
knowledge any authority but his own, afliumed eve-
ry e:ifign of royalty but the title of king.

b1;~~ ~ Eight

Eight persons wecre clioftn to govcrn

A.D I45».

the kiingdom, during the minority of
lames the Third. Lord Boyd, however, by feiz-
in.r the king's person, engro(fed the vwhole autho-
rity. To raise his own family to the fame gran-
deur with that of thc prime nobility, he relaxed
the rigour of government, and the barons once
more became accuatomed to anarchy and indepen-
dence. According to the fate of favourites, his
fall was sudden al ' deftruative; but upon his
ruins the family of Hianl-liion rose, which soon
at:; incd the }igl:cfl r;ink in the kingdom.

As the minority of James the Fifth was longer,

it wais likewise more turbul;nt tha ttli ofe o tle
picceding kings. Regul ir f.oa iont oflhe conten.i-
ing ncl.ls were encouraged !by the kings of France
and England ; and by tie infiutnce of the former,
the duke of Albanv, a native of France, and a
grandso,n of James the Second, w.is raised to be
regent. The first years of his adminifitration was
thwarted by Alexander lord Home, and tlhe latter
part was enbaranftd by the intrigucs of the queen
lowvagr, fiftcr' to Henry the Eighth. The con-
tempt of the nobles at length inducoCl him to aban-
don his troublesome rlition, and to r tire ro France.
On his rctreat, Douglas, earl of Aingus, became
master of the king's person, and governed the king-
dom in his name. NM n7y efirts weie made to de-
prive him of his iufrrp, d authority ; Iut !is vafl.ls
adhered to him; tliz p'ople reverenced .rnd loved
the name of Douglas i an:! without tilt title of re-

gent,

g.?.r! , he r:xcrci .d a fuller and more absolute autho-
riUr th:ll alv v.'i, had enjoyved that dignity.

Such we-r:. rtc linci:ipal causes to which the

'-ottith nobility owed the exorbitant, and uncom-
mI'M power .vhich tley enjoyed ; and many years
;afcr tle dtc!en!ion of the icudal fyftlm in the o-
tlher kingdomnes of Europe, that ancient fabric, re-
mained, in a great measure, firm and untouched in
Scotland. The nobles continued still to extend
their influence by new acquisitions; and, however
felicitous to humble them, the resources of our
monarchs were few,-and the progrtfs which they
made was of course incor.fiderable. But as the
number of their followers, and the extent oftheir
jurifdicTHonq, were the two chief circumstances
which rend-red the nobles formidable; in order
to counterbalance the one, and reitrain the other,
all our kings had rccouric to nearly the fame expe-
dients.

Among nobles of a fierce courage,, and of un-

polilhed manners,'the causes of discord were many
and unavoidable. To fo;give an injury was mean;
to forbear revenge, infamousi and cowardly. Hence
quarrcls were tr.atfmitted from father to son, and,
under the nnme of l:'! y/ j'elds, fubfiited for many
generatioels with unnitigatcd rancour. It was the
i.tereft of ilit crown to foment rather than extin-
guilh thcle quarrels. Private revenge often con-
tribiutRd to ftrcingthet. the feeble laws.; and to their
oncill ic enmity ,iur kings were indebted for tile
fitcc:f, w;tii w!hich theiy fometimcs attackel the

13 mos

most powerful chieftains. But this cxpcdiLit',
though it feemeed to humble individuals, did not
weaken the body of the nobility; and thole who
were the inlfruments of the prince's vengeance,
became in a ihort time the objects of his fear.

As the administration of justice is one of the

noft powerful ties between a king and his subje&s,
all our monarchs were at pains to circumscribe the
jurifdidtion of the barons, and to extend that of the
Crown. By the external forms of the feudal sys-
tem, an appeal lay from the courts of the barons
to the king; the nobles, however, easily found
means to defeat the effe&s of these appeals. To
strip the nobles of the judicial rights they had u-
furped, was an objedc of uniform and anxious at-
tention to all our princes. James the first led the
way towards a more regular and perfect police.
He made choice, among the estates of parliament,
of a certain number of ptrfons, whom he diflin-
guifhed by the name of lords of Jeffon, and ap-
pointed them to hold courts for determining civil
causes, three times in the year, and forty days at a
time, in whatever place he ple.fed to name. James
the Fourth, on pretence of remedying the incon-
veniencies arising from the short terms of the court
of session, appointed other judges, called lords of
daily council. The fellion was an ambulatory court,
and met seldom ; the daily council w.as fixed,
and fat contfantly at Edinburgh. At lalt James
the Fifth cretled a new court, that tliil fubfills,

S lhicl:

which lie n-imed the crs'llge of jtfi,'e: the judges,
orfialt-ry of which were called lords of council
znd farlToni. 'This court not only cxercifed the
fime jurifliction which formerly belonged to the
fil:fion and daily council, but new rights were ad-
ded; men willingly submitted their property to
its dcterminaition, and its encroachments on the
iuricfliion of the nobles were popular, and, for
thlt reaflon, successful.

But bcfi.les theife methodls of defending the roy-

al prerogative, and hlumbling the Aristocracy,
which may be coniidercl as common to all our
princes, we flall find, on a review of their reigns,
that almost everv one of our kings, from Robert
Bruce to James tile Fifth, had formed Come parti-
cular fyllem for depreitirg the authority of the
nobles. No prince was ever more indebted to his
nobles than Robert Bruce. '[Their valour conquer-
ed the kitngdom, and placed him on the throne;
his gratitude and generosity beltowed on them the
lands of the vanuqfilhed. But ami.if: the rapid
ldihanes whiLli property had undtl rgcne, nany po'-
lctl;:dltl-ir lands by titles e;rt;cnimly defective.
During, h llort truce with England, sRoiirt sorn-
ed a fclicn'e for clhcking tlhe power and wealth
of tile nobles. lie fu:nimoned thenm to appear,
andl to lhcw by what rig!it thcy held tiheir lands.
'Illey alltinblid accoinliigly;* and the qucflion be-
hig put, they titteld up at once, and drew their
word-s; " Iy these," falid they, " we acquired our
andls ; witli thef' will we di lc.i them ' and the

B 3 king,

king, intimidated by their boldness, prudently drop.
ped the projed. But so deeply did they resent
this attack upon their order, that, notwithstanding
Robert's splendid virtues, it occasioncd a danger-
ous conspiracy against his life.

David, his son, at firfi an exile in France, afrer-
vwards a prisoner in England, and involved in con-
tinual wars with Edward the Third, had not lcifure
to attend to the internal police of his kingdom;
and though our hiltorians have minutely defciibed
the inroads and fkirmiflles during the reign of Ro-
bert the Second, yet they arc altogether silent on
the events of those years which are not marked by
foreign wars.

Robert the Third, a prince of mean genius, and

feeble constitution, was incapable of contending
with his martial nobles; but the reign of James
the First opens to our view the civil tranfadions
of Scotland; and a complete ferics of laws supplics
the defects of our historians. During the many
years he was detained in England, he had an op-
portunity of obfcrving the feudal system in a more
advanced state, and refined from many imperftc-
tions. He saw their nobles great, but not inde-
pendent; a king powerful, though far from :.bfo-
lute; a regular administration, wife laws, and a
nation flourishing and happy, because all ranks of
men were accufltomed to obey them. On his re-
turn to his native country, he found the regal au-
thority contemptible, the ancient patrimony and
revenues 4f the crown almost annihilated, and the

nobles

nobles rendered independent by the licence of ma-
ny years; in every corner some barbarous chieftain
ruledl at pleasure, and neither feared the king, nor
pitied the peoolr.

To correet these inveterate evils, James, inilead

of force, eriployed the gentler and less ostensive
remedy of laws and statutes. In a parliament held
immediately after his return, he gained the confi-
dence of tile people by many wite laws, tending to
re-eltablilli order, tranquility, and juflice. Ac
the fame time he obtained an a&t, by which he
was empowered to summon fiich .:s had aflumed
crown lands during the last reigns, to produce the
rights by which they held them. In a fubfcquent
parliament, another tlatute was pafled, that declar-
ed all leagues and combinations unlawful. En-
couraged by there laws, James seized, during the
fitting of parliament, his cousin Murdo, duke of
Albany, and his sons; the earls of Douglas, Len-
nox, Angus, March, and above twenty other peers
and barons of prime rank. To all of them, how-
ever, he was immediatcly reconciled, except to Al-
bany and his sons, and Lennox. These wcre tri-
ed by their peers, and condemned ; and while
their execution flruck the whole order with,ter-
ror, their forfeiture added vait pofeillions to the
crown.

Encouraged by the facility with which he had

hitherto adlvanced, the king next ventured upon a
measure that irritated the iwhole body of the no-
bility.. The father of George Dunbar, earl of

Marc!h,

r.,rlh), h-I!' tall':el arms ne:dinlt Robert the Third,
the king's fat;ler ; Iut th:it crimne h:d becn par-
don!ld, anil his lands ruilct red by Robert duke tf
Alliny Jamiics, on prletext tlint the regent hadl
exceeded his power, o;.t:;'ii c fd icntct ce, declaring
the pard;n to be \oi d, and deprived Dunbar of the
carldomn. Sucli ;a d! ifon occ:ifioned a general
:; arm; ia.d tli nobles drea'td le ! thleir titles to
!thiir pof!'.liolns nijl:r't be fubjt;ccld to the review
f courts o; law, v. hist forms, of proc.ctdilg, iand
ii:f,'iiciion, in a n ;:r!i.ld age, were little known
:anid cx:-t.l

r y'.l!hus. 'I'lici comn:ioi drxje-r call-

ed on thl, whvlc order to unite; aiidt the fenli-

2:tT1s ,of thle no., bl1 i oui;irg,d a( f ew dcfpcrat
nen to isr n

: a confpri'cv a:;.:infl the life cf the

ki::^. 'l'he i ,:i :it'ige ncc wa; brotnilit ]inm
w}hil; e lc ;y in 't.is can,) bcfiire lRo.xlur,il call!c.
Ile dnl i:l not caLn. '.c il! nbl(;:s to l;.o}ni be lhad giv-
en so manv c,,utl i-Cf du, bu) t iibiantly (dilni-
ftd them and their valE, ', ;m:d retiring to a rrmn;a-
ftcrv near Perth, was soon after m;urdered there in
the mclei crLul mlln:inr.

Cric!':c:, wvho .had ie.en tl;e initiiilr (;f J ines

thec Tii-l, afin ned t!he dirtc:ioni of afEfirs durinmr
the minority of James the Second, and prompted
that monarch to purfuc the design of humbling
the nobility. W.illiani ti.e iixth earl of )ouuglas,
wvas the fit Il viciim of this bllrla rous policy; lie
wns decovcd by many promifcE to an interview in
the cattle of lEdinbur^h, and was murdered, with
hii brotlir. 'I'th credulity of Williun the eighth

(e21

earl of I)ouglas, led him into the fame fiare as
had proved fatal to his brother; after forming ;
powerful a;'Ociatiorn againit the crown, le ventur-
cl to meet the kinig, on the faith of a ifae conduEt
unit r the gre.it ftal, at Stirling c: i!e. James urg-
ed hi;n to dliTolve the dangerous confeleracy he
h;ad entered into; the earl obflinately refused:
' If you will not," said the enraged monarch, draw-
ing his dagger, '; this f{all ;"-and fibbbed Iim to
the heart: An atfion so unworthy of a king, fil-
led the nation with astonishment and horror: The
earl's vaffls ran to arms with the utmost fury ; a
tranifeni accommodation between James and the
new earl was soon succeeded by open hostilities
both armies met near Abercorn ; and a single bat-
tle muff have decided wl-ether the house of Stu-
art, or of Donglas, was henceforth to poffcfs the
throne of Scotland. But while the troops of the
latter impatiently waited the (ignal to engage, the
earl ordered them to retire to the camp. The ir.
resolution of the commander was attended by the
deftrtion of his followers; and the earl, defpifedl
or forsaken by all, was soon driven out of the king-
dom, and obliged to depend for his fubfitfencc on
the friendihip of tlh king of Enliii.d. The ruin
of this great family secured the king for some time
from opposition ; he procured the contfent of par-
li.mlent to several l.ws more advantageous to the
prerogative and as he wanitd ncither courage
nor genius, lhe might probabl! have ftbvcrtcd the

feudal

firtddl f'. Rtl, i Sco.t!;nd, had ]:h not prc'matur-
ly faihnu hy tihe fl!inter of a c:;ninon, which buri:
nt;lir hiin t the
, ' ate of Rox.nt^,i.

Jamelt s the I 'il'!,, t:lecni;T far i.fi:rior to his f..-

ther and .'t::,l'.ii!icr illn 'L,!;-, w s no lecs dtl.ious
cr ! illl-i iltlg nti '. ,si: . \ Vllii hc kcpt them nt
alln luuiuil! (ul cl, l:cb.cilocdCl every ir-lrk of con-
fidence and as lCtion upen a few mean persons:
fliut up in tlic c.tie of Stiillilg, he fcl(iom appear-
ed in public, and amused himfelfwith architec'ture,
muric, a ::l other arts, swhich were then but little
etR.eilr.cd. Alexalnder, duke of Albany, and John,
earl of M r. his brothers, entered deepl'y into the
cib.;ils of tile nobility. But the king, detecting
their designs, fcized them both: the earl of Mar
was murdered, annd if we may believe our hiflori-
ans, by tic king's conmandl: Albany, apprehen-
livc of the fame fate, mad lIis cfcape out of tie
kingdom, and fled into France ; thence he pifled
over to E!,gl:nd, iand concluded a treaty with rld-
ward tie I'ourth, in which he alfiimed the name
of AltX.indcr, king of Scots. Ic bound Iimrfelffo
Ibon! as he was -.Ut in p ,lfll' oui of tili: k:i!'dtOm,
to fwcar s.alty aind do hic.m.ge to the I nrli!hl nio-
n.rcli, and to illircentidr ioin' of tihe nroit valuable
counties iln Stiotind ; anll lie Wv'.s conldunted,( ii
rcturn for thr,' Ilipui.ltiol', I-v the Duke of (;lou-
ccitlr, w\\ili a pow\v,:r;til :tirny towards Scotland.
The d(I.anger of foreigia iov:a:iOio obliged James to
inllore the :Iaiilt.mlc of tho, i noblea, hIoU11 Ih e hlad
so Io;'l: t:'c.Ltd with cji:itclinpt. 'Thliuo tlhey

se1i 'l ..i

therir sovecreign:1, the.; toch the ft!C \~ta a niron:g]Cr
diipoP tion to pun ifl hiSur
ti annov toe e!iney. ' n ie ct . near Liuder,
thec carls of Anmi, ilunitle, and Leitcx. fullow-
cd [,v aln;los a t . biroiis of note in the army,
entlered te aparument of Jime- , seized tll his, fa-
s',,tritCS, except one Rambtv, whir they c.anhil
noat teLr srol th armi; of the king, and
acxcl ennie dli.

J.,ai mies had on ic-eont to con (ide iil in arnv so

li~tis under 108 eoriintanil, and
! : g a, ior

u, ill cii t i of L r r
1 I Icit ot anll Ills lr r ; 1,0 ' Iner,

' p

t :tj)tint Atm] m

tlr]K i,'i

bay poi'i-,:, liedA I o;sl C AW:t L 1 to miIS
i0eof I bi.I. ~ahof m 2 te

cxpe~.~e.I(room ,. s .me croi O''- a'' "I

h en frora ht1 ansl tIr,.tke no',, i
t:moil, rt s of jis ii:i.ve cou nt ry.

Lmmio~dei~ed b Ill, retci, te :1inm .'n.lai;,

iBimli t-rS ni~pi: i l1i. 'e~ ll y haoi( s--
--red, to time itbi ' ~~n~ mmda

o~konundler thec f it 'v .

mcyt! -Vo i

cd for [lie defenlce cf tilmvlpvmmn.te c,-, n-
niand oif it was,, givenl ta Riom it' ii -v eci.m.~,d
earl. of L'otliwl-,L: ; whille Jnte, ilon inl indolencIe
or lnpc- Itomdvolve'-, hi s ; oea~oiy

ed

ed injuries, flew to armns; they persuaded or oblig-
ed the ldule of Rothesay, the king's eldest son, i
youth of fifteen, to set himself at their head ; near
Bannockburn they defeated the royal army, andt
James Iiminlf was (lain in tile pursuit.

The indignation which many of the nobles ex-

pressid againl, the conduct of the ccnfpirators,
and the fcntcnce of excommunication which thli
pope pronoanced ag'ai ' them, obliged the:n to
use their viacory V ith nmodcration. They endea-
voured to atone for their treatment of the father.
by their loyalty to the son ; and James the Fourth,
'rho wis naturally generous andt brave, prone to
magniiicence, and de(ig;lting in war, soon expe-
rilenced hov much a k:ingr beloved by ls noble,
is able to peff(rni. In the inv;fi;.n of

F.l lani,

lie was folibow'd by as ;illanit :;n ;iry as ever any
of his ;anc(tlors liIad led ,loni Eingiilhl gro' 1:.1 aid
in the unlfo-tun;nte bittlc of Flowlden, a brave n:i-
bility chose r.:tllr to die tlian to d (itll: their fovv-
rcign. With the King, thcre fell ;wcvec carls,
thirteen ,lrds, five c;dir foi.i of noblemen, and
nid incredible nuimbter of barons.

On the dc:;.th of liis s.i:er, Jnnms the Fifthi was

but an iif;it of a y.ar o(ld ; :nd the o flce of re-
gent was conferred on his ctulin the l)uk '

cf Al-

bany, a native of France, and accuntlcied to a go-
etrnmcnl, , whelc the powver of tihe kit g was very
great. ' hlough he mIade feverail boldt atten:pts to
cxtend tlie royal author it)y tlhe nolbles afl; r d their
privilcges with firnilcfs ; ;and a;fitr fcvrald unfuc-

3 cc£f;ful

cefsful struggles, the Duke of Albany o vountarily
retired to France. On his retreat it was deterin-
ed that the king, then in his thirteenth year, flould
af!ltle the government,andthat eightperfons should
be appointed to attend him by turns, and afTifi him
in the adminiitration es public affairs. The earl
of Angus, one of the number, soon gained the as-
cendincy over his colleagues, but unable to acquire
the affettions of the king, the influence was ihort
and in consequence of an attempt that he made
to fccure the royal person by force, he, and his ad-
herent; were attainted, and he was at length o-
bliged to fly into England for refuge.
James had now, not only the name, but, though
extremely young, the full authority of a king;
though inferior to no prince of that age in grace-
fulness of person, or in vigour of mind, his edu-
cation had becn extremely negl.tcted, and he dif-
covered all the features of a great but unculti ated
fpiri;. HIc felt that the authority of the crown
was not fuflicient to counterbalance the aritlocra-
cy; yet from the fate of former princes, lie felt,
th;it without some new acccflinl of ilrcngth, he
could expet no better fuiccfs in the flruggle
than his ancclers. In this extremity he applied
to the clergy ; ;nd as the Scottill monarchs had
the sole right of the no.niinlltion to vac.int billiop-
ricsand ababys, lie naturally concluded that men
who txpctlcdc prefermenl t from his favour, would
be willing to merit it by promoting his deligns;
the nobility had not yet recovered the blow whic

C ft l

fell on their order at Flowden; many ,f the clec-
gy, on the other hand, were diliiiguiihed by their
great abilities, and no lcs by their ambition; fe-
cure of their powerful concurrence, James ventur-
ed to proceed with greater boldness. He repaired
the fortifications of Edinburgh, Stirling, and other
castles; he replenified his magazines with arms
and ammunition ; and having taken these precau-
tions, Ihe began to treat the nobility with the ut-
i7noft coldness and reserve. Those offices lwhich
were long confidered as appropriated to their or-
der, were now,beftoxwced on ecclcfiaflics, among
whom cardinal Beatoun diftinguiflhed himfeif by
his fupcrior talents. Every accusation againfl per-
sons of rank was heard with pleasure, and tle pa-
tience with which they endured persecution, cn-
creafi-d the king's contempt for them ; meanwhile
the nobles observed the tendzncy of his fihenlcs
with concern and with resentment, and J imc;n and
his counsellors, by a f.:llfe i p w\lich they took,
presented to tlhem an advantage which tley ,, i: J.
fail to inprove.

Mlotives, which are well k'o,\v'I, :hadl rc.(n-pt..

Henry tie ighthlito d!i!; I ii:i t;i c p.pe'iC , utih, rT-,
and to fcize the revnues of tile regular cl:i.' V.
lie wM s desirous of ifi.;ip intin; the r, '; nt.-' t t'
lii, cnemlile, and of f,:;-il, 1 i n

lni,, ing' );

lr. I nt i;-

vafion by a cliil alii nc- with his n:l;'^; ,it'
Jame-, wli ..is ,.i.,tli:i thl.t a. w. ir with Liih l,:id
vould. lrt(dluc in Io dl.p,' l u|)o lIi: hlo lm lilt.-
'.-.; ~t f: .rfI tno Hlcir'., rc'. i'Al.-l, aud conitllt.ed to

'il t

:;, h;.trTvie-.v nt York. Bu.t the clergy dreaded left
l.ir.ics ighlit be per l'u dd by the arguments of
Ik liiy to follo.v his example, and to seize the re-
v.:l..hlls i f the cluichl ; t!:ey prevaiid upon him to
,re.1k his are;mnc:;m. v,'iil the king of England,
who, in cxpectaition of m"c:ing himn, had already
come to York; and that haughty monarch resent-
ed the affront by deilaring war against Scotland.
IIli armry vwas soon ready to invaie the kingdom;
and at tlc comrmandl of their fcl. rcign, the Scot-
ti' ! n'les fc.n aurembled their filowers but they
s.:ized the firfL opportunity to difcov:r to the king
their difm.ifiifacóionC witlh his government, and their
contcrrnt of authori:y. Scarcirty of provirions, and
tle r;rour of t!,e fiafon, had obliged the Englifi
arl-.y to retire ; and J.imes imagined he could at-
tack them with advantage in their retreat. But the
ntbles rtfufed to advance a ftep beyond the limits
cos tle'r own crountry ; and the king provoked by
this insult, diib.i(lt,:d an army which paid so little
reg. rd to Iis orders, and returned aLrupt'y into
tl.e lcart of tllt kingdorrm.

An! aimnbitious a;l high fijiiited prtin;.c could nc,
brook this mort;'ication , he felt hims. ls eng;aed
in ;n un nccci:iry war with Eingl.m. ; and beheld
llow v.,;in arlt inncitlcE.ual vwire the projects he
h.ld f,.rt.d to hiumble his nobles. 'L'he violence
of rhi. p.:lions ;:ltcretd his temper and perhaps im-
paiired l}ii r.:-ifon. lie b came;ic pensive, fullen, and
retired ; and in order to revive the king's spirits, an
inllorad on thei wl tern Iorders wau concerted by

C h
l

his minilfers. But James would not even entruit
his nobles with the comlllanl of the army that they
had aflcmlble(l; that was reservcd for Oliver Sin-
clair his favourite, who no fooiitr took polTdlion
of the dignity, than rage and indignation occasion-
cd an univerlal mutiny in the arlny. Iivc hun-
dred English whom happened to be in fight attacked
the Scots in this disorder ; hatred to their king,
and contempt of their gcneral, overcame the fear
of death, and the love of liberty; and ten thousand
men fled bhfore a number so far inferior without
firiking a blow. This event was a new proof to
the king of the general diflfiflecion of the nobles,
and of his own we.knefs. All the violent palions,
which are the enemies of life, preyed upon his
mind, and wafted and consumed a youthful and
vigorous constitution. Some authors of that age
impute his untimely death to poison ; but the
known effeats of diiappointment, anger, and re-
fentment upon a sanguine and impetuous tem-
per, sufficiently account for his unhappy fate.

Among the firuggles of our kings to reduce the

exorbitant power of the nobles, the influence
which the former pofl'fcd in their parliaments,
remains yet to be explained. In all the feudal
kingdom, fucli as held of the king in chief were
bound by the condition of their tenure to attend
and aflift iu his courts ; this fcrvice was also exact-
cd of biflops, abbots, and the greater eccclefialtics
as cities gradually acquired wealth, a conliderable
l(hare of the public taxes were levied on them ; and

tl-.ic

tlic inhabitants being enfranchised by the fove-
reign, every borough was permitted to chufe one
or two citizens to appear in the name of the cor-
poration ; the property of the vaflals of the crown
had in many inilances been parcelled into differ-
e it hands, and tl e.,; who were termed the leffr
b,1ros,, to diitinguilh them from such as held their
original fiefs undivided, were exempted from per-
fodiil attendance, on condition of their electing in
each county, a certain number of representatives
to appear in their name ; but while the exemption
wals eagerly Liid hold of, the privilege was so little
v.lued, that, except in one or two instances, it
lay neglcated during one hundled and sixty years.

A Scoitifh parliament, then, consisted ancient-

lv of great barons, of ecclefiattics, and a few re-
prefent.itives of boroughs, who composed one as£
ftimllvy, in which the lord chancellor presided.
The gre:at barons A cre extremely few; even so
late as the beginning of the reign of James the sixth,
they amounted only to fifty three. The eccleliaf-
tics cqualled them in number; and being devoted
implicitly to the crown, for reasons which have
been explained, rendered all hopes of viCtory def-
perate: nor were the noles anxious to prevent
a}ts of parliament, which, trufling to their own
flrength, they were coiifcious they could afterwards
either elude, or contemn.

But another circurrflnance, peculiar to the con-
litution of the Scottish parliament, will fully serve
to explain the influence of our kings in these assem-

C 3 blics.

llies. As far back as our records enable us to
*race, we find a committee, distinguishcd by the
name of lrds of articles. It was their business to
prepare, and to digest all matters which were to
be laid before the parliament. What they approv-
ed, was formed into a bill and presented to parlia-
ment; and it seems probable, that what they re-
jccted could not be introduced into the house.
This committee was chosen and constituted in such
a manner, as put this valuable privilege into the
hands of the king; though chcfnl by parliament,
it confilted of an equal number our of each eflatc,
.nd moll commenly of eight temporal inc( eight
spiritual lords, of eight reprefent.itivcs of boroui;s,
and of the eight great officers of the crown. Of
this body the ecclesiastics, and the officers of the
Acrown, were at the devotion of the king ; and as
he was capable of influencing the elcEtion of the
lords temporal and burgeflcs, he commonly
found the lords of articles no lcfs obfcqui-
ous to his will, than his own privy council.
To this account of the internal corntitution of
Scotland, it will not be improptr to add a view of
the political Itatt of Europe, at that period where
the following hiltory commences. I lie fubver-
sion of the feudal fyflem in France, and its dc-
clenfion in the neighbouring kingdoms, occasioned
a remarkable alteration in the political llate of
Europe. Kings became conscious of their own
power and importance; th, y meditated schemes
es conquell, and engaged in wars at a .distance;

numerous
4

rumerous armies wer, aifcd, and great taxes im-
posed for thiAr fultfiften:e.

It was in italy that t!.e powerful monarchs of

France, Spain, and Germany, firll appeared to
make a trial of their flrength. The Italians, ac-
customed to mock battles only, were aftoniihect
when the French invaded their country, at the
fight of real war ! Incapable of rffitting the tor-
rent, they suffered it to spend its rage; and by
balancing the power of one prince againit another,
supplied by intrigue and policy the want of
strength. This fyflenm of refined policy was loon
extended to the other countries of Europe; confe-
deracies were formed to humble any power that
rose above its due proportion; almost every war
in Europe became general; and the most inconfi-
derabie itltes acquired importance, because they
could add weight to either scale.

Francis the First, who ascendcd the. throne of

France in the ye.ir one thoufaud five hundred and
fifteen, and Charles the Fifth, who obtained the
imperial crown in the year one thouf.nmd five hun-
d:ed and nineteel, divided between them the
flrengthand atFctions of all Europe. Their perpe-
tual enmity was founded in nature and policy, and
fubftted between their polterity for several ages.
Betides his poflcllions in Germany, Charles was
heir to the crown of Spain, and to all the domini-
ons of the house of Burgundy. 'he discovery of
the new world opened a vein of wealth to him,
which all the extravagance of ambition could not

exhaust;

exhaust ; and he poflfifed in an eminent degree the
charateriitic virtues of all the different races of
princes to whom he was allied. lis abilities wtre
equal to his power, and neither of them would
have been inferior to his d.figns, had not provi-
dence, in pity to mankind, to preserve them from
universal monarchy, raised up Francis tile First,
to defend the liberties of Europe. His doniTnions
were more united, though less extcnflve than the
emperor's; his fubjecls were numerous and active,
varlike and 1, yAl; and though Francis negleded
some advantages which a more phlegmatic or more
frugal prince would have improved, a lively and
intrepid courage supplied all other defects, and
chc ked or defeated manmy of the Eir.peroi's de-
signs.

Henry the Eighth of England, who might have

held the balance between the contending monarchs,
poffefitd not dexterity equal to so dtlicate a fitnua-
tionI: he was governed by caprice more than prin-
ciple ; and the paflions of the man were an over-
match for the maxims of the king. His reign
was a perpctu.ll series of blunders in politics; and
while he ellccined hIimfilf the wifclt prince in Ei-
rope, he was a conl ant dupe to those M iho found it
neccffry, and could fublmit to flatter hin.

In this fitu;tion of Europe, the alliftance of

Scotland wals frucquiintly of conlfccuence to the con-
tending partis,; tlhe part afiniicd to ler was to di-
vert Illnry from carrying his arms into the conti-
icnt; and when 1leCry routed the French at C ui-

regent,

negate, France attempted to divide his forces, by
engaging James the Fourth in th.it unhappy expe-
dition, which ended with his life. Henry himself
began his reign by imitating the examples of his
ancestors with regard to Scotland : he held its pow-
er in extreme contempt, and irritated the nation
by reviving the antiquated pretensions of the crown
of England to the sovereignty of Scotland. His
own experience gave him an higher idea of its im-
portance; and he fell at last upon the true secret
of policy with refpeat to that country which his
ancestors had too little penetration to discover, or
too much pride to employ. It had not yet become
honourable for one prince to receive pay from ano-
ther under the more decent name of a subsidy; but
in all ages the fame arguments have been good in
courts, and of weight with ministers, factious lead-
ers, and favourites. What were the arguments by
which Henry brought over so many to his interest
during the minority of James the Fifth, we know
by the original warrant still extant for remitting
considerable fums into Scotland. His successors a-
dopted the fame plan, and improved upon it; the
aftfirs of the two kingdoms became interwoven,
and their interells were often the fame. Elizabeth
divided her attention alloft equally between them,
and the auithori; which flie inhelriied in the one,
was not rcatlc tha thtat which ihe acquired in
the other.

Chnpter

# Chapter the Second. BIRTH of Mary Queen of Scots. - Earl of Arran declared regent. - His character. - That of Cardinal Beatoun. - Negociation between the Regent and Henry. - Irresolution of the Regent ...

ChaptCer the Secoiid.

BIRTH of Mary QUeen of Scot.-Earl of Arran declared re-

gent.-His character.-l'hat of Cardinal Beatoun.-Negoti.
ation between the Regent and lHenry.-Irtcfulutio of the
Regent.-Embraces the Roman Catliolic faith.- Henry in-
vades Scolland.-Treaty of peace.--lIurder of Cardinal
Beatoun.-War again between Eng'and and Scotland.-
.Battle of Pinky.-Negociation with France.-Mary is affi-
anced to the Dal phin. and fer.t to France -Peace restored.
-Progress of the reformed relig;opn -Charalqcr of Knox.-
Earl ofArran created Duke of ChatelherJult; icfigns the
regency which is conferred on Mary of Guife.-Marriage
of Mary with the Dauphin.-Perfecution of the Prcteflants.
-Treaty between the Regent and the former.-Violated by
Mary of Guife.-Second T'rcaty.-Charadcr of the prior
of St Andrews.-Confedcracy of the Proteflart leaders.-
They pals an A6t depriving the queen dowagtr tf the office
of Regent.
INARY, the cdugilter of Jmrecs the

A. D. t$4~.

Fifth, ;and of Mary of (,uile, -.s
Ioin a few days before thei (!,. .I of her sither.
The situation in which he left the kingdonm alarm-
ed all ranks of 1mntn n;' ry ipefons of tllhd C'f

ralnkl

rank had fallen into the hands of the Englifi in
the unfortunate route near the Firth of Solway,
and still remained prisoners at London. Among
the refl of the nobles there was little union; and
the religious disputes occasioned by the dodrines
of the reformed, growing every day more violent,
added to the rage of those faEtions which are natu-
ral to a form of government nearly ariftocratical.
The government of a queen was unknown in
Scotland ; and the profpett of a long and feeble
minority invited to fattion, by the hope of impu-
nity. Jaines had left open the office of regent to
every pretender; and cardinal Beitoun, who had
for many years been confidered as prime minister,
:ws the firit thit claimed that high dignity.
Tll.u :! supported by the queen dow.igcr, lie had
cnj'.)ydl i:ow':r too leng to be a favourite of the
u'.,;II , nid, at the iniii.ition of the nobles, who
widhlci for a r formatiiln in religion, James Ha-
milton, earl of Arran, rouCed himself from Ihis in-
acivity, and ': s, hy the noblcs assem led, no-
ininattd reg.-nt, with the gcneial applause of the
people.

No two men diflc:rcdI more widlel in ('ifpofitnon

and cl.r.;'cL-r il.. il',- earl of Arr,i ,n d c;'lin.
BC toun ; the fi,rliir ,Was til idi '(l irrcl' :utc,
and the perpetual t'nl , ot tliu '.' w o found i heir
advantage in prad iii ,; uo: his t ar s; the aI tter,
wilh ackn wledged abi itic. a;d linmg experieice,
was iminodelatcly amltitious; tlnd as his: own
eminence was founded upon the power of the

church

church of Rome, he was an avowed enemy to the
reformers.

The firif negociation of Arran gave birth to

events of the most fatal consequences to himself,
and the kingdom. After the death of James,
Henry the Eighth conceived hopes of uniting the
crowns of Scotland and England, by the marriage
of Edward, his only son, with the queen of the
Scots. On the promise of supporting his plan in
Parliament, he reloafed the prisoners he had taken
at Solway, and these were joined by all who feared
the cardinal, or who delired a change in religion,
and looked towards England for the protection of
their persons and principles.

But Henry's rough and impatient

,A D. 1543.

temper was incapable of improving
this favourable conjuncure; imperious by nature,
he demanded that the queen's person ihould be im-
mediately coninitttd to his cultody, and that the
government of tht kingdom fiould be put into his
hands during her minority. 'Ihough the regent
secured himself from the opposition of the cardinal,
by confining him a prisoner, yet Henry was oblig-
ed to give up his own proposals, and consent that
the queen should reside in Scotland, and himself
remain excludtd from any flare in the government
of the kingcim: on the other hand, the Scots a-
greed to fend the qucen to England, as soon as the
obtained thl full age often years, and instantly to
deliver fix persons of the first rank, to be kept as

?z hoflages

hostages by Henry, till the queen's arrival at his
court.

The cardinal, who had now recovered his liber-

ty, complained loudly that the regent had betrayed
the kingdom. He foretold the extindcion of the
true Catholic refigion under the tyranny of an he-
retic; and he lamented the ignominy of an ancient
kingdom, descending into the station of a depend-
ent province. His remonstrances *were seconded
by the imprudence of Henry himself. Several
ships, which the Scots had fitted out for France,
were, by badness of weather, driven into the ports
of England; and Henry, under pretext that they
were carrying provisions to a kingdom with which
he was at war, ordered them to be seized and con-
demned as lawful prizes. The Scots, at this insult,
expressed 3i -the resentment natural to a high spirit-
ed people.. The cardinal, by seizing on the persons
of the young queen and her mother, added to his
party the splendour of the royal name; he receiv-
ed a real accession of strength by the arrival of
*Matthew Stewart, earl of Lennox, whose claims
upon the regent extended not only to exclude him
from the fucceflion to the crown) but to de-
prive him of the pofleffion of his personal for-
tune.

The abbot of Paisley, a natural brother of the

regnt, a warm partisan of France, and a zealous
defender of the eftabliflicd religion, had the ad-
dress at the fame. time to play upon the fears of
that nobleman; yet the irresolution of the earl of

D Arran

Arran continued to the last moment. On the
25th of August he ratified the treaty with Henry,
and proclaimed the cardinal, who opposed it, an
enemy to his country. On the 3d of September
he fecresly withdrew from Edinburgh, met with
the cardinal at Callender, renounced the friend-
ship of England, and declared for the interests of
France.

Soon after this sudden revolution in his politi-

cal principles, the regent changed his sentiments
concerning religion.' He had formerly been led
to express great esteem for the writings of the re-
formers and had entertained, in his own family,
two of the most noted preachers of the protestant
doctrine. But the cardinal represented to him the
great imprudence in giving encouragement to opi-
nions so favourable to the pretensions of Lennox;
and the timid dispositions of the regent, alarmed
at the most distant profpe& of danger, publicly ab-
jured the dodrine of the reformers at Stirling, and
declared, not only for the political, but the religi-
gious opinions of his new confidents.

The regent now consented to every thing that

the zeal of the cardinal thought neceflary for the
preservation of the eltablifhed religion. The refor-
mers were perf-cutcd with all the cruelty which
foperlition inspires into a barbarous people ; many
were condemned to that dreadful death which the
church of Rome has appointed for the punilhnment
of its ncemies; but they fullered with the patience
and fortitude of the primitive martyrs. The car-

dinal

final had now in Ihis pofeflion every thing his am-
bition could desire; and exercised all the authority
of a regent without having the envy of the name:
nothing embarraflcd him but the pretensions of the
carl of Lennox. That noblI man, resenting the
tduplicity of Beatoun, who had sacrificed. his inte-
reft to purchase the friendfllip of the earl of Arran,
withdrew from court, and threw himself into the
arms of the party at enmity with the cardinal.

Lennox, who was now at the head of the advo-

cates for the English alliance, and a reformation in
r.:ligion, got the start of the cardinal's wonted ac-
tivity. iHe surprised both him and the regent, by
a sudden march to Edinburgh, with a numerous
army; and might easily have crushed them before
they could prepare for their defence ; but he was
weak enough to liften to terms of accommodation;
thcfe were artfully spun out to a considerable length;
his army, disgusted at the delay, gradually deserted
him; and instead of giving the law, he was obliged
to receive it. A second attempt to retrieve his as-
fairs was' yet more unfortunate; a body of his
troops was cut-to pieces, and he must have fled out
of the kingdom, if an English army had not brought
lim a short relief.

Henry was not of a temper to bear

A.D. 1544.

tamely the indignity. with which he
had been treated by tle regent and parliament of
Scotland. In the spring, an English army, under
the earl of Hertford, was landed without opposition
near Leith. That general occupied Edinburgh,

) a and

and plundered the adjacent country; but, on the
approach of the Scottish army, he retired towards
England: and Henry, by this expedition, still fur-
ther alienated the affecions of the Scots from an
unioir with England.

The earl of Lennox, after a few feeble and un-

fuccefbful attempts to difRurb the regent's admini-
fration, was obliged to fly for safety to the court
of England, where Henry rewarded his fcrvices by
giving him in marriage his niece, the lady Marga-
ret Douglas. ''his unhappy exile, however, was
destined to beth e father of a race of kings i he saw
his son lord Darnkly mount the Scottish throne, to
to the perpetual exclusion of that rival who now
triumphed in his ruin; and from that time his
posterity have held the sceptre in two kingdoms,
by one of which lie was cast out as a criminal, and
by the other received as a fugitive.

The war was continued with little vigouroneither
fide: the historians of that age relateparticularlythe
circumftancesof several ikirmifhesand inroadswhich
at this distance of time deserve no remembrance. At
last this languid and inacive war was terminated
by a peace, in which England,France, and Scotland
were comprehended. Henry laboured to exclude
the Scots from this treaty; but although a peace
with England was of the utmost consequence to
Francis the First, he was too generous to abandon
allies who had served him with fidelity and by
fubmiflion, flattery, and address, he prevailed to
haye the Scots included in the treaty agreed upon.

4 The

The arrogance of cardinal Beatoun, a (hort time

before the peace, had precipitated his fate. His
severity to the reformers, and insolence towards
the nobles, had worn out the patience of a fierce
age. He had treated Norman Lefly,, the eldest
son of the earl of Rothes, with injustice and con-
tempt. It was not the temper of the man, or the
spirit of tle times, quietly to digest an affront. The
cardinal, at that time, resided at the castle of St;
Andrews, which hehad fortified at a great expence;
his retinue was numerous, the town at his devo-
tion, and the neighbouring country full
of his dependants. In this situation fix- 14
teen persons undertook to surprise his castle, and
to assassinate himself; and their success was equal
to ti,e boldness of the attempt. Early in the
morning they seized on the gate of the castle,
which was set open to the workmen, who were
employed in finishing the fortifications; and hay-
ing placed centinels at the door of the cardinal's
apartment, they awakened his numerous domestics,
one by one, and turning them out of the castle, they
without nbife, or tumult, or violence to any other
perfan, delivered their country, though by a most
unjustifiable ation, from an ambitious man, whose
pride was insupportable to the nobles, as his cruel--
ty and cunning were the great checks to the re--
formation.
His death was fatal to the Catholic religion, and
to the French interest in Scotland. Nothing can
ckqkal the consternation which this unexpected

D 3, vcnt

event occasioned among his adherents; and though
the regent secretly enjoyed an event which remov-
ed.out of his way a rival, yet decency and the de-
fire of recovering his eldest son, who, together with
the cafile, had fallen into the hands of the confpi-
rators, induced him to take arms. Five months
were inneffedually consumed before the walls of
the castle and the tedious siege was concluded
by a truce, which would probably have afforded
the conspirators the moR decisive advantage, had
not their hopes from England been blasted by the
death of Henry the Eighth.

Francis the Filtt, king of France, did not long

survive the English monarch; but his successor,
Henry the Second, was not negledful of the
French interest in Scotland. He sent a confider-
able body of men, under the command of Leon
Strozzi, to the assistance of the regent: that gene-
ral foonr compelled the conspirators, on the pro-
mnire of their lives, to surrender; they were ac-
cordingly traifported to France ;. the castle itself,
in obedience to the canon law, as stained with the
blood of a.cardinal, was demolished ; and the arch-
bishopric of St A ldrews was bestowed by the re-
gent upon his natural bVother, John Hamilton, a-
hot ofPaifley.
The conspirators against cardinal Beatoun, found
the regent's eldest son in the castle of, St Andrews.
The presumptive heir to the crown in the hands of
the avowed enemies of the kingdom, was a dread-
ful profpe t; in order to avoid it, the parliament
! . fell

fell upon a singular expedient. By an aft made
on purpose, they excluded the regent's eldest son
from all right of succession, public or private, so
long as he should be detained a prisoner; and sub-
fituted in his place his other brothers, according
to their seniority; and, in failure of them, the next
heirs of the regent.

The delay of a few weeks would have saved the

conspirators. The ministers of England conduct-
ed themselves in regard to Scotland by the maxims
of their late master. In the beginning of Septem-
ber, the earl of Hertford, now duke of Somerset,
and protector of England, entered Scotland at the
head of eighteen thousand men, and a fleet of sixty
ihips appeared on the coast at the fame time, to
second his forces by land; but the Scots, posted
to advantage near the river Efke, were almost
double the number of the invaders. The duke of
Somterfet saw his danger, and would have extri-
cated himself out of it by conditions the most rea-
fonalhle, but his proposals were rejected with feorn,
and the English were only saved by the rashness of
their enemies. The Scots descended from their,
advantageous situation, and hastened with tumul-
tuoss valour to encounter at Pinkey, the difciplin-
ed courage of the Englifih; the event was such as
might have been expeEted. I'he rout of the Scot-
tilh army after a (hort contest, became universal i
few fell in the encounter, but the pursuit was fierce
and bloody, and above ten thousand Scots prifhcl:]
en that disastrous day.

The

The protecor had it now in his power to become

master of the kingdom but'inftead of reducing.
the fortified places accessible by sea, he arnufcd
himself with wafting the open country; and the
late battle had no other effect than to precipitate
the Scots into new engagements with France. The
duke of Somerset soon after returned to England'
to encounter the cabals of his domestic enemies

while a body of troops seized and for-
tified Haddingtown; a place, which on.

account of its distance from the sea, and from any
Englifli garrison, could not be defended without
great expence and danger..

Meanwhile the French gained more by the de-

feat of their allies, than the English did by their
vltory. On the death of cardinal Beatoun, Mary
of Guise, the queen dowager, took a considerable
share in the direcion of affairs. She. was warmly
attached-by blood and inclination to the French
interest; and she seized the favourable moment to
represent to the Scots, whoft spirits were depreffd
by the battle of Pinkey, that no assistance could be
expeted from Henry the Second, without extra-
ordinary concelions in his favour: The prejudi:
ces of the nation powerfully seconded htr repre-
fentatiolns the nobles, in the violence of their re-
fentment, forgot their zeal for the independence
of Scotland, which had prompted them to reject
the proposals of Henry the Eighth; they volunta.
rily offered their young queen in marriage to the
dauphin, eldest son of lHenry the Second; and pro-
losed to fend her immediately to France to be e-

ducated

dcucated at his court. Henry accepted eagerly the
offer, and for the defence of his new acquisition,
embarked fix thousand veteran soldiers under the
command of Monsieur Deffe; there served two
campaigns in Scotland with a spirit equal to their
former fame; but the jealousy of the Scots prevent-
ed them from effecing any thing of more impor-
tance, than compelling the English to evacuate
Haddingtown, and several small forts which they
possessed in different parts of the kingdom.

The overtures which had been made to the

French king, were confirmed in a parliament as-
fembled in a camp before Haddingtown; in vain
did a few patriots remonstrate against such extra-
vagant concessions; the regent was gained by the
offer of a pension from France, and the title of
duke of Chatelherault in that kingdom; and Mary,
who was then about fix years old, was convoyed
to Calais by the fleet that had brought over the
forces under Monsieur Deffe.

The government of England had in the meand3

time undergone a great revolution; the duke of
Somerset had been compelled to resign the power
he had usurped, to the earl of Warwick, who
quickly found peace necefTary -for the eitablillunent
of his new authority. so acquire it, he scrupled
at nothing which Henry pleased to didate. Eng-
land consented to restore to France, Boulogne with
its dependencies; and gave up all prete.nion, to a
treaty of marriage with the queen of Scots, or to
the conquest of her country; a few sPall forts, of

which

which the Elgliflh troops had hitherto kept posses-
sion, were razed ; and peace between the two king-
doms was eftabliihed on its ancient foundation.

Immediattly after the conclusion of the peace,

the French forces left Scotland; as much to their
own fatisfaaion as that of the nation. The Scots
had early found the manners of their allies incom-
patible with their own; and naturally irascible and
high-fpirited, they had borne with impatience those
marks of contempt which a polished people could
not disguise at their barbarous customs. A pri-
vate French soldier engaging in an.idle quarrel,
with a citizen of Edinburgh, both nations took up
arms: the provost of Edinburgh, his son, and fe-
veral citizens of diftinftion, were killed in the fray ;
the French were obliged to avoid the fury of the
citizens by retiring out of the city; .and from this
time were regarded in Scotland with an aversion,
the effeets of which were deeply felt, and operat-
ed powerfully through the subsequent period.

During the war with England, the clergy had

no power to molest the protestants; and in that
interval, the new doctrine advanced by large and
rapid steps towards a full establishment. Nothing
was wanting to complete the ruin of fiperftition,
but a daring and afive leader to direc the attack.
Stich was the famous John Knox, who, with more
extensive views than any of his predecessors in
Scotland, poflcfsed a natural intrepidity of mind
which set him above fear. Instead of amusing
himself with lopping the branchcs, he (truck di-

rcetly

rectly at the root of popery, with a vehemence pe.
culiar to himself. An adversary so formidable
could not escape the rage of the clergy: at first he
retired for safety into the castle of St Andrews;
and, while the conspirators kept the poffeflion of
it, preached publicly under their prote&ion.

The great revolution in England, which follow-

ed upon the death of Henry the Eighth, contri-
buted no less than the zeal of Knox, towards de-
molifhing the popish church in Scotland. The
ministers of his son Edward the Sixth, cait off al-
together the yoke of popery; while in Scotland
several noblemen of the first diftinflion openly
espoused the principles of the reformers, and the
spirit of innovation, peculiar to that period, grew
every day bolder, and more universal.

Meanwhile their cause received reinforment

from two different quarters, whence they never
could have expected it. The ambition of the
house of Gulfe, and the bigotry of Mary of Eng-
and, hastened the subversion if the papal throne
in Scotland; and by a singular disposition of Pro-
vidence, the persons who opposed the reformation
in every other part of Europe with the fiercest
zeal, were made instruments for advancing it in
that kingdom.

Mary of Guise poflhfled the fame bold and afpir-

ing spirit which diftinguilhed her family; but in
her it was softened by the female charater, and
accompanied with great temper and address. She
entertained the arduous design of acquiring the

high

high dignity of regent; and the French king wil-
lingly concurred in a measure, which he hoped
would in future bring Scotland entirely under his
management.

But as the warlike disposition of the Scots ren-

dered it imprudent to attempt this enterprize by
force; so also it appeared a chimerical project to
persuade a man to abdicate the supreme power;
but the hopes of the queen dowager were inflamed
by her knowledge of the regent's inconstancy and
irresolution. She fomented the factious difpofi-
tion of the nobles; ihe countenanced the favourers
of the reformation; and she had no sooner formed
a strong party of adherents, than the overture was
made to the regent, in the name of the French
king, enforced by proper threatenings of fu-
ture vengeance if he opposed, and' sweetened by
the promise of a considerable pension, with the
confirmation of his French title, if he acqui-
efced.

Had the archbilhop of St Andrews been pre-

sent to fortify the irresolute spirit of the regent,
he would in all probability have rejeced the pro-
pofal with disdain; but that prelate was lying at
the point of death; and the regent, abandoning
himself to his fears, voluntarily consented to fur-
sender the supreme power.

The queen inflantly returned to Scotland, in

full expecation of taking immediate polefllion of
her new dignity; but by this time the archbishop

2 of

es St Andrews had surmounted that difternper
which the ignorance of the Scottilh physicians had
pronounced mortal; and together with his health,
had recovered the entire government of the regent;
he quickly persuaded him to recall that dishonour-
able promise which the artifices of the queen had
prevailed on him to grant. A tedious negociation
ensued; but even the firmness of the archbishop
could not withstand the universal defection of the
nobility, the growing power of the protestants,
who all adhered to the queen dowager, the reite-
rated solicitations of the French king, and above
all, the interposition of the young queen, who was
now entering the twelfth year of her age, and
claimed a right of nominating whom fle pleased
to be regent.

It was in the parliament, which met on the

tenth of April, one thousand five hundred and sis-
four, that the earl of Arran executed this extra-
ordinary resignation; and at the fame time Mary
of Guise was raised to that dignity which had beet
so long the object of her wishes. Gratitude in-
duced her to countenance the principles of the re-
formed ; while Mary, who had ascended the throne
of England on the death of her brother Edward,
and soon after married Philip the Second of Spain,
equalled in her persecution of the Protestants, the
deeds of those tyrants who have been the greatest
reproach to human nature.

The causes which facilitated the irtroduction of
the new doctrines into Scotland, merit a particular

E and

and careful enquiry. The reformation is one of
the greatest events in the history of mankind, and in
whatever light we view it, is inftrutive and enter-
taining. Therevivalof learningin the fifteenth and fix-
teenth centuries roused the world from that lethargy
in whichithadbeen funk for many ages; science and
philosophy had laid open to many of the Italians
the imposture and absurdity of the established super-
ftition; but it remained for Luther to ere& the
standard of truth, and uphold it with an unconquer-
able intrepidity, which merits the admiration and
gratitude of all succeeding ages.

The occasion of Luther's being first disgusted

with the tenets of the Romifl church, and how,
from a small rupture, the quarrel widened into an
irreparable breach, is generally known. At that
time, the power and wealth of the church in Scot-
land was immenfc ; and the little learning which
existed in that country was entirely engrofed by
the clergy; but the refpedt and influence which
these advantages mult have commanded, were di-
minifhed by their licentious lives, ..nd extreme it-
dolence. According to the accounts of the re-
formers, confirmed by several popifl writers, the
most scandalous and diolllte manners openly pre-
vailed among them; nit inllead of being abaf(lcd
by the public clamour, and reforming their liecs,
they affeflcd to dtfpifc the cenfurc. of the peo-
ple.

At the faiine time, in the place cf mitigating
the a')furliry of the cl'.blillhd doorines, the fables

of

of purgatory, the virtues of pilgrimage, and the
mnerita of the faints, were the topics on which they
infilled in their discourses; the duty of preaching
was left wholly to monks of the lowest and most
illiterate orders; and while the reformers were
attended by crowded and admiring audiences, the
popiflh preahers were either universally deserted,
or lilt ned to with scorn.

The only device which they employed in order

to recover their declining reputation, was equally
imprudent and unsuccessful. They endeavoured
to call in the authority of false miracles to their aid;
but the vigilance of the reformers defeated these
impostures, and exposed not only them, but the
c:ufe which needed the aid of such artifices, to ri-
dicule.

As the popish ecclesiastics became more and more

the objcts of hatred and contempt, the discourses
of the reformers were listened to as so many calls
to liberty; the people hoped to shake off the yoke
of ecclesiastical dominion, which they had long
felt to be oppressive, and which they now discover-
ed to be unchristian; and the spirit of aversion
to the established church, which spread fast through
the nation, at last burst forth with irrefiftable vio-
lence.

The queen's elevation to the office

of regent, seems at first to have tran-
sported her beyond the known prudence and mo-
deration of her charater. By conferring upon
foreigners several offices of trust and dignity, she

E 2 excited

excited the indignation of the Scots; and an in-
cident which happened at that critical juncture,
inflamed their aversion to French councils, to the
highest degree. Henry the Second having refolv-
ed upon war with Philip the Second, and foresee-
ing that the queen of England would take part in
her husband's quarrel, was extremely solicitous of
securing in Scotland the affitance of some troops
which would be more at his command than an un-
disciplined army, led by nobles who were almost
independent. Under pretence of relieving the no-
it:s. frum th, exp::.nc and danger of defending
the borders, the queen regent proposed to impose
a small tax on land, for the constant maintenance
of a body of regular troops; three'hundred of the
lefler barons represented in a body their lense of
the intended indignity; and the queen prudently
abandoned a scheme which she found to be univer-
sally odious.

Soon after the French commenced hostilities

against Spain, and Philip prevailed on his consort
to reinforce his army with a considerable body of
Engliih troops; Henry had recourse to the Scots,
and attempted to excite them at his junEture to in-
vade Englaid. But the nobles of Scotland lif-
tened with coldness to the solicitations of the
French monarch, and declined engaging the king-
dom in an unneceflary war. What she could not
obtain by persuasion, the queen regent brought
about by UIratagem. She commanded the French
soldiers to rebuiid. a small fort near Beiwick, which

was

was appointed by the last treaty to be razed; the
garrison of Berwick sallied forth, interrupted the
work, and ravaged the adjacent country; this in-
fult roused the fiery spirit of the Scots. War was
determined on; but before their forces could as-
femble, their ardour cooled; and the nobles re-
solved toftand on the defensive. They marched
to the banks of the Tweed; they prevented the
incursions of the enemy i and having done what
they thought sufficient for the fafefty and honour
of their country, the queen could not persuade
them, either by her entreaties or her artifices, to
advance another ftep.

The queen having discovered the impotence of

her own authority, dismissed the army ; and to
counterbalance the influence of the archbishop of
St. Andrews, still continued to favour the parti-
zans of the reformation. Kirkaldy of Grange,
and other surviving conspirators against cardinal
Beatoun, were about this time recalled from their
baniihment; and through her connivance the pro-
tellant preachers enjoyed an interval of tranquil-
lity which was of great benefit to their cause.

As the queen regent discovered how limited her

authority,was, fleeen;deavoured to eftablifia it on
a more secure foundation, by hastening the con-
clufion of he daughter's marriage with the dau-
phin. 'o complete this,. the French king applied
to the parliament of Scotland, which appointed
eight of its members to represent the whole body
es the nation at the marriage of the queen; the

E 3 inftrustions

inftru&ions of the parliament to those commiflion-
ers frill remain, and do honour to the wisdom and
integrity of that aflembly; at the fame time that
they manifest, with refpeEt to the articles of mar-
riage, a laudable concern for the dignity and inte-
reft of their sovereign, they employed every pre-
caution, which prudence could dictate, for preferv-
ing the liberty and independence of the nation,
and for securing the right of succession to the
crown, in the house of Hamilton.

The marriage was celebrated with

A. D. 1558.

great pomp, and in the treaty the com-
riffioners h,ad agreed that the dauphin should as-
fume the name of king of Scotland : this they con-
fidered only as an honorary title; but the .French
lahourcd to annex to it some solid privileges and
power. They insisted that the crown matrimonial
should be conferred on, and all the rights pertain-
ing to the husband of a queen (hould be vested in
the person of the d.auphin. By the laws of Scot-
land, *a person who married an heixefs, kept pof-
feflion of her estate during his own life, if he hap-
pened to survive her, and the children born in mar-
riage: this was called the courtesy of Scotland; and
the French aimed at applying this rule, which takes
place in private inheritances to the succession of
the kingdom. But the answer of the deputies was
firm though refpeflul; and they discovered a fix-
td resolution of consenting to nothing that tended
to introduce any alteration in the order of fuccef-
sion.

Not-

Notwithstanding the cold reception which their
proposal concerning the rro'wn matrimonial met
with from the Scottish deputies, the French ven-
tured to move it in parliament. The partizans of
the house of Hamilton, suspicious of their designs
upon the succession, opposed it with great .zeal.
But that party was little able to withstand the in-
flueace of France, and the address of the queen
regent; that artful princess consented to many
new limitations; and the Scots were prevailed on
to pass an ad which conferred the crown matri-
monial on the dauphin, and to trust to the frail
security of words and statutes, against the dange-
rous encroachments of power.

'1 he protestants had concurred with the queen

regent in promoting this measure, while the popish
clergy, under the influence of the archbishop of
St Andrews, violently opposcd it. The former
were by this time almost equal to the catholics
both in power and number and submitted with
impatience to that tyrannical authority with which
the ancient laws armed the ecclesiastics against
them. There were, however, only two ways of
exonerating thcmfelves from the burthen. Either
violence must extort the indulgence from the hand
of the sovereign; or, by prudent compliances, they
might exped it from her favour and gratitude;
the latter method was preferred and by their
zeal in forwarding the queen's designs, they hoped
to merit her proteation.

The earl of Argyll, and James Stuart, prior of

St

St Andrew's, one the moft.powerful, and the
other the mos popular, leader of the protestants,
were appointed to carry the crown, and other en-
signs of royalty to the dauphin ; while in England,
Mary finished her short and inglorious reign, and
and was succeeded by her sifter Elizabeth, who
once more established, according to law, the pro-
teftant religion in that country.

In Scotland, the reformation advanced towards

a full eftablifliment; all the low country was deep-
ly tinctured with the protestant opinions; and
some praise is due to the regular demeanor of so
numerous a party, among a people bred to arms,
and in an age when religious paflions had taken
such strong hold of the human mind. From the
death of Mr. Patrick Hamilton, the first who sus-
sered in Scotland for the protestant religion, thrty
years had elpfed, during which the reformed had
patiently submitted to. the most cruel excefles of
ecclesiastical tyranny. The archbishop of St Ar,-
drew's, had indeed, by his temper and prudence,
encouraged this pacific disposition; but some time
before the meeting of the last parliament he de-
parted from his wonted humanity, and sentenced
to the flames an aged pries who had been convict-
ed of embracing the protestant opinions.

Nothing could equal the horror of the protestants
at this unexpected and barbarousexecution, but
the 'zeal with which they espoused the defence of
a cause, that now seemed devoted to deltrudion.
Unfati6fied with the permiflion of the queen to ex-

cifc

cife their religion with more freedom than before,
they resolved to petition parliament for some legal
protection against the exorbitant and oppressive
jurifdiaion of the ecclesiastical courts. But from
this intention they were dissuaded by the queen,
who aflured them in the molt solemn manners of
her countenance and support.

Yet it w;. not long before they be- A

gan to fufpea some change in the re-
gent's disposition towards them. The princes of
Lorrain, though itrangers at the court of France,
had in a short time, by their eminent qualities,
placed themselves in a level with the princes of
the blood. The church, the army, and the reve-
nue, were under their direcion by the marriage
of their neice, the queen of Scots, to the dauphin,
they were raised to a near alliance with the throne;
and to render that princess more worthy the heir
of France, they set on foot her claim to the crown
of England, which was founded on pretences not
unplaufible.

Henry the Eighth, moved by the caprice of his

love or resentment, had beheaded four of the fix
queens whom he married. In order to gratify him
both his daughters had been declared illegitimate
by at of parliament ; yet in his last will, whereby
he called bothof them to the throne upon the death
of their brother Edward; and at the fame time,
palsing by the posterity of his eldest sifter Marga-
ret, queen of Scotland, he appointed the line of

fuccefllon

succession to continue in the descendants of hi:
younger sifter, the duchess of Suffolk.

On the elevation of Elizabeth, Rome trembled

for the catholic faith, and France beheld with con-
cern, a throne to which the queen of Scots tould
form so many pretenfiols, occupied by a rival,
whose birth, in the opinion of all good catholics,
excluded her. fiom any legal right oi succession.
Inffigated by the princes of Lorrain, Henry, focn
after the death of Mary, persuaded his daughter
in law, and her husband, to assume the title of
king and queen of England ; it was on the fide of
Scotland that France determined to attack Eliza-
beth; and to allure the English catholics to join
in the enterprise, previous to the invasion, it was
determined by the princes of Lorrain, to break the
power of the proteltants in Scotland.

This plan was far from meeting the approba-

tion of the regent; she represented to her brothers,
that in the hope of exterminating the protestant
dotrine, it was probable the established church
would be overturned ; yet sacrificing her own judg-
ment to their opinions, file became the instrument
of exciting civil commotions in Scotland, the fatal
termination of which he fle foresaw and dreaded.

The popish ecclesiastics readily joined the at-

tempts of the queen, to check the progress of the
reformation : and the regent, secure of their alfift-
ance, iflued a proclamation enjoining all persons
to observe the approaching feltival of .aller, ac-
cording to the Romish ritual; when her former

engage-

engagements were urged to her, in the name of
the reformed, by the earl of Glencairn and Sir
Hugh Campbell, " The promises of princes," said
she, " ought not to be too carefully remembered,
" nor the performance of them exated, unless it
" suits their own conveniency."

On the first information that the protestant reli-

gion had been introduced into Perth, she issued
a mandat summoning all the protestant preachers
in the kingdom to a court of Justice, to be held
at Stirling. At that time there prevailed in Scot-
land a custom, that persons accused of any crime
were accompanied to the place of trial by a reti-
nue of their friends and adherents; authorised by
this anceint usage, the reformed convened in great
numbers to attend their pastors to Stirling. The
queen dreaded their approach with a train so nu-
merous, and promised that file would put a stop
to the intended trial, on condition that the preach-
ers and their retinue advanced no nearer to Stir-
ling; the protcftants listened with pleasure to so
pacific a proposition ; the multitude dispersed; and
the preachers, with a few only of the leaders, re-
maiiitd at erth.

BIut notwithstanding this solemn promise, the

queen on the loth of May, proceeded to the trial of
the persons who had been fumnloned, and upon their
non-appearance, the rigour of jufice took place,
and they were pr mounced outlaws. The protef.
tants, no less fl(ockcd at the indecency with which
the piullic f.iith hadl been viol.tcd, thln at the

danger

danger which threatened themselves, prepared
bcldly for defence ; their zeal was heightened by
the popular and powerful eloquence of Knox, who
obliged to retire from the popish rage to Geneva,
was returned to his native country only a few days
before the trial appointed at Stirling. He hurried
inftahtly to Perth, to (hare with his brethren the
common danger, or to assist them in promoting
the common cause. While their minds were in
that ferment, occasioned by the queen's perfidy,
he mounted the pulpit, and by a vehement har-
rangue against idolatry, inflamed the multitude
with the utmost rage. The indiscretion of a priest
who was preparing to celebrate mass, precipitated
them into immediate action. They fell upon the
churches, overturned the altars, and defaced the
pictures; but this infurredtion, censured by the
reformed preachers, and publicly condemned by
by the persons of the modt credit with the party,
must be regarded merely as an accidental eruption
of popular rage.

Yet the queen dowager, irritated by this con-

tempt of her authority, was determined to inflid
the severest vengeance on the whole party; with
what forces l(e could aflemble, (he marched di-
rectly to Perth, in hopes of furprizing the prote-
ftant leaders; but these planned their measures
with the greatest vigour; their adherents flocked
in such numbers to Perth, that they not only fe-
cured the town from danger, but in a few days
were in a condition to take the field.

2 Neither

Neither party, however, was impatient to en-

gage; and as both dreaded the event of an adlion,
a treaty was soon concluded, by which it was (li-
pulated that both armies should be disbanded, and
the gates of Perth set open to the queen ; that
indemnity should be granted to the inhabitants of
that city, and to all others concerned in the late
infurretion; that no French garrison fhouid be
left in Perth, and no French soldier should ap-
proach within three miles of that place; and that
a parliament should immediately be held to com-
pose whatever differences remained.

No sooner were the protestant forces dismissed,

than the queen broke every article in the treaty;
The introduced French troops into Perth, fined
some of the inhabitants, banished others, removed
the magistrates from office, and on retiring to Stir-
ling, the left behind a garrison of fix hundred men,
with orders to allow the exercifc of no other reli-
gion than the Roman Catholic.

From some pafTages in Bachanan, it may be

conjectured that the French, and Scots in French
pay, who threatened the liberties of the kingdom,
might amout to three thousand men, and they were
soon after augmented to a much more confider-
able number ; but the zeal of the protestants got
the (tart once more of the queen's vigilance and
ativity. Though the leaders set out fiom St. An-
drew's with the slender train of an hundred horse,
yet by the ardour of their adherents, before they
reached Falkland, a village only ten miles distant,

F they

they were able to meet the queen with superior for-

ces.

The queen, surprised at the approach of so formi-
dable a body, had again recourse to negociation;
the found however, that the preservation of the
protestant religion, which had at first roused the
leaders of the congregation, a name by which the re-
formed aboutthis time were diftinguifled,to arms,
was not the only object they had now in view.
They demanded not only the rcdrefs of their
religious grievances, but required the immediate
expulsion of the French troops out of Scotland;
it was not in the power of the queen to make this
important concession without the concurrence of
the French monarch; and as some time was requi-
ite in order to obtain that, fle hoped, during
this interval, to receive such reinforcementb from
France, as wouid insure the accomplifhmtnt of
that design which file had twice attempted with
unequal ftrtngth.

Mean while file agreed to a cessation of arms

for eight days, and before the expiration of these,
engaged to transport the French troops to the south
fide of the Forth ; and to fend commissioners to
St Andrew's, who (hould labour to bring all dif-
ferences to an accommodation. As fie hoped by
means of the French troops to overawe the pro-
teftants in the southern counties, the former ar-
ticle in the treaty was punctually executed; thie
latter having been iriferted merely to amule the
congregation, was no longer renmembered.

By

By theef reiterated instances of perfidy, the

cqeen loft all credit with her adversaries; they re-
fumed their arms with more inflamed resentment
anti more extensive views. Of the country be-
tween the Forth and 'Fay, the inhabitants of Pertl
.aone remained in the power cf the queen ; thither
the proteflants marched, and without listening to
the in:dlious offtrs of their antagonfit, compelled
th-e g;rrifon to fubmir. By a rapid march, they
p:c've1ited the desiGns of the queen on Stirling, and
profling forw.rl towards Edinturgh, compelled
her to retire to Dunbar.

The proteflant army wherevir it came, spread

the ardour of reformation ; their furious zeal o-
verthrev the monuments of cur anceflorb' magni-
ficence, the noblest ornaments of ;h. kingdom.
Yet thl humanity of the leaders of the congrega-
tion so far reflrained the rage of their followers,
so that few of the Roman Catholics were exposed
t., any peronal inlult, and not a single man suffercd
d-ath ; with their fucccfs their demands were raif-
cdl; they now openly aspircd at establishing the
pr tcti nit docdrine on the ruins of popery; and
thcir preachers taking poG'lTion of the pulpits at
Edlnburgh, fervt.ntly declaimed againfl the idola-
trj .t errors of their r(lirious rivals.

In the mean ti.ic the q(lcen, who had prudent-

ly givt:l way to a torrent w hvlicl fe could not refit,
observcd with pleaifure that it now began to subside.
The finaiices of Inoft of the la;ilets had been ex-
haufied by the lengclh ,f lie cipi;ign ; tlhe mul-

1 2 titude,.

titude, concluding the work already done, retired
to their habitations; and a few only of the most
zealous and wealthy barons, remained with their
preachers at Edinburgh; when the queen rapidly
advancing in the night, appeared before that city
with all her forces. The proteflants durst not en-
counter the French troops in the open field; and
the regent would have tafily forced her way into
the town, if the seasonable conclusion of a truce
had not procured her admiflion without the effusion
of blood.

Theirdangerous situation easily induced the lead-

ers of the congregation to liften to any overtures
of peace ; and as the queen still expe&ted a strong
reinforcement from France, ihe also agreed to it,
upon equal conditions. Together with a fufpen-
sion of hostilities to the tenth of January, it was
fipulated in this treaty, that on the one hand the
protestants should open the gates of Edinburgh
next morning to the queen regent, remain dutiful
to her government, abstain from all future viola-
tion of religious houses, and give no interruption
to the eftabliiled clergy. On the other hand, the
queen consented not to molest the preachers of
the protestant religion, to allow the citizens of E-
dinburgh the exercise of the religious worship most
agreeable to each individual, and to permit the
public profession of the protestant s.ith in every
part of the kingdon ; yet the infifled on retaining
the French troops, and would content to nthing

more

more than that a Frelnch garrison Pnould not be
introduced into Edinburgh.

The danger of this conceifson was evident to

the Scots; and the duke of Chateiherault and the
earl of Huntly, two noblemen who had followed
the queen during the late commotions, and who
were confdered as the leaders of the eftabliihed
church, now desired an interview with the chiefs;
of the congregation ; they determined rather to en-
dlanger the religion they profeficd, than the liberties
of their country; and they promised to Argyll,
Glencairn, and the prior of St Andrews, that if the
queen should violate any article of the truce, or
refuse to dlfniifs the French troops, that they
would instantly join with their countrymen in com-
pelling her to a melfure which the public safety
rendered neccffary.

About this time died Henry the Second, just

when he had adopted a system in regard to Scot-
land, which would in all probability have restored
tranquility to that kingdom. Towards the close
of his reign, the conffable Montmorency had ac-
quired an ascendancy in the cabinet of that prince,
and lie imputed the late disturbances in Scotland
to the princes of Lorrain, who now visibly declined
in favour. But the tragical and untimely death of
the French monarch, put an end to all moderate
and pacific measures; the duke of Guise, and the
c.,rdinal his brother, upon the acceflion of Francis
the Sccond, aflitmed the chief diretion of French

F 3 aflfairs

affairs; allied so nearly to the throne by the mar-
riage of their neice, the young queen of Scots, they
wanted but little of regal dignity, and nothing of
regal power. They had beleld with the utmost
concern the progress of the protestant religion in
Scotland; they bent all their firength to check its
growth; and they encouraged the queen their sis-
ter to expect, in a Ihort time, the arrival of an ar-
my so powerful, that the zeal of her adversaries,
however defp)crate, would not venture to oppose.

The lords of the congregation were not igno-

rant of their counsels, or careless of providing a-
gainft the danger. The success of their cause de-
pended on their rigour and unanimity; they en-
tered into a ftriler bond of confederacy and mu-
ttral defence; and by the accefrorn of the duke of
Chatelherault, and his eldest son the earl of Arran,
gained a coilfiderable encreafe both of reputation
and power. The latter had commanded the Scot-
tifh guards in France, and had imbibed the protef-
tant opinions; witl the zeal of a proselyte, he hald
uttered sentiments on points of controversy which
did not suit the temper of a bigotted court. The
princes of Lorrain lhad at that time resolved to fe-
lcct for a sacrifice some person, whose fall might
convince all ranks of men, tlat neither splendour
<(bilth, not eminence in station, could exempt
fren punifliment those who should be guilty of the
crime of hercry. The earl of Arran was the per-

fbn

son destined to be the unhappy victim, but some
expressions of the cardinal of Lorrain raised his
suspicions, and he escaped the intended blow by a
timely flight. Animated with implacable aversion
towards France, he returned to Scotland, and com-
municated those sentiments to his father, the duke
of Chatelherault, who now joined the congregation,
and was confidered for some time as the head of
the party.

But with refpeC to him, this diflintion was

merely nominal ; James Stuart, prior of St An-
drews, was the person who moved and acuated
the whole body of protestants, among whom he
pofifl'ed that unbounded confidence, which his
great abilities so justly merited. He was the na-
tural son of James the Fifth, by a daughter of lord
Erlkine, and had received from his father the priory
of St Andrews; but disgusted with the indolence
and retirement of a monastic life, his enterprising
genius called him forth to at a principal part on
a more public and conspicuous theatre. To the
rnolt unqueflionable bravery, he added great skill
in the art of war; his sagacity and penetrat.ion?
in civil affairs, was universally acknowledged;
while his boldness in defence of the reformation,
and the severity of his manners, secured him the
reputation of being sincerely attached to religion,.
without which it was impossible, in that age, to
gain an ascendant over mankind.

It was not without reason that the queen dread-
ed a man so capable of obftruting her designs.

She

She endeavoured to lessen his influence, by inlinu
ating that his ambition aspired at nothing less than
the crown itself. An accusation so improbable,
gained but little credit. To dethrone a queen
who was lineal heir to an ancient race of mo-
narchs; who had been guilty of no actio:n by
which she could forfeit the esteem and the assec-
tions of her fubjecs ; who could employ in de-
fence of her rights, the forces of a kingdom much
more powerful than her own; and to fubflitute in
her place, a person whom the illegitimacy of his
birth, by the practice of civilized nations, render-
ed incapable of any inheritance, either public or
private, was a projeat so chimerical, as the moll
extravagant ambition could hardly entertain, and
would never conceive to be practicable.

The arrival of a thousand French soldiers com-

penfated in some degree for the iofs that the queen
sustained by the defection of the duke of Chatel-
herault; they were immediately commanded to
fortify Leith, in which place, on account of its
commodious harbour, and its situation in the neigh-
bourhood of Edinburgh, the queen resolved to fix
the head-quarters of her foreign forces. In order
tobring the town under their command, the French
turned out a great part of the ancient inhabitants;
and thus rendered an unpopular measure, still
more unpopular by the manner of executing it.

It was with deep regret that the lords of the

congregation beheld this bold and decisive ftep
taken by the queen regent. 'hey representcd in'

th.

the strongest terms, their diffatisfaEion at the late
measures; but the queen, conscious of her prefenr
advantageous situation, was in no disposition to
liften to demands utterly inconsistent with her
views, and urged with that bold importunity which
is so little acceptable to princes.

As all things tended to a crisis, the princes of

Lorrain did not entrust to their ordinary agents,
their influence over the mind of their fitter, they
called in to their aid the ministers of religion; un-
der pretence of confounding the protestants by the
{kill of able masters in controversy, they appointed
several French divines to reside in Scotland.
Though amidit the noise of arms, these doaors
had little opportunity to display their address in
the use of their theological weapons, yet they gave
no small offence to the nation by one of their ac-
tions; they persuaded the queen to seize the church
of St Giles, in Edinburgh, which had remained
ever since the late truce in the hands of the pro-
teftants, and to re-eftabliih there the rights of the
Romith church; this convinced the lords of the
congregation that it was in vain to expect any fa-
tisfadion from the queen, and that it was absolute-
ly neceflary to take arms in tleir own defence.

It was but a small part of the French auxiliaries

that had yet arrived ; the fortifications of Leith,
though advancing fat, were still incomplete; and
the confederates, under there circumstances, con-
ceived it possible to surprise the queen's party, and
to terminate the war by one blow. With a nu-

merous

4

merous army they rapidly advanced towards Edin-
burgh, but the regent had already forefecn the
danger, and had retired to Leith to wait the arrival
of new reinforcements; while the fortifications of
that town, flight as they were, might defy the es-
forts of an army p!ovildcd neither with heavy can-
non nor with military f!ores.

The arts of the queen had in some measure

damped the zeal, and divided the p.irtv of the con-
federates ; when it blazed up with fresh vigour,
and rose to a greater height than ever. The lords
of the congregation on their arrival at Edinburgh,
had represented to the regent the dangers a-
rising from the increase of the French troops, and
the fortifying Leith ; but the answer of that prin-
cess was in-terms the most explicit; she pretend-
ed that she was not accountable to the confederate
lords for any part of her conduct; that fie would
neither dismiss forces which fie found useful, or
demolifl a fortification which might prove of ad-
vantage. And fle required them, on pain of trea-
son, to disband the forces which they had affnin-
bled.

The confederate nobles were sensible at once

of the dignity offered to themnfelves, alnd alarmed
with this plain declaration of the queen's intetn-
tions, there now remained but one ftep to tilke
but that they might not fecm to depart from the
eftablithed forms of the constitution, they all m-
bled all the peers, barons, and reprefcntativts who

adhered,

adhered to their party ; the leaders of the congre-
gration laid before them the declaration which the
queen had given in answer to their remonstrance ;
they represented the unavoidable ruin which her
measures would bring upon the kingdom; and re-
quired the diretion of the assembly with regard
to the obedience due to an administration so un-
just and oppressive.

T'he assembly proceeded to decide with no less

dispatch than unanimity; as the determination of
the point in doubt was conceived to be the office
of divines as well as of laymen, the former were
called to aflift with their opinion. Knox and Wil-
cox appeared for the whole order, and pronounced
th;:t it is lawful for fubjeds, not only to resist ty-
rannical princes, but to deprive them of the au-
thority they abuftd. The decifon of persons so
highly revered, had great weight with the whole
ait mrbly ; and all gave their suffrages, without one
diflenting voice, for depriving the queen of the
office of regent, which she had exercised so much
to the detriment of th: k.ngdoln.

The a&t of deprivation, and a letter from the

lord'j of the congregation to the queen regent, are
tfill extant; they discover not only that undaunted
spirit, natural to men capable of so bold a refolu-
tion, but are remarkable for a precision and vigour
of expreflion, which we are surprised to meet with
in ail age so unpolilhed; but the language of bufi-
ness is nearly the fame at all times; and whenever

men

men think clearly, and are thoroughly inte.
refted, they express themselves with perspicuity
and force. 2

Chatter

# Chapter the Third. SEIGE of Leith. - Retreat of the Protestants. - They are joined by Maitland. - His character. - Negociations between the protestants and the queen of England. - Elizabeth sends a fl ...

Chapter the Third.

SILGE of Leith. - Retreat of the Protestants, - They are

joined by Maitland. - His character. - Negociations be-
tween the protcftants and the queen of England. - Eliza-
beth fends a fleet to the lurcour of the former. - Siege of
Leith resumed by the English and Scots. - Death of the
queen regent. - Peace between the contendin? powers.
- The reformed religion established by parliament. -
Death of the king of France. - Mary returns to Scltland.
- Jealousies between her and Elizabeth. - Adminifira-
tion of Mary. - Prior of St. Andrew's created earl of
Murray. - Revolt of the earl of Huntly. - Battle of Cor-
richie. - Proposal of marriage to Mary. - She efpotfes
lord Darnly, son to the earl of Lennox. - Murray difcon-
tented retires into England. - His reception there. - Vi.
gorous measures of Mary.

THE lords of the congregation soon found that
their zeal had engaged them in atn undertaking
which it was beyond their ability to accomplili
the French garrison, d-:fpifing their numerous but
irregular f)rces, refused to surrender Leith, or to
lrpart out of the kingdom ; the aflailants soon be-
came impatient of the severe and conflant duty

G which

which a siege requires. The queen's emissaries,
mingling with their countrymen, heightened their
disgust, which difcovcrcd itself at sirs in murmurs
and complaints, and, on occasion of the want of
money for paying the army, broke out into open
mutiny. 'he most eminent leaders were hardly
secure from the insolence of the soldiers ; discord,
confternatio, and perplexity, reigned in the camp
of the reformers; while the duke, their general,
funk with his usual timidity under the terror of
approaching danger.

The congregation, in this situation of their as-

fairs, applied to Elizabeth, who desirous of her ex-
tending her influence in Scotland, listened with
pleasure to their applications. Sir Ralph Sadler
and fir James Crofts, were entrusted with a dif-
cretionary power of supplying the Scottfh male-
contents; from them, Cockburn of Otmifton re-
ceived four thousand crowns, but little to the ad-
vantage of his party. The elrl of Bothwell, by
the queen's infIigation, lay in wait for him on his
return, difpcrfed his followers, wounded him, and
carried off the money.

This dif.lppoiutment prove d fatal to the party;

in mere difpair they attempted to aTlault Leith,
but the French beat them back with difiracc, and
pursued tlhem'to the g;ates of Edinburgh. A ic-
cond fliirmifnl, which happened a few days after,
was no Icfs unfortunate ; ainl on tlihee reiter.lted
blows, the holpcs anid spirits of the congregation
funk dltogfic.r. They dlid not even think them-

I'lve'

selves secure within thevwalls of Edinburgh, but
determined to retire to some pli.ce at a greater
ditinnce from the enemy. In vain did the prior
of St Andrew's, and fomc others, oppose this igno-
minious flight; at midnight they set out from E-
dinburgh in great confusion, and marched without
halting till they arrived at Stirling.

A few days before the retreat of the congrega-

tion, the queen fuilered an irreparable loss by the
defetion of her principal secretary William Mait-

.i-: of l.cthington whose zeal for the reformed

rtligion, exposed him so much to the resentment
of her French counsellors, that he, fuIecting his
life to be itn danger, withdrew secretly from Leith,
and fled to the lords of the congregation; early
accustomed to bufinefa, he possessed in an eminent
degree that intrepid spirit which delights in purfu-
ing bold designs, and was no less master of that
political dexterity which is necessary for carrying
them on with ftccefs. But these qualities were
deeply tinctured with the neighbouring vices. His
addrcfs sometimes degenerated into cunning; his
acuteness bordered upon excels ; and his enter-
prizing spirit engaged him in projeas vast and
fllendid, but beyond his utmolt power to execute.

The army of the congregation, before it reached

Stirling, dwindled to an inconliderlalel number.
The spirit of Knox howcver frill remained un-
daunted and icec ; and iic a, irefiid his despond-
ing heacers in a (iifcouric remark:able for the boldl-
uefs and freedom of reproof afilfmcd by the sirs'

G 2 refornmlli,

reformers. The hopes of the leaders refted solely
on Elizabeth; and Maitland, as the most able ne-
gociator of the party, was employed in the embaf-
fy to England. There was little need of his ad-
dress to induce Elizabeth to take his country into
her prote6tion; and the motives which determin-
ed the queen to espouse the defence of the congre-
gation, are still extant in two papers written by
fir William Cecil, and entitled, aJbort difcfiu;n of
the iueighty matters of Scotland.

'rTat minister lays it down as a principle, that

every society hath a right to protect itself, not
only fromiprefent dangers, but from such as may.
probably ensue ; to which he adds, that nature and
reason teach every prince to defend himself by the
fame means that his adversaries employ to distress
him. Upon these grounds he eftablilhes the right
of England to interfere in the affairs of Scotland,
and to prevent the conquest of that kingdom, at
which the French openly aimed. The latter he
observes, are the ancient enemies of England;
and though now drained of men and money, they
would quickly again be in a condition for acting.
The Princes of Lorrain, who governed France,
openly questioned the legitimacy of the queen's
birth, and by advancing the title and pretenfiolis
of their neice the queen of Scotland, studied to de-
prive Elizabeth of her crown. They had solicit-
i:d at R-cme, aid obtained a bull, declaring Eliza-
beth's birth to be illegitimate. Scotland is the
quarter from whence they can attack England with

nioft

rnoft advantage; a war on the borders of that
country exposes France to no danger, one unfuc-
cefsful aCion there may overturn the government
of England. The invading of England will im-
mediately follow the redudtion of the Scottish
malecontents; by abandoning whom, Elizabeth will
open a way for her enemies into the heart of her
own kingdom. Nothing therefore remained, but
to meet the enemy at a distance, and to crush the
designs of the princes of Lorrain while yet in their
infancy, before their power had time to take root,
and to grow up to any considerable height.'

These arguments produced their full efitd upon

Elizabeth ; one of Maitland's attendants was in-
Itantly dispatched into Scotland with the itrongeft
aflurances of protedion ; and the lords of the con-
gregation, were desired to fend commiflioners into
England, to conclude a treaty,. and to fettle the o-
perations of the eampaign with the duke of Nor-
folk..

A. D. 6. The queen regent, informed of this
A D.1560o.

negociation, endeavoured to get the

start of Elizabeth; a considerable body of French
were commanded to march to Stirling ; they pro-
ceeded along the coast, plundering the lands of
those whom they deemed their enemies; and pro-
posed to seize and fortify St Andrew's. But on
this occasion the prior of St Andrew's, lord Ruth-
veu, and Kirkaldy of Grange, performed a service
the most essential to their party, by continually
harraffing the French at the head of fix hundred

G 3 hortl

horse which they had assembled. At length their
'weakness obliged them to retire, and the French
movea forward to St Andrew's. They had advan-
ced but a few miles when they descried a power-
ful fleet fleering its course up the frith of Forth;
they concluded it was the marquis d'Eltbcuf, and
their guns were already fired to welcome the ar-
rival of their friends ; when a small boat from the
opposite coast blasted their premature triumph, by
informing them it was the fleet of England, in-
tended for the relief of the congregation, and
which was soon to be- followed by a formidable
land army.

No sooner had Elizabeth determined to afford

protection. to the-lords of the congregation, thar,
they expeticnced her astivity. She instruCted
a.ltrong squadron to cruize in the frith of Forth;
and the Frelch, at the appearance of it, weri-
ftruclrwith such terror, that they retreated towards
Stirling with the utmost precipitation, and arrived
at leitll h.trraltd and exhausted with fatigue.

The Englith fleet precluded the garrison of

Leith from receiving succours; and soon after its
arrivil the comnmifiioncrs of the congregation re-
paired to Btrwick, and concluded with the duke
of Norfolk a treaty, the bond of that union with
Elizabeth, which was of so great advantage to the
c.ufe. 'li,: Scots engaged never to susser any clo-
ser union with Eranlce, and Elizabeth promised
to employ in Scntland a powerful army : no place
in Scotland was to remain in the hands of the

Eiglifh;

English; and if any invafi6n ihould be made .uimr
England, the Scots were obliged to alfift Elizabeit
with part of their forces.

The Englifs, consisting of fix thousand foot and

two thousand horse, were swelled by the,forces of.
the congregation, and advanced to Leith: the
French, to embarafs the besiegers, lain waite the
adjacent country; but the zeal of the Scots fruf-
trated their intentions; the neighbouring coun-
ties supplied every thing necessary, and the Eng-
lifh found in their camp all forts of provisions at
a cheaper rate than had for some time been known
in that part of the kingdom.

On the approach of the .English army, the

queen regent retired into the castle of Edinburgh
and committed herself to the protection of lord
Erflcine, a nobleman of unblemished integrity, who
still preserved a neutrality, with the 4fteem of both
parties; and who received the queen wiithhonour
but took care to admit no such retinue as might
endanger his command of the castle.

A few days after they arrived in Scotland, the

Englifhl invested Leith : the circumstances of this
liege, related by cotemporary historians, men
without knowledge or experience in the art of war,
are often obscure and imperfeQc; but from their
detail it is easy to observe the different charaters
of the French and Englifli troops; the former,
trained to war under the active reigns of Francis
the Firit, and Henry the Second, defended them-
selves not only with bravery, but with the ikill of

veterans;

veterans; the latter, though they still preserved
1e desperate valour peculiar to the nation, dif-
covered few marks of military genius. The length,
however of the siege, and the loss of part of their
magazines by accidental fire, reduced the French
to extreme distress, which the profpea of relief
made themr bear with admirable fortitude.

Meanwhile the leaders of the congregation were

not idle; by new associations and confederacies
they laboured more perfecly to unite their party;.
the earl of Huntly, and' several other lords, who
still adhered to the popifli church, were induced
to concur in their measures by their indignation
against the French.

The queen regent, rather the instrument, than

the cause of involving Scotland in its diitreis, died
during the siege: poflefled of much discernment,
and no lefa address; intrepid yet prudent: hu-
mane without weakness; religious without bigo-
try ; just without rigour: all these great qualities
were poisoned by-her attachment to France, and
to the Princes of Lorrain, her brothers. To gra-
tify them, she departed from every maxim which
her own wisdom or humanity might have approv-
ed. A few days-btfore her death she desired an
interview with the prior of St. Andrew's, the earl
of Argyll, and other leaders of the congregation;
to them she lmnentcd the fatal issue of those vio-
lent councils whi h flie had beerrobligcd to follow;
but (le warned them at the fame time, amidst
their ftruigles for liberty, not to lose light of the

loyalty

loyalty which was due to their sovereign: the re-
mainder of her time flhe employed in religious ex-%
ercifes; the even invited the attendance of Wil-
cox, an eminent protestant preacher, listened to
his inftrutions with reverence, and prepared for
the approach of death with decent fortitude.

Nothing could now save the French troops in

Leith, but a peace, or the arrival of a powerful
reinforcement; but the princes of Lorrain were
at this time embaraffed by the protestants in France;
and instead of fending new troops into Scotland,
it became necessary, to defend the dignity of the
French crown, to withdraw the veteran forces al-
ready employed in that kingdom.

The interests of the French and English courts

were soon adjusted by Monluc, bishop of Valence,
and the fieur Randan, on the fide of the former;
and Cecil, and Wotton, dean of Canterbury, on
the part of the latter. The French consented to
withdraw the forces which had been the occasion
of war; but the grievances of the congregation
required longer time. The Scottish nobles could
not think themselves secure without fixing some
new bartier against the future encroachments of
royal power. The French ambassador confidered
it unworthy of a sovereign to treat with fubjeats;
yet the impatience of both parties overbore their
scruples: the Scots consented to accept the redrefa
of their grievances as a matter of favour ; Francis
and Mary agreed to grant what they demanded as
ads of royal indulgence; and the French ambaf-

fador

fador allowed these concessions to be inserted ii
the treaty with Elizabeth, and rendered her there-
by the guarantee of their execution.

In the treaty between France and England, the

right of Elizabeth to her crown is acknowltdged
in the firongeft manner ; and Francis and Mary
engaged neither to assume the title, nor to bear
the arms of king and queen of Englind, in any
future time to cosie.

Nor were the conditions of peace less advanta-

geous to the Scots; Monluc and Randan confernt-
ed that the French forces flhould be inflantly sent
back into their own country; that the fortifications
of Leith and Dunbar should be rafed ; that a par-
liament should be held the first day of Aaguft, and
should be declared valid, if called by the exprtfi
commandment of the king and queen; that the king
and queen should not declare war or conclude a
peace, without the concurrence of that parliament;
that during the queen's ab'sence, the admniniftrat;on
of government should be vested in a council of 12
persons, to be chosen out of twenty-four perfonls
named by parliament, seven of which council were
to be elected by the queen, and five by the parlia-
ment; that the king and queen flould not advance
foreigners to places of trust and dignity, nor con-
ser the offices of treasurer or comptroller of the
revenues upon an ecclfiaftic ; that a gencraLobli-
vion for all ollcnces, committed since the 6th of
March 1558, lhall be pafled in the enfwing parlia-
ment, and bc r.tified by the king and quetn; and

th:at

that the redress due to churchmen for injuries
which they had sustained during the late inftrrec-
tions, should be left entirely to parliament.

To such a-memorable period did the lords of

the congregation conduCt an enterprise, which at
first promised a very different iflue. A few days
after the conclusion of the treaty, both the French
and the English armies quitted Scotland; and the
eyes of every man in that kingdom was turned to-
wards the approaching parliament.

A meetl summoned at such a critical junc-

ture, and fleiiberate upon matters of so much
consequence, was attended by an unusual conflu-
erce of all orders of men. Btfides a full conven-
tion of peers, temporal and spiritual, there appear-
ed the representatives of almoil all the boroughs,
and above an hundred barons, who though of les-
f&r order, were gentlemen of the first rank and for-
tune in the nation.

Though no commiflioner appeared in the name

of the king and queen, yet the aflembly, by the ex-
press words of the treaty of Edinburgh, was de-
clared valid; the boldest leaders of the congrega-
tion, whose adherents greatly out-numbered their
adversaries, were chosen to be lords of the articles,
who formed a committee of ancient use and of
great importance in the Scottish parliament; their
deliberations were carried on with the most ative
zeal; the aEt of oblivion, the nomination of twen-
ty-four persons, and every thing prcfcribed by the
late treaty, were passcd without delay.

The article of religion employed longer time,

and

and was attended with greater difficulty. Againfl:
the opprefive discipline and corrupt manners of
the popish church, the protestants remonstrated
with the utmost severity of style; and though
several prelates attached to the ancient fuperfti-
tion were present; they deemed it impossible to
resist the torrent of religion, and dreaded to imitate
their adversaries by delay: and they were willing,
perhaps, to sacrifice the dotrine, and even the
power of the church, in order to ensure the safety
of their own persons, and to preferv~l posses.
sion of those revenues which were 'iin their
hands.

The parliament did not think it enough to

condemn those doctrines mentioned in the peti-
tion of the protestants; but they also approved a
confeflion of faith presented to them by the re-
formed teachers. By another ad, the jurifdi&ion
of the ecclesiastical courts was abolished; and by a
third statute, the exercise of religious worship, ac-
cording to the rites of the Romifl church, was
prohibited.

Thus did the vigorous zeal of the parliament o-

verturn in a few days the ancient system of reli-
gion, which had been eftabliflied so many ages.
In reforming the dotrine of the church, the no-
bles kept pace even with the expetations of Knox
himself. But their proceedings were flow and
dilatory, when they entered on the consideration
of ecclesiastical revenues. Many of the lay mem-
bers had already enriched themselves with the

2 fpoilu

fpols of the church, and others wa.ted in ex;; -
tation of v'it iill rem lined tn: truch:1 ; the pro-
pof.il of the: ref rmed'iminll't. rs, for pj:lvlyl. those
revenues towards the mainten tnlc of ;C.C.lCi'cS, t'lc
educition of youth, and the support of the p or,
was equally dreaded by tle prsotc. : t et. lcr-
and we find Knox, v.wiofe spIrit was fIpc rior to
the conliderations of interelt, exprciirig l.is indig.
nation at these early symptoms of avarice and fci-
fiflnefs which he beheld among his adherents.

The treaty of Edinburgh allowed the parliament

to tike into consideration tie ftite of religion,
and to figriify their fentimrents of it to the kin^,
and queen; but that afiTmbly, intc(ad of present-
ing their desires in the form of an aidrecfi, hadt
converted their into so many a ms, which ihad ob-
tained over the kingdom the mwcihit :aid autl:ority
of laws. To lay their proced(ing s before the king
and queen, Sir James Sandilands of Calder, and
lord St John, were appointcd to repair to the
court of France ; but l'ancis and Mary rccmived
the ambaflidor with coldnefi;; and, after endur-
ing the scorn of the princes of Lorrain, and their
partizants, he wa.s difililT:id without tlh ra;tification
of the parli.ament's prnceedings.

Thiough the aminl.li.dors of the parliamlent to

ElizabeLh met with a very (liifcrent reception,
they were not more filccefful in one part of the
negoci.ation entrufld to their c.:re. They he-
f:)iu4t tli.t priil:icl to rcndllr lie friendllhip bc-
t.veen tle two natirils ptrprtti al, by nmrryiru

1I tHle

the earl of Arran : who, after Mary, was the ul.
oubted heir of the crown; but Elizabeth, natu-

averse to marriage, declined tle proposal,

vith imany expreflions of good will towards the

ottifl nation, and of refped for Arran him-

Towards the conclusion of this year, distinguish-

ed by so many remarkable events, there happened
one of great importance. On the 4th of Decem-
berdied Frncis the Second, a prince of feeble
constitution, and of a mean undeiftanding. As
he did not leave any iflue by the queen, no inci-
dent could have been more fortunate to those,
who, during the late commotions in Scotland, had
taken part witl the congregation; Catherine of
Medicis, who, during the minority of Charles th,
Ninth, her second son, engrosscd the entire direc-
tion of the French councils, was far from haviin.
any thoughts of vindicating the Scottish queen's
authority ; and Mary, flighted by the queen mn-
ther, and forsaken by the tribe of courtiers, ulh.)
appear only in the funlhine of prosperity, rttirel
to Rlhimis, and there in fulitude indulged her
grief, or hid her indignaitin.

The death of the l,'rtnch monllrch excited ;:-

mong the Scots the flrolgiilt cmotiniis of joy, .il
was confidertd as :te only tvcnt wliicli cou.ld gixe
firinnicf and ft.bility to the fyitti of religion and
governmient which was now introduced. It was
about this time that the protellant church in Scot-
l;nd began to afiinli a regular frr.. Its prinei-

ples

l'es Ih'l o'oti ned the f.mni'on of public authority,
.nld lb.ine tfxcd external policy became nccefl';ry
for the gover:n ntt andl p rcfcrvtion of the infant
focict ; an; the !motiv\C which induced the refor-
,mers to di2cr from the model so long eiaali'ilhcd,
dcferve some expi;l:ition.

In gret part of Germany, in England, and in

the northern kingdomns, the operations of the re-
formation were checked by the power and policy
of the ptinces and the ancient episcopal jurifdic-
lion, under a few limitarions, was f'il continued
in tljefe churches. In Switzeland and the Low
Countries, the nature of the government allowing
full scops to the genius of the reformation, all prc-
cminence of order in the churches was destroyed;
the ituation of the primitive church suggested the
litter system, which has since obtained the name
ofpreA/bte'ri.an: Calvin was the patron and restorer
of this scheme of ecclesiastical policy; the church
of Gepnzva, formv'l under his eye, wa;s cftcemed
the nc l: perfec't mod.l1 of this governilllnt; and
Kiox, whol d:iring his refinlcnce in that city, lad
ludlie.l and adir:d it, \w.armiy recommiiended it to
the iminition of lis countrymacn.

Am -,ig thle S( tttifh n.lbi!i'y foime liatcd :hc prr.

so is, ;.,l others cvcted th: wvialth of the dignifi-
t1 clcr y; t

will e

tlhe pe)ii-' inflalld Iwith the most

violent av.rfion to pop-ry, approved of every
scheme that (lcpartcd( from the Romiifil church,
;:ndwcre d tlijhtcd ,vith a .' I'l n 'o a tmirably suit-
cd to tlheir prIdomi':ritt p1dIuon. Yet the num-

Il 2 bers.

bers or l!pe refor-ned; clriy, to wm :ce care cf
parochi.ili dluty was ennutllcd CI sr I;: ! , Xticlinciv
min!l; ithe tirft generMal iaflli )!. ti l.C church,
wvh;ch was htitl this ycar, b;.i:rs ;ll le marki (:f
an infant an I unforiied fcciery. Thle nmIbcrs
v'e_'rc eCw, :!rid of no conli;dcr.le ra il ; :i(l con-
'.ious es their ovwn wcakn.:f;, tlhey put all cnl to
ti:eir debates without entciing upon any decision
of much importance.

Knox indeed, with the afliftance of his brethren,

had composed a book of discipline, which contains
the model of intended policy, and might have gi-
ven strength to the presbyterian plan; but as it
insinuated a design to recover the patrimony of
the church, it met from the nobles a cold recep-
tion, who affeaed to confider it as visionary,
and bestowed upon it the name of a devout inagi-
nation.

The convention appointed the prior A D. 6.

of St Andrews to repair to the queen,
and to invite her to return into her native country,
and aflime the reins of government. The zeal of
the Roman Catholics got. however, the start of
the prior, and Lefly afterwards bishop of Ross, ar-
rived before him at the place of her residence.
Lefiy endeavoured to persuade the queen to throw
herself into the the arms of those who adhered
to her religion; he gave her assurance of being
joined in a few days by 20,oco men; and flat-
tered her, that with fiich an army, hli might

overturn

overturn the reformed church before it xws firmly
fettled.

But the princes of Lorrain, intcnt on defending

themselves agailnf Catharine of Medicis, had no
Itifure to attend to the niT.irs of Scotland, and
v i!licd tihir i.tice to take pofi'.-fion of the kingdom
with as little difit.rbanicc as poRible. The French
(ITicers too, who had served in Scotland, dissuaded
rtl.lry from all violent mcafures; who receive. the
piior of St Andrews with confi icice and aefition,
!nd1 give credit to liis reptrcfcntation of the state ol
tl`: kingdom.

In a fccond ccn'.cntion that was lIeld in Ma,,.

a!l anli'ilfl dor from Fr.nce solicited the Scots to
renew thei.r ancient alliance with the Freinch, and
to rflore the popish ecclesiastics to the poflftlion
'f tlihir rei enules and the exercise of their religion.
'Ihefe propositions weere rejected with s'orn, but
tlhe proteftint clergy found tliemfelvesalfo equally
ili,.int fromi obtaining the piatrimony of the church:
yvt in another point, the zeal of- the nobles was
confpicioufly displaycd. The book of discipline
required that the monuments of popcry through-
out the kingdom should be derrolified ; the con-
vention confidering every religious fablic as a re-
li: of idolatry, passed sentence on thenl in form:
and a deliberate and univeiftl rapine completed the
devastation of every thing vYi l.able and magnifi-
knlt, which had escaped the xviolcnce of popular
iniurrc ion.

II 3 Though

'lhcu-h MAary was in no lafce to return (,

Scotland, yet the mortifying nIcgltcl with vwhich
ihe was treated by the queen mother, forced her to
think of bceginniog her voyage. But while the w:.
preparing for it, there wtre sown between ier::: ,.!
Elizabeth, the feeds of that perf.tial jcalosl'y :uan
discord, which embittered tihe life, and lliorttniic
the days of the Ccottilli queen.

By the treaty of Edinbur}gh, t!h' Irec!;:h nani :l-

fadors had not only acknow!cid.led that the crow'n;
of England and Ireland be:longsed to Eliz/ii tli, b)t
had promiscd that Mary, in all times to come,
flould abRain from iifing the tit!c. cr h!b;arin, libC
;arms of thiofe kingdoms. By ratifing this artcke,
Mary would have lolt that rank which (fli had hi-
thcrto held among neighbouring princes; the zeal
of her adlierents mufl have gradti.illy coolt;d ; anil
the'n.iihit hiv.e renounced fromn that moment allI
- hopes of ecer wearing the Englifhl crcwn.

Yet there rean;lined a nmetlio w)iicli mirlit

have brought the present qutetion to an aiiic:,blc
issue. The intdfiiite and ;abigjuoui exprciiion
which Cecil hiad inf-rted into the treaty, mightl
have been cliangcd into one more precise: and
Mary might .have en,,aged not to afil;ie tle titi!
of queen of Eni and during the life of Elizaclli,
or of ierr lawful pollerity.

Such an amendment however did not suit the

views of either queen. Though Mary had sus-
pendled the proftcution of her title to the English
crown, fie lihid nut. rclincui uhcd it; and was un-

wi!'illg

willing to bind herself by a positive engagement
not to take advantage of any fortunate occurrence.
Nor was Elizabeth more inclined to recognize the
right of her rival to ascend the throne after her de-
cease ; vet neither ivrflt avow their secret senti-
r-lents ; and one solicited, and the other refused,
to ratify the treaty in its original form, without
either having recotrfe to the natural explication
of it.

Though the consideration ofintereft first occa-
sionrd the rupture between the Bririfil queens, ri-
va!fl;ip of another kind contributed to widen the
breach ; notwithdanding that Elizabeth was as
lmuch inferior to Mary in beauty and gracefulness
of person, as file cxcclled her in political abiliZes
and in the arts of government, yet ihe was weak
enough to compare herself with the Scotilh queen;
and amidit profefiions of regard, fle cnvied and
hated her as a rihjl by whom {he was eclipsed.

It was not long before Mlary was convinced of

the enmity of the Engiflh princess. In failing
from France to Scotland, the course lies along the
coast of England. In order to be safe from the in-
fults of the Englifl fleet, Mary demanded from
Eiizabeth a safe condutd during her voayge. This
was reje.ted; aind though the efufal filled Mary
with indignation, it did not retard her departure
from France.

Catharine of Medicis, who was impatient for

her absence, yet graced the lat farewcl of her
daughter-in-law widl every cireumltance of mag.

nificence,

nificence. With a fad heart Mary took leave of
that kindom, the short, but only scene of her life
in which fortune had finiled upon her. As long
as her eye could diftinguifi the co.fl, lhe continu-
ed to feed her melancholy with the profped, and
to utter " farewcl France ; farev.el btlovi\d
" country, ,t'lich I fiall never behold more ." at
last a bick gale arose, by the favour of which,
and laider the covert of a thick fog, flie cfcapldl
the Englifll fleet which lay in a.iit to intercept
her ; and on the g9th of Augult, after an abfliice
of near tlirteen years, landld lffcly at Leith in her
n,.ti\ve kingdoml.

Mary was rcceved by her fubjcas with accla-

mations of joy ; but they cou], not with all their
cfforts hide from her the poverty of the country,
a!nd were obliged to condual her with little pomp
to Iolyrood-houfe. The queen, accustomed to
magnificence from her youth, cquld not lielp ob-
serving the ch.mge in her (ituation, and seenmd
to be deeply afitcted with it.

Nev.r did any prinee afeend the throne at a

jun6turc which called for more wifldom in council,
or more cour;ge :nd ficadinefs in atlion. lhe
iage of re'igioun controvcrfy was ttill unalbated;
the abfcnce of their fovercign had accullolnc(d the
nobles to ind- pendence thc kingdom had long
been governed by regents, whose dtlegated autho-
rity inspired little rcverec ce; and during the two
lalt years, a slate of pure anarchy had prevailed.
The influence of 1rance, the anciclt ally of the

the

t~:e l:.igl!om, \;as withidraiwn or :l-

..!.;; :nd

the E'nlili haldl g;:iied an aiccndalilcv in all the
council; of the 4atinn.

In this poilure were the afftirs of Scolln'id,

when the adlminiitrat cn fell into the hands of
young queen, not nineteen ye irs of age, un:c-
quainted with the manners and laws of her coun-
try, a stranger to her fubjeEts, without experi-
ence, without allies, and almost without a friend.

On the other hand, the fubjeEts of Mary, long

unaccnftomed to the residence of their prince,
were dazzled by the splendour of royal presence.
The nobles crowded to testify their duty and their
affefion to their sovereign. t he amusements
and gaiety of her court, which was filled with the
mots accomplished of the French nobility, began
to polish the rude manners of the nation. The
beauty and gracefulness of her person drew uni-
versal admiration ; the elegance and politeness of
her manners commanded general refpec ; and
tli. progress she had made in the arts and sciences,
was far beyoud what is commonly. a:tained by
princes.

'While all parties were contenoding who fliould

dilcover the rnoft dutiful attachmlent to the queen,
the zealous spirit of the age broke out in a re-
markable instance. On the SunJavy :,ifr her ar-
rival, the queen commanded ma-. to be celebra-
ted in the chapel of her pal;ac. f'iu first rumour
of this, occasioned a fecrct murmurnilng among
the protcIants who attended the court; com-

plaints.

plaints ard threa:nings soon followed; t:c 1'r-
vants belonging to the cli.,cl were inl;ltcd and
abused; and if tile prior of St. Andrew's had nor
seasonably interpiofdl, the rioters might have pro-
ceeded to the utnioft excefl's.

'The prior of St. Andrew's and cther leaders of

the party, in spite of the cxclamations of the
preachers, obtained for the queen and her domes-
tics the undisturbed exercise of the Catholic reli-
gion ; and the protestants for this compliance were
gratified by a proclamation highly favourable to
their religion ; at the fame time the prior of St.
Andrew's, and Maitland ofLethington, both of the
reformed, seemed to hold the first place in tle
queen's affection, and to poflefs the reputation of
favourite ministers.

Elizabeth, who had attempted so openly to ob-

ftruE the queen's voyage into Scotland, did not
fail a few days after her arrival to command Ran-
dtolph to congratulate her safe return; and Mary
;lfo dispatched Maitland to the English court with
many cercn,4nious expreflions of regard. Both
the anibafladors were eitrulled lowcv, r \ ith
fomrthing more than mere ceremony. lh ndolll,
urged Mary witl frclh importunity to ratify thl'
treaty of Edinburgh; andl Maitland si nili d tile
w'illingnrifs of his inilr-'fs to dif:l tim any li lt to
the croa n1 of Englald during the life of I'lizactt1i,
and the lives (o her poltcrity, if in failure ot
tliefe file 'were Lcl.altd next heir by at of parlia-

Rcafoilnbl:

Rcafonable as this proposal might appear to Ma-

Ty, it was inconsistent with the predominant paixon
of Elizabeth; who, like her grandfather Henry
the Seventh, observed every pretender to the fuc-
cession with that aversion which suspicion inspires;
and fie rejeCted the demand with many expref-
sions of a resolution ncver to permit a point of so
much delicacy ro be touched.

About this time the queen made her public en-

try into Edinburgh; and though nothing was ne-
gleaed which could express the duty of the citi-
zens towards their sovereign, yet tle fcrtiments of
the nation discovercd themselves amidst these de-
nonlftrations of regard. Most of the pageants ex-
hibited the representations orthe vengeance which
tle Almighty had iiflitctd upon idolater ; and e-
rve while they itudied to aiiufe and flatter the
(u:en, her fubjeds could not refrain from tefti-
fying their abhlorrence of that religion which flie
proftefld.

'i'o r-thore the regul r adminiilratian of justice,

waIs the next olijec of the queen's care. Inl the
cooiiries whilh bordered on Engl.nd, the impo-
tence of reg.d authority, the violence of facdion,
;1aid the iicrcc manners of the people, had rendered
the execution of ihe laws feeble, irregular, and
pu'tial. I'he prior of St Andtrew's was the per-
lon choren to repress the clans who fubfitlte en-
tirely iy pillage ; the freeholders of elcvcn fevcral
citunzics were funimoned to afllil him in the dif-

chargy

charge of his office; lie executed his conlmilfio
with vigour and prudence; numbers of the banditti
iufiered the punii'hircnt due to their crimes; and
order and tranquillity were reltored to that part of
the kingdol.

During his absence, tile popifnl fation had taken

some steps towards infinlua;lng themselves into the
queen's favour: but the archbilhop of St Andrew's,
the molt conliderable of that party, was coldly re-
ceived at court, ard Mary discovered no inclina-
tion to take the adminifIration of affairs out of the
hiands to which tfie had already committed it.

The cold reception of the archbi'iiop of St

Andrew's was owing to his connexion with the
house of Ilamilton, from which the queen was
much alienated. Tl'he duke of Chatelherault, and
his son the earl of Arran, had espouscd with zeal
the cause of the congregation; the former conti-
nued to live at a difrance from the court; and
though the latcer openly aspired to marry the
queen, lie publicly protclted aig:iiili Mary enjoy-
ing the excrcifc of her religion ; while the fordid
parsimony of his father obliged him to appear in a
manner uhibccomilg his dignity as first prince of
the blood. Ilis love inflamed by disappointments,
and his impatience exafperattd by ncglect, preyed
gradually on his reabfon and after many extra-
vagancies broke out at last in ungovernable
frenzy.

Towards the end of the year a convention of
eflates was 11id1, chiefly on ;iccou;.t ofccclsliallical

: aftifirs.

affairs. The afembly of the church presented a
petition for the maintenance of the proteltant cler-
gy, Though these were considerably increased in
number, no legal provision had been made for
them; to remedy this evil, an exaa account was
taken of ecclesiastical benefices throughout the
kingdom; the present incumbents, of whatever
persuasion, were allowed to keep poffefllon; two
thirds of their whole revenue were reservcd for
their own use, the remainder was annexed to the
crown; and out of this the queen undertook to
assign a fuflicient maintenance for the protestant
clergy.

The latter were by no means considerable gain-

ers by this new regulation; they found it to be a
more easy matter 1o kindle zeal than to extinguish
avarice. The men whom formerly they had sway-
ed with absolute authority, were now deaf to all
their remonstrances; the prior of St Andrews, the
earl of Argyll, the earl of Morton, and Maitland,
all the most zealous leaders of the congregation,
were appointed to assign their flipends; an hun-
dred marks Scottish, was the general allowance;
to a few three hundred marks were granted; even
there were paid with little exarnefs ; and the *i-
nilters were kept in the fame poverty and depen-
dence as formerly.

The elegance of Mary's court had

A. D. i$6z.

in some degree mitigated the ferocity"
of the nobles; but this year became remarkable
for intcftine discord, and animosity. An here-

I ditary

dict-ly diTlansion had fuifiPted betwveen the houses
of Halmiltcn and Bothwell; and the earls of Ar-
ran and Bothwell lhappening to be in waiting at
the fLne

f time; their foilowers quarrelled in tlie

fircets of Edinburgh, and excited dangerous tu-
mults in that city. At aift, the meditation of their
friends, particularly of Knox, brought about a re-
conciliation, but an unfortunate one to both ofthefe
tl!blemen.

A few days after Arran confetfed to Knox, ard

then tothie prior of St Andrew's, that in order to
obtain the sole direction of affairs, Blothwell and
his kinfinen the IIamiltons' had conspired to mur-
der the prior, Maitland, and the othtr favcurites
of the queen ; though this conspiracy might only
exill in the dii tel-pcred fancy of Arran, and
though the persons accused delmied their guilt with
the utnioft confidence, yet the known characters
of the men justified the conducl of the queen's
ministers, who confined Bot3.hwcll .and Arran, and
obliged the duke of Chatelhcrault to furrcnder the
firong cafle of Dumbarton.

The designs of George Gordon earl of Iluntly

aginft the prior of St Andrew's were more deep-
ly laid. The power and poffeflions of that noble-
man were immense; and his condut, during the
late commotions, had been perfectly suitable to
the characlerof the family in that age, dubious,
variable, and crafty. lIe had observed the growing
authority of the prior of St Andrew's with jea-
lousy; pcrfollal injuries soon increascd the mifun-

derllanding

lr-fl.ldllgs o .l::, b}y i.,l ip in pw'.
The (uet-r !>.:3 rr'.';: I to re'.t.-id . p r, h'r
cre.ting li ji car c f .,r, .i '.:'o 'cJ. o'l n! :
the lands of t!.:.t n.:';'C. '1 i.i-, !: 'ih p rt f tl.''
roval nf'cL, l bet l ' ;

):( rve..r.by th

cearls of Ilunt!v; i :'i, "t.r2 . ' ; b Iil'd '.l:l "t
terror ar acti'.c rivji litro ;L . .c'.

i:. J tihe i c: t ci
}cis territorics.

His third son Sir john Gord6n, Iiad ii a quarrel

wounded lord Ogi;ie; the queen commandled
both offenders to be fcized ; Iut Gordon ef!capingg
out of prison, fled into Ahcrdeenfliirc, and cclm.
plained loudly of the indignity with which he had
been treated; and as all the queen's ations were a':
tils juncture imputed to thl etarl of IMar, this add-
cd rot a little to the refentmecn; which Hluntly had
conceived again!i that nobleman.

,o t. : } : ;

:' .

t:t;, a

tttc',.; b .y .1e carli.

of Mar, and Mlorton, set cut on a progress into
the northern parts of th! kingdom ; on her arrival
iu the north, the wifc of Huntly solicited tlic par-
.don of her son ; hut M.irv pcrcmintori!y refused,
unless he wouid n,.ain dc liver Limfelf into the
hands of justice: th'is Gordon was persuaded to
dlo; but lie soon ftecr escaped fronm his guards,
and returned to the comm.:ad of his follov.crs, who
were riling ii aurs all overthe north. lThe queen
on the firit intelli-tcncc of Gordon's flight, refused
to enlter the limule of the father ; and by this ad
* , r':fc:itillliit fivcd l,' r minliiilrs from ldefruc-

I : tioln;

tion; since IHuntly had ldtermined the aflaf;llation
of Mar, Morton, an(d Blaitla d.

The ill fuiccefs of private revenge precipitated

Huntly into cpcn rebellion ; by iis orders the gate,
of the castle of Inverness were fiht againt the
lueeen but the Monroes, l'raz'.rs, and Mackin-
toflics flocked to the I'fpport of their fovereig:i
by their affitance Mary conpi !l,'d the cafilc to
surrender, and infliacd on the goveltnor the pu.
nifliment which his infolelnc-' deserved.

This open a&S of (liobe(li.nee was the occasion

of a measure more gailing to HI-untly thart any the
queen had hitherto taken. l.ord Erckinc having
pretended a right to the earldom of Mar, Stewart
resigned it in his favour; anid at the fame time
Mary conferred upon him the title of earl of Mur-
ray, with the ellate annexcd to that dignity, which
Jiad ieen in the pofeffion of the earl Huntly since
the year t548.

From this he concluded his fa.nily was devoted

to ldeflrudlion, and aflnemblii a considerable body
of men, he advanced ripilly to Aberdeen, to
which pl.:ce the queen had retired. Murray, who
could gain nothing by dclay, marched f( rward to
meet him with what troops lie could ha(lily col-
let the superior colduLt of the latter decidedl
the fate of the day. At Corrichic the followers
of Huntly were attacked and broken; the earl
himself was trodden to death in the pursuit; his
sons Sir John and Aldam were taken ; aid Murray

returnidd

rcturned in triumph to Aberdeen with his prifo-

'I'hree days after the battle, Sir John Gordon

was beheaded at Aberdeen. lis brother Adam
wa s pardoned on account of his youth. Lord
Gordon, who had been privy to his father's de-
ligns, was fcized in the foutl, and upon trial
found guilty of treason; through the queen's
clemency, the punifllment was rtmitted ; Gut the
power and fortune of the family was reduced to
the lovwet ebb.

Ma\.rv hoad now continued above two years in

a state of widowhood ; and her alliance had been
fought by the most illultrious princes. The em-
peror solicited her hand for the archduke Charles,.
his third son; Philip of Spain for his eldest fonl
don Carlos, the heir of all the extensive dominions
which belonged to the Spanili monarch; and the
court of France interell.:d itself in favour of the
(luke of Anjou, the brother cf Mary's former htf-
band.

The Spanifih propofitiil;s, antd the profp)ct of

such vafl dominioi:s, flattered the ambition of a
young princess; but bclides the d.. h of her un-
cle, the duke of Guise, who fell by the hands of
an anfi:lin, as he w.is prosecuting the var againll
the proteflantst, al:d wh fe fall (dilinillhed the in-
terelt of the Scottifli queen in France, two other
circninftances con:currcd to divert Mary from any
ilhoughts of a foreign alliance.

1 3 EL:zlLbtth

Elizabeth dreaded the rcftlefs ambition of the

Auflrian princes, the avowed and bigotted pa-
trons of tle catholic superstition. She inctruaed
Randolph to remonstrate against any alliance with
them ; and to acquaint Mary, that the English na-
tion would regard such a match as the diflblution
of that confederacy which now subsisted between
the two kingdoms; at the fame time, though flt
preserved a mysterious silence concerning the per-
obn to whom file wished the choice of the Scottifli
queen to fall, yet fie threw out some hints, that a
native of Britain, or one not of princely rank,
would be in prudence preferred.

The protestant fubjets of MI3ry dreaded also

her union with any great prince, whose power
might be employed to oppref3 their religion and
liberties; and the queen, to remove the jealousies
of Elizabeth, and to quiet the apprehenlions of her
people, laid aside at that time all thoughts of so-
reign alliance.

A. D. S6 Though the parliament met this
A. D.1563.

year, no attempt was natde to procure

the queen's aflcnt o the laws eftablilhing the pro-
teltant religion. The clergy of that perfuafiotl
bore the temporizing conducl of( their leaders with
impatience; and Knox solemnly renounced the
friendship of the earl of Murray, as a man devoted
to Mary. This rupture, which continued above a
year and an half, is a strong proof of Murray's
eady attachment to the qlcen.

The

'rTe preachers difapnointed -1 tfien in whom

they placed the greatelt confide'nt eave: ent to
their indignation in their pulpt't'i loudly de-
claiimed against idolatry. The pi)e, inflamed
by their discourses, in the absence of the queen,
broke into her chapel at Holyrood-houfe, where
mass continued to be celebrated, interrupted the
service, and fi;led such as were prefcnt with con-
fternation. Tw3 of the ringleaders in this tu-
mult were seized, and a day appointed for their
trial.

Knox, who esteemed the zeal of these perfotns

laudable, issued circular letters requiring all who
profefled the true religion to affenble at Edinburgh
on the day of trial. One of thcle letters fell into
the hands of the queen; and a resolution was
taken to prosecute Knox ; happily for him his
judges were not only zealous protestants, but those
who in the late commotions had refiiled the
queen's authority; and after a long hearing, lit
was unaniinoufly acquitted.

The marriage of the Scottifhl queen

A. D. 1564.

continued still to be the objet: cf at-
tention; as Mary, in compliance to her fubjets,
and prefled by the flrongeft motives of interelt, de-
termined fpledily to marry, .lizabeth was obliged
to break the ilernce fle had hitherto affeced ; the
secret was disclosed, and her favourite, lord Ro-
bert Dudley, aftewards earl of Leicester, was de-
clared to be the person flie ihad chofln.

Eli zabetl

Elizabeth preferred her ministers for their ca-

pacityin business, her favourites for their beauty
and gracefuiTy : of person ; arid to the latter (Iiiali-
ties Leicefeite'folkly owed his grandeur. The
Scottish queen, folicitcl by so many powerful
princes, felt sensibly the humiliation of Elizabeth'j
prcpofal ; she difembled, however, with the Eng-
lifh resident; annd though file declared in itrong
terms what a legrad:ltion ihe flnould deem this al-
liance, file mentioned the earl of Leicester in
language full of refpec.

It is probable the attachment of Elizabeth' to

Leicester prevented her from seriously intending to
bdteow him upon another ; and that her only tc-
sign was to amuse Mary: it is certain, that Lei-
cefter hinifelf entered but coldly into the porpo-
fal; he flattered hi mfill, that the aitcl.ion of Eli-
zabetli might triium;i c:er her prudence and
pride; that lie mi ,ht t lat lafobtailn her ianId ; and
this hope induced him to impute the propof,:l cf
the marriage with the Scottilh queen, as a prcje'it
for his defiiruflion, and as tlhe filar of thc miiii-
iter Cecil.

While tlhefe negociations Nwerc intentionally

spin out by each party, Mary began to turn her
thoughts on HI.nry Stewart, lord Darnley, eliceit
son of the earl of Lennox. Tlhe wife cf that ino-
bleman was lady Margaret Douglas, daughtcr of
lIargaret, tlhe elhdkit fiitr of llcnry the Eighth,
by the call of Angus. L.ady Lennox, though
boril of a lecond al l.uri.age, wva one dcglcie ncall c

the

the roy;l blood of Engl nil; fhie was tile daugh-
ter, Mary o::ly the gr.ill-(ldtihitrr of Margaret;
ihe was borni i E1).ln:,d, and by a maxim of
lw;v in that country, wi:.h rega.ld to private in-
heritance, " Whoever is not born in England, or
' at least of parent-, wh.i, ,it the time of his
" birth were in the obcditnc.- of .he king of Eng-
"land, cannot enjoy any inherit.nce in the king-
" dom." Thi3 maxim, I-Iales, an Enizlih l.iwyer,
produced in a treatise which he pu!iithe. about
this time, and endeavoured to apply it to the rigl:t
of succession to the crown.

Mary was aware of 1ll this; and from the time

that she became sensible of the diTiculties which
would attend her marrying a foreign prince, she
entered into a ciofe connexion with the earl of
Lennox, and invited him to r.tAr. to $co:-'l.
whence he had been driven out, and had lived in
banishment near twenty years. The designs of
Mary did not escape the difeernmcnt of Eliza-
beth; hie was pleased to fee the plide of thl
Scotith queen Itoop at alft to the thoughts of t.lk-
ing a fubjcEt to her bed. l'arnly w.s in no
situation to excite her fears ; his father's estate
lay in England ; and no sooner did lennox, un-
der pretence of profecutiug his wife's cl.im upon
the earldoin of Angus, apply to Elizabeth for her
licence to go to Scotland, than he obtaincd it;
with letters, recommending himi to the protcalion
of Mary.

Yet the Eniililh queen warned Mal y, at the

falme

f.ime tm;e ihat any iinlullnce ti> I.en:i(x n:r;,L;
p:ove i.tal to herfclf, by levivinr the antitnt :.ii
mcfity bcvween him an;:ile loutli of I-Iami!tk!'.
'l'hLs admonition dlrew; from AMary an allnrv re-
ply; tie correfpolndcince Lctweeni tlic twvo (lueeli,
'wans for foine time interrcitcdl : at lI:igth, by the
iadilrefs of IMtlvil, t1:c ainb.:'i:dor cf Scioti.in, the
alpnc.'rcn. cc f ,li::r:;Ic:y waVs Ici r d(i.

T'lhe qacen ernployed her influence to reconcile

the Hamiltons to Lennox; and Ahe Fcrfiaded the
latter to soothe the House of Douglas, by dropping
his claim to the title of Angus. After these pre-
lir.inary steps file c'lled a parliament, in which
,ennox was publicly refftred to the honours and
citates of his ancestors.

In order to bring the real intentions

of Elizabeth to light, Mary intimated

to Ran"u;p,;l tiat on condirion- that her right of
fncceflion to the crown of England was acknow-
ledged, fle was ready to yield to the folicit.tions
of his nlflrefs in bchalf of I.eiceftr : but thoulgh
ti'e Englith quo:ni promil;d, if the marriage with
Lcicefter should take place, to advance him to high
dignities, flic hloulh not fufler any enquiry to be
ma1d rcfpecCling the fuceffion, till the herfelt
fliould declare lher resolution never to rimrry.

Previou; to tliis anfwcr, tlihiugh no fi.raibgr lo

the fenriments that i'ltry began to entertain for
liim, flie had ;Iiven per:iflion to DarnIly to vilst
th, couirt cf S'ol.und. ,'She hcl:-d tu dirrd1 tlih

niotutnti

lmotions of DI)rnly, and again to ir;vo've M1 ry in

tli intricacies of negociatiin ; but tl:is deep laid
feiheme was in a moment disconcertcd. Lord
Darnly was at this time in the filit bloom and vi-
gour of youth, and he eminently excelled in such
arts as nc'd cafe and elegance to external form his
conquest over the qucen's heart became complete;
and inclination now prompted her to ccnclude a
marriage, the firil thoughts of which had been
suggested by considerations mercly political.

As Darnly was so nearely related to the queen,

it was necefl'lry to obtain the pope's difpcinftiol;
and wlhiic Mary set on foot a ne'ociation with
the court of Rome, fle wks busy at the fame time
in procuring the consent of the French kinil, and
liis nother; these, as they had no hopes that
Mary wot.ld lIoop to a French subje&t, encourag-
cd her pre.':it paifion.

But while Mary was endeavouring to reconcile

foreign courts to a measure which 11he h id so much
at heart, D)artly, bv his behaviour, was railing tup
enemies at home. Wrjth a weak underltLnding,
his pafiluns were impetuous; and intoxicated with
the queen's favour, lie began already to afTume the
imperious air and haughtiness of a king.

It was by the advice of Murray and his party,

that Lennox had been ilvited into Scotland; yet
tlhe latter now began to enter into secret cabals
igainlft that nobleman ; while Darnly, (fill more
imprudtcnt, a:!owed fomne rafl expressions to es-

cape

cape Lim concerning those favours which the
queen had conferred upon Murray.

But the fainiiairty which Darnly had cultivated

with .ivid Rizzio, was the chief source of dif-
gust to theinobility. This Italian, the son of a
musician in Turin, had accompanied the Pied-
montefe ambaflador into Scotland; and had gain-
ed admiflion into the queen's family by his Ikill
in music. His servile spirit had taught him sup-
pleqcfs of temper, and insinuating manners. He
was soon prefered to the place of secretary to the
queen ; was admitted to her confidence; and
grew not only'to be confidered as a favourite, but
as a minister. He discovered In all his behaviour
that assuming insolence with which unmerited
prosperity inspires an ignoble mind; and the no-
bles who had bcheld with indignation the power,
more loudly exclaimed against the arrogance of
the unworthy minion.

M.iry had afttcted hitherto to conceal her pre-

ference for DIarnly; (lie now determined to at
more open; and dispatched Mlaitland to signify
her intention to Eliz-beth, and to solicit her con-
sent to the marriage. That princess affeced the
greatest furprize at the sudden resolution; and
though the train had been laid by herself, she pre-
tended to soresec many dangers and inconvenien-
cies. She consulted even her privy council, with
regard to the answer (he should return; and they in
conformity with her views, drew up a remon-
firance against the proposed match ; to enforce

3 ihis

this she appointed Throgmorton as ambafadlor
:o Scotland; and not long after, flie confined
1advy Iennox as a prifbner, rirfI in her own house,
and then font her to the T'ower.

Mary, after giving vent to the first transports

of indignation, received the English ambanflaor
with refpeó&, and juflified her own condluc with
decency. Out of complaisance to Elizabeth, she
pretended to put off the confuinmation of the
marriage for some months: but this interval w: s
afliduoufly employed in procuring the pope's dif-
penfition, and in gaining the content of her sub-
jc s.

Of these the eari of Murray was the mor:

powerful; and that nobleman already perceived
that Darnly had est-ranged from him the queen's
confidence; his ambitious spirit could not brook
the diminution o! his power; ' 2 retired into the
country, and gave way to a rival with whom he
was unable to contend. Mary at this period in-
vited him back to the court with many expreflions
of esteem ; but The in vain endeavouring to pre-
vail on him to subscribe a paper containing a formal
approbation of her marriage with Darlly, he con-
tinued at that time to decline the request of the
queen ; and in a convention of the nobles, which
wXls aflembled fooln after, many of that order, in-
fluenced by the example of Murray refused their
conl fit.

M anwhile Mary gave a public evidence of her
own inclination, by confcrring upon Darnly titles

K of

of honour peculiar to the royal family. The op-
position she had already met with, produced i:;
usual effet on her heart; it confirmed her pas-
sion, and increased its violence. Love fliarpened
her invention, and made her study every method
of gaining her fubjccts. On some (he bcflowed
lands, to others fl(e gave new titles of honour;
fle even condescended to court the protestant cler-
gy; f he invited three of them to Sterling; and
exprefled her willingness to be present at a confer-
ence upon points in doctrine, which were difput-
ed between the proteflants and papists.

On the other hand, Murray and his associates

were dupes of Elizabeth's policy; and conceiving
that princcfs sincere in her opposition te the mar-
riage, they entered into measures for seizing
Darnly, and carrying him a prisoner to England.

Mary, receiving intelligence of Murray's enter-

prize, retired with I)arnly, from a second conven-
tion which had been summoned at Perth, and re-
paired to Edinburgh: fie there summoned lihr
vafils by proclamation, and solicitLd themn by let-
ters to protect her perlon againlt: her foreign andl
domeflic enemies, She was obeyed with prompt-
ness and alacrity; and confident in the fiupport of
her people, fle directed Murray to appear husei ic
her, and to alfier to fulch things as fliould Le i.lid
to his charge.

At this very time Murray, and the lords who

adhered to himi were allmblcd at Stirling to d(ii-
bcratc what course they filould hold in fucl a

dillict.!r

dl'ficult conjunn(ture. But the current of popular
favour ran so firong anainft them, and notwith-
sl.iding some fears and jcaloufies, there prevailed
in the nation such a general disposition to gratify
thle queen in a matatr which so nearly concerned
her, th:it without coming to any other conclusion,
than to implore th.e queen of England's protetion,
they put an end to their incfteEtual consultations,
and returned ev()y man tb his own house.

Mary, thus aflured of the weakness of her ene-

mies, determined to bring to a conclusion an as-
fair \lhich had so long engroficd her heart, and en-
gaged her attention. On the 29th of July she
married lord Darnly; she iflfed at the fame time
proclamations, conferring the title of king of Scots
upon her huiband ; thoughe ertainly lie had no
right to raise him, without the content of parlia-
ment, to that dignity, yet MItry pofli-fred so entire-
ly the confidence of her fubjed:s, that scarce any
fTi ,mptoms of discontent appeared.

Tlirec days after the marriage, Murray was a-

g iil; fdlilllied to appe ir at court, and on his dif-
ob)cdience,, li was declared an outlaw. Neither
he nor his confederates had yet openly taken arms;
I t. tihe queen having ordered her' fubjeds to
i.arch out

1 againilt them, they lled into Argylefhire,
.rId i:nplored the all ilua nee of Elizabeth.

Tliut princess ail'ctedt to blame the precipitate

nimrri.l.g: of Mary, and to vindicate the coidult of
Murray. ;She furnillied Murray and his adherents
with a fnmall fumi of money, who now\ endeavoured

K 2 to

to raise their followers in the weflern counties;
but Mary's vigilance hindered them from aflnm-
bling in any considerable body. She marched at
the head of her forces, tnd by her alacrity, inspired
them with invincible resolution. As ihe advanc-
ed, the rnalecontci!ts retired, and despairing of es-
fedive resistance, fled at length into England.

The conduct of Elizibeth on this occasion dif-

plays the wretched condition of exiles, who are
obliged to depend on a foreign prince. Murray
and Hamilton could not even obtain from her the
favour of an audience, until they had meanly con-
sented to acknowledge, in the presence of the
French and Spanill ambafflaors, that Elizabeth
had given them no encouragement to take up
arms. No sooner did they make this declaration,
than she aftonifled them with the following re-
ply. " You have declared the truth; I am
" far from setting an example of rebellion to
"my own fubjdcs, by countenancing those who
" rebel agaiunL their lawful prince. The treason
" of which you have been guilty is detestable, and
" as traitors I banith you from my pretence." Not-
withstanding this scene of farce and falsehood, so
dishonourable to all the persons who aaed a part
in it, Elizabetl permitted the mnalecontents peace-
ably to reside in her dominions, and renewed her
intercession with the Scottifi queen in their fa-
vour.

Mary, to improve her advantage, had called a
meeting of parliament in order that a sentence of

forfeiture

forfeiture might be pronounced against the ba-
nilhed lords. T'he duke of Chatelherault, on his
humble application, obtained indeed a separate par-
don ; but he was obliged, however, to leave the
kingdom, and to reside for some time in France.

The nlumcnrou; forces which Mary had brought

into the field, and the length of time that fle had
kept them in arms, exhausted a treasury which was
f.:r from bting rich ; to supply the royal exigency,
lines were levied on the towns of St Andrews,
Perth, and Dundee. A considerable loan was de-
manded fromn the city of Edinburgh : but the in-
habitants firmly resifted this unprecedented exac-
tion; and the queen, to obtain the money, was o-
bliged to mortgage to the city the superiority of
the town of Leith.

K 3 Chapter

# Chapter the Fourth. MARY's hostile intentions against the reformed - Imprudence of Darnly - Murder of Rizzio - Murray recalled - Morton and other conspirators fly to England - Mary disgusted with Darn ...

Chapter the Fortih.

MARY's ihofilc intentions againfl the reformcd-!mrl-udcnce

of Dainly-Mulrder of Kizzio-Murray recalled-- loMrton
and other conlpilators lly to ]'ngland-Mary difgulled witi,
Darnly-lier partiality to Bothwvell-Birth of James the
Sixth--Murder of Darnly--Acnfatlioni of Bothwell -His tri;'
-He c-.-ries off Mary--lk created-duke of Orkney - His mar-
riage with the qlecn--General indignation of Europe-Con-
federacy of the Scotlin nobles--Proceedigsl of the qucen an'd
Bothwell-Tlhey retire to Dunbar-Afl'inbb!e an ;rmy, and
advance towards the confcdetatcs-Irrelflutioi of Bothwcil;'s
followerb--l1e takes leave of Mary, and quits the field-
Thec queen lirrcnilcrs to Kirkal ly of the Grange-1, treat-
ed with indignity by the foldiers-Is contluded uinidtl the
inlults of the pl(ople I to Edinburgh.

A s the day appointed for the meet-
ing of parliament approached, Mary
and ler minilters were enployed in deliberating
concerning the course which it was moil proper
to hold with regard to the exiled nobles; many

powerful

powerful reasons inclined the queen to sacrifice
her refentmeiits, and to treat them with clemency;
but in the moment that file confidered the man-
ner in which hlie flould extend her grace to them,
the arrival of two arrbafladors from Fiance fa-
tally disappointed the effkets of this amicable dif-
position.

The objet of the firit envoy was merely to

congratulate the queen on her marriage, and to
inveit the king with the enrigns of the order of
St Michael. The inftrudions of the latter related
to matters of more importance, and produced great-
er cfteils.

Ift an interview between Charles the Ninth,

and his filter the queen of Spain, measures were
tConcerted for fupreffing the reformation through-
out Europe; and the second French envoy con-
jured Mary, in the name of the king of France,
and the cardinal of Lonain, not to restore the
leaders of the protestants in ler kingdom to power
anid favour, at the very time when the catholic
princes were combined to destroy that felt in the
countries of Europe.

Mary herself was deeply tinEtured with all the

prejudices of popery; {he was devoted too, with
the utmost fiobmiifion to the princes of Lorrain,
her uncles; and had been accustomtd, from her
infancy, to liften to all their advices with a filial
refped. lihe pilofp.: ' ns restoring the public ex-
ercife of her religion, tlh pletfurc of complying

with

with her uncles, and the hopes of gratifying the
French monarch, counterbalanced all the prudent
considerations which had formerly weighed with
her; she instantly joined the confederacy, and
altered the whole plan of her conduct with regard
to Murray and his adherents.

By a new proclamation, the i 2th of March was

fixed for the meeting of parliament ; Mary rc-
solved to proceed to the attainder of the rebel lord:s.
The ruin of Murray and his party seemed now
inevitable, and the danger of the reformed church
imminent, when an event unexpectedly happened
which saved both.

Darnly's external accompliihments had excited

that sudden and violent pallon, which raised him
to the throne; but the qualities of his mind cor-
responded ill with the beauty of his person. Of
a weak underltanding, and without experience, he
was at the fame time conceited of his own abili-
ties; fond of all amusements, and even prone to
the vices of youth, lie became by degrees careless
of Mary's perfom, and a f(ranger to her company.
In proportion to the queen's firlt afnetion, was
the violence with which her disappointcd paflions
now op-rated(; their domcftic quarrels were fc-
mented by the extravagance of Darnly's ambition,
who now demanded the crown matrimnii.al with
the most insolent importuiltl ; nor was to be fa-
tisfied with the defence of TVMrv, ltht tlhe gtft was
beyond her power, .nil i;tat (nj, '. 'ority ot par-
liament mull be interpolc Io 1 . it.

Rizzio,

Rizzio, whom the king had at first taken into

confidence, did not humour him in these follies;
by this he incurred Henry's displeasure, whose
haughty spirit could not bear the intrusion of such
an upstart; and unrestrained by any scruple he in-
fLtntly resolved to get rid of him by violence.

The fame design was harboured at the fame
time by Morton, Ruthven, Lind'ay, and Maitland,
who had warmly promoted the queen's marriage,
and expected the chief management of affairs
would have been committed to them. Difap-
pointed in their expectations, they conceived the
return of Murray and his followers as the only e-
vent which could restore them to their former as-
cendancy over the queen's councils; and as they
imputed the rigour of the quten towards that no-
bleman, to the suggestions of Rizzio, the difguit
which they conceived against him inlpired them
with thoughts of vengeance in no wife suitable to
justice, to humanity, or to their own digiity.

While they were ruminating upon their scheme,

the king communicated to them his resolution to
be avenged of Rizzio, and implored their assistance
in the execution of the design; they saw at once
the advantage they hmould reap from the concur-
rence of such an associate; they infl;tmt( Hlenry's
resentment by insinuation of a criminal familiarity
between the queen and her favourite ; and they
wrought upon his ambition by a promise to pro-
cure the crown matrimnonial. The king on the
Qther hand engaged to obtain the pardon of the

banihcd

baniflicd lords, to proteCt those embarked in rhe
enterprize againsi Rizzio, and to support to the ut-
molt of his power the religion now clfablifhcd in
the kingdom.

Nothing remained but to concert the plan of

operation the place clofen was the queen's bed-
chamber; and, on the ninth of March, Morton en-
tered the court of the palace with one hundred
and sixty men, and seized the gates without refit-
ance. The queen was at supper with the coun-
tefs of Argyll, Rizzio, and a few domestics, when
the king fuddenlv entered her apartments by a pri-
vate paflage. Behind him was Ruthven clad in
complete armour, with three or four of his molt
trusty accomplices. Such an unusual appearance
alarmed those who were prcfcnt; and Rizzio, ap-
prehending that he was the victim aimed at, in-
itantly retired behind the queen. Numbers of
armed men now rushed into the chamber. M.!ry
in vain employed tears, threats, and entreaties, to
save her favourite ; lie w~s torn from her by vio-
lence; and before he could be dragged through
the next apartment, the rage of his enemies put .an
end to his life, piercing his body with fifty-fix
wounds.

The conspirators in the mean time kept polilf-

ion of the palace, and guarded the queen m ith the
utlnoft care A proclamatioi was publilhed by
the king, prohibiting the parliamnent to meet on
the day appointed ; and Murray, Rothcs, and their
followers, informed of evcey Itep ag.illit Rizzio,

arrived

arrived at Edinburgh next evening. Murray was
graciously received by the king and queen; and
the latter hoped by gentle treatment to prevail on
him not to take part with the murderers of Rizzio;
the obligations which Murray lay under to these
men, compelled him to labour for their safety; and
the queen was persuaded to grant them a promise
of pardon, in whatever terms they should deem ne-
ceffary for their security.

The king, conscious of the insult he had offer-

ed to so illustrious a benefat'refs, laboured now
to regain her affetions: Mary, availing herself
of his irresolution, prevailed on him to dismiss
the guards which had been placed on her person,
and to escape with her to Dunbar. There they
were quickly joined by Bothwell, Huntly, and fe-
veral nobles: and the number of her followers e-
nabled the queen to let the power of the confpira-
tors at defiance.

This sudden flight filled them with confterna-

tion; it now appeared, the promise of pardon
was only meant to amuse them ; the queen, at the
head of eight hundred men, advanced towards
Edinburgh, and talked in the highellt irain of
resentment and revenge. She had the address
at the fame time to f-parate Murray from the
coufpirators againfl Rizzio; that nobleman was
no less wiliidg to accept a pardon, than his fove-
reign to grant it. While the conspirators, de-
prived of every resource, fled precipitately to
Newcaitle, having thus changed lituations with

Murray

Murray and his party, who left that place a few
days before.

No man so remarkable for cunning as the earl

of Morton, ever engaged in a more unfortunate
enterprise. Deserted basely by the king who
now denied his knowledge of the conspiracy, and
abandoned by Murray and his party, he was obli-
ged to fly from his native country, to resign the
high office of lord chancellor of Scotland, and to
part with one of the most opulent fortunes in that
kingdom.

Mary, on her return to Edinburgh, began to

proteed against those concerned in the murder of
Rizzio; but in praise of her clemency it must be
observed, that only two persons, and those of no
considerable rank, suffered for this crime.

Though Henry had published a proclamation,

disclaiming any knowledge of the conspiracy against
Rizzio, the queen was fully convinced that he was
the contriver of that crime ; this outrage, joined to
his dissolute condute, had changed the coldness of
Mary, to an aversion which flie could no longer
conceal. Among the nobles, some dreaded his
furious temper; others complained of his perfidi-
ouflefs : and ail despised the weakness of his un-
derflanding; when at court he appeared with lit-
tle fplkndour; and avoided by e;c-ry party, he was
left alnioft alone in a ncgletcd .lad unpitied soli-
tude,

About this time Jamc. ! !T y'urn, earl of Both-
well, grew into great credit with the queen ; by

2 his

his extenfilve pofieflions and numerous v.ifTls, he
was one of the most powerful nobleman in the,
kingom. Even in that turbulent age, when so
many vast projets were laid open to an aspiring
mind, no man's ambition was more daring than
Bothwell's, or had recourse to bolder or more fin-
gular expedients for obtaining power. When the
conspirators against Rizzio had seized the person
of Mary, he became the chief instrument of reco-
vering her liberty ; her gratitude loaded him with
marks of her bounty; and by complaif.lnce and
afliduity, he confirmed there dispositions in his fa-
vour, and paved his way to that height which he
perhaps already aspired to, and which in spite of
many difficulties, and at the expence of many
crimes, he at length attained to.

On the 9th of June Mary was delivered of her

only son, James; and MIclhil was instantly dif-
patched with an account of the event to Elizabeth,
who affecled to receive the news with fatisfadion,
and accepted Mary's ofilr to Itand godmother to
her son; finiiliar invitations were also dispatched
the French king, and the duke of Savoy.

The breach between the king and queen be-
came in the mean while more apparent, and the
ascendancy of Bothwell over the latter more pub-
lic; the haughty fpilit of Darnly, accustomed to
command, could ill brook the contempt under
which he had fallen. He conceived the wild re-
solution of embarking on board a flip, and of
flying into foreig nparts. He communicated the

L design

lefign to his father the earl of Lennox, and to ihe
French ambassador; both endeavourcd to dissuade
him from it, but without success. Lennox com-
municated the matter to the queen by letter; who
endeavoured to draw from Henry the source of
of this proje&, and to divert him from it; he
afigned two reasons for his dufguit; that Mary
no longer admitted him into any confidence ; and
that the nobles, after her example, treated him
with open negle&.

To screen her reputation from the censure

which the flight of the king might cast upon it,
and to prepoflefs the minds of her allies, the queen
ordered her privy council to transmit a narrative
of this tranfation, both to the king and to the
queen mother of France.

About this time the licence of the borderers

called for redress, and Bothwell, who was lieute-
nant of all the marches, attempted to seize a gang
of banditti who lurked among the marshes of Lid-
derdale. While he was laying hold of one of
these desperadoes, he was wounded by him in fe-
veral places, so that his followers were obliged to
carry him to Hlermitage castle. Mary instantly
flew thither with the anxiety of a lover ; finding
Bothwell was threatened with no dangerous fymp-
tom, ihe returned th.it fame day to Jcdburgh ; but
the fatigue of her journey, and the agitation of her
mind, threw htr into a fever, which fle only
furmountd( by her youth and the goodness of con-
llitution.

On

On her recovery, the attention of MIry was

dircated towards England ; her pretensions to the
succession of thi;t kingdom were favoured by the
Englilh p.rliament; a motion was made in both
houses for addrcfling the queen either to marry,
or to consent to an aa eftablifling the order of
fucccflion to the crown. Elizabeth bent all her
policv to eludle or d-feat this motion ; he called
into her preftnc: a certain number of each house;
fle fIothed and c.arrtffed them ; fle remitted sub-
sidies which were due, and refused those which
- were offered ; and in the end prevailed to have this

formi,!able motion put off for that fetion. Hap-
pily for her, the conduct of the Scottish queen,
and the misfortunts which besel her, prevented
the revival of it in any future parliament.

As neither the French nor Piedmontefe ambaf-

fadors were yet arrived, the baptism of the prince
was deferred from time to time. Mean while
Marv fixed her residence at Craigmillcr ; a deep
mc(.'incholy fuccetdcd to that gaiety which was
nI'tlral to her ; the raflnlfs a;nd levity of her own
choice, and tile king's ingratitude and obftinacv,
iiiltd her witlh flam and difpair. MIurrav and
IM\.:itl.ind o!ferv\td all thecfe workings of passion,
:'"(t conceived hopes of tiuring them to the ad-
\,a:t. ;c of their anctl.Cit Ilb!ciates, Morton and
tile otier colnirirators agilnfll Rizzo. 'lhcy propo-
fed to obtain a sentence of divorce from D).rnly, if
ileh queen would stipulate in return the pardon of
orto:n and his followers; but Mary, however

L 2 desirous

dclirous of being delivered from Dairnly's cap ice-,
rtjetctd the proposal; the birth of lhr foil had
ftrengtliened her claim upon the Einglifl fuccef-
sion; and fle could fcarcc hope to be divorced
from her hulband, without throwing some impu-
tation upon her Ton.

''he earl of Bedford, and the count de Brienne.

the Englilih and the French anibaffidors, being ar-
vived, Mary set out for Stirling to celcorate the
baptifrn of iher fou. 'I le nmagnificence displayed,
exceede(l wliattvc-r hld bcltc known in Scotland;
but inither IBedford nor any of the Scottiih nobkts
who profclTed the proteflant religion, would wit-
ntfs a ccremony which xsas performed according
to the rights of the Romifli church.

A few days after the baptism of the prince,

Morton, and all the other conspirators against
Rizzio, obtained their pardon ; this favour was
granted to the solicitations of Bothwell, who daily
rose in power; whlile the king, long funk in soli-
tude and contempt, quitted abcut this time Ster-
ling, and retired abruptly to Glasgow.

1-le had fearce reached that city be-
A D. r$67.

fore lie was seized with a dangerous

dillemper ; the symptoms which attendtd it were
violent and unusual, and it was in that age impu-
ted to poison ; the vigour of his conflitution fur-
mounted the m.ldignity of the disease. During
his illness Mary displayed the greatelt indifference,
and fufl'ied near a month to e.apfe before flie vi-
fited him at Glafguw; by that time, the king,

though

though weak and languishing, was out of danger.

Though the refentmcnt of Mary againit the

king seems not to have abated from the time of
his leaving Stirling, yet flie now not only visited
Henry, but by her words and actions endeavoured
to express an uncommon affecion for him. The
source of this diflimulation is laid open by two of
her letters writen during her stay at Glasgow, to
Bothwellt. That nobleman had now gained an
:ibfolute afcendancv over the queen ; and she con-
fciled to him, that her reconcilitior with Henry
was merely an artifice. She Htill dreaded the king
might leave Scotland, and retire into a foreign
country; a circuml.ance whidJ mult have been
highly dishonourable to the queen, and would have
entirely disconcerted Bothwell's measures. While
-Henry resided at Glasgow, he might with more
facility accomplifli his designs; fle therefore em-
ployed all her art to remove him to some place
mere immediately under her eye ; and at last per-
fuaded the credulous king to fix his residence in
the neigbourhood of Edinburgh.

The place prepared for his reception was a

houte belonging to the provost of a collegiate
church called Kirk of Field. On a rising ground
and in an open field, it had all tlh advantages of
healthful air; but on the other hand, the solitude
of the place rendered it extremely proper for the
commission of that crime, with a view to which it
seems manifestly chosen.

L 3 Mary

t Mary's alleged lettcrs no Bothwcll arc now preved to be in.
ómoua foxIcrica.

Mary continued to attend the king with the

mofi alTiduous care; lie heaped on him so many
marks of confidence, as in a great measure quiet-
ed those suspicious which had so long diflurbed him.
But while he was fondly indulging in dreams of
the return of his former happiness, he flood on
the brink of deftrudion. On funday the ninth of
February, about eleven at nignt, the queen left
the Kirk of Field in order to be present at a masque
in the palace. At two next morning the house in
which the king lay, was blown up with guinpow-
der. The noise and Ihock alarmed the wiole
city; the inhabitants ran to the place whence it
came; the dead body of the king, and that of a
servant who slept in the fame room, were found
lying in an adjacent garden, without the city wal!,
untouched by fire, and with no bruise or mark of
violence.

Every one's imagination was at work to guess

who had contrived and executed this execrable
deed; the suspicion fell, with almost a general
consent, on Bothwell; and some reflections were
thrown out as if Mary herself was no stranger to
the crime ; a proclamation which fie iflued, with
a considerable reward to any person who ihould
discover those who had been guilty of the murder,
by no means changed the public opinion; which
was confirmed to her disadvantage by the high fa-
your in which Bothwell flood.

In the mean time Lennox incited Mary to ven-

geance with inceflanit importunity he declared
hi1t suspicion of Bothwell, and urged her to bring

him

him to a fpeady trial; decency would not allow
the queen to elude this demand; but intlead of
confining his person, (he admitted him into all her
councils ; though the offices which he had already
poffcfled, gave him the command of all the south
of Scotland, the castle of Edinburgh was a place
of too much consequence not to wish it in his
own power. ''he queen, in order to prevail on
the earl of Mar to surrender it, consented to put
the young prince into Lis hands, and immediately
bestowed the government of that important for-
trefs on Bothwell.

The day of trial for that nobleman, was by the

privy council fixed, on the twenty eighth of March,
or the twelfth of April following. This /hort
space was the only interval allowed to Lennox to
accuse a person so far superior to himself in power
and favour. He in vain complained of the in-
jury done him by hurrying on the trial with such
precipitition; he in vain required Mary, as she
regarded her own honour, to confine the person
who was suspected as the author of the murder;
neither his entreaties or the interference of Eliza-
beth, who seconded his solicitations, were attended
with the smallest effed.

On the day appointed Bothwell appeared, but

with such a formidable retinue, that it would have
been dangerous to condemn, and impotfible to pu-
nilih him. Lennox was called upon to make good
his accusation; in his name appeared one of his
dependants, who cxcufcd his master's absence oni

account

account of the flortnefs of the time, which pre-
vented his afliembling his friends and vafl :ls, with-
out whose assistance he could not set himfeJf in
opofition to such a powerful antagonist. For this
reason he desired the court to flop proceeding;
while on the other hand, Bothwell infilted that
they should proceed to trial. Lennox's objections
were over-reled; and the jury, eounfifing of beers
and barons of the first rank, sonnd Bothwell not
guilty of the crime.

That nobleman however did not rely on the

judgment which he had obtained, as a full vindi-
cation of his innocence. Immediately after his-
acquittal, he in compliance with a custom, which
was not then obsolete, bublifled a writing, in
which he osiered to fight in single combat, any
gentleman of good fame, who should presume to
accuse him of being accefary to the murder of the
king.

Every flep taken by Bothwell had hitherto been

attended with all the success which his molt fan-
guine wiihes could expeCt. He had entirely gain-
ed the queen's heart; the murder of the king
had excited-no public commotion; lie hind been
accquitted by his peers of any flare in the crime;
aid their decision halbeen in forne fort ratified
in parliament. To secure the approbation of the
nobles to the completion of his projects, he invit-
ed a great number to an entertainment at his own
house He demanded their consent to his marriage
with the queen and by threats and perfualions.

prcvailedj'

prevailed on all who were present to sign a paper,
in which, after an acknowledgment of his good
fcrvices to the kingdom, they recommended him
to Mary as the molt proper person she could cllufe
for a husband.

'I'hree days after the rising of parliament, Mary

went from Edinburgh to Stirling, in order to vilit
the prince her son. Under the pretence of an ex-
pedition agaiinft the freebooters of the borders,
Bothwell aflfmbled his followers, and with a thou-
find horse marched towards Linlithgow, met the
queen, difpcrfcd her slender train without refilt-
ance, and conducted her, with a few of her cour-
tiers, to his castle of Dunbar.

Mary on this occasion expressed neither surprise,

nor terror, nor indignation, but seemed to yeild
without itruggle or regret. The appearance of
violence afforded her a decent excuse for her con-
duE ; and flhe hoped that her reputation, among
foreigners at least, wculd Jfcape without censure,
or be exposed to less reprc2ch. Bothwell, who
fill diltrulled his late acquittal, was dc(irous of a
pardon under the great feal. By the laws of
Scotland, the molt heinous trime mnut he menti-
oned in a pardon, and then all Icfilr oflnllces are
deemed to be included under the general clauft,
iand l to/1/.'r crimes twhail/tfc.'er. o1'0 fcizc the
perbfn of the prince is high trcafon ; and Both-
well hoped tht a pardon obtained for this, would
extend to every thing of which he had been ac-
cufed.

To

To conflumnmate his schemes, that nobleman

instantly comnmenced a suit, in order to obtain a
sentence of divorce from his wife, Lady Jane Gor-
don, the earl of Huntly's filter. The pretexts
which he pleaded were trivial or scandalous. Iut
his authority had greater weight than the juftitc
of his cause; and in both courts, sentence of di-
vorce was pronounced with the fame indecent and
frfpicious precipitancy.

Soon after lBothwell conducted the queen from

Dunbar to Edinburgh, and lodged her in the cafltle,
of which he was governor. Though the difcon-
tent of the nation rendered this precaution ne-
ceflary, fill one difficulty remained to be fur-
mounted; as the queen was kept in a fort of
captivity by Bothwell, her marriage might be im-
puted to force. In order to obviate this, Mary
appeared in the court of fefion, and declared, that
though Bothwell's violence in seizing her, had, at
first, excited her indignation, yet his refpeEtful
behaviour since, had not only appeased her rcfent-
ment, but determined her to raile him to higher
honours.

What these were, soon became public. T'he

title of duke of Orkney was conferred upon
Bothwcll; and on the lilteenth of May, his ni.Lr-
riage with the queen was solemnized. 'lhie finall
number of the noblks wlo appeared at the m;ar-
riage, and the lullcn lilence of tle people when the
queen appealed in public, were fynmptonms of the
general ditfltitfacton of hlr own fuljects. The

rcfufal

refusal of du Croc, the French ambalTador, to be
present at the nuptial ceremony, discovers the fen-
timents of her allies.

The eyes of the neighbouring nations were fixed

at that time upon the great events which had hap-
pened in Scotland during three months. A king
murdered in his capital; the person fufpeted of
that crime acquitted by a sentence which served
only to confirm the suspicions of his guilt; and
permitted without opposition to marry a queen,
the wife of the prince whom he had assassinated.
Such a succession of detestable incidents, left a
mark of infamy on the charaEer of the nation;
and the Scots were held in abhorrence all over
Europe.

'hefe reproaches roused the nobles, who had

hIirerto been amused by Bothwell's artifices, or
intimidateil by his power. A considerable body
of them entered into an afflciation; and Argyll
Athol, "M.lr, Morton, Kirkaldy of Grange, and
Malitland the Secretary, were the heads of this
confederacy.

The account of this league filled the queen

alnl Bothwell with terror; and in order to prepare
for the dtorm, Mary issued a proclamation, requir-
ing her fubjels to ta.ke arms, and to attend her
huiband by the d.iy appointed. But the confede-
rate lords carried o'i their prepnartions with more
fucccfs; and were ready to mairch before the
q:een and Uothwell were in a condition to resist
tlhem. The two lattjr fled precipitatcly towards

Dunbar,

Dunbar, while the confederates advanced towards
Edinburgh, entered the town without refiftancc,
and were inffantly joined by a number of the
citizens.

At Dunbar, Bothwell assembled his forces; and

he soon gathered such Itrength, that with the
queen he prefled forward to engage the confede-
rates; these, on the first intelligence of his ap-
proach, advanced to meet him. The numbers on
both fides were nearly equal: but the queen's
army consisted chiefly of a multitude, hastily as-
fembled, without courage, or experience in war.
The troops of the confederates were composed of
gentleman of rank and reputation, followed by
their most trusty dependants.

Du Croc, the French ambaflador, who was in

the field, laboured in vain by negociation to pre-
vent the effusion of blood. The paffionsof the
nobles were too high to admit of any pacific pro-
positions. They advanced resolutely but 'slowly
against the queen's army that was poited on a rising
ground. Her troops were alarmed by their ap-
proach, and discovered no inclination to fight. A
few of Bothwell's immediate attendants were eager
for the encounter; the reft stood wavering and
irresolute, and some began to steal out of the
field. Bothwcll endeavoured to inspire them, by
offering to decide the quarrel in single combat with
any of his adversaries. Kirkaldy of Grange,
Murray of Tullibardin, and Lord lindsay,. ctn-
tended for the honour of entering the lift, against

2 him

him. But either the confcioui ess of gult depIiv-
ed Botlhwell es his wointd courage, or the queen,
by her authority, forb:id the combat.

After the symptoms of fear discovered by her

followers, Mary would have been inexcufible had
flie hazarded a battle. To have retreated was im-
praaicable, since part of the enemy firr.oluned
the hill on which ile stood. In this situation flie
demanded an interview with Kirkaldy, a brave
and generous man, who commanded an advanced
body of the enemy. He, with the consent, and
in the name of his party, promiled, that on con-
dition she would difiifs Bothwell, and govern the
kingdom by the advice of her nobles, they would
honour and obey her as their fivereign.

During this pariy, BothwJc! took his lafl f:are-

well of the queen, and rode off the field with a
few followers. This dismal reverse happened ex-
actly one month after that marriagc which had cost
him so many crines to accomplish, and which
leaves so foul a ftaii on Mary's memory.

As soon as lothwtll retired, Mary ifurrendered

to Kirkaldy, who conduaced her towards the con-
federate army. Morton, in the name of the lead-
ers, made amplc profcullons of future loyalty and
obedicnce; but by the flldicrs Ihe was treated
with the utmolt indignity. Wherever file turn-
ed her eys, they held before her a flandard, on
which was pai'ltcd the dead body of the late king,
and the yonng prince kneeling before it and utter-

;,M Aing

ing these words, " Judge and revenge my cauec,
"O Lord!"

Amidst these insults, the confederates carried

her to Edinburgh. The streets were covered with
multitudes, whom zeal or curiosity had drawn to-
gether to behold fucli an unusual scene; and the
queen, worn out with fatigue, covered with dust
and bedewed with tears, was exposed as a spec-
tacle to her own fubjeas, and led to the provoPi'L
house.

C%~l~ia~e

# Chapter the Fifth. MARY is carried prisoner to Lochlevin. - The earl of Murray solicited to accept the regency. - His interview with Mary. - Accepts the office of regent, - Fate of Bothwell. - Mary re ...

Chap :fcr the Fifth.

hM \R' is carri d prifcner to l.oihl-vin.-Tl.e earl of Mar-

rJ. si iicitrd to acc.pt thle -cgeucy.-- I 1 ;intrview wi:h
lMar)'.-Ac.- ipr th ilthece f r. gcnt,--:at uof Bothwell.-.
Ml\.ry clly ;l, trh crown to hi)r li:.-:,-l i parliament con-
firm Murray as regent--- Mary cfcr;pcs from prifotn.- I
tde(tated at Langl;id:.-Efcapes to En1!anld.-Condui: cf
t i;..ibe.h.-Maily conlciits to 'uiil:iit hcr conduct to the
lc, lioln oftlh qlucen ofi L:iglane.-Con;mmil:c'nLrs appointed
by Elizabeth, Mary, and Muiray.-Iltrigues of the duke
of Norfalk.-The confercnce removed to XVefminifler.-
Arts of Eiizabe;i.-Cominoti)ns in Scotland.-Projea of
a marriage betwscen tie duke of No; ifl: and the queen of
S,::.,.-lt is dilcovcred by Eliz:abeth.-KIirlaldy quits the
p.ilty of the rccnt, anc fcie, the caf.l! cf L.liinburgh.-
R'vl: ,so the .' Is of : Jrthunljb'r!-n I a;i \VctmorlaiTd.-

Ail..liiiat;:i of the regent.- I.s ::ar..ccr.

lit r: cofretlcr.tre IcrT:; l:;tl proccc.idld to such

cx:r.:m'i:ics tl.'itill thlr:r lovct.l.'1 , lithat it lnow
!,.'ca! it'ip.ilijlc for t' :,r eCither to fl.op llort,

:. to tlue ;it couil c I. is vitIl:t. MI.r'v's ;fl'C-
tion for BothlM lil Ilill coii i;nucdt .s iole nt. a; ever:
ihlc t)ubl'.ntttlv ri.fct:f.I to U!Lr:'k :o
: t ;' prplf.'.l

for dlilTlving thltir marriage; and they reckoning
thenifelvcs thus alfolvct from any einagemIlnts,
xvhen the yielded Iicifelf a prisoner, carried her
under a ftroAg guard to the calll of Ioclhlcvin ;
ind figlned a warrant to Williamn Douglas, the
(,,Incr of it, to detain her na a prifoncr.

Itmcmit(lyIv after the qutcn's impnrifonilent,

l})c coiifcdier.atts- wcre ;it the utlo{l: lt );i,is to
!iw iietl.cn their ,parlt; they ciletrced ilito new
,orntls of al];ci.ition ; t vh y aiflincd(l tlih tll' r,.i

.!,;',J I/r,'}J" . ;.-,-'t ,;ntil; ;ind without .ni olth'r
;i At, ;trar.; :t: to t!;rnmfclVIc ttl: vh!,oi rcg.l
power. One of tlicir first aCts was to fcarc!l the
city of Edinburgh for those who were concerned
in the murder of the king; and an unexpected
accident put into their hands what they deemed
the fullkft evidence of Mary's guilt.

Bothwell having left in the castle of Edinburgh

a caflet containing several sonnets and letters,1:
written with the queeil's own hand, he now sent
one of his confidents to bring him this precious
deposit; but as the mcfl'nger returned, he was in-
tercepted, and the cafkct seized by Morton. T'he
contents of it were always produced by the party
as thc most almple jufirfication of their own con-
dutt, and the molt unaufwcrable proof of, their
not having lo;dled tleir fovcrign with the imput.-
tion of ialiginiary crimes.

The confederates, though ftcure from the at-

tergpts of tleir own counitrylmen, whlo, without
Icaders of vigour and reputation, could only give a

I o(tv'

i Ini,,. ,,ou fu rgctiss . Sec Il'itl.
S lr.

.Iofe to murmurs and compl.ints, were yet alarn;-
ed at the profpeC of danger from another quarter.
This great revolution in Scotland had been car-
ried on without any aid from Elizabeth, and even
without her knowledge. Her notions of rov:tl
prerogative were very exalted. The conduct of
1tie confederates w;s a dangerous example to o-
ther fubiets; and Mary's cadule became the com-
mio:n coufe of princes. Elizabeth therefore instant-
I: d(ispatched Throgmorton into Scotland, with
p-ower to negociate both with the queen, and with
tie confcderates. But the latter peremptorily

,:ijind that ainball.idor acccfs to their royal prison-

cr; al nd what propoiltions he made to them in her
bhialf, they citlhcr rcfufed or cluded.

Meanwhlile they deliberated with the utmost an-

xiety coinccrinin the fettleme.:t of the nation, andl
tlhe future difpof.l of the queen's person. Many
(Onfll lations were held, and various opinions a-
iufe with regard to each of these. At length all
p.rrices united in one fcheime ; by which Mary
was to be pcrfualced or forced to rtlign the crown:
lie young prince was to be proclaimed king ; and
tlhe eall of Murray was to be appointed to govern
the kingdom, during his minority, with the name
and authority of regent. With regard to the
queen's person, nothing was (leterinilled ; though
it seems to have been the intention of the con-
federates to keep her in perpetual inprifon-
Imcit.

M3 It

It was obvious to fee difficultics in the execu-

tion of this plan. Mary was young, ambitious,
:ind accustomed to command: to induce her to
acknowledge her own incapacity for governing,
and to invest with her authority those whom she
confidered as the authors of her calamities, were
points hard to be gained. But lhe ha;d already
endurcd, for fevcral wveeks, all the hardflips an.l
terrors of a prison ; no person, in whom flih could
confiic, was admitted to her presence; ccrtain
death was prcfentcd to her eyes if Ihe refused to
comply with the confederatcs: Ihe wai informed
by Sir Robert Melvil, in tle name of Athol, Mait-

iand, and Kirkaldy, persons the most attentive to
ier interest, tlat a Icl;gn.tio!i, extorted by fear,
was not biniling the fnie intelligcnce was con-
veyed in a note to 'lr by Tlirotenortoti. IDe-
Ierence to their opinion, and concern for her own
faf.ty, prevailed; anid lie lubCcribcd the papers,
by which flhe refigied the crowi to her son, and
;appointed the earl of Muiray rege;t.

The confederates cndeavoured to give tl,is refig-

snation all the weight and validity in their power,
by proceei'ng without delay to crown rhe young
prince. '[Ie ceremoney was performed at Stir-
ling, in the prci'cAce of all the nobles of the party,
a considerable number of Itfier barons, and a
great afficnbly of the people.

No revolution. so great was ever-eflectRed with

moic ease, or by means so unequal to the end.
hu a warlike age, and in less time than two months,

U

a part of the nobles, who neither ponfeffed the
chief power, nor the greatest wealth in the nation,
and who never brought three thoufaind men into
the field, seized, imprisoned, and, dethroned their
queen, and without tllhlding a single drop of
blood, set her son, an infant of a year old, on the
throne.

The return of the carl- of Murray, about this

time, gave a regular furm to the palty. Soon
after the murder of the king, this nobleman had
retired to.France; and now retirned at the desire
o)f the chiefs of the confederacy. He fecmed at
lirft unwilling to accept rhe office of regent, and
asseted to continue some days in fufpence, to bal-
ance the strength and resources of the contending
!',Etions. 1Bfore he declared his final rcfolution,
ihe waited on Mary at Lochleven. Naturally
i-orgh and uncourtly in his manners, he expoftu-
lated so warmly with the queen on her faults, that
Mary melted into tears, and abandoned herself to
despair: while Murray, blon after his return from
Lochieven, accepted the ollice of regent, and
)eg-tn to adt in that charaAer without oppofi-
lion.

Ami(dst so many great and unexpeEed events

the fate of 13otllwcll, the chief cause of themn all,
hath been aimoll t.)rgotten. Hlunted from place
to place, defcrt:dI by hii fliinds, and accompanied
by a ftw retainers as dlcfperate as himfclf, he
fuifered .t once the mli^liCs of w.ant and infamny,
His i!:;.;Lc:nt: ferct. llim Oil a courCf of life

whichl

which increased the latter. He armed a few
ftfips which had accompanied him from Dunbar,
and attacking every veflel which fell in his way,
endeavoured to procure fubfi{tence for himself and
his followers by piracy. Kilkaldy and Murray of
Tullibardine were sent out against him by the con-
fedcratcs; and scattering his finall fleet, obliged
Ilim to fly with a tingle fliip towards Norway.
On that coast he fell in with a cflel richly lilen,
and immediately attacked it. The Norwegians
failed with armed boats to its assistance;; :nd as-
ter a defpcrate fight, Bothwell and all his crew
were taken prisoners. I-is name and quality
were both unknown ; and he was treated at fir2t
with all the indignity and rigour which the crime
of piracy merited. Hlis real characer was soon
discovered, and though it saved him from an infa-
mous death, it could neither procure him liberty,
nor mitigate the hardships of his imprisonment.
lie languiflied ten years in this unhappy condition;
melancholy and despair deprived him of reason,
and at last lie ended his days, unpitied by his
countrymen, 2nd unafifiled by firangcr;.

The good cleccls cf Murr.y's acccion to the

regency were quickly felt: the party forming for
the queen was weak, irresolute, and disunited;
and the members of it soon began to treat fepa-
ratcly with the regent. So many of them were
brought to acknowledge the Ling's authority,
that scarce any appearance of opposition to the

ealtlblited

eiltblifned government was left in the ling-
dom.

The regent was no less successful in his at-

t.mpt, to get into his hands the place of strength.
1lilfour, the deputy governor, furendered the
castle of Edinburgh; and as the reward of his
treachery, in deftrting Bothwell his patron, ob-
tained.terms of great advantage to himself. The
governor of Dunbar, who discovered more fidelity,
was fuon forced to capitulate; tome other small
forts furrendcred without refiltancc.

This face of tranquility in the nation encou-

raged the regent to call a meeting of parliament,
to confirm the king's authority, and the proceed-
ings of the confederates. The numbers that re-
forted to an assembly which was called to deli-
berate on manners of so much importance, were
great. The meeting was opened with the ut-
most solemnity; and all its ats pafled with much
unanimity. Mary's resignation of the crown was
accepted, and declared to be valid. The king's
authority, and Murray's election, were recognized
and confirmed. The imprisoning the queen, and
all the other proceedings of the confederates, were
pronounced lawful; and the letters whlich Mary
had written to Bothwell were produced, and file
was declared to be accellbry to the murder of the
king.

A few days after the diflblution of

A. D. x568.

parliament, four of Bothwtl'a3 depen-
;i:s3 were convi:d : 'if being guilty of the king's

ml urder,

murder, and fuiTered death ac traitors. Their cc,-
fetlions brioug)ut to light in:, v cil'Cumr::::mcs rc-
lative to the manner of co;mlitriug that clime;
but they were p:rfoos of l']; ra;ik, . nd fcemed
not to ha:ve been admitted into the secrets of the
confipracy.

Amidit the external appcarn.nee of fil-bn:ilTmcn nt,

the regent, fccrct murnlt rs aid c.ib;!l lkrtevlild.

lhe partizans of the hlionf of ilan:iltoii rcckoitd

Murray's promotion an i',ii:ry to the (lu!e of
Chatelherault, who was firil prince of the bloodl;
the length and rigour of Mary's fifl-rings I;-
gan to interefr ma;ny; and th- ftvere virtues of
Murray, and his haughty and dliiant dcpirtmen;,
offended sone of the nobles, and alarmed otliers.
The queen's fnaion began again to unite ; nln
were secretly favoured by fevcral -who had :ithcr-
to zealoully concurred with the confedexat.s.

Such was the disposition of the nation, whlen

the queen unexpe'tedly recovered her liberty.
Mary had employed all h-r art to gail (;eorge
Douglas, her keeper's brother, a youth of cilh-
teen. She even allowed himi to cntcrr;iin lhocs
that fie would choose hili for a hlflb.n d. .At
his age such a tenptation w:as not easily to hi) ie-
fifled. -c viclded, and drew others i:to the i!'(:.
On Sund.iv tihe second of M:yv, whil lis l:r-tihcr
fat at supper, and the reft of the fainily wcre rc-
tired to their devotions, one of his acroir;lic's
found means to flcal lthe keys cut of l:is lrothltr',
chamber, and opening the g.tcs to tlhe ;utcn ll;id

U C

,o;e of her maids, locked them behind her, and
then threw the keys into the lake.

Mary ran with precipitation to the boat which

was prepared fur hc ; and on reaching the snore,
was rec-ived with the utmolt joy by Douglas, lord
Seaton, and Sir James Hamilton ; who with a few
attendants, waited for her. She mounted instantly
on horseback ; and after refting a few hours at
lord Seaton's, The pursued her route, and arrived
next morning at Hamilton,

On the firlt intelligence of Mary's escape, her

friends ran to arms ; in a few days her court was
filled with a great and splendid train of nobles,
accompanied by fich numbers of followers, as
formed an army of above fix thcufind strong. In
their presence flie declared that the rcfignation of
the crown, and other deeds that she had signed,
during her imprisonment, were extorted from her;
and the chief men of her party pronounced them
therefore illegal. At the fame time an aflociation
was formed for the defence of her person and au-
thority, and subscribed by nine earls, nine biffhops,
eighteen lords, and many gentlemen of diftinc-
Iion.

At the time when the queen made lher escape,

the regent was at Glasgow, holding a court of
juflice. An event so contrary to their I. peta-
tions, impreflid with terror his adl rcuats;; and
their councils were divided and flu' tuating. Some
adviscd him to retire to Stirling, as Glaifgow was
anl unfortilicd town, his own train but slender, and

the

the country was full of the friends and dependants
of the house of Hamilton.

On the other hand, the citizens of Glasgow

were well affeced to the cause; the vaflals of
Glencairn, Lennox, and Semple, were at hand,
and were both numerous and full of zeal ; and in
war, success depends upon reputation as much as
upon numbers. The resolutions of Murray were
prompted by wisdom, and executed with vigour.
He declared against retreating, and fixed his head
quarters at Glasgow, While he amused the
queen with pretending to hearken to overtures, he
drew together his adherents, with the greatest in-
duftry; and though far inferior in number to the
enemy, such was his confidence in the valour of
his troops, and the experience of his officers, that
he broke of all negociation, and determined to ha-
zard a battle.

At the fame time the queen's generals had com-

manded her army to move; their design was to
conduct her to Dumbarton cafil, a place of great
strength, which the regent had not been able to
wrest out of the hands of lord Fleming, the gover-
nor. But if the enemy should interrupt their
march, they resolved not to decline an engage-
ment. In Mary's situation, no resolution could
be more imprudent. A p.art only of her forces
was aflembled , flee might afluredly depend on the
friendfllip and countenance of France; flhe had
reason to expect protcotion from England and

2 she

file had much to hope from pursuing flow and cau-
tiois measures; and her enemies had every thing
to fear.

But her hopes were naturally sanguine, and her

passions impetuous; and elevated by her sudden
transition from the depth of distress, to filch an un-
usual appearance of prosperity, flie never doul)tcd
of success. Her imprudence in refoi'ving to figt,
was not greater than the ill conduct of her generals
in the battle. They attacked the regent on bri-
ken ground, where the superiority of their cavalry
could be of no benefit. The Hamiltons, who com-
posed the van-guard, ruffed eagerly forward, and
left the main body behind. The encounter was
fierce; but as the Hamiltons were not Supported
by the reft of the qucen's army, they were soon o-
bliged to give ground, and the rout immediately
became univcrfal.

During the engagement, Mary flood on a hill,

and when she saw the army, which was her last
hope, thrown into irretrievable confusion, her fpi-
rit, which all her past misfortunes had not been
able to subdue, funk altogether. In the utmost
consternation she began her flight; and so lively
were her impressions of fear, that lie never closed
her eyes till she reached the abbey of Dundrenan,
in Calloway, full sixty Scottish miles from the
place of battle.

The queen was now obliged to lurk, with a
few attendants, in a comrer of her kingdom, and

N not

not thinking herself safe, even in that retreat, her
fears impelled her to retire to England ; an action
the most unadvised, as well as the nmoft unfortu-
nate, in her whole life.

Mary could not be insensible to the mutual

distrust and jealousics that had prevailed between
her and Elizabeth. She had endeavoured by fe-
cret negociations and intrigues, to advance her
own pretensions to the Englifl crown; and Eli-
zabtth had openly supported Mary's rcb'llious
fubjeCs, and fomented all the dissensions in which
her reign had beed involved. The regent, after
his victory, had marched to Edinburgh, and not
knowing whlat course the queen had taken, it wvas
several days before he thought of pursuing her.
She might have remained concealed among sub-
jests dtvoted to her interest, till her party, which
was difperftd, rather than broken, should gather
such flrcngth that fie could again appear at their
head.

But the horrors of a prison were flill frefil in

Mary's memory ; and if Ihe flould f;ll a second
time into the hands of her fubjcd.s, there was 1n
injury to which the presumption of fncccfs miglt
not embolden them to proceed. T'o efclpe into
France, wns almtft impossible ; nor could hlc bear
the thoughts of appearing an exile in that king-
dom where fte had once enjoyed all the fpleiltc-iir
ofaqueen. Eliz ibetlhaddeclaiimcd wvnrlyagailft
the procccdings of her fubjc.(s, luld fjli.itud i for

her

her freedom wkih the appearance of sincerity, had
invited her to take (lelter in England, and proinif-
ed to give her such a reception as was due to a
qaeen and an ally. Though her attendants on
thc'r knees conjured her not to confide in Eliza-
beth's promises opr cnerofity, her infatuation was
invini ible. ferries, by her command, wrote to
Lowther, the deputy governor of Carlisle, to know
whit reception he would give her; and before
his answer could return, her fear and her impa-
tience wzre so great, that she got into a fiflier-
boat, and with about twenty attendants, land-
ed at Wirbington in Cimberlnd ; and thence
fle was conduted with many marks of rcfpea to
Carlisle.

As soon as Mary arrived in England, flle wrote

a long lctter to the queen, respecting the in-
juries iie had received, and imploring pity and as-
fifance. An event so extraordinary employed the
thoughts of Elizabeth and her council. Three
ditierent resolutions prtf:iitcd themfclves with re-
gard to the queen of the Scots; to re-instate her
c,. J er throne, was one; to allow her to retire in-
: Friance, wvas another; to detain her in England,
w.:s a third.

'lie lilrt would expol, the nobles, wirn were

ni.c. lirinly attaiLled to the Ensilith interctf, to
M.'nv ' rtfenitiaent; and as the gratitude of prin-
ces is feldo:n long or l;iifi.ig, reg.rd to her ad-
'v:it,!g minigh f.cnl efl'ice the Imemory of her

liaions to E'izabcth, and lrui prt !r: r to renew

N :: the

the alliance of the Scottifil nation with France,
and revive her own pretensions to the Englifli
crown.

To dismiss her to France, was not less danger-

cus; the French king could not refuse his assist-
ance towards restoring his sifter and ally to her
throne ; and Elizabceth would once nore fee a so-
rtign aimy in the island, over;:wing the Scots, and
ready to invade her kingdom where it was weakeit
and most dcfcncelefs.

Nothing therefore remained but to detain her

in England ; and to permit her either to live at
liberty there, or to confine her in a prison. In
the former cafe, her court would become a place
of resort to all the Roman Catholics, to the dif-
asseted, and to the lovers of innovation ; and her
beauty, her address, her sufferings, by the admira-
tion and pity which they would excite, could not
fail of making many converts to her party.

To treat Mary as a prisoner, might indeed excite
universal indignation; but Henry the Fourth had
fcized the heir of the crown of Scotland, who was
forced by the violence of a ftorn to take refuge in
one of the ports of his kingdom, and detained him
a prisoner for many years; this ation, though
detested by posterity. Elizabeth resolved to imi-
tate; but to screen herself from the censure her
conduct merited, and to make the treatment of the
Scottish queen look likethe effect of neceflity rather
than of choice, flie determined to put on the ap.

pearance

pearance of concern for her interest, and of deep
sympathy with her fuffcrings.

With this view (he dispatched lord Scroope and

Sir Francis Knollys to the queen of Scots, with let-
ters full of expressions of condolence and kindness;
but they were privately inftrulted to prevent her
tfcape into her own kingdom ; and when Mary de-
manded a personal interview with the queen, they
nfwivcred that it was with rcluctance this honour
was at prcfont denied her; that while tle lay under
the imputation of a crime so horrid as the murder
of her hutband, their miflrefs, to whom ihe was so
ncarly allied, could not, without bringing a slain
upon her own reputation, admit her into hrT pre-
Iencc ; but as soon as she had cleared her lss from
that afpcrfion, they promised h.-r a reception suit-
able to her dignity, and aid proportioned to her
diflrefs.

rhil pretence led the queen of the Scots into

dtl snare in which Elizabeth and her ministers
wilhcd to entangle her. Mary, who could not be-
lieve so many profefrions void of sincerity, frank-
ly offered to submit her cause to tlNe cognizance
of Elizabeth. This was the very point to which
the Englilh queen laboured to bring her. By
this appeal, she became the umpire between Mary
and her fubjedts; it was in her own power to
protralC the inquiry to any length and in the mean
time, she was furnished with a plausible pretence
for keeping her at a diflance from court, and for

N 3 refuting

refusing to contribute towards replacing her on the
throne.

Even had Mary discovered the secret intentions

of Elizabeth, and by receding from the offer
which she had made, had endeavoured to difap-
point thenm, that princess was determined not to
drop the inquiry, and had thought of several dif-
ferent expedients for carrying it on. The coun-
tefs of Lennox, convinced that Mary was accef-
fary to the murder of her son, had demanded with
tears the trial of the Scottilh queen. The confe-
derates had openly accused vMary of the fame
crime ; and it would be no difficult matter to pre-
vail on them to petition the queen of England to
take cognizance of their proceedings againfl their
fovercign ; at the fame time the obiolete claiml ot
the superiority of England over Scotland began to
be talked of, and on that account it was pretended
that the decition between Mary and her fubjc('ti
belonged of right to Elizabeth.. But that plincef;
still wished that the enquiry into Mary's conduct
flould appear to be undertaken purely in compli-
ance with her own demand, and in order to vin-
dicate her innocence anti so long as that appear-
ance could be prefcrved, none of the other expc-
dients were to be employed.

Mary, in submitting her cause to Elizabeth,
nmeant to confider her as an equal, for whose fa-
tisfaciio, n fle was willing to explain any part of
her conduCt that was liable to censure; and not to
cUtowlesdge her as a superior, before whom fh.

was

was bound to plead. But Elizabeth represented
herself as chosen to be judge in the controversy
between the Scotifl queen and her fubjeds, and
began to at in that capacity. She proposed to
appoint commilfioners to hear the pleadings of
both parties; and wrote to the regent of Scotland
to impower proper persons to appear before them,
in his name, and to produce what he could alledge
in vindication of his proceedings against his so-
vereign.

Mary, by this proposal, plainly perceived the

artifice of Elizabeth's condut, and saw what a di-
ninnution it would be to her honour, to appear on
a level with her rebellious fubjets, and to stand
together with them at the bar of a superior, and a
judge. She retracted the offer that file had made;
and in the language of grief and indignation, fie
demanded either to be permitted to implore the
aid of other princes, or to be furnished with that
assistance which would everbind her to the queen
of England in the ties of indissoluble gratitude.

Notwithstanding the remonstrances of Mary,

the council of Elizabeth agreed that the latter
princcfs could not confidently with her own ho-
nour, or the safety of her government, either give
the Scottilh queen the aliiftance which fie de-
manded, or permit her to retire out of the king-
dom; and left (le should have an opportunity of
escaping, it was thought advifeable to remove her
to tome place at a greater distance from the bor-
dexs.

While

While the Englifli court was occupied in thece

deliberations, the regent did not negleAt to improve
the victory at Langfide; he seemed at first refoi,-
ed to proceed with rigour against the queen's ad-
herents. Six persons of diftinftion were tried,
condemned, and led to execution; but at the pow-
erful interceflion of Knox, they obtained a par-
don; Hamilton of Bothwellhaugh was one of the
number, who lived to give both the regent and
Knox reason to repent of this at of lenity.

With a considerable army the regent marched

towards the weft borders; and as the nobles of
the queen's f;ltion in that part were not capable
of refliting him, they muf either have fubnitted,
or beheld their estates wafedl with fire and sword.
But it was the interest of Elizabeth to preserve the
balance of the two parties; and in compliance
with the English ambassador, the regent, after
keeping the field about two months, difmifi:cd his
forces.

The queen of Scots had been conduted from

Carlisle to Bolton, a caflle of lord Scroop's on the
borders of Yorkflhire. HIer correspondence with
Scotland became hercafter more dillicult, and her
escape impracticable. She now felt herfclf to be
entirely in Elizabeth's power; and though treated
as yet with the refpcd due to a queen, her rell
condition was that of a prisoner. Elizabeth
again proposed to her to fuflnr the regent and his
adherents to be called into Engl;lmd, and to con-
sent to their being heard in their defence ; oii her

part

part she promised, whatever fliould be the issue of
this inquiry, to employ all her power and influ-
ence towards replacing Mary on her throne, under
a few limitations, which were far from being un-
reasonable. Fear, impatience, despair, as well as
this soothing promise, with which the proposition
was accompanied, induced Mary to comply. Even
to render Elizabeth more favourable to her hopes,
file asseA e to liften to the dodrines of protef-
tantifm, and heard a clergyman of that persuasion
preach against the errors of popery, with seeming
attention and fatisfaaion.

The regent, to enforce fubmifion to the king's

authority, had about this time called a parliament;
and to obstruct this meeting, Argyle and Huntly,
whom Mary had appointed her lieutenants in the
south and north, began to assemble forces. Their
influence would have embarrassed the regent had
not Mary, at the desire of Elizabeth, commanded
her friends to lay down their arms, and to wait
patiently till matters were brought to a decision
in England.

The regent did not however, submit without he-

fitation to the demand of Elizabeth, that he fiould
fend deputies to York to vindicate his condut in
presence of her commissioners. His authority was
already eftabliflied in Scotland, and confirmed by
parlianent and to susser its validity now to be
called in question, was extremely mortifying. To
accuse his sovereign before flrangers, the ancient
enemies of the Scottifl name, was an odious talk ,

to fail in this accusation was dangerous; to fuccec1
in it was disgraceful ; but the power of Eliz:ib th
was so great, that lier commands were inither to
be disputed nor obeyed.

The ignominy of the O.cp was irrcreafed ly be-

ing obliged to repair to York in person. His al-
fociates had declined the oflice. unless he consent.
ed to fli.re the danger anld otliun with them.
The earl of Morton, Blothwl bilfop of Orkney,
Pitcairn cominmcndator of 1)unfcrmliin', and lord
Lindsay, were joined with him in commission.
Macgill of Bankeilor, and Balnaves of Hallhill,
two eminent civilians, George Buchanan, Mait-
land, and several others, were appointed to attend
them as alliftants.

Mary empowered Lefly bishop of Ross, lord

Livingston, lord Boyd, lord Herries, Gavin Ha-
milton commendator of Kilwinning, Sir John Gor-
don of Lochinvar, and Sir James Cockburn of
Stirling, to appear in her name.

Elizabeth nominated Thomas Howard duke of

Norfolk, Thomas Radcliff arl of Suflex, and Sir
Ralph Sadler, her comminioners to hear buth
parties.

The vievs with which the several parties con-

sented to this conference, and the itlini to which
they expceted to bring it, were extremnely dli re' 1r.
Mary's chief oljea was to recover her forni;r a:-
thority, whicl fle expeed front Elizabeth's ;ro-
mises. The regent aimed only at fecriiy g tlb
queen of England's protection ; but Llizabeth hlir-

fct1

fils was resolved, if the charge against Mary
ihould appear well founded, to pronounce her
unworthy of wearing the crown; and if the
proofs of her accufcrs only extended to mal-ad-
ministration, to set on foot a treaty for restoring
her ; but on such conditions, as would render her
for ever dependant on England, and the slave of
her own fibjcets.

On the fourth of OCtober the conference was
openrd with much folennity. The intention of
Elizabeth was to inflame both parties; and Mary's
coimnifioners were permitted to prefer a com-
plaint against the regent and his friends, enume-
rating their treasonable a tions, and requiring such
rcdrcfs as the injuries of one queen demanded from
the justice of another.

It was expected the regent would, in return,

have disclosed the whole circumstances of the crime
with which the queen was charged; but intRead of
accusing Mary, he did not even defend himself.
He continued to start doubts and feruples; his re-
serve and helltation surprised his aflbciates as well
as the greater part of the Englifl commiflioners;
and was founded in an intrigue, which since his
arrival at York, had been fccretly carried on.

The duke of Norfolk was at that time the Inolt

powerful and most popular man in England. His
wife was lately dead ; and he began already to
from a project which he afterwards avowcd more
openly, of mounting the throne of Scotland by a
marriage with the (uccn of Scots. He saw the
inflamy which would be the coilfequence of a pub-

lic

lie accusation against Mary, and to save her this
cruel mortification, he cxprefflcd to Mlitland his
afloniinnent that the Scots filoull submit the
transactions of their nation to the tribunal of
foreigners, and publickly expose the faults of their
fovcreign.

Maitland's fcntimcnts were the fame with the

duke's ; and he ofTi:red all his credit to diflude his
countrymen from his odious measure. This en-
couraged Norfolk to communicate the matter to
the regent. He repeated the fame arguments that
he had used with Maitland; and added, that Eliza-
beth was resolved to give no definitive sentence;
let Murray only demand that the matter should be
brought to decision immediately after hearing the
proof, and he would be fully convinced how infi-
dious the queen of England's intentions were.

These representations made a deep imprefflon

on the regent, and concurred in determing him
to make trial of the expedient which the duke had
suggested; he dlmanded therefore, before he pro-
ceeded farther, whether the Englifl commissioners
were empowered to declare the queen guilty by a
judicial ad ; whether they would promise to pass
sentence without delay; whether the queen should
be kept in restraint to prevent her from disturbing
the government now eftablifled in Scotland; and
whether Elizabeth, if (he approved of the proceed-
ings of the king's party, would engage to protec
it for the future. The paper containing these de-
mands was signed by himself alone, without

2 communicating

commuinicating it to any of his attendants except
MllaitLid and Mclvil.

As th! commifTio:iers were not empowered to

give him that ftisration which he demanded, it
became necef;:ry to transmit the articles to the
queen; and while fuller inftru&tions were waited
for, the regent gave in an answer to the complaint
which had been offered in the name of the Scotti{fi
queen. It contained no ninfinution of the queen's
being acceflfry to the murder of her husband ; andl
only urged the inf.amy of the marriage with Both-
we!l, which made it necefllry to take arms in or-
dcr to diilblve it.

'1Th conference had hitherto been conducedl i

a ni/lnur w;ichli tii'ppolnited El:zabeth's v icvs;
t'Lc dillice betuwccn York and Londod, and the
neceflity of conf:lting her upon every difficulty
that occurred, confumned much time; Norfolk's
nce ociation with tl:e regent, had probably not
efcied the \igilance of lis fovereiln ; alid i:ntead
of returning any aniwcr to the regent's dcnilnd:,,
liie resolved to reinmve the conference to Weft-
miilter, a; d to appoint new commilTfoners, in
vwhoin the could more absolutely confide. Both
the Scottifi queen ;lrd the rege::t were broughl
without any dlificu'ty to approve of this relo-
Ititir li.

Thli participation of tliL gui!t of the king's

mulder was the only circunimflince wlich could
ijllifv th< viclent proceediigs of Mary's fubjecls;
but this licr accufi;rs h'td indut!riourny avoided to

0 mention;

mention ; Elizabeth however was resolved that
Mary should not enjoy the fame advantage in the
conference to be held at. Weftmifter as at York.
She deliberated howl she might overcome the re-
gent's fcuples; and- as she foresaw that the pro-
mites which she should be obliged to allure him
with, would naturally exasperate Mary, she de-
termined to guard her more narrowly than ever,
and removed her from Bolton to Tuthbufy in
Staffordshire, and committed her to the keeping
of the earl of Shrewsbury, to whom that castle
belonged.

Mary soon began to fufpet the design of this

second conference; and her suspicions were con-
firmed by a circumstance extremely mortifying.
The regent having arrived at London, was receiv-
ed by Elibabeth with refpet and affection. This
Mary jultly confidered as an open declaration of
that queen's partiarity towards her enemies ; she
wrote to her commiflioners, and commanded them
to complain of the usage that The had met.with,
and the additional injuries which (he had reason
to apprehend. Her rebellious fubjecs were al-
lowed access to the queen, and flhe was excluded
her presence ; they enjoyed full liberty, whlile the
languished in confinement; flle. rnewed her de-
mand to be admitted to Elizabeth; and if that were
('.nied, ihe recalled the consent si: had given to
the conference at Weftminiiter. ;r. nrotefted that
whatever was done thr,:, lhoi id bl: held to be
null and void.

But

But either Mary's letters reached her commis-

fioners too late, or they suffered themielves to be
deceived by Elizabeth's profelImons of regard for
their mistress, and consented to the opening of the
conference.

To the commissioners who had appeared in her;

name at York, Elizabeth now added Sir Nicholas-
Bacon, keeper of the gre.,t fcal, the'earls of Arun-
del and Lcicefter, lord Clinton, and Sir William.
Cecil. A fatisfaEtory anf(er uWas given to the re-
gent's demands his negociation with Norfolk.
had been discovered to Morton by some of Mary's.
attendants, and communicated to Cecil. Hisper-
fonal safety, as well as the continuance of his pow-
er, depended on Elizabeth, and at length deter-
mined' him to produce his accusation againf: the
queen.

To' leffn the infamy, he protefled that it was:

with the utmost: rcluaance that he undertook this
disagreeable talk ; but the insolence and importu-
nity of the adverse fftiion compelled him to
publifl what he had hitherto, though with de-
triment to himself, endeavoured to conceal. He
then proceeded to charge Mary, not only with
having consented to the murder, but with being'
acceflary to the contrivance. and execution of
it. Bothwell, it was afterted, had been fcrcened
from the pursuits of justice by her favour ; and
that fie had formed designs no less dangerous,
to the life of the 'young prince, than subversive

0 2 of,

of tile liberties and constitution of the kingdom.
If any of these crimes flould be denied, an
offer was nmade to produce the most ample
and undoubted evidence in confirmation of the
charge.

At the next meeting of the commissioners, the

earl of Lennox implored Elizabetl's jultice agiainlt
the queen of Scots, whom he accused upon oath
of the unnatural murder of his son : While Mary's
commissioners, inftcad of attempting to vindicate
her honour, had recourse to the article in their
ii,ftruaions which they hat formerly negle&ed.
They demanded an audience of Elizabeth; and
having renewed their mistresse's request of a per-
fonal interview, they protested, if that were deni-
ed her, against all the future proceedings of the
commiflioners. A protestation offered, when
such a bold accusation was preferred ngainft Mary,
gave reason to fufpea that she dreaded the event
of the examination : 'his filfpicion was confirmed
by Ross and Herries privately acquainting Cecil,
tlhat their mistress, notwithstanding the regent's
audacious accusation, would still be glad to ter-
minate the dliffrences between herself and her sub-
jets by an amicable accomdation.

Elizabeth in answer, told Mary's commiflioners,

that in the present juncture nothing could be so
dishonourable to their niiilrcfs as an acconldation;
that the matter would seem huddeld up in this
manner, merely toliide her l.niae; nor was it pofli-
ble tlat fle could be .ltmitcd with any deccncy into

hler

Ilhr presence while Ifie lay under the infamy of
such a public :cculation.

Mary's co:nmiifioners, on this repulse, with-

drew; and as they declined anfwcring, the regent
seemed to have no further necelfity of produc-
ing proofs. But Elizabeth was not content till
there were in her hands ; (he intimated to the re-
gent her indignation at his accusing his sovereign
of such atrocious crimes. He, in order to regain
the good opinion of filch a powerful proteclrefs,
offered to shew that his accusations were not mali-
cious nor ill-grouuded; he produced and delivered
to the Englifli coinmnilioners the confessions of
the persons executed for the king's murder, and
the fatal casket which contained the letters, son-
nets, and contradts, that have been already men-
tioned.

Elizabeth, from the moment that ihe got there

into her poffellion, laid aside all expreilicns of
friendship and refpeEt towards M.ry, and wrote
to her as if the presumptions of her guilt amoun--
ted to certainty. She hoped thus to intimidate
lier, to confirm the rcfignation of the crown; to
ratify Murray's authority as regei t; and to con-
sent that both herself and her fen /loluld relide
in England under her pro:ection. But Mary re-
jeided this feheme witlouthtfi(ation :" Death, said
" he, is less drc:uidf thaln fuchan igiominious flcp.
" Rather than give away with my own hands the
' crown will., drtceeided to mc froin my ancef-

0 3 " tor,,

" tors, I will part with life; but the last words I
" utter flalU be those of a queen of Scotland."

At the fame time that Mary denied the allega-

tions of her enemies, (he recriminated by her
commiflioners upon the regent and his party, and
atcufed them with having devised and executed the
murder of the King. These asserted their inno-
cence with great warmth; while Elizabeth, who
had now in her hands the papers that she had so
long wished for, though The affeled still to urge
the queen of Scots to vindicate her honour, did
not desire to make any further progress in the in-
quiry.
A. D. 1569. The regent was now impatient to.
A. D. 1569.

return to Scotland; and before he

set out, he was called into the privy council, to
receive a final declaration of Elizabeth's sentiments.
Cecil acquainted him, in her name, that on one
hand nothing had been objected to his condut,
that she could reckon detrimental to his honour,
or inconsistent with his duty; nor had he, on the
other hand, produced any thing against his forw-
reign, on which he could found an unfavourable
opinion of her actions; and for this reason, fle
resolved to leave all the affairs of Scotland pre-
cifely in the fame situation in which flie had found
them at the beginning of the conference: The
queen's commissioners were dismissed much in the
fame manner.

Nothing could at first fight appear more trifling
and riticulous than such a conclusion of a confer-

ense,

once, which had lasted upwards of four months,
and had fixed so earnetly the attention of both
nations: Yet, at the fame time, nothing could be
more conformable to the future schemes of Eliza-
beth. She had no thoughts of continuing neuter,
notwithstanding her profeflions of impartiality;
nor was (he in doubt to what party to give her
protecion. She supplied the regent, before he
quitted London, with a large fum of money, and
promised to support, to the utmost of her power,
the king's authority.

This resolution was fortified by the condu&t of

Mary: The repeated instances of Elizabeth's art
and duplicity had awakened the queen of Scots
from those fond dreams of affiflance into which she
had been lulled; and despairing of obtaining any
succour from the English queen, lie endeavoured
to rally her own adherents to Scotland, and to
excite them to arms, by painting the interested
and unworthy designs of Elizabeth and Murray
in such colours as could not fail of inspiring every
Scotsman with indignation.

Mary asserted, that the regent hand agreed to

convey the prince her son into England ; to yield
to the queen of E nd the frongtlt places in.
Scotland; and to acknowledge the dependence of
the Scottifi upon the Englifl nation. As a com-
penfation for this, he was to be declared the law-
ful heir of the crown of Scotland i and at the
fame time, the question, with regard to the Eng-
iifh fuccefion, was to be decided in favour of the

earl

earl of Hartford, who had promised to marry one
of Cecil's daughters. An account of there wild
and chimerical projects was spread induftrioully
among the Scots. The queen of England, who
perceived the intention of it was to destroy its es-
sets by a counter-proclamation, and became more
disgusted than ever M ith Mary.

Scotland, during the absence of the regent, had

remained in tranquiiity; but the queen's adher-
ents, who had flattered themselves that the con-
ference in England would ruminate to her ad-
vantage, and had therefore restrained their impa-
tient discontents, were now ready to erea the
itandard of civil war. They were encouraged
too by the appearance of a leader, whose high
quality and prteenions entitled him to great au-
thority in the nation ; This was the duke of
Chatelherault, who had resiled for some years in
France, and whom that court had now sent over
with a supply of meney, in hopes of animating
the courage of the queen's faction by the presence
and influence of the filrf nobleman of the king-
dom-

The duke of Chatelherault has betei detal;ied

by the artifices of Elizabeth for several months;
but when these pretences were exhaufltd, the
queen could not openly refute her permiflion to
continue his journey ; and before his departure,
Mary invested him with the high dignity of her
lieutenant-general in Scotland, together with the
fantalic title of her adopted father.

'Ihe

The designs of the duke of Chatelherault had

nut escaped the penetration of the regent, who
prepared to prevent or encounter them with his
usual ativity. He marched to Glasgow at the
head of an army which he had expeditiously levied.
The followers of Argyll and Huntly, who com-
posed the chief parts of the queen's fagtion, lying
in very ditlant corners of the kingdom, and many
of the duke's dependants having fallen or been
taken grifoners in the battle of Langfide, he be-
held his estate and vassals exposed to destruction.
''o avert this, he proposed an accommodation,
which was eff-Etual on very moderate terms.

The duke consented to acknowledge the au-

thority both of the king and the regent; and to
claim no jurifdiaion in consequence of the com-
mission which he had received from the queen.
The regent bound himself to repeal the a& which
had passed for attainting several of the queen's ad-
herents; to restore all who would submit to
the king's government to the possession of their
titates and honours; and to hold a convention,
wherein all the differences between the two par-
ties fliould be fettled by mutual consent. For the
faithful execution of the treaty, the duke gave hof-
tages ; and as a mark of his sincerity, he and lord
lerrics, accompanied by the regent, visited the
young kipg at Stirling; while the regent, on his
file, re{torcd to freedom the prisoners wllo had
t'cn1 taken at L.ngfide.

These

r'hefe menfures did not however entirely secure

the tranquillity of Scotlind. Argyle and Huntlv
had rejected the ]ate treaty: In England, intrigues
were daily carried onjin favour of Mary; her
affairs wore a more favourable appearance ; and
the probibility of her speedy return into her owi
kingdom was hourly augmented: In France, the
Hugonots had been repeatedly broken by their ad-
verfiries, and their entire defrudion was expecq-
ed ; while the French king, having eftabliflied
once more peace throughout his domnllions, would
he at leifurc to direct his attention to the affairs of
Britain. Argyle and Huntly were strongly influ-
enced by these circumnfanccs ; and their reprefein-
tations produced such an effeci oa; the duke that
he appeared wavering and irrcfolute, and plainly
difcuvcred that he wilhed to evade the acconiplifh-
ment of the treaty.

The vigour of the regent diflipated the storm

that menaced him; he f£iw the danger of allow
ing the duke to difcngage himself from ihe condi-
tions that he had acceded to ; and he inftiantly
formed a refol'tion equally bold and politic. Hec
commanded iii guards to fcize Chatelherault in his
own house at Edinlburgh, whitlher he had come in
order to .ttend the ccrIvetfation agreed upon ; and
rcgardlefs either of his dignity, as the first noble-
man in tle kingdomi arind next heir to t!,. crown,
or of tic pronllifcs of prfonal fiafety on wlhich lie
had relied, corninittcd him and lord llerrics pri-
foncrs to the caftlc of Edinburgh.

The

The hopes of the party were blasted by an event

so fatal and unexpeóted; Argyle, intimidated at
this example of severity, submitted to the king's
government, and made his peace with the regent
on very easy terms; while Huntly, incapable alone
cf supporting the party of Mary, was at last oblig-
ed to lay down his arms.

The importunity of Fenelon, the French am-

banfador, had extorted some ovettures from Eliz.l-
beth, which wore the appearance of being favour-
able to tile queen of Scots. These were delivered
by lord Boyd to the regent, in a letter from the
queen of England. A convention was held at
Perth to confider of the proposal : The first de-
r:i.ded, rhat Mary flould be reflored to the full
pj;liTcion of her former authority ; the second,
that flie ihould be admitted to reign jointly with
the king her son; and the third, that fle fiould
bc allowed to reside in Scotland, in some decent re-
tiremnent, without any lhare in the administration
of government. Among propositions so unequal
a:i(l difproportiouate, Elizabeth plainly sav:. where
the choice would faill; the two former were re-
jcted ; and long delays must necelTlrily have in-
tcrvened, and many ditficultics have arilf;n, before
every circumilance rclaxire to the llts could be
finally alj tilted.

Elizabeth's letter was accominnied by one from

i'larv, in which the demanded that her marriage
\ irih orhb.weil ihould be reviewed by propr judges,
and, if found invalid, (hould be ditlblvcd by a

legal

legal sentence of divorce. For two years file h.id
now endiured a fcries of calamities, and all ori-
ginating in that fatal marriage; a divorce was
the only tiing that could repair the injuries her re-
putation had fuffcred; yet the had long prefervdl
a silence on that subjed ; and her particular mo-
tive for soliciting it now, was so well-knowvn by
the convention of eltates that the demand was rs-
jected.

YWhatever desire Mary might have to be fcpa-

rared from Bothwell, her present conduat vw.s
founded in an impatience to be married to t!lh
duke of Norfolk, rather than in any abhorrence
to the unhappy ni'n whose crimes had been pro-
duclive of so much mifCry to her. This marrinl.re
was thc iecrci of thol' intrigtu. in England wl.idc
we had already mentioned. The fertile and pro-
jeting genius of Iaitland first conceived tLis
scheme; during the confer-nce at York, he com-
municated it to the duke liimfelf, and to the bi-
flop of Ross; the fornmer readily cloled with .
projcd so flattering to his ambition; and the lat-
ter conlidercd it as a probable dcvice for relloriln;
his miltrels to liberty, and replacing her on thle
throne. A corrclponderice was carried on between
Mary and the dukl-, by means of Lady Scroop,
the filter of tile ltt,-r; this intrigue wais fl!l
continued after the removal of tih confereice to
Welltminifter; and by the means of Ross and

IMaitlanil, imany letters and love-tokens p.l:scd bc-
tween Norfolk and the IqucIn of S:ot:i.

3 'Lhcrc

The duke, conscious that the projec cotnl l not

cntircly cfcape the suspicions vigil ;nce of Eiizabh.h,
attempted on this occasion to deceive ;her by rh^
appearance of candour and ingenioufines. He
informed her of the rumour himfin!f; and at the
amre time that lie di!ielinied all intentions of I:
kind, he spoke of Mary and her dominic:s in fucil
terms of cont.-lipt, as seem to have entrrely satis-
fled his royal miftrcf,; 1But instead of desisting
from the enterprize, he pursued it with increais
of vigour, and even extended his ncgociations to
the regent himself. Murray was fenfiblc that he
hiad given offence to Norfolk, by his public ac-
cufation of Mary in breach of the concert into
which had entered at York; he was then ready
to return into Sccilind ; the influence of the duke
in the North of England was gre..t; the earls of
Northumberland and Welhnorland, the molf
powerful noblemen in that part of the kingdom,
threatened :o revenge upon the regent the injuries
that he had done his sovereign. In order to secure
his retreat, lie addrcslld hin.fclf to Norfolk, and
insinuated that he wou!d concur in promoting the
duke's marriage with the queen, his fifler ; Nor-
fo'k creduloully listelnd to his profellions, and
wrote to the two carla noLt Ut interrupt the panflge
of Murray.

From his colnnecllin with the regent, Norfolk

extenltld t:is negoci.tions: .lmlong the Englilh no-
bility. The marri;ig of the Scoitill queii to an
Etiilifln:t:t, and .1 :'lus pre.tlt.:in, the moill

I1 powerfti;

powerful and most univerf.ily beloved of the no-
bles, seemed an effeStual remedy against thl ca-
lamities of civil wair, with which the kingdom
might be aiflictcd if Mary's fucceilion to the throne
was disputcd, or the dangcr which might arise to
religion and liberty, iliould fie espouse a foreign
or popifi prince.

From these considerations the greater part of

the peers, either dirccdly or tacitly, approved the
union of Mary with the duke of Norfolk, as a
salutary piojec. The earls of Atrudde, Pem-
broke, Leiccfter, and lord Lumley, fuibfrilbd a
letter to the Scottill1 queen, in which they warm-
ly recommended the match, but infilted on Mlary's
promise that file would attempt nothing prejuii-
cial to Elizabeth and her polterity; thint hlic hou:,l
content to a leaguc ofeilfivse and defensive be-
tween the two kingdoms; that (lie fliould co:firm
the pr.cfent e{libiliilinent of r(ligio n ;in Scotlaid,
and receive into f.vour such of her fulbjc.s as lit
appeared in arms aga;iinflt r. ()n thei. coMii-
tions they cngi.tged to reilorc her to lher owul
throne, and to fcculnre her ti..t of ingl.iid i'l rc-
verrion ; and M.irv' readlily -Clncinted to :i: ecc.pt
the si-.cld article, o1 i wi.h

0lie dcinimiLd ti:i'.
to coniful hlr all'y the king of France.

The wvlol-e of this n,'go.lktion ll s indI irnliLu^

concealed f!om l'lli/..l:. !: It lwas w i.i-klno un
that fl)he oull d no t \ii;:iiicl co)Ifcl:t to :I 111 i liftL '
wlichl would incic.,!C lie r:; uttic: l ( f l.r liival:
'T'o taike as' f .'.ps
' i 'Wllirt hli: Ln,'WI'1c¢ in a

nI.lt.,'

nrrtt!': f fu mnich cocnludcclc, could fcarcc be
confidered as criii'-i.il ; and (ven Mary aind Nor-
io2ii h.ul decla-redt, til.lt witlout her approbation
,nol:in: tihoui, Ihe concluded. The greater part
of 11he n;lics re.rltldlld their duty a.nd allegiallce
ful!y prefcrved ; but t!hoi who coilufled the in-
trigue hld nore f':clct .nd danecrous designs; tile
prolifles which Ma:ry had made, they thought
miight bz eJfily evaded, whiie the advantages to

ier were inftint an:nd ir.portani t The concur-
rence of the kings of France anid Spain had been
e iry folcitCdi and obtained ; biut a treatyin lwhich
they con!ilted forcign princes coutd scarce be
deemed innocent. It was however expcQed, that
the ur;ion of so manly noblts would extort the
comnplia.nce of Eiiz.beth ; and fulch was their con-
fidence in their fucccis, that Norfolk exerted his
inaueLnce to prevent an attempt which had been
proje.ic-d in the north, to relcue iMary out of the
hands of h-r keepers, ler, when at liberty, she
might recede from those declarations whichl hie
hIid made in Iris favour.

Lord Boyd at this critic.:l juntlure dcliveredl

h:ttcrs in cyph!rs from the tluke of Norfolk and
'Tlrogmorton to the rcTent and Maitland. In
thLf, the t wo former cxpreilcd their moi t languinc
lopecs of fuccef;; and rcprclfented the wlhole no-
Liity of Enlg mnd ,s unanimous in ftpport of the
project. Tlie infilui nic and numbers of those
who lihad cojicurred in the llherme seemed to pre-
clude every id.L:tger from oppolition; and tile

1' 2 ceremony

ceremony of the marriage was only wanting It
remained with the regent to open a road to that
tranfaQion by haflening the divorce between
Bothwell and Mary; this was expected from him
in consequence of his promise to Norfolk; a pro-
mise which it was imagined he would punCtually
perform.

But the circumstances of the regent were

widely different at present to those in which he
had given his apparent approbation to the designs
of Norfolk ; he could not but be sensible that the
consequence of the duke's success would be fatal
to his own power; nor could he expet any favour
or even hope for impunity from the queen, should
she recover the regal authority, since she confi-
dered him as the author of all her calamities. It
is not surprising therefore that he should refute to
venture on a ftep which was to found the gran-
deur of another on the ruins of his own. A de-
lay was occasioned by this denial; but as every
other preliminary was adjusted, the bishop of Ross,
in the name of his mistress, and the duke of
Norfolk in petfon, declared, in the presence of
the French Ambafrador, their mutual content to
the marriage; and a contrat to this purpose was
signed and intrulted to the care of the ainbafl-
dor.

The number of confidents on whom Mary and

Norfolk had relied, became now too great to hope
that the intrigue could be concealed. Whispers
were circulated already at court; and Elizabeth

callin g

calling Norfolk into her presence, exprefled the ut-
most indignation at his conduEt, and charged him
to abandon all thoughts of so dangerous a project.
Itis probable tliat Leiceiler had only entered intoc
the feheme with the view of revealing it: lie now
communicated it with all its circumltances to the-
queen. Penmbroke, Arundul, Lumlcy, and Throg-
morton, were confined and examined; Mary was
watched more narrowly than ever; and Hastings,
earl of Huntingdon, who pretended to dispute with
the Scottiih queen her right of succession, being
joined in commnfilion with Shrewsbury, rendered
her imprisonment more intolerable by the excef6
of l's rigour.

We have already obfervedl, that the r.egent from

the first could scarce have been sincere in the pro-
je-l; and the moment tiht he was threatened
with the displeasure of Elizabeth, he haltened to
make his own peace at the expence of his accom-
pl;c.s. He delivered to the queen of England
all the letters of Norfolk, and furnilhcd her with
the mofl ampite intilligence. Thei duke, inflead
of obeying the fumimons to appe;lr before the privy
council, fled to his feat in Norfolk; but received
with ibidilbrence by his friends in that country,
unpreparedl for reliltanrce againlllt hli fovcrcign, and
intiinidited by the confinement of lis afliciatc.:,
he obeyed a second fumnIlons, andl ripircd to

m'lllfor. For some days lie was kept a prisoner
in a private houfc, iandl afterwards cumniitted to

1' 3 th;

the tower, where he fuftered an imprisonment of
nine months; and was not released but by his
humble submission to Elizabeth, and his promise
to hold no farther correspondence with the queen
of Scots.

The queen's partizans in Scotland had not been

inative during the negociation in England ; and
Maitland, whose fertile genius was never without
resources, had allured from the fide of the regent,
Lord Home, Kirkaldy, and several of his former
associates. He continued flill to foment the fpiri:
of difaflection in Scotland ; and Murray could
not regard his own power fecurc, while Maitland
enjoyed his liberty. For this rc.foni le employed
captain Crawford, one of his crc.itures, to accufl
him of being acceflilry to the murder of the king;
and under that pretence carried him a prisoner to
Edinburgh. He was saved however from defIruc-
tion by the friendfliip of Kirkaldy, who got him
from the hands of the person to whose care he was
committed, by a pretended warrant from the re-
gent, and condluictd him to the cafile, which
from th:t time remained under Alaitland's com-
nand ; wliile the regent, inltead of the deflruc-
lion of his most formidable enemy, endured no
iinAll mortification in the loss of a place of Co
much importaince, and the open defection of a man
fu eminent for military (kill as Kitkaldy.

Thc imprisonment of the duke of Noifolk did
,ot c tii'iniiui in Englland the hopes of Mary's adl-

hereI:T*

herents, or restrain entirely the enemies of Eliza-
beth's government. The earls of Northumberland
and Westmorland, whose influence in the northern
counties was such as might be expeEted from
their extensive property, and from the popular and
martial families of Percy and Nevil, were strongly
attached to the popifl religion, and discontented
with a court where new men and a new system
prevailed. They had warmly espoused the inte-
reft of Mary, and the caution of Norfolk ill suited
their ardour and impetuosity; they aspired not on-
ly at delivering the queen of Scots, but at chang-
ing the eftablifled religion and government; and
they solicited the aid of the king of Spain, the zea-
lous patron of popery in that age. Philip was
delighted with the profped of involving England
in the confusion of a civil war; and promised the
earls, that if either they pofleffed themfclves of a-
ny itrong place, or delivered the queen of Scots,
that he would supply them with money and a con-
iderable body of troops.

Though Elizabeth fufpeaed not the real design

of the conspirators, yet as flie confidered the earls
of Northumberland and Westmorland as privy to
Norfolk's plot, fie summoned them to court. Con-
fcious of their guilt, they refused to comply; and
as no time remained for deliberation, they instant-
ly ereted the standard of opposition against their
lovercign. The re-eftabliflment of the catholic
rtligioll and the settlement of the fucceflion of thc

Crown,

'crown, were the motives they afligned for their
enterpri;.e. Their names allured to their party
many of the lower people, but their abilities were
far from equal to the projce they had engaged in.
The removal of Mary to Coventry dif.ppoinlted
thei: principal obje ; the approach of regular
troops compelled them to retire; their numbers
dwindled intheirretreat; and after lurking for sone
time amidift the mountainsof Northumberland,
they fought refuge among the Scottish borderers.
Northumberland was made prisoner by the regenit;
and Westmorland was concealed by Scot of Buc-
cleugh, and Ker of Ferniherlt, and afterwards con-
veved to the Netherlands.

This revolt, however, deeply imprefltd Eliza-

beth with the danger of keeping such a prisone.r
as the Scottill Queen : lit conspiracy of Nor-
folk, and the rebellion of the earls of Northum-
berland and Weftmoreland, were both direced
to tre relief of Mary: Many of her own fubjets
pitied the captive queen; and the Rooman Ca.tha-
lic princes on the continent were warmly inter-
cited in her ciufe. By detailinig lher, ihe bcl.eld
llerfell exposed to the caalis and infilredtions of
the former, and Ihe might draw do'A':) upon hecr-
s.is the holtile arms of the latter. Sle new rt-
solved to deliver IMAry into the handsl of tini
regent, w!o was equally concerned wi.t her-
self in preveiting her fromn re-,.fc:nding tl.
tlirone.

Ti£

The remonstrances of the French
A. D. I$ 70.

and Spanifl ambafladors, who repre

sented the infamy of the tranfadion, deferred in
some measure this negociation ; and it was finally
broken by the murder of the regent himsef.

We have already noticed, that Hamilton of

Bothwellhaugh, who had been condemned for ap-
pearing in arms at the battle of Langfide, had re-
ceived his life from the regent's clemency: But
part of his estate had been beflowed upon a fa-
vourite of Murray, who had seized his house, and
turned out his wife naked in a cold night into the
open fields, where, before next morning, she be-
came furiously mad.

The injury made a deeper imprefion on Ia-

milton than the mercy he had experienced: He
vowed revenge; and was fortified in his refol-
ution by the applause of his kinfinen of the houfie
of Hamilton. The maxims of the age combined
with party rancour to keep him tfeady to his
purpose ; and he followed Murray for some time
with deliberate vengeance, in hopes of striking the
blow.

The regent was to pass, in his way from Stir-

ling to Edinbvrgh, through Linlithgow; and
Hamilton embraced that opportunity of satiating
his revenge. He took his fland in a wooden gal-
lery, which had a window towards the street;
spread a feather bed on the flour to hinder the
noise of his sect being heard; hung up a black
cloth behind him, that his fladow might not

be

be obfcrvcdi fnom without; and calmly expe-cti
the reent's approach, 's ho h:ad lodge.i during the
night in a houf- not ;i'r ditlin.t.

With whatever c'are e he id concealed lhis enl-

terprif., the lecret began already to be hlcifr-
ed; and sone indiilinct rumours hid uvcni reaclh 1
the ears of Mlurray himnellf. 11 paid lfo luch
attention to them, that he resolved to return by
the fame gate through which lie had entered,
and to fetch a compass round the town; but as
the throng was great, and he himself a tfrangcr
to fear, he unfortunately abandoned this int-n-
tion, and proceeded direcly along the firecr
where his enemy lay in w.it for him. The
crowd which surrounded him compelled him to
move slowly, and allowed the alEtnfin to take di-
fline aim. His skill was but too fatal ; a single
bullet entered the lower part of Murray's belly, and
even killed the horse of a gentleman who rode
on the other fide of him. His followers imme-
diately endeavoured to force the door of the
house, but found it firongly barricaded : it gave
way at iergth to their efl;rts; but Hamilmon l:a;
availed himself of the delay: an;d Imounting a
fleet horse lsich Itood prepared for him at thi
back pafThgc, soon gained a diit.iikue which pn-
cluded pursuit.

The wound which the regent reccived w:;is

mortal, and lie expired the anec ight. 1]- is c;i-
rarter has been ldrawi i)y thie- dli rct pitrti': of
the age in such oppolite colours, s nuitl na-

tuf,.lly

turally be expexp ed from gratitude and resent-
mcnt. Even his enemies allow him to have pof-
i fl`ed, in the highest degree, perfinal intrepidity,
military skill, saga;city and vigour in the admini-
firation of civil :afiirs. His moral virtues are
more doubtful; and cught neither to be praised
or censured without great reserve and many dif-
tim(":ions. His victories were diflinguified by
:. humanity rarely to be found in the barbarous
age he lived in ; and he was remarkable ior
his patronage of learning, whien it was confidered
with contempt by an haughty and martial nobi.
lity. His zeal for religion surpassed even that of
lIis contemporaries; and his confidence in his
friends could only be exceeded by hia liberality
towards them. in his oppolition to the perni-
cious fyft'.m which the princes o:' Lorrain 'had
obliged the queen niotirr to pursue, we discern
a li;iiutcrcftei, p.lllion fir the liberty ot hiscoun-
try ; andl hI fiaciiiccl the frindiiiiip of those wlio
\i,.' injl itt.;ccI(! tr) lhis perfto to the 7.'al and
ailLciii wihil v.'i, hcli f -r'td eM.ry', on he:; firit
rctrnri to Scotlland.

l;uc ,t tiIe f.inie tim. it mufi not be coani;l:d

t!l..t hlis ;! :n iti, ii ' i i;' i nm ,odcr. tc; .c Il l, it-
terilig i.roll, ,'t ,

wh 'l: a:ir-';.',i:.s (i-;':C- I

tO i';

c:teri)rilin, ,-niiUs temprc,l hin, ts o'.\Tr\x ironl
lie I ithis of al!v ,i.l, : to Iis fo'',-r. i 1. His
tre rilll'nt of liir it)vLvcreim, xwho w.,
:.i tnc,: his

'

. i

' 1 !

n, ..-. I

, .'

u tlI..-: , .n '! inl) tutifu!.
'l'hlc dcpicn'lc:i; o.i 'I::l..iu; (i whkl.! !h;i redluced

8cjtliand

Scotland, was disgraceful to his country; and
his treachery towards Norfolk, and the bafenefi;
with which he betrayed him, have fixed an in-
delible stain on his honour

From the moment that he attained to power

and dignity, his disposition changed with his situ-
ation: HIe difguft(l the nobles by his haughtinels
ann reserve; and the affected arts of dissimulation
and refinement took place of those blunt and inge-
nuous manners which were natural to him.
Towards the latter end of hislife he grew im-
patient of advice; and soothed by the voice of
adulation, the flatterers that crowded round him
cftr.nge(l him from the faithful counsels of his
ancient friends; who beheld the alteration with
regret, and predited his fall. Yet amidit the
turbulence and confusion of that factious pe-
riod, he dispensed( juaice with so much impar-
tiality, he reprcld-( the licentious borderers with
so much courage, and ela;blifled such uncom-
mon order and tranquiliry in the country, that
his adminillrittion was cxtremely popular, and he
was long and afieflioinatel remembered among,
the commons by the title of the Gpod Regent.

2 (1h.2ter

# Chapter the Sixth. INTRIGUES in Scotland. - Interference of Elizabeth. - Earl of Lennox chosen regent. - Negociations with Mary. - Execution of the Archbishop of St. Andrews. - The regent is killed at ...

Chapter the Sixth.
INTRIGUES in Scotland.- Interference of Elizabeth.-

Earl of Lennox chosen regent. - Negociations with Mary.
- Execution of the Archbilhop of St Andrews. - The re-
gent is killed at Stirling. - Is succeeded by the earl of Mar.
-- Conspiracy and execution of the duke of NoifJllk- Death
of Mar. - Ihe earl of Morton obtains the regcnLy. - Re-
duces the catlle of Edinburgh, and puts to death Kirkaldy.
- James assumes the reins of government. - Morton makes
himself master of the king's person. - Is divefled of au-
thority and accused of the murder of lord Darnly. - His
execution. - The Raid of Ruthven. -James recovers his
liberty. - His condua towards the conspirators - Exe-
cution of the earl of Gowrie. - The conspirators escape
into England. - James diminilhes the power of the
church.

W HILST Elizabeth bewailed the death of the
regent, the adherents of Mary openly exulted in
his fate. As the afallfin made his escape on a
horse which belonged to lord Claud Hamilton,
and fled diretly to Hamilton, where he was re-
ceived in triumph, it was concluded that the

Q_- blow

blow was rather suggested by a party, than the
revenge of a private man. The day after the
murder, Scot of Buccleugh, and Ker of Ferni-
herft, entered Englaid in an hostile manner; an
eutrage they would scarce have ventured on had
Murray been alive; nor could it well have hap-
pened so soon after his death, had they not been
privy to the crime.

To restrain these excesses, a fettled form of go-

vernmert was neceflary; and a convention of
nobles was held, to deliberate concerning the
choice of a regent. The queen's adherents rc-
fused to be present at the meeting, and protcfted
against its proceedings: The king's own party
was irresolute, and divided in opinion; while
Elizabeth, according to her ancient fyitem, con-
tinucd to iultiply the factions which tore the
kingdom in pieces. 'The convention broke up
without coming to any agreement, and a new
meeting, to which the nobles of all parties ,w;crc
\ invited, was appointed on the firfi of Mlay.

Maitland and Kirkaldly had laboured to refore

some degree of harnmo.iy among their country-
men but while the one factio: demni mlnd the
refturatilo of t!e queCn, the otllhr iil;itl cd t t
the king's authlority iiould on no account t,:
impaired. loth were rcidtcrcd a:'.It to 1-
conciiiation by the hope of foreign ;,id. It \w..'
expecled that tue civil wars in .France wouil
be so soon terinil:itcd, aid that Charles the Ninth
would be at lib'.rty to support M!ary; on the

otlhr

i,!ler h ind, lhe e.i l of SuffTx was affembiing a
p.-orftd army onl the bordles, and its opera-
tinms could not fail of adding ltrength and spirit
to th parly of tle kinl.

MA-r:on, the nmoft able leadcr on the king's

fide, w.rmnly solicited the affliftance of Eli2t-
beth; while the cliefs of the queen's fadion
assembling at Linlithgow, marched from thence
to Edinburgh ; and were, by the persuasions of
Kirkaldy, who was both goveriior of the cafile
and provofl of the town, admitted within the
ga tcs. The earl of Athole and Maitland al-
mofl openly acceded to the fame party; and the
duke of Chatelhcrault and lord Herries having,
by the means of Kirkaldy, recovered their li-
b;rty, resumed the places which they had for-
merly held in their councils'.

It was the projet of these to engage England

and Scotland in open hostilities; not only to
difhlve a confederacy of great advantage to the
king's cause, but to reconcile their countrymen
to the queen. With this view, they had encou-
raged the depredations of Kcr and Scott; but
Elizabeth foresaw the consequences of rendering
thiis a national quarrel: By a proclamation, Ihe
declared that fle imputed the outrages on the
bIrders, not to the Scottish nation, but to a
few drfigning persons; and that t(e was deter-
milcdl to inaiftain the friendship of the former,
vllile fle challised the licencicufnefs of the lat-
ter. SufTcx and Scroop acccordingly entered the

(Q 2 borders,

borders, and Lid waste tlhe adjacent countries
with fire and iword ; while the adherents of Mary
retired from Edinburgh, the inhalbitants whereof
were ill affeded to their cause, and from Lin-
lithgow iflued a proclamation forbidding their
countrymen to refpet any other authority than
that of the.iidke, and Argyll and Huntly, whom
the queen had conflituted hex lieutenants in the
kingdom.'

The nobles who adhered to the king, assem-

bled at Edinburgh; and declared by a counter-
proclaniation, such as appeared for the queen,
enemies of their country. They were effetu-
ally supported by Elizabeth, who detached Sir
WTilliam Drury into Scotland with a thousand
foot and three hundred horse. The king's par-
tizians joined him with a considerable body of
troops, and their united forces plundered and laid
wafle the country in the neighbourhood of Glaf-
gow, which belonged to Hamilton.

The earl of Lennox, under Drury's protetion,

returned into Scotland. It was natural to commit
to him the government of the kingdom during
the minority of his grandson. Yet though Eliza-
beth ardently wished that he might succeed Mur-
ray as regent, she did not think it prudent to fa-
vour his rretenfions too openly. - The civil wars in
France appeared now to be on the point of com-
ing to an iflue, and both parties firmed to desire
peace with equal ardour. Charles the Ninth could

1ot

not in honour susSer a queen of France and the
m,)ost ancient ally of his crown, to languish in her
present cruel situation, without attempting to pro-
cure her relief; and Elizabeth had every thing to
dread from the impetuosity of his temper, and the
power of his arms; it therefore became necessary
for her to at with some reserve.

But an event of an extraordinary nature roused

her from this indecisive conduR. Pope Pius had
iibied a bull, by which he excommunicated Eliza-
bhth, and deprived her of her kingdom; and the
]le;el of E'igl:andl imputed this itep to a combi-
il.tion of the catholic princes alginft her, and sus-
pet,-e that some plot was formed in favour of
lMary. In that event she was sensible that the
ifafetv of her own kingdom depended on preserving
her influence over Scotland: She now encoura-
crgl the king's adherents to elect a regent ; and on
her recommendation, the convention conferred
t':,lt honour on the earl of Lennox.

The regent's firil care was to prevent the meet-

i'g of the parliament, which the queen's party
hlad fiimnloned at l.irlithgow. Successful in this,
aind cncouraged by a formidable English army,
mh!icll, under the earl of SulTex, bovcred.on the
blrdcrs, he deprived M litlland of the office of fe-
crctary ; and proclailied him, the duke, Huntly,.
and other leadcrs of the queen's party, traitors and
cnemies of their country.

In this desperate situation, they were indebted
fir their faf4ty to a trclty which Elizabeth was

Q 3 carrying

carrying on, under colour of rcftoring t'he captive
queen to her throne. As a proof of her sincerity
on this occasion, she loboured to procure a cefia-
tion of arms between the two contending faEtions
in Scotland. And though Lennox was highly
elated with the good fortune which had hitherto
attended his administration, it was not safe for him
td'difpute the will of his prote6refs. A ceflhtion
of hostilities during two months, to commence
on the third of September was agreed upon; and
being renewed from time to time, it continued
till the firfi of April next year.

Elizabeth had dispatched Cecil and Sir Wil-

liam Mildmay to the queen of Scots and the
propositions which they made to her, were advan-
t..gcous to Elizabeth, but such as a prince in MIa-
ry's situation had reason to expet : The ratifica-
tion of the treaty of Edinburgh; the renunciation
of any pretensions to the English crown, during
Elizabeth's own life, or that of her posterity ; the
adherence to the alliance between the two king-
doms; the pardoning of her fubjets who had ta-
ken arms againlt her; and her promising to hold
no correspondence that might disturb Elizabeth's
government were among the chief articles. ' o
secure the accomplishment of these, some persons
of rank were demanded as hostages; the prince
was to reside in England; and a few caitles on
the borders were to be put into Elizabeth's
hands.

Mary

Mary immediately contented to

many of Elizabeth's demands, and

discovercd a facility of difpofirion which promised
further concefions; but the lnglifh queen had
only carried on a treaty to amuse the allies of her
rival, though she continued to act as if her views
had been entirely different. Comminfioners were
,ppointed on every fide; but Elizabeth haA, in
the interval, discovered that there was no reason
to dread any danger from the French King, who
had not fliewn that ardour in support of Mary as
was expeEted: she therefore seized the opportu-
nity offered by the commiflioners of the regent;
who declared that they neither had, nor could re-
ceive, any inftrusions to consent to any treaty
that tended to lessen the king's authority; and
after having amused for ten months the unhappy
tqueen of Scots with the hopes of liberty, the now
broke off the negociation.

On the day after the expiration of the truce, cap-

t in Crawford, an enterprising officer, surprised
the cattle of Dunbarton, the only fortified place
in the kingdom that Mary had kept pofleflion of
ever since the commencement of the civil wars.
Lord Fleming, the governor, escaped with diffi-
culty; but Lady Fleeming, Verac the French en-
voy, and Hamilton, archbishop of St. Andrews,
were made prisoners.

'he Lady and Verac were treated with polite-

ness and humanity, but a very different fate a-
waited the archbiflop , he was carried under a

strong

firong guard to Stirling; and as he had beer
formerly attainted by aE of parliamncrt, he was,
without any trial, condemned to be hanged ; and
on the fourth day after he was takeni, the sentence
was executed. Lennox hated him as the person
who supported the power and reputation of the
house of Hamilton; and his zeal for the queen
had rendered him odious to the king's adherents,
Ierfonal enmity and party rage dictated the inde-
cent sentence, for which some colour was fought
in a vain attempt to convict him of being acceflary
to the murder of the king and regent.

The loss of Dumbarton, and the revere treat-

ment that the archbishop had met with, cnraged
the queen's party, and hostilitics were rent.wed
with all the fierceness that indignation could in-
fpirc. Kirkaldy, during the truce, had increascd
the numbers of his garrison; he seized the arms
belonging to the citizens, fortified the gates of the
city; and though the affecions of the inhabitants
leaned a different way, held out the capital against
the regent. The duke, Iluntly, and other chiefs,
repaired thither with their followers, and formed
no contemptible army within the walls. On
tlh other hand, Morton seized Leith, and con-
tinual Ikirmiflies took place between the hostile
places.

Meanwhile all the iniferies of ciil war dtfo-

Inted the kingdom : Fellow-citizens, friends, bro-
thers, took different fides, and rangtd themselves
under the standards of the contending f4acions.

Li

Il every county, and almost in every town and
village, Kinig's-men and .,lcen:'r-men were names
of diitinClion; and religious zeal contributed not
a little to heighten political anim fitics.

Both parties had summoned parliaments to

grace their cautfe with the fandion of that name,
and the time that each had appointed approached.
Only three peers and two bishops appeared in
that which was held for the queen at Edinburgh;
yet they attainted two hundred of their adver-
saries. The meeting at Stirling, which acknow-
ledged the king's authority, was splendid and
numerous; but while, after the example of the
parliament of Edinburgh, they were framing ads
against the opposite faction, they were awakened
from their security early one morning by the
fliouts of the enemy in the heart of the town. In
a moment the regent, the earls of Argyle, Morton,
Glencairn, Caflils, Eglinton, Montrose, Buchan,
the lords Sempil, Cathcart, Ogilvie, were all made
prisoners, and mounted behind troopers, who
were ready to carry them to Edinburgh.

Kirkaldy was the author of this daring enter-

priz:; and had he not been induced, by the ill-
timed solicitude of his friends, not to hazard his
own person in conducing it, that day might have
terminated the contest between the two factions.
By his direction, four hundred men, under the
command of Huntly, lord Claud Hamilton, and
Scot of Buccleugh, let out 1fom Edinburgh, and
deceiving their enclnies by m.rchlng towards the

south

south, fiudli!v wheeled to the right, and prtfl-d
forward to Stilling.

By four in the morning they arrived thcre, anii

met with no refift.nce from any peifon excclt
Alorton: lie defended his house with obfltinte
valour, nor yielded till compelled by fire. But
this occasioned some dtlay; the private men un.
accuflomed to diiucpllne, left their colours to pil-
lage; the noise and uproar of the town reachcl
the castle; the earl of Mar sallicd out on the as-
failants; the conquerors were fcized with a fud-
den panic; and if the regcnt had not been killed,
the loss on the king's fide would have been as in-
considerable as the alarm was great. rTink on
the arehbfhop of St. Anlzdrews, was the word among
the queen's soldiers, and Lennox fell a sacrifice to
his memory: The officer to whom he surrendered,
endeavouring to defend him, loft also his own
life.

The nobles at Stirling, relieved from this in-

slant danger, proceeded immediately to the choice
of a new regent. Mar was chosen by a majority
of voices: Amidfl all the fierce lditi'nfions which
had prevailed so long in Scotland, he had diftin-
guifhed himself by his modiration, his humanity,
and his difintereilednefs; his merit too, in having
so lately rcfcucd the lcaders of the party from im-
minent dcltrulion, contributed not a little to his
preferment.

About this time a treaty of marriage between
Elizabeth and the duke of Anjou, the French

king's

lin ^'s brother, was negociated; t ough neither
court wilhed its conclulion, and only carried it
on to cover their particular designs, yet they seem-
ed to enter into it with such ardour as could not
f.il of success. Mary confidering herself aban-
doned by France, turned for protedtion with more
eagcrnefs to the king of Spain. Ridolphi, a
Ilorentine gentleman, who resided at London un-
der the character of a banker, was employed as
the agent of Philip and the Pope ; and the queen
of Scots confidered herself bound to communicate
the secret to the duke of Norfolk, who, notwith-
flanding his pr(mife to Elizabeth, had kept up a
continual correfponldncc with the captive prinices.
She recommended Ridolphi as a p1rrf)n worthy of
the duke's confidence, and at the fame time in-
formcd limi of her hopes from the Spanifil mo-
narch ; who undertook that the duke of Alva
ih.)u!d iand ten thousand men not far from Lon-
ioll.

'lie Englilh court h.,l r.cclved forne intelli-

gence of this coirc ll midlcime. 'I'h dcuke, his do.
mielics, and all who cI ou!d be t;ltpccilc, of being
p ivy to tlih: (lciii, were takl' l i:lto cuitody.
Evc:v oie co ;f 'fi.d t!e whole of wh.it he knew;
an I tl- ..luke h; Ifcif at 1 . tlth ack:v)\a'ledg-d his
guilt, a. ! i.pli),l-cl t'ie tqiicin's im rcry. Ilia of-
fence w.,:; i,)o I, IhIus, and too often repeated to
obt in pardon: l':i^g tried by hia p,-crs, he was
found gui!ty ,ot hi;gh trcafon, and ds:er f vcral de-
lays, full-recd dlc..th.

The

The discovery of this conspiracy was extreme-

ly detrimental to Mary's interest. As there was
now the clearest evidence that flie had engaged in
the most liofLile and desperate enterprizes againif
the eftablified government and religion, flie began
to be regarded as a public enemy: Her confinement
was rendered more firict; the number of her do-
meftics was abridged; and no person permitted
to fee her but in presence of her keepers.

In the north of Scotland, Sir Adam Cordon,

Huntly's brother, had routed the king's adherents
in many encounters; but the conduCt of Eliza-
beth, who exhorted all parties to unite in ac-
knowledging the king's authority, contributed
not a little to depress the spirits of Gordon's fol-
lowers.

As Morton commanded the re-

gent's forces at Leith, and Kirkal- D. '
dy flill held out the town and castle of Edinburgh,
scarce a day paflcd without a (kirmifh, and both
partics for lome time hung up the prifoncrs that
they took witlout nercy. At length the misc-
ries of famline bpgan to be felt by the besieged,
and probably would hax e forced them to have ca-
pitulated, if the :En' ': and Fr, ncll atmbaffadors
had not procured .: lufpenfioln of hoflilities for two
months.

This truce 'Afllrdled a fiafolable interval of

tianquillity to the queen's adherents in the foutli,
but proved fit .l to ler interef in the north. Sir
Adam Gordon had flill maintained his reputation

2 antl

.nd superiority there; and had he not b-en obliged
by the truce to suspend his operations, he would
in all probability have brought that pirt of the
kingdom to submit entirely to the queen's autho-
ri,'?

But in England, the nation, jealous of Mary's

negociations with the duke of Alva, regarded her
with abhorrence, the parliament proceeded againlt
her as the molt dangerou enemy of the kinigdom;
in a conference between the lords and commons,
both houfc3 agreed in brinlging in a bill to declare
her guilty of high treaton, and to deprive her of
all right of fucceflion to the crBwn. But though
llizlbeth applauded thlir zeal, she did not think
it time to venture on the lift extrenmity r g:inft
MI.irv, and therefore prorogued the parlidment.

While Eiizabeth laboured to bring the Scots

to a general pacification, lhe was altoniihed by an
event which filled a great part of Europe with hor-
ror. This was the mahiacre of Paris, which
doomed to (letiru-l'tio: the protestants who had
been drawn to court by the mofl solemn promises
of safety and favour. In the midit of their feca-
rity the fatal warrant was iihued by their fovercign ;
and ten tho:.ifnd proteftanits, without dilltinlion
of age, or sex, or condition, were murdered i t
Paris alone. h'1' fame barbarous orders were
sint to other parts of the kingdom, and a like car-
nage ensued.

I'his deco inspired at once the protcillants with

horur, :and tliled
th:m with fear. It was believed

R that

that all the popifl princes had conspired the de-
ftruaion of their fca; and this opinion was of no
small disservice to Mary's affairs in Scotland.
Many of her adherents were protestants, and al-
though they wified her restoration, they were ,t
willing to sacrifice the faith which they profcficd.
They confidered the prcfent eftablifllment of reli-
gion could only be maintained against the league
formed to overturn it, by a itric union with Lli-
zabeth, and by the concuirence of both natlcns e-
spousing it as a common cause.

This disposition encouraged Elizabeth to re-

fume the scheme of fending Mary as a prisoner
into Scotland ; lle required tlat immediately on
lier arrival lie fiould be brought to public trial;
and that whatever fzntcnce should be pifli:d on
lier fiould be infliced without del.:y. But the
earl of Mar, happily for the honour of iis country,
had more virtue than to lfittn to this ignominious
proposal.

That nobleman h:id be n long occupied in ne-

gpciating a gencral peace airo,.g his countrymen;
and as the ad(vcrfe f.fion placed entire confidence
in his integrity, his enillavours coul.l hardly h:ai.
failed of bcini;. fucceisful. Kirkaldy and Ma3ir-
].l\d came 4so near an agret ment with him, tl;t
scarce any thing remaincd except the formality of
ligning the treaty. But thi. del;gii w.,s difappnint-
edbylMoi'tonl, wliof fw;vy with the p.:rty wnagrcat-
er than. th:t of the regent hi;nltelf; autl thle inwa ri

griei

r:i'cf of Ma.r, vw'oh, loved his counrry, and wv;ihcl
for peace witl ar'dour, brought on a di!temper of
which lie died the twcnty-linth of O)ober. He
was perhap3 the o: !y pe-fifn in the kingdonm who
cvul. hr.'ae enjoyed the office of regent without
loss of rcputation ; and whose honourable views,
and uncorrupted integrity, were acknowledged by
contending falaions.

The influence of Elizabeth supported Morton'.3

prctcnfions, and he was accordingly elected regent.
His elevation was soon after fuceeeded by the
dea.th of Knox, who had been so instrumental in
eftabliiliini t'i1 reformed religion in Scotland.
Zeal, intrepidity, and difintereftedntfs, were vir-
tues universally allowed him ; but his maxims were
often too severe, and his impetuo(ity excelfive;
and rigid and uncomplying himself, he flhewed no
indulgence to the infirmities of others.

The new regent, de5 roas of efta-

A. D. I573

biilhing his authority, renewed the
negociations for peace. Mary's party was now
divided into two factions. At the head of the
one were Chatelherault and Hmintly; Miitlantl
and Kirkalldy were the leaders of the other. 'Ior-
ton's first offlr wa3 to Kirka!!dy and his aflocites;
but as these knew the prefCet regent's s)ysem to
be different fro.m that of hlii prcdicceflbr, d

nd as

thly were encour.aged by a proinife of eilftu:ll
filccour from France, if the c.lat! could hold foni
time lunger, they refufred all terms, unless tht
*;lwhle of the queen's !:prt w.is il,'l!led, and

R ~ , Kirkdlliv

Kirkaldy wns permitted to retain the command
of the castle in fx n:onths after the treaty was
figi'id.

The regent, on Kirkaldy's rcfufal, turned to

Chatelherault, and lluntly, who were less flcr-
1dilouF, and lillened e;igerly to his overtures. Ti.e
chitfarticles were, that all the parties compre-
hended fl;ould declare their approbation of the
reformed religion; that they fliould submit to the
king's government, and own Morton's authority
as regent; that on both fides the prisoners should
be set at liberty, and the lands restored to their
proper owners; and that the a& of Attainder pas-
fed against the queen's adherents should be re-
pealed.

Kirkaldy, though thus abandoned by his allies,

.did not lose courage, and still resolved to defend
the cattle in the queen's name. But Elizabeth,
who determined at any rate to put an end to the
diflcnfions in Scotland, ordered fir William Drury
to join the regent with fifteen hundred foot, and
a confidtrable train of artillery. The united for-
ces opened the trenches, and carried on thlir ap-
proaches regularly againil the castle ; yet Kirkaldy
continued to ref;ft all the efforts of the Englifll
and Scots, during thirty-three days; and deter-
mined rather to fall gloriously than to yield to his
invetcrait cnemics: IBut his garrison was not ani-
nmated w ith the f.mnc heroic resolution ; and rising
in a mutiny, compelled hiin to capitulate. lie
furrcndcrcd himself to Drury, lwhlo prcli'tcdt il

the

the name cf his miilrcfs, that he should be favour-
ably treated ; together with him, James Kirkaldy
his brother, lord Home, Maitland, and fir Robert
Melvil, were made prisoners.

Kirkaldy and his associates remained in Drury's

cuilody, and were treated by him with great hu-
manity, until the queen of England, whose pri-
f ncrs they were, fliould determine their fate.
Eiizabeth, without regarding Drury's honour, or
his p1romises in ler name, gave them up to the
regent's dirpofal, who condemnted Kirkaldy and
his brother to be hanged at the Cross of Edin-
burg ; while Maitland prevented the ignominy of
a pablic execution by a voluntary death.

Mary, incapable of afiirdiig iher party any rc-
ieLf, Ibwailed thLir niisfortunes in prison. Her
liealth began to be impaired by confinement ;. and,
at the intreaty of the French Ambaflador, Shrew-
ibury, her keeper, wn:s permitted to carry her to
Buxton Wells, not far from. uthbury, the place
of her imprif'lnmenr.

In the mean time, the regent set
A, D. rJ74-5 C

hiimfelf to rcdr-fs the diordlers which

civil war had extended through Scotland; but he
(, it the reputation which he might have acquired
by the eltablifhment of order and security by his
avariciou; exaftions. Spies and( iilormers were
every where employed ; the rcmembrance of old
oll'ences was revived ; petty trefpafnis were aggra-
vated; and delinquents were forced to compound
for their lives by exhorbt.ant finca. The currant

R 3 coin

coin was also debased, and even the feanty sub-
fiitence of the clergy was inttrcepted by his avi-
dity.

The weight of the regent's opprtf- D

five adminilfration had hitherto fallen
chiefly on the lower and middle ranks; but he
began now to take filch fleps as convinced the
nobles their dignity v ould not long exempt them
from feeling the eflfes of his power. The e:rls
of Argyle and Athol had aftilmedl arms to decidi
a private quarrel; the regent, by iiiterporing his
authority, obliged them to dilband their forcq;
both of them had been guilty of irregularities,
which though common, were contrary to the Iht-
ter of the law. Of these, the regent to!k( aldvan;-
age, and resolved to found a charge of high trel-
son. The two earls forgot their old quarrls in
their common. danger; their confederacy enabled
l:em to defpifee the fumnons of Morton; but
though he was obliged to defilt irom further pro-
fecution, tlh injury he intended made a deep im-
preflion on their minds.

James w:Is now in the twelfth year .

r .

of his age ; and all beg.n to turn tit ir
eyes on the young king, fron whlhom tlh y cx-
pc'Icd a more gentle adminiitration. But a;
he was f1ll difiant from the period at which
the law permitted him to assume the reigns of
government, the regent did not sufficiently rell (t
how f;.r the wishes of the people might antici-
p;i that moment: lie not only negliltl to

fc cutr

secure the friendll,ip of those who were about
the king's person, but had even exasperated some
of them by personal injuries. Tiel:f rcprefented
to the prince, tihe exorbitant authority and dan-
gerous ambition of Morton, and contrasted it
with his own limited situation. Their fug-
geftions were productive of the desired eflfet;
and James consented to call a council of the no-
bles for the redress of the gritvanccs of the na-
tion.

A. D. LI.etters for this purpose were if-
.\. D. 5i°3.,

sied in the royal nar.le; but were

ient only to such as were known to bear no good
will to Morton. The number of these was, how-
ever, so confiderablc, that on the day appointed
fr the greater part of the nobles aflembled at
Stilling. They advised the king to deprive the
rc(gtnt of his office, and to take the adminiftra-
tion of affairs into his own hands. This was
lignifird to Morton at Dalkeith, his usual place
of residence; ard nothing could equal the joy
with which this resolution filled the nation, but
th:e surprise at the seeming alacrity with which
thc regent lefcellned fiom so high a station.

Yet Morton wanted neither sagacity to fore-

sic the danger of resigning, nor inclination to
kt]ep pofilffion of that authority; but the sources
whence he had derived it were no more. The
commons and clergy were totally alienated from
him; and Elizabeth, occupied in the aWairs of the

Nethe rlands,

Netherlands, had not leisure to attend to Scot#
land.,

He therefore attended the Clhanceilor and Her-

ries to Edinburgh ; was present when the king's
acceptance of the government was prcladimed;
and, before the people, surrendered all the autiho-
rity to which he had any claim in virtue of his
office. He obtained however friom James, an ad
containing the approbation of every thing idone
by him in the exercise of the regency, and pr(rdon
in the molt ample form, that his fear or cautioi
could devise, of all pail offences, crimes, and
treasons. The nobles who adhered to the ki:i ,
bound thcmftlves, under a great penalty, to n'c.
cure the ratilication of this at in tile fir. p r-
liament.

A council of twelve peers was appointed to as-

fill the king in the adminiltration of astirs; ai;!
Morton retired to one of his feats, and seemnd to
be occupied in the amusements of a country life.
Even in this retreat, which the people called the
Lion's )Den, his wealth and abilities rendered hi;r
firmildable; and the new counsellors wnre so im-
prudent as to rouze him by their pr-fecutio'.
Not content with stripping him of the castle cf
Edinburgh, they called a parliament, ;and multi-
plied their den:ands upon him, in fucli a manner
as convinced him that his utter ruin was intei'-
ed.

But their power and populaiity began already
to decline. The favouritcs at Coutrt were either

avowcd

avowed papifls, or fiufpectcd of learning to the
opinions of that fct: The return of popery
gave universal alarm ; and as Morton had always
treated the papists with rigour, this unseasonable
favoar to peifons of that religion, made all zealous
protet.fnts remember that circumstance ii, his ad-
niiniftration with great praise.

Morton, to whom all these particulars were

known, thought this the proper junture for set-
ting his instruments to work. Having gained the
confidence of the earl of Mar, and of the countess
his mother, he insinuated to them that Alexan-
der Erskine had formed a plot to deprive his ne-
phew of the government of Stirling Castle. This
was readily believed; and the earl repairing ftd-
den!y to Stirling, and being admitted as usual,
seized the gates early in the morning, and turned
out his uncle, who dreaded no danger from his
hands. The soldiers of the garrison submitt.-d
to him as their governor; and with little danger,
and no effusion of blood, he became mnalter of the
king's person, and of the fortress.

Though Morton's hand did not appear in the

execution, he was universally believed the author
of the attempt. The new counsellors saw that it
was necefl;ry to enter into terms of accommnoda-
tion with an adversary still so capable of creating
them trouble. Morton himnfelf fat out for Stir-
ling, and by the means of Murray of Tullibardin
was admitted into the cadlle; and soon had more
entirely the command of the fort than the earl

hillfelf:

hinifelf: lie was likewise admitted to a feat in
the privy council, and acquired the fame ascendant
in it.

The time now approached for meeting the pir-

liament at Edinburgh ; and M;lorton, afraid of con-
duding the young king to a city whose inhabi-
tants were so much at tile devotion of the adverse
.facion, issued a proclamation, changing the place
to Stirling; though the parliament met, and con-
firmed the king's acceptance of the government,
and ratified the act granted to Morton for his fe-
'curity; yet Argyll, Athol, and their followers,
soon after took armss under the specious pretext of
rescuing the king from captivity, and the kingdom
from oppreflion. James secretly en.-oraged their
enterprise, though he was obliged l;ubli.!y to dii-
avow them. BIoth fides were re:idy for action;
when an accomodation was effetlkl by tle me-
diation of Bowes, whom Elizabeth had sent into
Scotland. Argyll and Athol were admitted into
the king's presence; some of their party were
added to the privy council; and a convention of
nobles was called, in order to bring all remaining
diflerences to an amicable issue.

The reconciliation of the nobles

was followed by a tragical event.

Morton had invited the leaders of the oppoite
party to a great entcrt.inmcnt. Athol, tile clai:-
cellor, ma.s soon after taken ill, and died within a
few days. l'he fyniptoms and violence of the dif-
ease gave rile to fuiipicion of poison; and as the

*·' .itl~dvalntages

advantages of his death accrued to :':-'rton, the
people al:o im! uted to him the crime.

By conferring the oflice of charcelXvr on Ar-

gyll, Morton reconciled that nobleman to his ad-
minillration ; arid he now b!.held only the house of
IL.milton that was capable of obflrudcing his de-
dcfins. ''he earl of Arran, the eldest brother, still
remained bereft of reason ; lord John, the second
brother, was in poflellion of the family estate ; lord
Claud was commendator of Paisley. Morton
dreaded their influence, and availed himself of the
king's jealousy to his apparent fucceflbr. The
pardon, itipulated in the treaty of Perth, did not
extend to such as were accefllry to the murder of
the regents Murray and Lennox.

Lord John and his brother were suspected of

being the authors of both tiefe climes, and had
bi:en included in a gincr.il .a c i ..ttainder on that
account: i'his att,.-inrfr u ; now i;cL rhlt fuffi-
cient to subjed thcm to :ia the per'li!'. which
they would have incui:'icd by being forinrlll ,on-
vidted. A cc:nllidcr.iii body of troops was de-
ta:cled to Han;iilon ; the .two brothlrs made their
ellipe ; 'iuc tl. ir lands were confiscated ; and the
earl of Arrain, though incapable from hic situation
of conmitting any crime, was involved il the
common ruin of his family.

ML.rtI had crulhed his enemies, and was
g.'iii in pollellion .of the sole direction of affairs
hut the king was now of an age, when the cha-
racScr and diipoliiions of the mindl begin to unfold
'irmfjl/cs: ; lie (:-lv difccv!crcd hlat cx.clive at-

t.a.hmlliit

tachment to favourites which accompanied h;m
through his whole life; the most conifiderable
of them was Efine Stewart, a native of France,
and son of a second brother of the earl of Lennox.
He was distinguished in France by the title of
lord d'Aubigne, and arrived in Scotland to de-
mand the estate and title of Lennox, to which he
pretended a legal right. James's favour flowed
towards him with its usual rapidity and profusion.
Within a few days after Stewart's appearance at
court he was created lord Aberbrotheck, soon as-
ter earl, and then duke of Lennox, governor o[
Dumbarton cafile, captain of the guard, firlt lord
of the bed-chamber, and lord high chamberlain.

At the fame time captain James Stewart, the

second son of lord Ochiltree, without that envy
which is usual among candidates for favour, grew
into confidence: Yet, notwithstanding this union,
Lennox and Stewart were persons of very oppo-
site charac1ers. The former was naturally gentle,
humane, and candid ; But unacquainted with the
iafte of the country, and utterly disqualified for
afcing as miniller. The latter was remarkable
for all the vices which render a man formidable to
his country, and a pernicious counsellor to his
prince ; nor did he poffcfs any one virtue to coun-
terbalance theft vices, unlcfs dexterity in con-
dumting his own designs, and an enterprising cou-
ragr: supcrior to the fcnfe of danger, may pass by
that name.

2 Both

Both the favourites concurred in employing

their whole address to undermine Morton's cre-
dit; who, no longer capable of confining James
within the walls of Stirling, brought him to
Edinburgh to meet the parliament; he was re-
ceived with the loudest acclamations by the citi-
zens, and lodged in Holy.rood.houfe, to which all
his fubjeas had access.

Morton, to retard Lennox's pre A D

ferment, had insinuated that he was
a formidable enemy to the reformed religion; this
accusation was greatly obviated by Lennox re-
nouncing the errors of popery; he in his turn re-
presented Morton as entertaining a design to seize
the king's person, and to carry him to England.
This rumour afforded a pretence for reviving the
office of lord Chamberlain, which was immediate-
ly conferred on Lennox; Alexander Erlkine, Mor-
ton's capital enemy, was his deputy; they had
under them a band of gentlemen who were ap-
pointed constantly to attend the king, and to guard
his person.

The aa of indemnity which Morton had ob-

tained when he resigned the regency, was worded
with such fcrupuious ex5t1nefs, as almost screened
him from any legal prosecution. The murder of
the late king was the only crime which could not
with decency be inserted in a pardon granted by-
his son. Here Morton lay open; and captain
Stewart entered the council chamber, while the
king and nobles were assembled, and falling on his

knees

,knees, accused Morton of being accessary in the
conspiracy against the life of his majesty's father,
and offered, under the usual penalties, to verify
this charge by legal evidence.

Morton heard the accusation with firmrefs,

and replied, that he would cheerfuly submit him-
fe1f to a trial either in that place, or any other
.court; he was confined first to his own house,
and afterwards carried to Dunbarton castle, of
which Lennox had command.

-A.D. - Elizabeth did not fail to inter-

pose with warmth in behalf of a

man, who had contributed so much to preserve her
influence over Scotland. The power'which Len-
nox had acquired, independent of her, was dan-
gerous; fle ordered a considerable body of troops
to assemble on the borders; and ihe dispatched
Randolph as ambassador to James.

But James's counsellors were too intent on the

deftruCion of their enemy to liften to any remon-
itrances; a general and evasive answer was re-
turned to the application of Randolph. All thofc
who were fufpeted of being attached to Morton,
were stripped of their places; and the greater so-
licitude Elizabeth difcovcred for that nobleman's
safety, the more eagerly did his enemies drive on
their schemes for his deftrution. Captain Stew-
art, his accuser, was first appointed tutor to the earl
of Arran, and soon after both the title and cftate
of his unhappy ward were conferred on him. T'lhe
new made pecr was commanded to conduct Mor-

ton

ton from Dunbarton to Edinburgh; and the eart
had the cruel mortification of feeing his deadly
enemy already loaded with honours, in reward of
the malice with which he had contributed to his-
ruin.

The account which our historians give of Mor-

ton's trial, is inacurate and unfatisfacory. The
jury was composed of his known enemies, and
after a short consultation they found him guilty;-
the doom which the law decrees against a traitor
was pronounced; the king, however, remitted the
cruel part of the sentence, and appointed that he
fliould susser death next day by being beheaded.

During that awful interval, Morton possessed

the utmost composure of mind. The clergyman
who attended him prcffed freely upon him the ne-
ceflity of confefling his- crimes; he acknowledged
in regard to that for which he suffered, that Both-
well had informed him of the conspiracy againit
the king, which the queen, as he told him, knew
of and approved. " But, (continued he) " as I
" neither consented to this treasonable a&t, nor
" aflifted in committing it, so it was impossible
" for me to reveal or prevent it. To whom could
" I make the discovery ? The queen was the au-
"thor of the enterplife ; Darnly was such a
" cangling, that no secret could be safely com-
"municated to him; Huntly and Bothwell, who
"bore the chief sway in the kingdom, were them-
" selves the perpetrators of the crime. " These
ecumunftances, it must be confefled, serve to ex-

S i texluata

tenuate Morton's guilt; and hehimfeif seems not to
have been disquieted by uneasy reflections. When
his keepers told him that the gaurds were attend.
ing, and all things in readiness; " I praise my
" God," said he, I am ready likewise." On the
scaffold his behaviour was calm ; his countenance
and voice unaltered; and he suffered death
with the intrepidity which became the name of
Douglas.

A parliament was held this year, at the opening

of which some disputes arose between Arran and
the duke of Lennox. Though the former, to pre.
serve his interest at court, from which he was ba-
nifhed, made the most humble fubmillions to the
favourite; yet, during the continuance of the rup-
ture, each endeavoured to conciliate the good will
of the clergy, and we must ascribe to their rival-
ship, several a&s uncommonly favourable to the
church.

A. D. zjg. The two favourites by their ascend.

ant over the king, poffefled uncontrol-

ed power, and exercised it with the utmost wan.
tonness. Exalted notions of prerogative were in-
stilled into the young monarch, and unfortunately,
made a deep impreflion on his mind: Courts of
justice were held in almost every county; the pro-
prietors of lands were called before them, and upon
the slightest neglect of forms were fined with in.
tolerable rigour. 'The bold discourses of the cler-
gy were regarded as fcditious, and Dury one of
the moit popular ministers, was compelled by the

king's

ing's order to leave Edinburgh: While the ser-
vices of those who had placed the crown on James's
head; were but little remembred; and many who
opposed him with the greatet violence, enjoyed
the rewards and honours to which the others were
entitled.

The impatient spirit of the Scottish nobles

could no longer endure the insolence of two up-
start minions. Their difeontent was fanned by
the promises of Elizabeth, who, since Mortoh's.
death, felt herself deprived of all the influence in
Scotland. The earls of Mar and Glencairn, lord
Ruthven, lately created earl of Gowrie, lord
Lindsay, lord Boyd, the tutor of Glamis, the
eldest son of lord Oliphant, with several barons-
and gentlemen of diftindion, entered into a corm-
bination to rescue the king out of theehands of the-
favourites.

James had resided for some time in Athol;,

where he enjoyed his favourite amusement of
hunting; and in his return to Edinburgh, was in-
vited to Ruthven Caltle, which lay in his way.
The multitude of strangers whom he found there
gave him some uneasiness; but he concealed his-
fears, and prepared next morning to takle the field,.
expeLing to find there some opportunity of mak-
ing his escape. But just as he was ready to de--
part, the nobles entered his bed-chamber in a bo-.
dy, and presented a memorial againf. the illegal
mnd oppreflive conduCt of his favourites.

James, though he received this remonfirance

S3 witli

with complaisance, was extremely impatient to be
gone; but as he approached the door of his apart-
ment-, the tutor of Glamis rudely flopped him.
The king complained, expoftulated, threatened,
and finding all these without effe&, burst into tears.
"No matter," said Glamis, fiercely; "better
" children weep than bearded men." These words
made a deep impreflion on the king's mind, and
were never forgoten. The conspirators, without
regarding his tears or indignation, dismissed such
of his followers as they fufpe&ed ; allowed none
but persons of their own party to have access to
him; and though they treated him with the greatelt
refpe&, guarded his person with the utmost care:
This enterprise is usually called by the hiftorains,
the Raid of Ruthven.

Lennox, aflonifled at this event, had in vain

endeavoured to excite the citizens of Edinburgh
to arms; while Arran, with his usual impetuosity,
mounted on horseback, and arrived at the gate
of Ruthven Caftte. At the fight of a man so odi-
ous to his country, the indignation of the confpi.
rators rose; and instant death mufl have been the
punifliment of his rashness, had he not been saved
by the friendship of Gowrie. He was confined,
however, to the castle of Stirling, without being
admitted into the king's presence.

The king, though really the prisoner of his own

fibjetes, was obliged to publish a proclamation
signifying his approbation of their enterprise, and
oxbidding any attempt against those concerned in

the

the Raid of Ruthven, under pretence of rescuing
him out of their hands; at the fame time, he
commanded Lennox to leave Scotland before the
twentieth of September.

Lennox, who had received private afurances.

that the king's favorr towards him was in no ways
abated, seemed resolved at firlt to pay no regard to
a command extorted by violence: But the power
of his enemies, who were fecretely supported by
Elizabeth, and openly by the clergy, deterred him
from any enterprise; the success of which was
dubious, and the danger certain, both to himself
and his sovereign.

The conspirators were extremely solicitous to

obtain some legal fancion of their condu&c: They
obliged the king to grant them a remiifiou in the
moss ample form. From the church they pro-
cured an at also, declaring, " That they had done
good and acceptible service to God, to their fove-
reign, and to their native country." A convention
of citates afiembled a few days after, pafltd an ad
to the fame effet, and granted full indemnity to
the conspirators for every thing they had done.

James, though conducted to the palace of HIoly-

rood-houfe, was kept under a restraint no less
Itrit than at the first moment when seized by the
conspirators. Lennox, after eluding many com-
mands, set out at length for France; soon after
his arrival in that kingdom, the fatigue of the
journey, or the anguish of his mind, threw himr
into a fever. In his last moments, he difcoveredl

* arI

such a firm adherence to the protestant faith,.
as fully vindicates his memory from the imputa-
tion of popery, with which he had been unchari-
tably loaded in Scotland. As he was the earlief
and belt beloved, he was, perhaps, the most de-
serving, though not the molt able of James's fa-~
vourites: And the warmth and tenderness of his
master's afietdion were displayed by many acts
of kindness and generosity towards his polteri-
ty.

The fuccefi of the conspiracy which deprived

James of liberty, at last reached the ears of Mary;
and in the anguish of her heart, she wrote to Eli-
zabeth, bcfeeching her not to abandon her son to
the mercy of his rebellious fubjedts ; nor permit
him to be involved in the fame misfortunes, U4n-
der which fle had so long groaned. But the re-
monstrances of a captive queen were of little es-
fel ; nor was. the interposition of Henry 'the
Third, of France, more successful: 'The. French
court had long loft its ancient influence over the
affairs of Scotland; and.the clergy werc alarmed
at the danger to which religion would be expofedl,
if the princes of Cuife should recover any afcen.
dant over the public councils.
. Meanwhile James, though he dif.

A. D. iS8j:

fembled with great art, was conti-
nually attentive to find out a proper opportunity
for making his escape. As the conspirators had
forced Lennox out of the kingdom, and kept Ar-
ran at a diltauce from court, they grew secure.

Colonel

Colonel Stewart, the commander of the band of
gentlemen who guarded the king's person, had the
principal merit in the scheme for restoring his
master to liberty.

Under pretence of paying a visit to the earl of

M:rch, his uncle, James was permitted to go
from Falkland to St. Andrew's He at first lodged
in an open defenceless house in the town; but ex-
prefling a curiosity to fee the castle, no sooner was
he entered with some of his attendants whom he
could trust, than colonel Steward commanded the
gates to be shut, and excluded all the reft of his
train.

Next morning the earls of Argyle, Huntly,

Clawford, Montrose, Rothes, with others to
whom the secret had been communicated, entered
the town with their followers; and though Mar,
with several of the leaders of the faation, appear-
ed in arms, they found themfelyes so fir out-num.
bered, that it was in vain to think of recovering
poffefion of the king's person, which had been in
their power above ten months.

The joy of James at his efcpe, was youthful

and excessive; he resolved, however, by the advice
of Sir James Melvil and his wisest counsellors, to
a& with the utmost moderation. He declared,
that though he had been held under restraint for
some time by violence, he would not impute that
as a crime to any man; but without remembering
the irregularities which had been so frequent dur-
ing his minority, would pass a gencral ad of obli-

violn

vion, and govern all his fubjeas with undiftin-
guifling and equal affelion.

The king did not long adhere to this prudent

plan. A visit to the earl of Arran re-kindled his
fondness for that favourite; who having once
more acquired the afccndancy over James, re-
fumed the exercise of power with all the arro-
gance and raflinefs peculiar to himself.

The first effc& of hi; influence was a procla-

mation with regard to those concerned in the Raid
es Ruthven. They were required to acknow-
ledge their crime ; and the king promised to grant
them a full pardon, provided their future conduat
obliged him not to remember past miscarriages.
This proclamation was very different from the
a&t of oblivion which the conspirators had been
encouraged to expet. None of them reckoned
it safe to rely on a promise clogged with such an
equivocal condition: Many of the leaders, who.
had at first appeared openly at court, retired to
their own houses; and foreseeing the dangerous
form that was gathering, began to look out for a
retreat in foreign countries.

To protect the conspirators, Elizabeth appointed

"Walsingham, her secretary, ambafiador of James
but that minister was unable to prevail on the
Scottifl king to change his rcfolutions. n1 his
return to LEngland he, however, rrade so advan-
tageous a representation of Jamcs's abilities, as
determined Elizabeth to treat him Itenceforward
with greater decency and rcflpet.

As

As the conspirators had refused to accept of

pardon on the terms which the king had offered
them, they were required by a new proclamation
to surrender themselves prisoners. The earl of
Angus alone complied; the reft either fled into
England, or obtained the king's licence to retire
into foreign parts; and a convention of estates de-
clared those concerned in the Raid of Ruthven to
have been guilty of high treason.

The clergy could not conceal their apprehen-

sions at the prosecution of those nobles who had
been esteemed the mofl zealous defenders of the
protestant cause. Mr Andrew Melvil was fum-
moned before the privy council, to answer for the
doctrine which he had uttered in a sermon at St.
Andrews. IHe declined the jurifdicaion of a civil
court in a cause which he maintained to be purely
ecclesiastical. The king, jealous to excess of his
prerogative, was alarmed at this daring encroach-
ment on it ; and as Melvil, by his learning and
zeal, had acquired the reputation of head of the
party, he resolved to punilh him with severity;
and by diltinguifhing him as an example, difcou-
rage the rcvivil of such a dangerous claim. Mrcl-
vil however avoided his rage by hlying into Eng-
land ; and the pulpits rcfoulded witl complaints
that the king had extinguillcd the light of learn-
ing in the kingdom, and deprived the church of
the ablest and mofl faithful guardian or its libir-
tics and difciplinc.

''1,,:

The conspirators though driven out of the king-

dom flill possessed great influence there, and never
ceased soliciting their adherents to take arms in
their defence. Cowrie, the only person among
them who had submitted to the king, and accepted
of a pardon, soon repented of a ftep which loft
him the esteem of one party, without acquiring
him the confidence of the other. After suffering
many mortifications from the king's negled, anti
the haughtiness of Arran, lie was at last com-
manded to leave Scotland, and to reside in France.
While he waited at Dundee for an opportunity to
embark, he was informed that the earls of Angus,
Mar, and the tutor of Glamis had concerted a
scheme for furprizing the caltle of Stirling: In
his situation little perfuufion was neceffiry to draw
him to engage in it.

Under various pretexts he put off his voyagc,

and lay ready to take arms on the day fixed. His
lingering so long at Dundee, without any appa-
rent reason, awakened the suspicion of the court,
proved fatal to himself, and disappointed the fuc-
cels of the conspiracy. Colonel William Stewart
siarrounded the house where lie lodged with a body
of foldicrs, and in spite of his refiltance took him
prifoncr.

Two days after, Angus, Mar, and Glamis

fcizcd the cdllk of Stirling, and erecling their
ftalid.ird thelre, publil.icd a manifesto, declarillg
that they took arms for no other reason, but to

renlove

remove from the king's presence a n. :;iC, w'ho
had acquired power by the nift unworthy adllcn,
and who exercised it with the mofi ii:tolcr,-ble 5;-
fi,lcnce. The account of C;owrie's imprin(,ment
firuck a damp upon their spirits; they imputed
it to treachery on his part, and suspected that he
had betrayed them : Their friends and vafials came
in slowly, and their ihops gradually gave way to
despair.

Mean while the king advanced against them at

the head of twenty thousand men; and incapable
of refiflance, they with difficulty made their escape
into England. 'This rath and feeble attempt pro-
duced such effects as ufualiy fiiow diftppointed
conspiracies: It not only hurt the caufc for which
it was undertabken, but added ltrength and repu-
tation to the king ; confirmed Arran's power ; and
enabled them to pursue their ineafures with more
boldness and greater success. Gowrie was the
first victim of their refentnent ; after a very in-
formal trial, a jury of peers found him guilty of
treason, and his head was struck ofF at Stirling

''o humble the church was the king's next ftep;

and fucli laws were pil'lld as totally overturned
Its conilitution and diftipline. The refu(ing to
acknoMledge the jurisdiCtion of the privy council;
the pretending an exemption from the civil courts;
the attempting to (lilniill tle rights and privi-
leges of any of the three cl.ltes in parliarnent,
were declared to be high treason. The holding
;allnmblies, whether civil or ecelefiaflical, without

'P the

the king's permission or appointment; tlie uttr-
ing, either privately or publicly, in sermons, or in
declamations, any falfC or scandalous reports a-
Mainft the king, his ancestors or ministers, werc
pronounced capital crimes.

These new flatutes were calculated to render

churchmen as inconsiderable as they were indi-
gent; no wonder therefore the alarm was univer-
fal. All the minifers of Edinburgh forsook their
charge, and fled to England ; the most eminent
clergymen throughout the kingdom imitated their
example ; and desolation and aftoniflhment appear-
ed in every part of the Scottifl church.

( 3,, i,':,

# Chapter the Seventh. CONSPIRACY of Throckmorton against Elizabeth. - Second conspiracy by Parry - Act of the English parliament. - Negociations of James with Elizabeth. - Intrigues in Scotland. - Babin ...

Chaj1fcr the Seventh.

Ct.'N:P;R \CY of Throckmorton againit Elizlbeth.--t-

cur.d conpiracy by Parry-Act us the English parliament.
- Negociations of J.lms with Elizabeth.-lntriguea in
S5.tlaild.-Babirggtors' col.fpiraty against Elizabeth.-Ma-
ry is accused as arcctfrry.-A court infttuted to try her.,-
SLntenec of tlh.t court.-In-erceffion of James.-Perfidy of
hia anlbaffador.-Artful conduct of Elizabeth.-Behaviour,
death, and chara9cr of Mary.-James's indignation.-He
is appcafed by the pro:eftations of I'liaabcth.-Spaniih Ar-
nad.-Ilntrigues of the king cf Spain in Scotland.-lThe
(t',fpirators pardoned by James.-Negociations of marriage
wuith Denmark.-James suddenly embr ..for Copenhagen.
- ;.lcmnizec his marriage with the fccond daughter of t;e
k.!'g ol Delnmark.
D.IS 4 V IIII.r. Scotland was torn by ilitf.

tiln f.iclions, Elizabeth \was al.lrnlitl

with the rumour of a projct in agitation for set-
tiLg IMiry ut libirt . l:r.lcis Trockinorton, a

T1' Clicllire

Chcflire gentleman, was fufpeded of being deep-
lv concerned in the design, and was taken into
cuflody. Among his papers were found several
remarks on the principal harbours in the king-
dom. The rack forced from him the secret;
and he acknowledged that he had held a fccret
corrcfpondence with the queen of the Scots;
and that he had concertcd with the duke of
Guise and the Spanifi monarch, the invasion of
Engl.and.

Though Throckmorton retraced this consef-

sion at the place of execution, yet it strongly im-
pressed the mind of Elizabeth; and that {he might
be in no danger of being attacked within the ifl-
and of Britain, she determined to use her utmost
efforts, in order to recover that influence over the
Scottish councils, which she had for forne time
entirely loft. By gaining the earl of Arran, she
might secure the direcion of the king his mafler;
for this purpofc s/he sent .;;-i'n, one of her prin-
cipal secretaries, into Scotland; and a minister
so venal as Arran, who was hated by his own
countrymen, accepted Elizabeth's offers without
helltation, and deemed the acquisition of hcr pro-
teetion to be the molt solid foundation of his own
grcatneis.

The banished lords and their adherents Goon felt

the etlets of Arran's friend(hip with Englanld.
As Elizabeth's protection had hitherto restraincd
the ministers of James, no sooner was the dread
of that removed, than they ventured to call a par-

liament,

liament, in which Angus, Mar, Glamis, and a
great number of their followers, were attainted.
Their estates devolved to the crown, and James
dealt out the greater part of these to Arran and
his associates.

Mean while Elizabeth was carrying on one of

those fruitless negociations with the queen of
Scots, which it had become almost matter of
form to renew every year. The treaty now on
foot was not, perhaps, more sincere than many
which preceded it; the reasons, however, which
rendered it ineflc&ual were far from being frivo-
lous.

As Crichton, a Jesuit, was failing from Slanders

towards Scotland : the ship in which he was a
passenger, happened to be chased by pirates, who
in that age often infested the narrow seas.
Crichton, in great confusion, tore in pieces some
papers in his custody, and threw them away:
But by a very extraordinary accident, the wind
blew them back into the flip, and they were car-
ricd by some of the paflelgers to Wade, the clerk
of the privy council. He joined them together,
;and found them to contain the account of a
plot, said to have been formed by the king of
Spain and the duke of Guise for invading Eng-
land.

The consternation of tle people at this intel-

ligence became general and excelfive; they con-
lidered Mary as the source of all the dangers with

T 3 which

which they had been threatened for some years;
and to convince her adherents of their attachment
to their own sovereign, an association was framed,
the subscribers of which bound themselves by the
most folernn oaths, " to defend the queen against
"all her enemies, foreign and domeRic; and if
" violence fllould be offered to her life, in order
" to favour the title of any pretender to the

crown, they not only engaged never to allow
or acknowledge the person or persons, by whom,

" or for whom, such a detestable at fllould be
." committed; but vowed in the prtfence of the e-
" ternal God to prosecute such a person or persons

to the death, and to pursue them with their ut-
" most vengeance, to their utter overthrow and

extirpation."
Mary confidered this combination as the imme-

diate fore-runner of her destruction. She sent
Naue;, her secretary, to court, with offers of more
entire resignation to the will of Elizabeth; but
that princess, instead of hearkening to her over-
tures, took her out of the hands of Shrewsbury,
and appointed Sir Amias Paulct and Sir Drue
I)rury, her keepers, men of inferior rank, whose
severe vigilance was perhaps their chief recom-
mendation to that employment.

James had appointed the master of Gray lis

ambafTador to the court of England, and intrufed
him with the condut of a negociation, to deprive
the banished lords of Elizabeth's protection. For
this honour, lie was indebted to the jealousy of Ar-

ial,

ran, whoobfervingthe progress that he made in the
royal favour, hoped to efface the impression by ab-
fence. Elizabeth endeavoured, by caresses and by
presents, to secure Gray to her interest; and fuc-
ceeded so well that he not only undertook to re-
tain the king under the influence of England, but
aded as a spy upon the Scottish queen.

Arran had now possessed for some

time, all the power, the riches, and

the honours that his immoderate ambition could
desire, or the fondness of his prince could heap
upon him. The office of Lord Chancellor was
conferred upon him, and the public beheld with
astonishment, a soldier of fortune, ignorant of
law, intrusted with the supreme disposal of the
property of his fellow fubje~ds. His venality as a
judge was scandalous, and exceeded only by that
of his wife; his rapaciousness as a minister was
insatiable; his spies and informers filled the whole
country; all familiar society was at an end ; and
even the common intercourses of humanity were
interrupted, no man knowing in whom to confide,
or where to utter his complaints.

This year Elizabeth again was alarmed by a
new conspiracy. Parry, a doctor of laws, and
a member of the house of commons, had lately
been reconciled to the church of Rome; and had
offered to demonstrate the sincerity of his conver-
sion by killing Elizabeth; but though he often
got access to the queen, fear, or some remaining
fcnfe of duty, rcftrained him from perpetrating

the

the crime, His intention was at last discovered
by Nevil, the only person to whom he had com-
municated it; and he himself having voluntarily
confessed his guilt, suffered the punithment which
it deserved.

These repeated confpiraces againfl their fove-

reign, awakened the indignation of the English
parliament, and produced a very extraordinary
statute, which, in the end, proved fatal to the
queen of Scots. By this, it was enacted, " That
" if any rebellion should be excited in the king-
" dom, or any thing attempted to the hurt of
"her majesty's person, by orfor any person pre-
"tending a title to the crown, the queen shall
" empower twenty-four persons, by a commiflion
" under the great feal, to examine into, and pass
" sentence upon such offences; and after judg-
"ment given, a proclamation shall be issued, de-
" claring the persons whom they find gui'ty ex-
" eluded from any right to the crown ; and her
" majesty's fubjecls may lawfully pursue every one
" of them to the death, with all their aiders and
' abettors; and if any design against the life of
" the queen take effccd, the persons by or for
" whom such a detestable ad is executed, and
" heir i'ers, being in anywise assenting or privy
" to the fame, fall be disabled for ever from prc-
"tending to the crown, and be pursued to death
" in like manner." This ad was plainly levelled
at the queen of Scots; and M.ry '.'as thereby
not only rendered accountable for her own adions,

but

but for those of others; in consequence of which
flie night forfeit her right of succession, and even
her life itself.

Mary jufily confidered this aet as a warning to

prepare for the worst extremities. Even the short
period of her days was rendered uncomfortable by
every hardfllip and indignity. Almioft all her ser-
vants were dismissed; the was confined to two
ruinous chambers scarcely habitable ; the castle in
which she resided was converted into a common
prison; and it was only by repeated importuni-
ties that Caftlenau, the French ambassador, pre-
vailed at length to have her removed to Tuth-
bury.

A severe and undutiful letter, which James was

prevailed on by Gray, on his return to Scotland,
to write to his mother, made a deeper impression
on her than the insults of her enemies, or the ne-
glet of her friends. In the bitterness of anguish
(he could not help warmly expoftulating; but
James, whose affeaion to his mother had never
been ardent, seems to have been indifferent to her
reproaches, and did not now take any pains to
regain her favour.

Her rival Elizabeth was not however without

anxiety. In France, the holy league had been for-
med to preclude the king of Navarre, a protest-
ant, from mounting that throne to which he was
next heir. At the head of this league was the
duke of Guise; and Philip of Spain was closely
confederated with that daring nobleman. To op-

pose

pose their force, Elizabeth endeavoured to form a
general confederacy of the protestant princes; she
determined also to proceed with the utmost rigour
against Mary, whose rights afforded her enemits
a specious pretence for invading her dominions;
while fle laboured to extend and perpetuate htr
influence over the councils of Scotland.

To James file proposed a itrie alliance between

the two kingdoms, in defence of the reformed re-
ligion. This was readily acceded to; but the chief
objea of Wotton, her ambassador, was to ruin Ar-
ran, who, grown odious to the nation, could new
be of little service to Elizabeth.

Wotton's plan was facilitated by an event nei-

ther uncommon nor considerable. Sir John For-
fter, and Ker of Ferniherft, the English and Scot-
tifh wardens, having met, according to the cultom
of the borders, a fray arose; and lord Ruffel, the
earl of Bedford's eldest son, happened to be killed.
This scuffle was accidental; yet Elizabeth chose
to confider it as a design formed by Ker, at the in-
ftigation of Arran, to involve the two kingdoms
in war. To sooth her, James was obliged to con-
fine Arran in St. Andrew's; while Wotton and
his associates, during his absence from court, car-
ried on their intrigues without interruption.

By their advice the banished nobles returned in

a body to the borders of Scotland. Arran, who
had again recovered favour, infilted on putting the
kingdom in a posture of defence; but Gray, Bel-
lenden, and Maitland, fecrctly thwarted all his

. roeasures.

measures. Wotton's audacity proceeded so far as
even to contrive a plot to seize the king, and to
carry him into England; but the design was hap-
pily discovered; and in order to avoid the punish-
ment his treachery merited, he departed without
taking leave.

Meanwhile the banished lords entered the king.

dom, and advanced towards Stirling at the head
of ten thousand men. The king, though he had
aflembled an army superior in number, could not
venture to meet them in the field with troops
whose loyalty was doubtful. The town was fur-
prifed; and the castle, in which there were not
provisions for twenty-four hours, was invested.
James was immediately obliged to hearken to terms
of accommodation. The demands of the confe-
rates were far from extravagant: A pardon was
granted in the most ample form, for the offences
they had committed ; the principal forts in the
kingdom were, by way of security, put into their
hands; Crawford, Montrose, and Colonel tewart
were removed from the king's presence; and a
parliament was called, in order to eftablifl the
tranquillity of the nation.

In that parliament the ancient honours and e-

states of the confederate nobles were restored
and Arran, deprived of all his dignities, stripped
of his borrowed spoils, and proclaimed an enemy
to his country, funk back into obscurity, and mull
henceforth be mentioned by his primitive title of
captAin James Stewart.

The

The league which had been pro A. .

posed last year between England
and Scotland was now formally executed. The
chief articles in it were, that both parties should
bind themselves to defend the evangelic religion;
and that each should mutually support the other a-
gainft any invader. Elizabeth also assured the king,
that no ftep should be taken which might derogate
in any degree from his pretensions to the English
crown,

Soon after, the inconsiderate affetion of the

English catholics towards Mary, and their impla.
cable resentment againit Elizabeth, gave rife to a
conspiracy which proved fatal to one queen, and
left an indelible stain on the rcputation of the o-
ther.

Do&or Gifford, Gilbert Gifford, and Hodfon,

priefte educated at Rheims, had adopted a notion,
that the bull of Pius the Fifth, was ditated imme-
diately by the Holy Ghost. This opinion they
instilled into Savage, a Spanili officer, noted for
his furious zeal and daring courage. Animated
by the hopes of martyrdom, Savage bound him-
self by a solemn vow t9 kill Elizabeth. Ballard,
a priest of that seminary, had at the fame time
come over to Paris, and solicited Mendoza, the
Spanifn ambassador, to procure an invasion of
England. Paget and the Englifl exiles demon-
ftrated the fruitleffiefs of such an attempt, unless
Elizabeth was first cut off, or the invaders fecur-

...

ed of a powerful concurrence on their landing.
If it could be hoped that either of these events
would happen, effecdual aid was promised; and in
the mean time Ballard was sent back to renew his
intrigues.

He communicated his design to Anthony Ba-

bington, a young gentleman in Derbyshire, of a
large fortune and many amiable qualities, who
hlad been recommended by the archbishop of G!as-
~ow to the queen of Scots. He concurred wirh
Paget in confidering the death of Elizabeth as a
neceflary preliminary to any invasion; and Bal-
lard imparted to him Savage's vow, who was now
in London waiting to strike the blow. In this
enterprise Babington proposed to join five reo-
lute gentlemen, and offercd to find persons willing
and qualified to undertake the office. He accord-
ilngly opened the matter to Edward Windsor, Tho-
mas Salisbury, Charles Tilney, Chidioc Tich-
bourne, Ro ert Gage, John Travers, Robert
Barnwell, John Charmock, Henry Dun, John
Jones, and Robert Polly; all of them, except Polly,
whose forward zeal introduced him into their so-
cicty, gentlemen of good families, and united to-
gether in the bonds of private fricndlhip. Many
consultations were held, and at length a regular
plan of operations fettled.

While the conspirators b:lieved that their ma-

chinations were carried on with the most profound
i crecy, every 1tep they took was fully ktown to

U Wafitngham

Walsingham. Polly was one of his spies; and hal
entered into the conspiracy with no other design
than to betray his aflbciates; Gilbert Giffotd too
had been gained by the fame mitifter, and gave
him sure intelligence of all their projeats.

At length Ballard, the prime mover in the con-

f-iracy, was arrested; and his associates were soon
after, except Windsor, seized in different places
of the kingdom, and committed to the Tower.
They immediately confessed all they knew; the
indignation of the people hastened their trial; and
all of them suffered the le.tth of tiaitcrs.

Elizabeth and her miuiiters chose not to confi-

dcr this conspiracy as inspired by the frantic zeal
of a few rafli young men: They wiflhed to per-
fuade the nation, that Babington and his affociatea
.Were inftrumeuts employed by the queen of Scots.
'They produced letters which they ascribed to her,
in support of this charge; these, they gave out,
had come into their hands by the following myfte-
'rious method: Gifford had been trusted with let-
ters from some of the exiles to Mary; to make
'trlaltf his fidelity they were only blank papers
mhde 'p in that form: These being safely delivered
'by him, he was afterwards employed without any
scruple. Walsingham had found means to gain
this man; antd he, by the permiflion of the mini-
fter, and by tle connivance of Paulet, bribed a
tradefinan in chatiighbourhood of Chartley, whi-
thet Mary had besn conveyed, who deposited thd
ktters in a hole in the wall of the caltle: thence

they

they were taken by the queen, and her answers re-
turned in the fame manner. All these were o.
pened by Walsingham, and re-ealed, were tranf-
mitted to the persons to whom they were direct-
cd,

It was given out that in these letters Mary-

approved of the assassination; that The recom-
mended the carl of Arundel, his brothers, and
the young earl of Northumberland, as proper per-
fona to conduc their enterprise; and befougfit'
them to concert with care the means of her own
fccape.

All these circumstances were opened at thes

trial of the conspirators, and were believed with-
out hesitation or enquiry. It now evidently ap-
pears, said the Englifli, that the safety of one queen
is incompatible with that of the other. Why thena
added they, should the tranquillity of England-be
sacrificed for the fake of a stranger ? Why is a life
so dear.to. thlnation-expefed to the repeated al-
faults of an exasperated rival ?

To Elizabeth and her ministers no fcntimcnts'

could be more agreeable. The former feared and,
hated the unhappy Mar y; and Burleigh and Wal-
gingham had acted with so little reserve in oppofi-
tion to the queen of Scots, that they had reason
to dread the most violent effcts of her resentment,
if ever fh* should mount the throne of England .
they therefore urged their miftdefs to proceed to
those extremities which the had folong meditatedb

U TOz

The conspiracy had hitherto been kept ferret

from Mary, and flie was surprised with the account
just as site had got on horseback to rifle out along
with her keepers. She was ftiuck with astonish-
ment, and would have returned to her apart-
ments, but was not permitted. In her absence
her papers were seized; her two ifcret:iries were
carried prisoners to London; and the herself was
conveyed to Fotheringay, a strong castle in Nor.
thampton{hiite.

Elizabeth and her counsellors were for some

time divided respecting the fate of Mary; at length
a public and legal trial was determined on as the
most unexceptionable plan. The proceedings a-
gainft her were founded on the a& of the last par-
liament, and by applying it in this manner, the
itention of those who had framed that fevcre fta-
&u.becakBe more apparent.

By a commifilon under the great feal, forty per-

sons, the Xt. iLu?.ad: Am *b dom h thbei
birth or offices, with five of the judges, were
named to hear and decide this great cause. Many
difficu.t.ies were started by the lawyers about the
name and title by which Mary (lould be arraign-
ed: They at length agreed that fle should be ftyl.
ed: " Mary, daughter and heir of James the Fifth,
"' late king of Scots, commonly called queen of
" Scots, and dowager of France."

On the eleventh of Oftober the commirtioners

arrived at Fotheringay, and delivered a letter ftor
their fovercign to Mary; in which, after the bit-

tcreft

tercft reproaches, she was required, as ihe had
lived so long under the protection of the laws of
England, to submit now to the trial which they
had ordained to be taken of her crimes.

Mary, though furprized at this meflage, was

not unmindful of her dignity: She protested in:
the motl solemn manner that she was innocent of
the crime laid to her charge; " but if I must be-
"tried," said flie, " princes alone can be my.
"peers; the queen of England's fubjeQs, how-
" ever noble their birth may be, are of a rank in-
"ferior to mine. Ever since my arrival in this.
"kingdom I have beenr confined as a prisoner:
" Its laws never offered me any proteaion; let:
" them not now be.perverted, in order to take a-
" way my life."

For two days, Mary maintained her resolution,.

and refited the intreaties andnmenaces of the corn-
mifflioners. She yielded at length to the artifice.
of Hatton, who insinuated that ihe injured her
own reputation by avoiding a trial; and that,
nothing could be more acceptable to their miC-
titss, than to be convinced by undoubted evi-
dence, ,that flie had been unjulUy loaded with as-
prrfions, -

At her appearance before the jui. 2s, Ihe took
tire to protelt, tlLt, in condefcendini to give an
answer to the .ccufations which thould be brought
a;gint her, (he neither acknowledged the jurif-
diition of the court, nor admitted of the validity

U 3--, or

justice of those ads by which they pretended to
try her. This was followed by a counter pro-
teftation of the chancellor, who endeavoured to
vindicate the authority of the court.

Copies of Mary's letters to Mendoza and Ba-

bington were then produced; and the cornfeffions
of the conspirators, with the declarations of Nan
and Curie, her secretaries, were read; and the
whole heightened by the colourings of legal elo-
quence.

Mary listened, without emotion, to the ha-

rnngues of the lawyers; but at the mention of
the earl of Arundel's name, who was then con-
fined in the Tower, she broke out into this tender
and generous exclamation: " Alas! how much
"' has the noble House of Howard fuflered for my
" face."
'When the queen's counsel had finished, Mary
.with,greal mnagnimity of mind began her defence.
She absolutely denied any correspondence with
Babington or Ballard. Copies only of her pre-
tended letters were produced, though nothing less
than her hand writing ought to convit her of fu
odious a crime. No proof was brought that the
letters had ever been delivered into her hands, or
i.at any answer was returned by her diretion
."le confeflions of wretches condemned for such
an cxecrable design might be procured by the
hopes of pardon; and the declarations ofher fc-
cretarles might be extorted by fear of punishment.
She acknowledgedthat ihe had often made efforts

fur

for the recovery of her liberty; but that {he ab-
horred the detestable crime of affafination; and
if ever Ihe had given consent by words or even by
thoughts, to any attempt against the life of the
queen of England, far from declining the judg-
ment of man, she would not even pray for the
mercy of God.

Two different days did Mary appear before

the judges, and in every part of her behaviour
maintained the magnanimity of a queen, tem-
pered with the gentenefs and modesty of a wo-
man.

The commissioners, by Elizabeth's express com-

mand, adjourned, without pronouncing any fen-
tence, to the Star-Chamber in Weftminifter; and
there unanimously declared Mary " to be accef-
" fary to Babington's conspiracy, and to have ima-
" gined diverle matters tending to the hurt,

death, and deftrulion of Elizabeth, contrary to

" the express words of the statute, made for the
' security of the queen's life."

The irregularities in this trial were great and

flagrant. If the testimony of Babington and'his
aflciates was so explicit, why did not Elizabeth
fparc them for a few weeks, and-confront them
with Mlary ? And why. were not Nau and Ctlrle,
her fecrctaries, produced in person at Fother-
ingay ?

A few days after the sentence was pronounced

against M.iry, the parliament ratified the pro-
ceedings of the commilliounrs by whom the had

been

been tried; and presented an address to the queen,,
beseeching her, as (he regarded her own safety,
and the prefcrvation of the protestant religion,
to inflict without delay, on a rival no less irre-
claimable than dangerous, the punishment which.
fie had merited by so many crimes.

All the princes of Europe observed the proceeds

ings againfl Mary witr' astonishment and horror.
They pleaded from justice, from generosity and.
humanity; they intermingled thre:ts with rc-
proaches ;,but Elizabeth continued deaf gnd in-
exorable ; nor did fie even pay any greater re-
gard to the solicitations of the Scottish king.

James could not at first believe that Elizabeth.

would venture on an action which tended to de-
grade the regal dignity, of which she was remark-
ably jealous; but convinced at length that flie
was in earnest,, he wrote to her with his own
hand, complaining in the bitterest terms of her con-
du. , not without threats that his honour would
oblige him to renounce her frieudliip, and to a&
as became a son, to revenge his mother's wrongs.
At the fame time he afucmblcd the nobles, who.
promised to sand by him in so good a cause. lie
appointed ambaflf.dors to France, Spain, and I)Dn-
mark, in order to implore the aid of these courts;
and took other flcps towards, executing his threats
w'ith vigour.

Elizabeth, though enraged by lis letter, was

embarrassed by his preparations; ihe therefore pro-.
,ilfed to !ircn to any overture front the king.;

atId

and to suspend the execution of the sentence
u'til the arrival of new ainblafadors from Scot-
land.

In the mean while fle commanded the sentence

agaitll Mary to be published; aflerting, that it
was extorted from ht r by the intreaty of both
lioufes of parliament: She also informed her roy-
al captive, that though she had not hitherto yield-
ed to the solicitations of the people, yet she ad-
vised her to prepare for an event which might
become necessary for securing the protestant re-
ligion.

Mary received the intelligence with becoming

fortitude " I am proud," said she, " to think
" that my life is deemed of importance to the ca-
" tholic religion; and as a martyr for it, I am
" now willing to die." She rejeted a protestant
bilhop that was offered to attend her; and without
any clergyman to direct her devotions, {he pre.
pared fnr-'a.* A.Lu l which lhe now bel':o- was
at no great distance.

James, without losing a moment,

fcnt new amtbaffadors to London:
These were the master of Gray, and Sir Robert
Mclvil. The last executed his commiflion with
fidelity and zeal, and loudly urged the indignation
of Scotland : But the first deceived his master, and
betrayed the queen whom he was employed to
five; he encouraged Elizabeth to execute the
sentence againlt her rival, and undertook to

prevent

prevent any violent effects from James's resent-
ment.

While the determination of Elizabeth was a-

waited, England was agitated by rumours artfully
invented and indtuftrioufly propagated. One day
it was said, that the Spaniih fleet was arrived at
Milford Haven; on another, that the duke of
Guise was landed in Suflex; and a conspiracy, it
was whispered, was on foot for seizing the queen,
and burning the city.
It was amidit the panic and indignation occasion-
ed by there reports, that Elizabeth thought that
she might venture on the blow (he had so long
meditated. She commanded Davison, one of the
secretaries of state, to bring to her the fatal war-
rant; and her behaviour on that occasion plainly
{hewed that it is not to humanity that we muff
ascribe her forbearance hitherto. At the very
moment file was signing the writ which gave up
a wromn, a queen,- and her own newefrtciation,
into the hands of the executioner, (he was capable
of jesting. " Go," fays fle to Davison, " and tell
" Walsingham what I have now done, though I
" am afraid he will die for grief when he hears
"' it." Her chief anxiety was how to secure the
advantages which would arise from Mary's death,
without appearing to have given her consent to
a deed so odious. She often hinted to Paulet and
Drury, as well as to some other courtiers, that
now was the time to discover the sincerity of their
concern for her safety, and that (he expeeted their

zeai

zeal would extricate her out of her present perplex-
ity But they were wife enough to fecm not to
underfRand her meaning. Even after the warrant
was signed, she commanded a letter to be writen
to Paulet, in less ambiguous terms, complaining
of his remifliefs in sparing so long the life of her
capital enemy, and begging him to remember at
last what was incumbent on him as an affetionate
fubjecl, as well as what he was bound to do by
the oath of aflociation, and to deliver his sovereign
from continual fear and danger, by flortening the
days of his prisoner. Paulet, though rigorous and
harsh, and often brutal in the discharge of what
he thought his duty, as Mary's keeper, was never-
tlielefs a man of honour and integrity. He reject-
ed the proposal with difd;iin and lamenting tllha
he should ever have been deemed capable of ading
the part of an affifin, he declared that the queLn
might dispose of his life at her pleasure, but that
he would. never stain his own honour, nor leave
an everlalting maik of infamy on *is posterity, by
lending his hand to perpetrate so foul a crime.
On tle receipt of this anf- ar, Elizabcth became ex-
tremely peevilh and calling himal a lauiity and pre-
Fcif fllow, who would promise much, but perform
nothing, file proposed to employ one Winglield,
who had both courage and inclination to (trike
the blow. But Davison remonfirating against this,
as a deed dillionourable in itfclf, and o'dangerous
example, lie agaia dcclared her intention that the
fcntcnce prolounccd by the comnmiifioners lllould

be

be executed nccordinr to law; and as file had al-
reaIdy signed the v'.rr Int, fhie begged that no far-
ther applic.tion mlight be made toler on that head.
By this the privy counsellors thought themnfclves
fuffirint'y authorised to proceed; and prompt-
ed, as they pretended, by zeal for the queen's
fafetv, or infligated, as is more probable, by the ap-
prehenfi,'n of the danger to which they would then-
selves be exp,,fcd, if the life of the queen of Scots
were spared, they affimbled in the council cham-
ber; and by a letter under all their hands, em-
powered the earls of Shrewflnlry ani Kent, to-
gether with the high llieriff of the county, to fee
the sentence put in execution.

On Tuesday the ifventh of February, the two

earls arrived at Fotheringay, and demanded acccfs
to the queen; read in her presence the warr.nt
for execution, and required her to prepare to die
next morning. Miry heard thim to the end with.
out emotion, and crofllng herftlf in the name of
the Father, and of the Son, and of the I-oly
Ghost, " That foul," said flie, " is not worthy
," the jovs of IHeavcn, which repines because the
" body mult endure the firoke of the executioner
"' and thoughl I dill not cxpcd that the queen of
" England would set the firit example of violat-
" ir, tihe f.cred person of a fovcreign prince, I
" willingly submit to that which Providence has
" decreed to le my lot." And laying her hand
on a Bible, which happened to be near her, ihe
solemnly protestcd that lhce was innocent of that

con Fpiracy

coifpiracy which Babington had carried on against
Elizabeth's life. She then mentioned the requests
contained in her letter to Elizabeth, but obtained
no fatisfaaory answer. She entreated with parti-
cular earnestness, that now in her last moments
her almoner might be suffered to attend her, and
that lhe might enjoy the consolation of those pi-
ous institutions prescribed by her religion. Even
this favours which is usually granted to the vilest
criminal, was absolutely denied.

Her attendants, during this conversation, were

bathed in tears, and though overawed by the pre-
fence of the two earls, with difficulty fupprefled
their anguish; but no sooner did Kent and Shrew-
fbury withdraw, than they ran to their miRfrefs,
and burst out into the most passionate expreflions
of tenderness and sorrow. Mary, however, not
only retained perfect composure of mind herself,
but endeavoured to moderate their excelive grief;
and falling on her knees, with all her domeotics
round her, the thanked Heaven that her sufferings
were now so near an end, and prayed that she might
be enabled to endure what still remained with de-
cency and with fortitude. The greater part of the
evening (he employed in fettling her worldly affairs.
She wrote her eftament with her own hand. Her
money, her jewels, and her clothes, (he diftribut-
ed among her servants, according to their rank or
merit. She wrote a (hort letter to the king of
France, and another to the duke of Guise, full of
tender but magnanimous fcntiments, and recomi

X mended

mended her foul to their prayers, and her afflieled
servants to their protetion. At supper she eat
temperately, as usual, and conversed not only with
ease but with cheerfulness; {he drank to every one
of her servants' and alked their forgiveness, if ever
(he had failed in any part of her duty.towards them.
At her wonted time (he went to bed, and slept
calmly a few hours. Early in the morning file
retired into her closet, and employed a confidera-
ble time in devotion. At eight o'clock the high
sheriss and his officers entered her chamber, and
found her still kneeling at the altar. She immedi-
ately siarted up, and with a majestic mien, and a
countenance undismayed and even cheerful, advan-
ced towards the place of execution; with calm
but undaunted fortitude, the laid her neck on the
block; and while one executioner held her hands,
the other at the second firoke, cut off her head,
which falling out of its attire, discovered her hair
already grown quite grey with cares'and sorrows.
The executioner held it up still streaming with
blood, and the dean crying out, " So perifi all
" queen Elizabeth's enemies," the earl of Kent a-
lone answered Amen. 'The reft of the fpedators
continued silent, and drowned in tears; being in-
capable at that moment, of any other ientinlents
but those of pity or admiration.

Such was the tragical death of M.iry, queen of

Scots, after a life of forty four years and two
months, almolt nineteen years of which lic pa.ifli
Il captivilv. The political parties which were

form'lcd

formed in the kingdom, during her reign, have
fubfilted, under various denominations, ever since
that time. The rancour with which they were
at first animated hath descended to succeeding ,a-
ges, and their prejudices, as well as their rage, have
been perpetuated, and even augmented. Among
historians, who were under the dominion of all
these pafions, and who have either ascribed to her
every virtuous and amiable quality, or have im-
puted to her all the vices, of which the human
heart is susceptible, we search in vain for Mary's
real chara&er. She neither merited the exagge-
rated praises of the one, nor the undiftinguiflhing
censure of the other.

To all the charms of beauty, and the utmost

elegance of external form, (he added those accom-
plifhments which render their iripreffion irrefift-
ible. Polite, affable, insinuating, sprightly, and.
capable of speaking and of writing with equal
cafe and dignity. Sudden, however, and violent
in all her attachments; because her heart was
warm and unfufpicious. Impatient of contradic-
tion; because flie had been accustomed from her
infancy to be treated as a queen. No stranger, on
some occasions, to diflimulation ; which, in that
perfidious court where fie received her education,
was reckoned among the necef'lry arts of govern-
ment. Not insensible of flattery, or unconscious
of that pleasure, with which almost every woman
beholds the influence of hlcr own beauty. Form-
ed with the qualitieb which we love, not with the

X 2 taleng

talents which we admire; fie was an agreeable
woman, rather than an i!luftrious queen. The vi-
vacity of her spirit not fufiiciently tempered with
found judgment, and the warmth of her heart,
which was not, at all times, under the reitraint of
discretion, betrayed her both into errors, and into
·crimes. To fay that the was always unfortunate,
will not account for that long and almost uninter-
rupted fucccffion of calamities which besel her
we must likewise add, that (he was often impru-
dent. Hier palfion for Darnly was ralh, youthful,
and excessive and though the sudden transition to
the opposite extreme was the natural effect of her
ill-requited love, and of his ingratitude, insolence,
and brutality; yet neither these, nor Bothwell's
artful address, and important services, can justify
her attachments to that nobleman. Even the man-
ners of the age, licentious as they were, are no
apology for this unhappy passion; nor can they
induce us to look en that tragical and infamous
scene which followed upon it with less abhor-
rence. Humanity will draw a veil over this part
of her character which it cannot approve, and may,
perhaps, prompt tome to impute some of her ac-
tions to her situation, more than to her difpofi-
tions; and to lament the unhappiness of the former,
rather than accuse the perverseness of the latter.
Mary's sufferings exceed, both in degree and in
duration, those tragical diftrcflks which fancy has
fcigned to' excite sorry and commifcration ; and

whiln

*while .we survey them, we are apt altogether to for-
get her frailties; we think of her faults with less
indignation, and approve of our tears as if they
were shed for a person who had attained much
nearer to pure virtue.

With regard to the queen's person, a circum-

stance not to be omitted in writing the history of
a female reign, all contemporary authors agree in
ascribing to Mary the utmost beauty of counte-
nance, and elegance of fliape, of which the human
form is capable, Her hair was black, though,ac-
cording to the fafhiion of that age, The frequently
wore borrowed locks, and of different colours. Her'
eyes were a dark grey; her' complexion was ex-
quifitely fine; and her hands and arms remark-
ably delicate, both as to fhaps and colour. Her
ifature was of a height that rose to the majestic.
She danced, file walked, and rode with equal
grace. Her taste for music was just, and the both
sung and played upon the lute with uncommon
Ikill. Towards the end of her life, long confine-
ment, and the coldness of the houses in which fhc
lrad been imprisoned, brought on a rheumatism,
which often deprived her of the use of her limbs.
No man, faysBrantome, ever beheld her person
without admiration and love, or will read her his-
tory without sorrow.

None of her women were suffered to come near

her dead body, which was carried into a room ad-
joining to the place of execution, where it lay,
for some days, covered with a coarse cloth torn

X 3 from

from a billiard table.- The block, the scaffold,
the aprons of the executioners, and every thing
Atained with her blood, were reduced' to ashes.
Not long after, Elizabeth appointed her body to,
be buried in the cathedral of Peterborough with
royal magnificence.. But this vulgar artifice was
employed in vain; the pageantry of a pompous
funeral did not efface the memory of those inju-
ries which laid Mary in hergrave.. James, soon
after his acceflion to the Engliflh throne, ordered
her body. to be removed to Weftminfter-abbey,
and to be deposited among the monarchs of Eng-
land.

Elizabeth asseted to receive the accounts of

MTary's death with the most violent emotions of
surprise and of concern. Sighs, rears, lamenta-
tions and mourning, were all employed to display
the reality and greatness of her sorrow. Evident
marks of dissimulation and artifice may be traced
through every period of Elizabeth's proceedings
against the life of the Scotti(h Queen. The corn-
mniflon for bringing. Mary to a trial had been ex-
torted by the entreaties of her privy council; the
publication of the sentence by those of the parlia-
rnent; nor did (he sign the warrant for execution'
without apparent reluCtance. She now undertook
to make the world believe, that Mary had been
put to death without her knowledge, and without
her will.

It was the duty of Davison, as secretary of ftatei
to lay before her the warrant for execution in order

to'

to be signed.; and by her command he carried it
to the great feal. She pretended however, that ihe
had charged him not to communicate what (he had:
done to any person; nor to susser the warrant to go-
out of his hands without her express permission,
That, in: contempt of this order, he had not re-
vealed the matter; but he had assembled her privy
council, by whom, without her content and know-
ledge, the warrant was issued,

Though Davison denied these charges, which

in themselves were sufficiently improbable, yet he
was brought to a solemn trial in the ftar-chamber,.
condemned to pay a fine of ten thousand pounds,,
and to be impritoned during the queen's pleasure.
A victim to the reputation of Elizabeth, he lan-
guifhed several years in confinement, and never
recovered any degree of favour or of power.

This tranfacion,.however, furnished Elizabeth:

with an apology to the King of Scots. The ac-
count of his mother's death had filled that prince.
with grief, and his fabjeats with indignation. It
order to soothe both, Elizabeth dispatched Robert
Cary, with a letter exprefling her affliRion at
what had happened so contrary to. her intention.
James, as well as his nobles, at first breathed
nothing but revenge: But when he confidered the
superior force of England, and that by engaging
in a fruitless war he might deprive himself of a
noble inheritance, he was induced to stifle his re-
fentment; to. appear fatisfed, with the punishment

ihfliCtd.

infliaed on Davison; and to preserve all the fenv.
blances of friendship with the Eiglifh court.

Mary's death, however, proved fatal to the

master of Gray; the treacherous part that he had.
ased during the late embassy was no secret, and
filled James, who at length came to the know-
ledge of it, with astonishment. He was accused,
before a convention of the nobles; and unable to
palliate his guilt, was condemned to perpetual.
baniffhment.

Europe beheld the present year dif-

tinguifhed by events the most inter-
cfting. In France, the duke of Guise drove Hen-
ry the Third out of Paris, forced him to conclude
:.peace which left him only the fladow of royalty,.
and soon after fell a viaim to the resentment of
his sovereign.

In Spain, Philip the Second had employed three

fucceflive years in hostile preparations. A fleet,,
the greatest that ever appeared on the ocean, was -
ready to fail from Lisbon, and a numerous land
army was aflembled to embark on board of it.
From many circumstances,. England was supposed
to be the objet of its destination. Elizabeth had
supported the revolted provinces in the Low Coun-
tries; her fleets had infuled the coasts of Spain,
intercepted the galleons from the Welt Indies,
.ad threatened the colonies there.. Roused by
these injuries, Philip aspired to the conquest of
England, to which his descent from the house of
Lancaster, and the donation of Pope Scxtus the

Fifth

Fifth, gave him, in his own opinion, a double
title.

Elizabeth saw the danger approach, and pre-

pared to encounter it: Her chief care was to fe-
cure the friendship of James. Philip had excited
that monarch to revenge his mother's wrongs;
and with a share of his conquests, had offered him
his daughter Isabella in marrtage. But James un-
derftood his own interest in the present jun&ure,
and pursued it with much steadiness. He reje&-
ed an alliance with Spain as dangerous; he re-
fused to admit into his presence an ambaflador
from the Pope; and without listening to the fug-
geitions of revenge, determined to a& in concert
with Elizabeth against the common enemy of the
protestant faith.

The success of Philip's enterprise was not ade-

quate to the hopes his preparations had inspired.
Continual difaiftrs pursued the Spanish fleet, from
the moment it entered the English channel. Sus-
ceffive storms and battles conspired with the ill-
condut of the leaders, to blaf their expe&ations.
The Armado, on which had been arrogantly be-
flowed the name of Invincible, was driven out
of the English seas; their shattered {hips were
forced to steer their course towards Spain, round
Scotland and Ireland: Many of them suffered
'shipwreck on those dangerous and unknown
coasts. Though James kept his fubjets under
arms, to prevent the Spaniards landing in an hostile
manner, yet he received with great humanity seven

hundred

hundered who were forced on fliore by a tempesl;
and after supplying them with necessaries, permit-
ted them to return into their own country.

On the retreat of the Spaniards, Eli2abeth sent

an ambassador to congratulate James, and to com-
pliment him on the firmness and generosity which
he had discovered during a conjunature so dan-
gerous.

Philip, convinced of his own raft-

ness in attempting the conquest of
England by a naval armament, now meditated the
invasion of it through Scotland. Zeal for popery,
and the artful insinuations of his emiflaries, induc-
ed several Scottish noblemen to favour a measure
which tended so manifestly to the destruction of
their country. Huntly continued warmly attach-
ed to the Romish church; Crawford and Errol
were animated with the zeal of converts: To
these, Francis Stewart earl. of Bothwell, grandson
of James the Fifth, though a protestant, joined
himself, prompted merely by caprice and the reft-
leffnefs of his nature.

.The letters of the conspirators were intercept-

ed in England, and Elizabeth sent them immedi-
ately to the king, reproaching him with his for-
mer lenity towards the popish party. But Jamei,
though firmly attached to the protestant religion,
yet wished not to irritate the Roman catholics, who
were at that time powerful and aCtive in England,
and far from inconsiderable in his own kingdom.
He endeavoured to reconcile them to his govern-

ment

ment and fucceflion by gentle treatment; and a
short imptifonment was the only punishment that
he in lited on Huntly an his associates.

He had soon reason to repent of this clemency.

The firit use the conspirators made of their li-
berty was to assemble their followers, and to erea
the standard of rebellion. The king in person
advanced against them with such forces as he
could readily levy; and as they could not rely
on the fidelity of their troops, they threw them-
selves on their sovereign's mercy. Huntly, Er-
rol, Crawford, and Bothwell, were all brought to
a public trial, and repeated ads of treason were
proved against them. But James did not permit
any sentence to be pronounced; and took occasion,
amidst the public festivity and rejoicing at the ap-
proach of his marriage, and to set them again at
liberty.

As James was the only descendant of the an-

cient monarchs of Scotland, his marriage was an
event which the nation desired with ardour. He
himself was no less impatient to accomplish it;
and had made overtures for that purpose, to the
eldest daughter of Fredcrick the Second, king of
Denmark. Elizabeth, jealous of every thing that
would render the acceflion of the houf¢ of Stew-
art acceptable, endeavoured to perplex James, in
the fame manner she had done Mary, and employ-
ed as many artifices to defeat or to retard his mar-
riage. IIis niinilters, gained by bribes and pro-
mises, seconded her intention ; and though several

different

different ambafladors were sent from Scotland to
Denmark, they produced powers so limited, or
insisted on conditions so extravagant, that Frede-
rick could not believe the king to be in earnest;
and fufpeding that there was rome design to de-
ceive or amuse him, gave his daughter in mar-
riage to the duke of Brunswick. Not discouraged
by this disappointment, which he imputed entire-
ly to the conduet of his own ministers, James
made addresses to the princess Anne, Frederick's
second daughter. Thoug Elizabeth endeavoured
to divert him from this, by recommending Ca-
therine, the king of Navarre's sifter, as a more ad-
vantageous match; though ihe prevailed on the
privy council of Scotland to declare against the
alliance with Denmark, he persisted in his choice;
and despairing of overcoming the obflinacy of his
own ministers in any other manner, he secretly
encouraged the citizens of Edinburgh to take arms.
They threatened to tear in pieces the Chancellor,
whom they accused as the person whose artifices
had hitherto disappointcd the wiflths of the king,
and the expectations of his people. In confe-
quence of this, the earl Marifchal was sent into
Denmark at the head of a splendid embassy. He
received ample powers and inltruations, drawn
with the king's own hand. 'he marriage articles
were quickly agreed upon, and the young queen
set fail towards Scotland. James made great pre-
parations for her reception, and waited her land-
ing with all the impatience of a lover; when the

2 unwelcome

unwelcome account arrived, that a violent tem-pel
had arifsn which. drove back htr fltet to Norvay,
in a condition o filattered, that there was litt!
hope of its putting again to sea before the ftiing.
This unexpeted difappointmcnt he felt wih the
utmost fenflibility. He inllantly fitcd. out some
fniips, and without communicating his intention
to any of his council, failed in person, attended by
the Chanecllor, fevcral noblemen, and a train of
three hundcrtd persons, in quell of his bride. -le
arrived facly in a finall harbour near Upilo, wihere
the queen then resided. There thee marriage was
solemnized ; and as it would have been rafli to
truit those boisterous seas in tlic winter f.afon,
James acceptid the invitation of the court of Den-
niark, and repairing to Copenilngeii, p )fi(d icveral
months there, amidst conti iul feafling and ainufe-
ments, in which both the queen and himnfdf had
great delight.

No event in the king's life appears to be a wider

deviation f.iom his general chl.tr. ter, than this
sudden filly. His son Charles I. was capable of
that. exceflive admiration of the tllhr fe., which
arises from great fcn(ibil;ty ps heart, heightened
by elegance of talte ; and the rom:nltic air of his
journey to Spain suited feich a difpiotiioi. But
James was not fufcptible of any refined gallantry,
and always exprei'(d that contempt for the fe-
male charat;r, which pedantry is apt to infpirc.
l1e was, however, anxious to secure the political
adlvantages, which lie expedcd froli marriage;

Y AnJ

and though his absence extended longer than he
had proposed, the nobles, the clergy, and the peo-
ple, during that interval, vied with one another in
loyalty and obedience.

C'l.aktsi

# Chapter the Eight. RETURN of James to Scotland. - Enterprise of the earl of Bothwell. - Conspiracy of the Popish nobles. - They are pardoned by Elizabeth. - Successive intrigues of Bothwell. - Battle ...

Cbaptcr the Eight.

RETURN of James to Scotland.-Enterprire of the earl of

Bothwell.-Confpiracy of the Popith nobles.-They are
pardoned by Elizabeth.-Succcffive intrigues of Bothwcll.-
Battle of Glenlivet.-Vigorous conduct of James.-Infur.
retion of Edinburgh.-Confpiracy by the earl of Gowrie.-
That nobleman and his brother are killed.-Proceeding* a-
gainft their memories.-Chara6cers of the earl of Rflex and
of Cecil.-Difcontcnts of the former.-His attempt to fur-
prise Elizabeth.-His execution.Regret of the queen-
Her indifpofition.-Difcovery of the Countess of Notting-
ham.-Death of Elizabeth.-Acceffion of James to the
throne of England.

A. _D1. 0N the firfl of May, the king and
A. D. Tjo9.

queen arrived at Leith, and were

received by their subje&s with every polfible ex-
preflion of joy. But the clemency of the king to-
wards offenders, had multiplied crimes of all kind,
and brought his government under contempt.

Bothwell had been accuscd of consulting some
pretenders to magic rcfpe&ting the king's death,

Y 2 and

ar.d n ti-tir evidence w?.s committed to prifin.
His ILaughty spirit could ill brook this irdignitv;
hle mnde his escape from his keepers, .finl-nibed his
foflovw'crs, and favoured by some of the king's at-
teindats, penetrated, under cover of the night, in-
to the court of the palace. 'The alarm, however,
was t.ikcn; the citizens of Edinburgh run to
arms, and lie with difficulty saved himftlf by a
precipitate flight.

He retired towards the north; and

. .. the king unadvisedly having given

a comnmiflion to the earl of IIuntly to pursue him,
he,, under colour of that commission, burnt to the
ground the house of the earl of Murray, and flew
Murray hinrfelf. The death of this promising
young nobleman, excited an infurredion in Edin-
burgh i and the king thought it prudent to with-
draw from his capital, and to fix for some time his
tefidence at Glasgow: 'lhere Huntly surrendered
himself to jultice ; and the king not only protected
him from punifliment, but exempted him from the
formality of a public trial.

An ad of parliament hald been paffied, attainting

Bothwell, and all lis adherents: But that daring
nobleman soon after made a new attempt to seize
the king at 'Falkland ; and as he was favoured Ly
the enemies of chancellor Maitlaid, James owed
his fifety only to thle vigilance of Sir Robert Mcl-
vil, and llte irr.folution of Bothwell's aflbciates.

'l'his dtlng;:r was fc rccly over,
.D .when the nationi was .ilarmed by a

n:Cw

new conspiracy. A correspondence between the
king of Spain, and the earls of Angus, Huntly,
and Errol, had been carried on by George Kerr,
the brother of lord Newbaltle. Ker Was seized,
and confefTcd their views were to re-establish the
Catholic religion. The indignation of all ranks
of people compelled James to declare, that no
consideration (hould induce him to pardon the con-
fpirators; and marching at the head of an army
into the north, he obliged the earls to retire into
the mountains : The refusal of Elizabeth to fur-
nifl him with a fum of money, afforded him a
pretence to desist from the pursuit ; and though
the importunities of hi. own fubjets obliged him
to call a parliament to attaint the conspirators, yet
;he escape of Ker out of prison ; an e scape which
the king himself was suspected of having contrived,
prevented any legal evidence of their guilt from
being produced.

The abilities of chancellor Maitland, had fecur-

ed lim the favour of the king, and the enmity of
his courtiers. Thcfe sacrificed their master to
their jealousy; and ha\ing combined with Both-
ticll, they brought him back secretly to Scotland ;
and seizing the gates of the palace, introduced
him into the royal apartments, with a numerous
train of armed followers. James was obliged to
fubint to the demands of his rebellious fubjeds,
;ind to diflifs the chancellor from his councils and
pref:nce ; while Bothwell, oni his part, consented

Y3 to

to remove from court, which he had previoufl,-
filled with a number of his aflbciates.

But it was now no'eafy matter to keep the king

under restraint. lle had becn pernitted to call a
convention of the nobles at Stirling, and to re-
pair thither in person. All Bothwell's enemies
obeyed the fumnmons; they pronounced tile late
infulr offered to the king, hilgh treason ; and Both-
well, rejecting the proifer of a pardon, fled to tih
borders.

The king's ardour ngaifit Bothlx-ell, compa:red

with liis flow proceedingsc aglinfl the popilf lord%,
occasioned a gencral dif:uft among his proteflant
i'nujcils; and an event happened soon after which
irpreafed their murmTurs. As James was march-
ing on an expedition agailift the borders, the three
popifli earls coming fuddeniy into his presence,
,,fnernd to fub.ilt thermfeives to a legal tri.i. rhe
convention of eflates, n.imel the Chancelhor Maii-
lind, and a few other memLb:r;, focr judges; these
ordained that the three earls fl;ould be exempted
from all fuTther profecutitn, on condition th.at
tlhey publicly renounced the errors of popery, or
reinoved out of the kingdom.

By this lenity towards the coi-

fpirators, James incurred much re-

proacl, and gained no advantage. The ea Is, buoy-
ed up with the hopes of foreign aid, refuf d to a.-
cept t!e conditions; a convention of estates pro-
n.ounced 'them to have forfeitcd the benefit of 1i .

articlcs

articles offered; and the king required them to fur-
render themselves to jutice.

Meanwhile Elizabeth, desirous of embarrafling

James, excited Bothwell again to arms: That
turbulent nobleman appeared suddenly within a
mile of Edinburgh, at the head of four hundred
horse. Though he had Tome success in putting to
flight Iord Home, who had rafily charged him
with an inferior number of cavalry ; yet he was
compelled to retire before the king in person. He
was soon after abandoned by his followers, who,
discouraged by so many fucceflive difappointmenta,
could never afterwards be brought into the field.

The popish lords had been suppled with money!

ftom Spain, and had been joined by Bothwell
and James, provoked by their obstinacy, exerted'
himself with unusual vigour. He called a parlia-
ment, which declared them guilty of high treason,
and their estates and honours forfeited. To exe-
cute this fentcnce, he delegated his authority to the
carl of Argyll and lord rorbes, the leaders of two
clans, at enmity with the conspirators. Argyli
took the field at the head of seven thousand men
iluntly and Errol met him at Glenlivet, with an:
army far inferior in number, but composed chiefly
of gentlemen of the low countries, mounted on.
lorfeback, and pofTcefcd of a train of field pieces.
The discharge of cannon, and the impression of
cavalry, disconcerted the Highlarnders, who were
loon put to flight; and Argyll was carried by his
fricnds out of the field, wx'tiing with indignation,

alld

and calling upon them to stand, and to vindicate
the honour of their name.

AD. 9. On the first intelligence of this

defeat, James, with a small body of

troops, marched towards the north; and Huntly
and Errol, who had loft several of their followers
at Glenliyet, were obliged to retire to the moun-
tains. Reduced at last to extreme dfltrefs by the
rigour of the season, and the desertion of their
vaflals, they obtained the king's permifTion to go
beyond seas and gave security that they should
neither return without hls licence, nor engage in
any new intrigues against the Frotcfitant religion,
or the peace of the kingdom.

Bothwell, whose name has been so often men-

tioned as the disturber of the king's tranquillity,
and of the peace of the kingdom, was now in a
wrctched condition: Abandoned by the queen of
England, on account of his confederacy with the
popifli lords; excommunicated by the church for
the fame reason, and dlcfcrtcel in Lis diftrcfs by his
own followers, lie was obliged to fly for safety to
France, and thence to Sp.in and Italy; where, after
renouncing the protcftant faith, he led many years
an obscure a;nd indigent life, remarkable only for
a low and infamous debauchery.

The clergy still continued to ha-

ranguc loudly against the lenity of
James, who fuffcred the popifl lords to receive
their revenues, and even privatc!y to return to
Scotland. Mr Black, minister of St Andrew's,

diftinguitlid

diflinguifhed himself on this occasion by his fupc-
rior boldness: The kilng commanded him to be
summoned before the privy council, to answer for
lis seditious expressions ; he pretended that he was
fuhbjc.t to the church alone ; and was supported in
this extravagant claim by the reft of the clergy.
J.ames, irritated by rtiftiancc, fcntenced Black to
retire beyond the seas; and required all the minis-
tcrs in the kingdom to subscribe a bond, obliging
themftlves to fubmin to the jurifdition of the civil
courts.

This decisive measure excited the most fatal

consequences: These muff be partly imputed to
the artifices of some courtiers, who expeted to
reap advantages from the calamities of their coun-
try. On one hand, they informed the king, that
the citizens of Edinburgh were under arms every
night; on the other hand, they wrote to the mi-
nifters, advising them to look to their safety, as
Huntly had been secretly admitted to an interview
with the king; They doubted no more of the
truth of this intelligence, than the king had done
of that which he received, and fell as blindly into
the finare. The letter came to their hands jult
as one of their number was going to mount the
pulpit. They resolved that he ihould acquaint
the people of their danger; and he painted it with
all the strong colours which men naturally em-
ploy in describing any dreadful and instant cala-
mity. When the sermon was over, he dcfircd
the nobles and gentlemen to afCmible in the Little

Clurilh.

Church. The whole multitude, terrified at what
they had heard, crowded thither; they promised
and vowed to stand by the clergy; they drew up
a petition to the king, craving the redress of those
grievances, of which the church complained, and
beseeching him to deliver them from all future ap-
prehensions of danger, by removing such of his
eounfel as were known to be enemies of the
protestant religion. Two peers, two gentlemen,
two burgesses, and two minifers, were appointed
to present it. The king happened to be in the
great hall of the Tolbooth,. where the court of
session was fitting. The manner in which the
petition was delivered, as well as its contents,
offended him. He gave an haughty reply; the
petitioners irfifted with warmth; and a promif-
cuous multitude prefling into the room, James
retired abruptly into another apartment, and com-
manded the gates to be (hut behind him. The
deputies returned to the multitude, who were still
assembled, and to whom a minister had been read-
ing, in their absence, the story of Haman. When
they reported that the king had refused to lifen to
their petitions, the church was filled in a moment
with noise, threatenings, execrations, and all the
outrage and confusion of a popular tumult. Some
called for their arms, some to bring out the wicked
Haman; others cried, the sword of the Lord and
of Gideon i and, rufliing out with the molt fu-

riOU

rious impetuosity, surrounded the Tolbooth, threat-
ening the king himself, and demanding some of
his counsellors, whom thay named, that they
might tear them in pieces. The magistrates of
the city, partly by authority, partly by force, en-
.deavoured to quell the tumult; the king attempt-
.ed to soothe the malcontents, by promising to re-
ceive their petitions, when presented in a regular
manner; the ministers, sensible of their own rash-
ness in kindling such a flame, seconded both; and
the rage of the populace subsiding as suddenly as
it had risen, they all dispersed, and the king re-
turned to the palace; happy in having escaped
from an infurretion, which, through the inftan-
taneous and unconcerted effect of popular fury,
had exposed his life to imminent danger, and was
confidered by him as an unpardonable affront to
his authority.

The leaders of the malcontents immediately

prepared their petition, which demanded the pu-
niflunent of the popish lords, and the removal of
the suspec'ted counsellors. -Fearful, however, of
renewing the king's rage, they deferred presenting
it that night; and before morning, James, with all
his attendants, withdrew to Linlithgow; and or-
dered, at the fame time, the feflion, and other
courts of juflice, to leave the capital; while the
most culpable of the ministers fled from his indig-
nation to England.

The

This unsuccessful infurre&ion, in-
A D. zrS**

(Aead of overturning, established the

king's authority. A convention of estates pro-
nounced the insurgents guilty of high treason; and
commanded every minister to subscribe a dec!ara-
tion of his fubmiflion to the king's jurifdidlon,
in all matters, civil and criminal; and ordered the
magistrates either to inflict condign punithment
on the authors of the late tumult, or that the
city itself fliould be subjed to the severest penal-
ties.

Armed with these decrees, James resolved to

crufl his rebellious fubjets. The city was de-
clared to have forfeited i:s privileges, and to be
liable to all the penalties of treason; nor even
could the mediation of Elizabeth prevail on him
entirely to pardon its guilt. The citizens were at
lalt indeed absolved from the penalties of law;
but they were neither allowed to eled their own
magiftratcs, nor their own ministers: Many new
burdens were imposed on them; and a great
fum of money was exated by way of peace offir-
illg -

The popifli lords had been allowed to make a

recantation of their errors, were absolved from
the sentence of excommunication, and received
into the bosom of the church; and towards the
close of the year a parliament was held, in order
to restore luntly and his afrociates to their tflatcs
and honours, by repealing the a&t of forfeiture
pafled against them.

2 As

As the profpet of succeeding to D.

the crown of England drew nearer,
James exerted his molt strenuous efforts to render
it certain. He sent ambassadors extraordinary to
the different princes of Germany, to whom lie was
allied by mairiage: He directed Edward Bruce,
a')bot of Kin-ross, whom he had appointed to the
Engllli court, to solicit Elizabeth to recognize his
title by some public deed. But age had strength-
cned all the paflions which had hitherto induced
Elizabeth to keep this great question obscure and
undecided; and a general and evasive answer was
ail that James could obtain.

The queen of England's sentiments were in-

deed far from favourable to J.mes ; his excessive
indulgence towards the popilh lords, and the faci-
lity witli which he pardoned their repeated trea-
sons, were confidered by her as so many indica-
tions of a mind alienated from the protestant re-
ligion ; and however that prince migLi; justify his
conduct towards his rebellious fubjeds, it is cer-
tain that about this time he was at the utmost
pains to gain the friendthip of the Roman Catholic
princes. Lord Home was fccretly dispatched to
the pope andt the fcntiments of the Roman pon-
til' were so favourable to the hopes of James, that
lie thought himfcelf bound, fame years afterwards,
to aLknowledge the obligation in a public man.
per.

In England, Sir John Lindsay had made a great
progress in ti.ainin tlih Rnman Catholics to ac-

knowledge

kinowledge James's title; and Elizabeth, who was
Iot cntirely ignorant of these intrigues, and whose
natural jealousy was increased by age, continued
to obfetve the conduc of the king with unceasing
folicitudc.

The kingdom for ofme months,
A. D. 1600.

had enjoyed unusual tranquillity

when, in the midit of security, the king's life was
exposed by a conspiracy as extraordinary as unex-
pzcted: 'The authors of it were, John Ruthven,
earl of Gowrie, and his brother Alexander, the
£fns of the earl who was beheaded in eighty four.
The natural endowment:t of these young men hid
been improved by edaictioni, and their country-
men had already conceived the moort sanguine
hopes of their early virtues.

The king had been hunting .t Fall:;ld, where

Mr Alexander Ruthven informed him, that the
evening before, he had surprised a man of a sus-
picious aspect, near his brother's house at Perth,
with a quantity of foreign gold ; ;nd tha: he had
immediately seized both him and his treasure.
James first proposed to empower the magistrates
of Perth, to enquire into the flory ; but this wa.:
violently opposed by Rutlven, who urged the king
to ride into Perth, and examine the matter himself.
In the mean time the chace bpegm, and James
could not help meditating on the tlr;ingencfs of
the tale, and on Ruthven's importuliivy. At l;i1
he called him, and prolnifed when the sport was
over, to set out for Pertl. The chace, however,

cuitinucJl

continued long; and Ruthven, who all the while
kept close by the king, was Itill urging him to
mike haflc. At the death of the buck, he would
not allow James to tlay till a fresh horse was
brought him; and observing the duke of Lennox
and the earl of Mar preparing to accompany the
king, he intreated him to countermand themr. This
James refuscd ; and though Rutliven's impatience
and anxiety, as well as the apparent perturbation
in his whole behaviour, raised some suspicions in
his mind, yet his own curiosity, and the folicita-
tions of the latter, prevailed on him to set out
for Perth. When within a mile of the town,
Ruthven rode forward to inform his brother of
the king's arrival, though he had already dispatch-
ed two messengers for that purpose. At a little
ditiance from the town, the earl attended by fe-
veral of the citizens, met the king, who had only
twenty persons in his train. No preparations
were made for the king's entertainment; the earl
appeared pensive and embarrassed, and was at no
pains to atone, by his courtesy or hospitality, for the
bad f.re with which he treated his gucfts. When
theking's repast was over, his attendants were led to
dine in another room, and he being left almost a-
lone, Rutlhven whispered him, that now was the
time to go to the chamber where the unknown
person was kept. James commanded him to bring
Sir Thomas Erlkine along with them ; but, intlead
of that, Ruthven ordered him not to follow: And
;ondudting the king up a ltair-cafe, and then

'7 2 through

through several apartments, the doors of which
he locked behind him; led him at last into a small
study, in which there stood a man clad in armour
with a sword and dagger by his fide. The king,
who expeCted to have found one disarmed and
bound, Ifarted at the fight, and inquired if this
was the person ; but Ruthven snatching the dag-
ger from the girdle of the man in armour, and
holding it to the king's breast, " Remember, said
" he, how unjuflly my father suffered by your
" commands; you are now my prisoner; submit
" to my disposal without refinance, or outcry;
" or this dagger shall instantly avenge his blood."
James expoftulated with Ruthven, intreated, and
flattered him. The man whom he found in the
study, stood all the while, trembling, and dismay-
ed, without courage either to aid the king, or to
second his aggressor. Ruthven protested, that if
the king raised no outcry, his life (hould be safe;
and moved by some unknown reason, retired in
order to call his brother, leaving to the man in
armour the care of the king, whom he bound by
oath not to make any noise during his absence.

While the king was in this dangerous situation,

his attendants growing impatient to know whither
he had retired, one of Gowrie's people entered the
room hastily, and told them that the king had just
rode away towards Falkland. All of them rushed
out into the ftrcet; and the earl, in the utmost
hurry, called for their horses. But by this time
his brother had returned to the king, and swearing

that

that now there was no remedy, he muff die, offer-
ed to bind his hands. Unarmed as James was,
he scorned to fuibmit to that indignity; and closing
with the aflaffin, a fierce itruggle ensued. The
man in armour flood, as formerly, amazed and mo-
tionlefs; and the king dragging Ruthven towards
a window, which duringhis absEnce he had perfuad-
ed the person with whom lie had been left, to o-
pen, cried with a wild and aifrighted voice, " Trea-
son ! Treason ! Help ! I am murdered !" His at-
tendants heard, and knew the voice; and saw, at
the window a hand which grasped the king's neck.
with violence. They flew with percipitation to
his assistance. Lennox and Mar, with the greater
number, ran up the principal stair-case, where they
found all the doors shut, which they battered with
the utmost fury, endeavouring to burst them open.
But Sir Johrn Ramsey, entering by a back-ftair,
which led to the apartment where the king was,
found the door open; and rulhing upon Ruthven,
who was still struggling with the king, struck him
twice with his dagger, and thrust him towards the
flair-cafe, where Sir Thomas Erlkine, and Sir
Hugh Herries met, and killed him; he crying
with his last breath, 4' Alas ! I am not to blame
for this a&ion." During this scuffle, the man who
had been concealed in the study, escaped unobfer-..
ved : ogether with Ramsey, Etfkine, and Herries
one Wilson, a footman, entered the room where
the king was, and before they had time to ihut the
door, Gowrie rulhed in with a drawn sword in

Z 3 each t

each hand, followed by seven of his attendants welt
arhied, and with a loud voice threatened them all
with instant death. They immediately thrust the
king into the little study, and (hutting the door
upon him, encountered the earl. Notwithftand-
Ing the inequality of numbers, Sir John Ramsey
pierced Cowrie through the heart, and he fell dead
without uttering a word; his followers having
received several wounds, immediately fled. Three
of the king's defenders were likewise hurt in the
conflict. A dreadful noise continued still at the
opposite door, where tnany persons laboured in
vain to force a paflage; and the king being affur-
ed that they were Lennox, Mar, and his other
friends, it was opened on the inside. They ran
to the king, whom they unexpectedly found safe,
with. transports of congratulation; and he falling
on his knees, with all his attendants around him,
offered solemn thanks to God for such a wonder-
ful deliverance. The danger, however, was not
yet over : The inhabitants of the town, whose
provost Gowrie was, and. by whom he was ex-
tremely. beloved, hearing the fate of. the two bro-
thers, ran to their arms, and surrounded the house,.
threatening revenge, withr many insolent and op-
probrious speeches against the king. James en-
deavoured to pacify the enraged, multitude, by
speaking to them from the window;, he admitted
their magistrates into the house; related to them
pli the circuniftances of the fa ; and, their fury
iublliing by degrees, they dispersed. On search.

Z 3 ing

ing the earl's pockets for papers that might dif-
cover his designs and accomplices, nothin g was
found but a fnall parchment bag, full of magic al
characers and words of enchantment; and if we
may believe the account of the conspiracy publish-
ed by the king, " while these were about him,
"the wound of which he died, bled not; but as
" oon as they were taken away,. the blood guflled
"out in great abundance."

The motives which induced the two brothers

to attempt an ation so detestable, and the end
they had in view, are altogether unknown: From
the words of Ruthven to the king, the desire of
avenging his father's death might be supposed.
But James was at that time too young to become
the objec of resentment; and had even endea-
voured to repair the wrongs the father had suffered
by benefits to his children.

On the other hand, it is impossible to believe

that the king had formed any design against the
life of the two.brothers. They had not incurred
h's indignation by any crime; nor was he of so
.ash a spirit, as to have attempted to murder them
in their own house, where they were surrounded
with many domestics, and he only with a slender
and unarmed train. Whether the intention, of
murder is imputed to Gowrie, or to the king, il-
superable dilliculties arise; and perhaps the source
of the conspiracy may be found in a more remote
and less criminal cause.

Elizabeth

Elizabeth had ever endeavoured to keep the

king of Scots in dependance, and to stir up some
fation of the nobles to oppose his authority. The
earl of Gowrie was one of the molt powerful of
the Scottish barons, and descended from ancestors
warmly attached to the English interelt. At Pa-
ris, he had contra&ed an intimate fiiendfhip with
Elizabeth's ambaflador; and as he pafled through
England, the queen received him with diftin-
guihed marks of rtfped and favour: at the mo-
nient of his enterprise, an Englifli flip was seen
hovering in the mouth of the Frith of Forth ; the
the earl's two younger brothers fled into England-
after the ill success of the conspiracy, and were
protected by Elizabeth. All these circumstances
occasioned a suspicion that the plan of the con-
fpiracy was formed in concert with the queen of
England.

In the mean time the proceedings of parliament

were diligently directed against the name and me-
mory of Gowrie. The dead bodies of the two
brothers were produced; an indictment for high
treason was preferred against them; numerous
witnefies were adduced; and an unanimous fen-
tcnce decreed their cflites and honours forfeited.
The punishment due to traitors ;as inflicled on
their dead bodies; and the parli;aent, to exprcfs
its abhorence of their crimes, enaaEtA tlat the
surname of Ruthven fliould be abolilhed ; the
fifth of August was alto appointed to lhe observed
annually, as a day of thanksgiving for the king's

miraculous

miraculous escape; yet all these marks of folem-
nity by no means eftahlifhed the credibility of the
narrative, which was still received, especially by
the ministers of the church, with jealous dif-
trull.
A. D. 6cIr. The enterprise of Gowrie, though

productive of a great and inftanta-

ricous alarm, was, however, attended by no es.
fential consequences: If excited by Elizabeth, she
had not long to triumph in her address, before fle
herself was alarmed by a conspiracy that broke
out in England against her; which, though the
first danger was immediately dispelled, produced
tragical effeEts, that rendered the close of that
queen's reign dark and unhappy. As James was
deeply interested in that event, it merits our par-
ticular notice.

The court of England was at this time divided

between two powerful factions, which contended
for the supreme diretion of affairs. The leader
of the one was Robert D'Evreux, earl of Effex;
Sir Robert Cecil, the son of lord treafurcr Bur-
leigh, was at the head of the other. The former
was the most accomplished and the mofl popular
of all the Englifli nobles; brave, generous, as-
fable; though impetuous, yet willing to lilten to
the counsels of those whom he loved; an avowed,
but not an implacable enemy; a friend no less
constant than warm; incapable of iifguifing his
own fentimlents, or of misrepresenting those of
others; better fitted for a camp than for a court;

and

and of a genius that qualified him for the firil
place in the adminillration, with a spirit which
sorned the second as below his merit. He was
soon diftinguiflhed by the queen, who with a pro-
fusion uncommon to her, conferred on him, even
in his earliest youth, the highi.ft honours. Nor
did this diminish the efleem and alTccion of his
countrymen; but, by a rare filicity, he was at
once the favourite of his fovtreign, and the dar-
ling of the people. Cecil, on the other hand,
educated in a court, and trained under a father
deeply skilled in all its arts, was crafty, infinuat-
ing, industrious ; and though polCLffed of talents
which fitted him for the highest ffices, he did
not rely upon his merit alone for attaining them,
but availed himself of every advantage, which his
own address, or the mistakes of others, afforded
him. Two such men were formed to be rivals
and enemies. Effex despised the arts of Cecil as
low and base. To Cecil, the earl's magnanimity
appeared to be presumption and folly. All the
military men, except Raleigh, favoured Effex.
Most of the courtiers adhered to Cecil, whose
manners more nearly resembled their own.

As Elizabeth advanced in years, the truggle

between there facions became more violent. Es-
sex, in order to itrengthen himself, had early
courted the friendship of the king of Scots, for
whose right of fuccefflon he was a zealous advo-
cate, and held a close correspondence both with
him and with his principal miniltri. Cecil, de-

voted

voted to the queen alone, roTe dtily to new ho-
nours by the assiduity of his services, and the pa-
tience with which he expected the reward of
them; while the earl's high spirit and impetuosity
sometimes exposed him to checks from a mistress,
who, though partial in her affection toward him,
could not easily bear contradiction, and who con-
ferred favours often unwillingly, and always flow-
ly. His own solicitations, however, seconded
rnalicioufly by his enemies, who wished to remove
him at a diflance from court, advanccd him to the
command of the army employed in Ireland against
Tyrone, and to tle office of lord lieutenant of
that kingdom, with a commirlion almofi unli::lite(i.
-Iis success in that expedition did not eqn'li ethier
llis own promises, or the expectations of Eliz beth.
The queen, peevish from her dif!ppoiltment,
and exasperated againf EtTex by the ; or:iiiers of
his enemies, wrote him a harsh letter, full o(f ic-
cufations and reproacSes Thef ih ilp,.,'.t:
spirit could not bear, and in the first transport, cf
his resentment, he proposcd to c.irry over a part
of his army into Englald. and, by diixingi his
enemies from the quecn':; prefencc-, to rciift.ite
liimfelf in favour and in power. But upon more
mature thoughts he abi;:(luncd tlis r:ifli dedign,
.ind fctting fiil with a few o!ficers devoted to his
person, landed in England, and polled direcily
to court. Elizabeth received him without any
symptom either of affiteion or of difplt.fure. By
proper coniplianccs and aicknowledgmints, he

milh:

mighti- hS; . ;r r;:.',,,iedt his former ascendant over the
queen I;u: li: diought himself too deeply injur-
ed to fiuhnii to tlefe. Elizabeth on the other
Jand detcr.nined to subdue his haughty temper;
and though her fevetity drew from him the most
humble letters, (he confined him to the lord keep-
er's house, and appointed commissioners to try
him, both for his conduct during his government
of Ireland, and for leaving that kingdom without
her pcrmiffion. By their sentence, he was sus-
pended from all his offices, except that of matter
of the horse, and continued a prifoncr during the
queen's pleasure. Satisfied with having mortified
his pride thus far, Elizabeth did not fufler the
sentence to be recorded, and soon after allowed
him to retire to his own Ioufe. During these
tranfadions, which occupied several months, Es-
sex flutuated between the allegiance he owed to
his sovereign, and the dclire of revenge; and
sometimes leaned to the one, and foometimes to the
other. In one of the intervals when the latter
prevailed, he sent a mellciiner into Scotland, to
encourage the king to aflirt his own right to the
succession by force of arms, and to promise that,
besides the afliftance of the earl and all his friends
in England, lord Mountjoy, now lord lieutenant
of Ireland, would join lim with five thoufmnd men
frem tlat kingdom. But J.imns did not clhfe to
hazard the losing a kingdomn, of which he was just
about to obtain poflk fiion, by a premature attempt
to seize it. Mountjoy, too, declined the enter-

.prilc

prise, and Effex adopted more dutiful schemes; all
thoughts of ambition appearing to be totally es-
faced cut of his mind.

This moderation, which was merely the effe&

of disgust and disappointment, was net of long
continu*nce; and the queen, having not only re-
fused to renew a lucrative grant which she had
formerly bellowed, but even to admit him into her
presence, that new injury drove a temper, na-
turally impatient, and now much fretted, to abfo-
lute despair. His friends, instead of soothing his
rage, or relfraining his impetuosity, added to both
by their imprudent and interested zeal. After
many anxious confilt;ltions, he determined to at-
tempt to redress Ilis wrongs by violence. To excite
James to join him, he reprcfented to'him that the
faction which now predominated in the English
court, had fefolved to support the pretensions of
the infanta of Spain, and advised him to insist on
the immediate declaration of his right of fuccef-
sion. James declined a proposal which he knew
would have been extremely dilagreeable to the
queen; and Eflex, though dif.ppointed of his assist-
fiance, and impatient for revenge, attempted with
a few hundred followers to expel the fation of
Cecil, and to seize the queen. Defertedinthis
ralfh enterprise by his attendants, he returned to
his own houfc, and furrendcred himself to his
enemies.

The queen could not without a painful Itruggle
resign into the hands of the executioner a man

A a who

who had once so entirely possessed her iavour ; and
it is probable, had any faithful friend enterceded
with Elizabeth, his life might have been saved;
but the unfortunate Eflex had at this time no such
advocate; and the queen, who imagined that he
scorned to sue for pardon, reluctantly suffered the
sentence to be carried into execution.

James had dispatched ambaflidors to England,

to solicit the pardon of Eflex; but before their
arrival the blow was struck; and finding them-
selves too late, they concealed that part of their
instructions, and employed themselves in extend-
ing their intrigues witli the Englifli nobles. Ce-
cil himself thought it no longer prudent to stand
at a distance from a prince who might so soon be
his matter; and James having gained the man
whose influence he had hitherto chiefly dreaded,
waited in perfect feeurity till the event should hap-
pen, which would open his way to the throne of
England.

That event was now rapidly ap- A. D. I6u2

I6o3.

proaching; Elizabeth began to feel
her vigour decrease, and to be sensible of the in-
firmities of old age. Her lillemper seemed to
proceed from a fettled melancholy; ihe delighted
in solitude; she fat constantly in the dark, and was
often drowned in tears.

No sooner was her indisposition known, than

all parties redoubled their afliduitics to the king of
the Scots; even her molt ancient servants, wearied
with the length of her reign, and fond of novelty,

were

were eager to pay their homage to, and to occupy
the favour of her fucceffr.

In the mean time thl queen's disease daily

increased, and her melincholy appeared to be sett-
led and incurable. Some imputed a disorder so dif-
ferent from the natural cheerfulnecfs of :i;r tem-
per to having pardoned, contrary to hr inclina-
tion, the earl of Tyrone, whose rebcHlil, had for
many years disturbed her government. Others a-
fcribed it to the ingratitude of her courtiers, who
beheld her declining with indifference, and turn-
ed their expedttions toward the king of the Scots.
But the general opinion conceived it to arise from
the loss of the earl of IEfTx. She retained an
extraordinary regard for the memory of that
nobleman; and though lie often complained of
his obstinacy, seldom mentioned his name without
tears.

This opinion was confirmed by an accident

which soon after happened, and which revived the
tenderness and augmented the sorrows of Eliza-
beth. The countess of Nottingham desired on
her death-bed to fee the queen ; lie informed her
that while Eflex lay under sentence of death, he
was desirous of imploring pardon, by returning a
ring which, during his favour, Elizabeth had given
him, with a promise, if in any future distress he
should fend it back, it should entitle him to protec-
tion. That this ring was delivered into her hands;
but that her husband, one of Essex's greatlft ene-

A a z* miea,

mies, had forbidden her either to carry it to the
queen, or to return it to the earl.

The queen heard her with the greatest emotion,

exclaiming, " God may forgive you, but I never
" can." From that moment her spirits funk en-
tirely; she would scarce tafie food ; fie refused
all medicines prescribed by her physicians; and
without going to bed fat pensive on cushions dur-
ing ten days and nights. Ihe only thing to which
the attended were acts of devotion, in which fle
joined, with great appearance of fervour. Waft-
ed, at length, by anguish of mind, and continued
abstinence, ihe expired without a fruggle on Thurf-
day, the twenty-fourth day of March, in the fe-
ventieth year of her age, and in the forty-fifth of
htr reign.

Though Elizabeth had never fuffired the fuc-

celnion of the crown to be determined in parlia-
ment, nor declared her own sentiments refpe&ing
it, yet The had formed no dcfign of excluding the
Scottish king. A niort time before her death,
{he broke the silence which (he had so long pre-
served, and told Cecil and the lord admiral, "That
" her throne was the throne of kings; that (ie
" wculd have no mean person to afeend it, and

tlhat her cousin the king of Scots fhuuld be her
" fucceflur."

As soon as the queen breathed her last, the

lords of the privy council proclaimed James, king
of Engl:nd ; and Sir Cliarlcs Percy, brother of
thc earl of Northumberland, and Tholmas So-

n.cLfc t,

nmerfet, the earl of Worcester's son, were dif-
patched to Scotland, with a letter to the king,
signed by all the peers and privy counsellors then
in London ; informing him of the queen's death,
of his succession to the throne, of their care to
recognize his title, and of the universal appliufe
with which the public proclamation of it had been
attended. They made the utmost haste to deliver
this welcome mefiage; but were prevented by the
zeal of Sir Robert Carey, lord Hunfdon's youngest
son, who setting out a few hours after Elizabeth's
death, arrived at Edinburgh on Saturday night,
just as the king had gone to bed. He was imme-
diately admitted into the royal apartment ; and
kneeling by the king's bed, acquainted him with
the death of Elizabeth, saluted him king of En-
gland, Scotland, France, and Ireland; and as a
token of the truth of the intelligence which he
brought, presented him a ring, which his sifter
lady Scroop liad taken from the queen's finger as-
ter her death.

James heard him with a decent composure.

But as Carey was only a private messenger, the
information which he brought was not made pub-
lic, and the king kept his apartment till the arri-
val of Percy and Sonierfet. '[hen his titles were
solemnly proclaimcd ; and his own fubjcats ex-
prclled no less joy than the Englifll, at this in-
crease of his dignity. As his prefcnce was ab-
folutely neceflary in England, where the people
were extremely impatient to fee their new fove-

rcign,

reign, he prepared to set out for that kingdom
without delay. iec appointed his queen to follow
him within a few weeks: lle committed the go-
vernment of S`cotland to his privy council: He
intrusted the care of his children to different no-
blernen. On the Sunday before his departure
he repaired to the church of St. Giles, and after
hearing a sermon, 'i which the preacher difplyed
the greatness of the divine goodness in railing him
to the throne of such a powerful kingdom with-
out opposition or blood hed, and exhorted him to
express his gratitude, by promoting, to the ut-
most, the happiness and prosperity of his fubje'ts;
the king rose up, and addressing himself to the
people, made many profellions of unalterable as-
feEtion towards them; promised frequently to
visit Scotland; assured them that his Scottifi sub-
jel-s, notwithstanding his absence, shou'd feel that
he was their native prince, no leTs than when
he resided among them: and might still trust
that his ears (hould be always open to their peti-
tions, which he would answer with the alacrity
and love of a parent. His words were often in-
terrupted by the tears of the whole, audience;
who, though they exulted at the king's prosperity,
were melted into furrow by these tender declara-
tions.

On the fifth of April he began his journey,

with a splendid, but not a numerous train; and
next day he entered Berwick. Wherever he
came, immeife multitudes were aflmblcd to wel-

colme,

come him ; and the principal persons in the diffe~
rent counties through which he pafled, displayed
;ll their wealth and magnificence in entertain-
ments prepared for him at their houses. E!iza-
beth had rcizned so long in England, that most
of her fubjec's remembered no other manners but
hers: and captivated with that flowing affability
for which the was remarkable, were far from being
pleased with Jamnes, wlo, though easy among a
few, could not bear the fatigue of rendering him-
self agreeable to a mixed multitude ; and who, in-
letad of the frugality with which his predecefifor
conferred titles of honour, bestowed them with
an undiftinguifiing profusion, which prevented
them from being confidered as marks of diftinc-
tion, or rewards of merit.

Yer these observations never occurred to the

giddy populace; amidit whose acclamations James
entered London the fcventh of May, took peace-
able poffcilion of the throne of England, and unit-
ed two kingdoms, divided from the earliest ac-
counts of time:, but :ltillned by their situation to
form one great monarchy. By this jundiion of
its whole native force, Great Uritain hath risen to
an eminence and authority in Europe, whidc
England or Scotland could never have attained.

FINIS.

EDINBURGI * l
PRINTED BY (tlANT 3' MOIR,

,4 l'IREM N'6 COU T. .
