TH/

THE

HISTORY
H E S T 0 R
¥

O F
A M ERIC A.

V 0 L. I.

T H E
HI STORY

o F
AMERICA.

By WILLIAM ROBERTPON, D. D.

/
PRINCIPAL OF THE UNIVERSITY OF EDINBURGH;

AND HISTORIOGRAPHER TO HIS MAJESTY FOR SCOTLAND.

VOLUME THE FIRST.

D U B L I N:
Printed for Messrs. PRICE, WHITESTONE, W. WATSON, CORCORAWN

R.CROSS, SLEATER, SHEPP ARD, CHAMBERLAINE, POTTS,J. HOEY,
FITZSIMONS, WILLIAMS, E. LYNCH, S. WATSON, W COLLE6,

W. WILSON, MONCRIEFFE, WALKER, EXSHAW, M. HAYS

ARMITAGE, PORTER, HALLHEAD, T. STEWART, FLIN,

FAULKNER, BURNET, JENKIN, MILLS, BEATTY)

SPOTSWOOD, GILBERT, VALLANCE, P.WILSON,

R. STEWART, P. HOEY, WOGAN, E. CROSS)

MACELRATH, HIOLEY,WHITE, KIDD,

GRUEBER, HILLARY, M'KENLY3

and MAzEE. M, DCC, LXXYII.

# PREFACE.

P RE FACE.

IN fulfilling the engagement which I had
come under to the Public with refpeEt to
the History of America, it was my inten-
tion not to have published any part of it
until the whole was completed. The pre-
sent state of the British Colonies has induc-
ed me to alter that resolution. While they
are engaged in civil war with Great Britain,
inquiries and speculations concerning their
ancient forms of policy and laws, which
exist no longer, cannot be interesting. The
attention and expectation of mankind are
now turned towards their future condition.
In whatever manner this unhappy contest
may terminate, a new order of things must
arise in North America, and its affairs will
afumne another aspea. I wait, with the
solicitude of a good citizen, until the ser-
ment subside, and regular government be
re-established, and then I shall return to
this part of my work, in which I had
made some progress. That, together with the

history

history of Portuguese America, and of the
settlements made by the several nations of
Europe in the Weft India islands, will com-
plete my plan.

THE two volumes which I now publish,

contain an account of the discovery of the
New World, and of the progress of the
Spanish arms and colonies there. This is
not only the most splendid portion of the
American story, but so much detached, that
it forms a perfec whole by itself, remark-
able for the unity of the subjed. As the
principles and maxims of the Spaniards in
planting colonies, which have been adopt-
ed in ome measure by every nation in
Europe, are unfolded in this part of my
work; it will serve as a proper introduc-
tion to the history of their establishment
in America, and convey such information
concerning this important article of policy,
as may be deemed no less interesting than
CUrioUS.

IN describing the atchievements and in-

ftitutions of the Spaniards in the New
World, I have departed in many infiances
from the accounts of preceding historians,
and have often related fads which seem to
have been unknown to them. It is a duty
I owe the Public, to mention the sources
from which I have derived such intelli-

gence,

gence, as justifies me either in placing tranf-
adions in a new light, or in forming any
new opinion with refpea to their causes
and effets. This duty I perform with greater
fatisfadion, as it will afford an opportunity
of expressing my gratitude to those benefac-
tors, who have honoured me with their
countenance' and aid in my researches.

As it was from Spain that I had to ex-.

ped the most important information, with
regard to this part of my work, I confidered
it as a very fortunate circumfiance for me,
when Lord Grantham; to whom I had
the honour of being personally known, and
with whose liberality of sentiment, and dif-
position to oblige, I was well acquainted,
was appointed ambassador to the court of
Madrid. Upon applying to him, I met with
such a reception as satisfied me, that his en-
deavours would be employed in the most
proper manner, in order to obtain the grati-
fication of my wishes; and I am perfedly
sensible, that what progress I have made in
my inquiries among the Spaniards, ought to
be ascribed chiefly to their knowing how
much his Lordship interested himself in their
success.

BUT did I owe nothing more to Lord

Grantham, than his attention in engaging
Mr. Waddilove, the chaplain of his em-

baffy,

baffy, to take the condud of my affairs in
Spin, the obligations I lie under would be
very great. During five years, that gentle-
man has carried on researches for my be-
hoof, with such aivity, perseverance, and
knowledge of the subjed, to which his at-
tention was turned, as have filled me with
no less aflonifhment, than fatisfadion. He
procured for me the greater part of the
Spanish books, which I have consulted;
and as many of them were printed early in
the sixteenth century, and are become
extremely rare, the collecting of these was
such an occupation, as, alone, required much
time and assiduity. To his friendly atten-
tion I am indebted for copies of several va-
luable manuscripts, containing fads and de-
tails which I might have searched for in
vain, in works that have been made public.
Encouraged by the inviting good-will with
which Mr. Waddilove conferred his favours,
I transmitted to him a set of queries, with
refped both to the customs and policy of the
native Americans, and the nature of several
infsitutions in the Spanish settlements, fram-
ed in such a manner, that a Spaniard might
answer them, without disclosing any thing
that was improper to be communicated to a
foreigner. He translated these into Spanish,
and obtained from various persons who had
resided in most of the Spanish colonies, such
replies as have afforded me much infirudion.

NoTWITP-

NOTWITHSTANDING these peculiar advan-

tages with which my inquiries were carried
on in Spain, it is with regret I am obliged to
add, that the success with which they have
been attended, must be ascribed to the bene-
ficence of individuals, not to any communi-
cation by public authority. By a singular
arrangement of Philip II. the records of the
Spanish monarchy, are deposited in the Ar-
chivo of Simancas, near Valladolid, at the
diflance of a hundred and twenty miles from
the feat of government, and the supreme
courts of justice. The papers relative to
America, and chiefly to that early period of
its history, towards which my attention was
direted, are so numerous, that they alone,
according to one account, fill the largest
apartment in the Archivo; and according to
another, they compose eight hundred and
feventy-three large bundles. Conscious of
possessing, in some degree, the industry which
belongs to an historian, the profped of such
a treasure excited my most ardent curiosity.
But the profped of it, only, is all that I have
enjoyed. Spain, with an excess of caution,
has uniformly thrown a veil over her tranf-
aaions in America. From firangers they are
concealed with peculiar solicitude. Even to
her own fubjeds the Archivo of Simancas
is not opened without a particular order from
the crown; and after obtaining that, papers
cannot be copied, without paying fees of

VOL. I. b office

office so exorbitant, that the expence exceeds
what it would be proper to bellow, when
the gratification of literary curiosity is the
only objed. It is to be hoped, that the Spa-
niards will at last discover this fyflem of con-
cealment to be no less impolitic than illiberal.
From what I have experienced in the course
of my inquiries, I am satisfied, that upon a
more minute scrutiny into their early opera-
tions in the New World, however reprehen-
fible the aions of individuals may appear,
the conduc of the nation will be placed in a
more favourable light.

IN other parts of Europe very different

sentiments prevail. Having searched, with-
out success, in Spain, for a letter of Cortes to
Charles V. written soon after he landed in the
Mexican empire, which has not hitherto
been published; it occurred to me, that as
the emperor was setting out for Germany, at
the time when the messengers from Cortes
arrived in Europe, the letter with which they
were intrusted might poflibly be preserved in
the Imperial Library of Vienna. I commu-
nicated this idea to Sir Robert Murray Keith,
with whom I have long had the honour to
live in friendship, and I had oon the plea-
sure to learn, that, upon his application, her
Imperial Majesty had been graciously pleated
to issue an order, that not only a copy of that

letter
L

.letter (if it were found), but of any other
papers in the library, which could throw light
upon the History of America, should be
transmitted to me. The letter from Cortes
is not in the Imperial Library, but an au-
thentic copy, attested by a notary, of that
written by the magifirates of the colony
planted by him at Vera Cruz, which I have
mentioned, Vol. ii. p. 204, having been
found; it was transcribed and ent to me.
This, no less curious, and as little known
as the letter which was the objecd of my in-
quiries, did not come to my hand till that
part of the history to which it relates was
printed; but I have given ome account of
what is most worthy of notice in it, at the
end of Notes and lustrations, vol. iii. To-
gether with it, I received a copy of a letter
from Cortes, containing a long account of
his expedition to Honduras, with refpe to
which, I did not think it necessary to enter
into any particular detail; and likewise
those curious Mexican paintings, which I
have described, vol. iii. p. 38, &c.

MY inquiries at St. Peterfburgh were car-

ried on with equal facility and success. In
examining into the nearest communication
between our continent and that of America,
it became of consequence to obtain authen-
tic information concerning the discoveries of

b the

-the Ruffians, in their navigation from Kam-
chatka towards the coast of America. Ac-
curate relations of their first voyage, in 174r,
have been published by Muller and Gmelin.
Several foreign authors have entertained an
opinion, that the court of Russia fiudioufly
conceals the progress which has been made
by more recent navigators, and fuffersthe
Public to be amused with false accounts of
their route. Such conduct appeared to me
unsuitable to those liberal sentiments, and
.that patronage of science, for which the pre-
sent sovereign of Russia is eminent; nor
could I discern any political reason, that
might render it improper to apply for infor-
mation concerning the late attempts of the
Ruffians to open a communication between
Asia and America. My ingenious country-
man, Dr. Rogerfon, first physician to the
Empress, presented my request to her Impe-
rial Majesty, who not only disclaimed any
idea of concealment, but inflantly ordered
the journal of Captain Krenitzin, who con-
du&ded the only voyage of discovery made by
public authority since the year 74r, to be
.translated, and his original chart to be co-
pied for my use. By consulting them I have
been enabled to give a more accurate view of
the progress and extent of the Ruffian disco-
veries, than has hitherto been communi-
cated to the Public.

FROM

FROM other quarters I have received in-

formation of great utility and importance.
M. Chevalier de le Pinto, the minister from
Portugal to the court of Great Britain, who
commanded for several years at Matagroia,
a ettlement of the Portuguese in the- inte-
rior part of Brasil, where the Indians are
numerous, and their original manners lit-
fie altered by intercourse with Europeans,
was pleased to fend me very full answers
to ome queries concerning the character
and inflitutions of the natives of America,
which his polite reception of an application
made to him in my name, encouraged me
to propose. These satisfied me, that he had.
contemplated with discerning attention the
curious objects which his situation 'present-
ed to his view, and I have often followed
him as one of my best inftruted guides,

M. SUARD, to whose elegant translation

of the History of the Reign of Charles V.
I owe the favourable reception of that work
on the continent, procured me answers to
the fame queries from M. de Bougainville,
who had opportunities of observing the In
dians both of North.and South America,
and from M. Godin le Jeune, who resided
fifteen years among Indians in Quito, and
twenty years in Cayenne. The latter are
more valuable from having been examined
by M. de la Condamine, who, a few weeks

before

before his death, made ome short additions
to them, which may be confidered as the
las effort of that attention to science which
occupied a long life.

MY inquiries were not confined to one

region in America. Governor Hutchinson
took the trouble of recommending the con-
fideration of my queries to Mr. Hawley and
Mr. Brainerd, two proteflant missionaries,
employed among the Indians of the Five
Nations, who favoured me with answers,
which discover a considerable knowledge of
the people whose cuflonis they describe.
From William Smith, Efq; the ingenious
hiflorian of New York, I received ome use-
ful information. When I enter upon the
History of our Colonies in North America,
I fnall have occaiion to acknowledge how
much I have been indebted to many other
gentlemen of that country.

FROM the valuable Colledion of Voyages

made by Alexander Dalrymple, Efq; with
whose attention to the History of Naviga-
tion and Discovery the Public is well ac-
quainted, I have received ome very rare
books particularly two large volumes of
iMemorials, partly manuscript, and partly
in print, which were presented to the court
of Spain during the reigns of Philip III.

and

and Philip IV. From these I have learned
many curious particulars with refpe to
the interior itate of the Spanish colonies,
and the various schemes formed for their
improvement. As this Colledion of Me-
morials formerly belonged to the Colbert
Library, I have quoted them by that title.

ALL those books and manuscripts I have

consulted with that attention, which the
refped due from an Author to the Public
required and by minute references to them,
I have endeavoured to authenticate what-
ever I relate. The longer 1reflea oni the
nature of hifiorical composition, the more
I am convinced that this scrupulous accu-
racy is necessary. The hifiorian who re-
cords the events of his own time, is credited
in proportion to the opinion which the Pub-
lic entertains with refped to his means of
information and his veracity. He who deli-
neates the tranfations of a remote period,
has no title to claim assent, unless he pro-
duces evidence in proof of his assertions.
Without this, he may write an amusing
tale, but cannot be said to have composed,
an authentic history. In those sentiments
I have been confirmed by the opinion of an
author *, whom his indufiry, erudition, and

* Mr. Gibbon.

discernment,

discernment, have deservedly placed in a
high rank among the most eminent hifto-
rians of the age. Emboldened by a hint
from him, I have published a catalogue of
the Spanish books which I have consulted.
This pradcice was frequent in the last cen-
tury and confidered as an evidence of lau-
dable indufiry in an author; in the present,
it may, perhaps, be deemed the effec of
ostentation; but as many of there books
are unknown in Great Britain, I could not
otherwise have referred to them as autho-
rities, without encumbering the page with
an insertion of their full titles. To any
person who may chufe to follow me in this
path of inquiry, the catalogue muff be ve-
ry useful.

MY readers will observe, that in menti-

oning ums of money, I have uniformly
followed the Spanish method of comput-
ing by peso. In America, the peso fuerte,
or duro, is the only one known, and that
is always meant when any fum imported
from America is mentioned. The peso fu-
erte, as well as other coins, has varied in
its numerary value, but I have been advised,
without attending to such minute variations,
to confider it as equal ta four shillings and fix
pence of our money. It is to be remembered,
however, that in the sixteenth century, the

effetiveQ

effedive value of a peso, i. e. the quan-
tity of labour which is represented, or of
goods which it would purchase, was five or
fix times as much as at present.

CONTENTS,

# CONTENTS.

CONTENTS.

VOLUME THE FIRST.

B OO K I.
PR 0 GR E SS of navigation among the ancients--

View of their discoveries as preparatory to those of
the moderns-Imperfection of ancient navigation and
geography-Dostrine of the Zones-Farther difcove-
ries checked by the irruption of barbarous nations-
Geographical knowledge fiill preserved in the EafI,
and among the Arabians-Revival of commerce
and navigation in Europe-favoured by the Croi-
fades-extended by travellers into the EaJ--promot-
ed by the invention of the mariner's compafs-Firf
regular plan of discovery formed by Portugal-State
of that kingdom-Schemes of Prince Henry-Early
attempts feeble-Progrefs along the wejfern coaJf of
Africa-Hopes of discovering a new route to the
Eaqe Indies- Attempts to accomplih this-Profpeots
of success.

BOOK II.
Birth and education of Columbus-acquires navalJkill

in the service of Portugal-conceives hopes of reach-

ing

ig the Eafl Indies by holding a wejierly courJfe-his
yjjemn founded on the ideas of the ancients, and know-
ledge of their navigation-and on the dfcoveries of
the Portuguese- 'is nezociations with different courts
--Obfacles which he had to furlmount in Spain-
Foyage of difcovery-difficulties-fuccefs--return to
Spain-Af/ionsijm.ent of mankind on this dicovery of
a NTew Wo;rld-Papal grant of it-Second voyage
-Coloy sett, d-Farther difcoveries-War with the
zIdians-Firft tax imposed on them-Third voyage
-He discovers the continent-State of the Spanih
colony-Errors in fiifyfi em of colonizing-- oy.age of
the Portuge'e to the East Indzes by the Cape of
Good Hope-E effes of tis Discoveries made by
private adventurers in the ATew World -Name of
Ameiica given to it -Machinations again/I Columbus
-Digraced and sent in chaits to Europe-Fourth
voyage of Columbus .-His discoveries-- dfafters -
-death.

BOO K III.
State of the cokny in Hfpan7iola-NTew war with the

Inzdians--Cruelty of the Spaniards-Fatal regulati-
ons concerning the condition of the Indianss-Diinu-
tion of that people-Difcover;ies and settlements-
FiZf coliay planted on the continenlt- Cojnque of
Cuba-Difcovery of Florida-of the Suth Sea-
Great expetations raied by this-Ciaufes of dfap-
pointment with refpet to these for some time-Con-
troverfy concerning the treatment of the Indians--
Contrary decfions-Zeal of the eccleijfics, parti-
c;dlarly of Las Cafas--Slzgular proceedins of Xi-
renes -Negroes imported into America-Las Cafas's
idea of a new colony-permitted to attempt it-
ilificcefsful -Discoveries towards the Wef/- Yuca-
tan-Cam peachy New Spain-Preparations for in-
vading it.

VOLUME
vn~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~i~~~~~~~~~~~~~gir.~~~~~~~~~~

'j
VOLUME THE SECOND,

BOOK IV.
[rew of Americd ewhen sirs dfcovered, and f the

manners and policy of its moJi uncivilized inhabi-
tants-Vafl extent of America-Grandeur of the ob-
jefcs it presents to view-Its mountains-rivers--
lakes-Its form favourable to commerce- empera-
ture-predominence of cold-Caues of this-uncul-
tivated-unwholefome-its animals-foil--Inquiry how
America was peopled-various theories-what ap-
pears moif probable-Condition and charatler of the
Americans-All, the Mexicans and Peruvians except-
ed, in the state of favages-Inquiry confined to
the uncivilized tribes-Difficulty of obtaining informa-
tion-various causes of this-Method oberved in the
inquiry-I. he bodily conJfitution of the Americans
conidered-II. he qualities of their mind-III.
Their domeflic state-1. Their politicalftate and in-
ftitutions-7. teir sys/em of war and public ecu-
rity--I. The arts with which they were acquainted-

II. T'heir religious ideas and inJfitutions- IIL.
Such igular and detached cufoms as are not reduci-
ble to any of the former heads-IX. General review
and estimate of their virtues and defes.

BOOK V.
History of the conquefl of New Spain by Cortes.

VOLUME

VOLUME THE THIRD.

BOOK VI.
History of the conquest of Peru, by Pizalrro-and of the

d{enfions and civil wars of the Spaniards in that
country-Origin--progreJs-and efeas of thefie.

BOOK VII.
Piew of inflitutions and manners of Mexicans and Pe-

ruvians-Civilized flates in comparison of other Ame-
ricans-Recent origin of the MeIxicans-Fats which
prove their progress in civilization-iew of their
policy in its various branches-of their arts-Fats
which indicate a small progress in civilization.-
What opinion Jhould be formed on comparing those
contraditory fatis-Genius of their religion-Peru-
vian monarchy more ancient-Its policy founded on re-
figion-Singular efets of this-peculiar slate of pro-
perty among the Peruvians- heir public works and
arts-roads-bridges-buildings-unwarlike spirit-
View of other dominions of Spain in America-Cinaloa
and Snora-California-Tucatan and Honduras-
Chili-Tucuman-Kingdom of Tierra Firme-Nev
Kingdom of Granada.

BOOK VIII.
liew of the interior government, commerce, &c. of the

Spanifi colonies-Depopulation of America first e.fle
of their fettlements-not the consequence of any fyflem
of policy-nor to be imputed to religion--Number of
Indians fill remaining-Fundamental maxims on

which

which the Spanilh fyflem of colonization is founded-
Condition of derent orders of men in their colonies-
Chapetones-Creoles-Negroes-Indians -Ecclefiafli-
cal state and policy-Characer of secular and regu-
lar clergy -Small progress of Chrifianity among the
natives-Mines chief object of their attention-Mode
of working thefe-theirprodu ce.E ftts of encourag-
ing this species of induftry-Other commodities of Spa-
niJl America-Firfi efets of this new commerce on
Spain-Why the Spani/b colonies have not been as
beneficial to the parent-ftate as those of other nations-
Errors in her fyflem of regulating this commerce-
confinedto one port-carried on by annual fleets-
Contraband trade-Decline of Spain both in popula-
tion and wealth-Remedies propofed-iew of the
wife regulations of the Bourbon Princes-Anew and
more liberal fyflem introduced-Beneficial efets of
this-Probable consequences- rade between Mexico
and the Philippines-Revenue of Spain from Ameri-
ca-whence it arifes-to what it amounts.

THE

# BOOK I.

THE

HI S T z
HISTORY

O F

AMERICA.
A M E R . C A

B O K I.

' H E progress of men in difeovering and peo-B o 0 K
pling the various parts of the earth, has been ex- I.
tremely flow. Several ages elapsed before they Thearth
removed far from those mild and fertile regions nowly pco
where they were originally placed by their Creator pled.
The occasion of their first general dispersion is
known; but we are unacquainted with the course
of their migrations, or the time when they took
poffeflion of the different countries which they now
inhabit. Neither history nor tradition furnish such
information concerning those remote events, as
enables us to trace, with any certainty, the operas
tions of the human race in the infancy of society.

WE may conclude, however, that all the early First rigri

migrations of mankind were made by lands Thetions by
ocean, which everywhere firrounds the habitable
earth, as well as the various arms of the ea which
separate one region from another, though destined

VOL. I, B to

B 0 0 K to facilitate the communication between distant

I. countries, seem, at firit, to be formed to check
r the progress of man, and to mark the bounds of

that portion of the globe to which nature had con-
fined him. It was long, we may believe, before
men attempted to pass this formidable barrier, and
became so kilful and adventurous as to commit
themselves to the mercy of the winds and waves,
or to quit their native shore in quest of remote and
unknown regions.

First at- NAVIGATION and hip-building are arts so nice
tpts and complicated, that they require the ingenuity,
wards na. and complicated, that they require the ingenuity,
ligation. as well as experience of many successive ages to

bring them to any degree of perfection. From
the raft or canoe, which first served to carry a fa-
vage over the river that obftruted him in the chace,
to the confiruction of a vessel capable of conveying
a numerous crew with safety to a distant coast, the
progress in improvement is immense. Many efforts
would be made, many experiments would be tried,
and much labour and invention would be employ-
ed, before men could accomplish this arduous and
important undertaking. The rude and imperfect
state in which navigation is still found arhong all na-
tions which are not considerably civilized, corre-
fponds with this account of its progress, and demon-
ftrates that, in early times, the art was not so far
improved as to enable men to undertake distant
voyages, or to attempt remote discoveries.

Introdufi. As oon, however, as the art of navigation be-
on of corn- came known, a new species of correspondence
mcrce.

among men took place. It is from this aera, that
we must date the commencement of such an inter-
course between nations as deserves the appellation
of commerce. Men are, indeed, far advanced in
improvement before commerce becomes an object
of great importance to them. They must even
have made ome considerable progress towards

civilization,

civilization, before they acquire the idea of pro- B 0 O K
perty, and ascertain it so perfetly, as to be ac- I-
quainted with the molt simple of all contrats, that "
of exchanging by barter one rude commodity for
another. But as oon as this important right is
eitablifhed, and every individual feels that he has
an exclusive title to possess or to alienate whatever
he has acquired by his own labour and dexterity,
the wants and ingenuity of his nature suggest to
him a new method of increasing his acquisitions
and enjoyments, by disposing of what is fuperflu-
ous in his own stores, in order to procure what is
necefary or desirable in those of other men. Thus
a commercial intercourse begins, and is carried on
among the members of the fame community. By
degrees, they discover that neighbouring tribes pof-
fess what they want, and enjoy comforts of which
they with to partake. In the fame mode, and
upon the fame principles, that domefiic traffic is
carried on within the society, an external commerce
is eflablifhed with other tribes or nations. Their
mutual interest and mutual wants render this inter-
course desirable, and imperceptibly introduce the
maxims and laws which facilitate its progress and
render it secure. But no very extensive commerce
can take place between contiguous provinces,
whose foil and climate being nearly the fame, yield
similar productions. Remote countries cannot con-
vey their commodities by land, to those places,
where on account of their rarity they are desired,
and become valuable. It is to navigation that men
are indebted for the power of transporting the super-
fluous flock of one part of the earth, to supply the
wants of another. The luxuries and blessings of a
particular climate are no longer confined to itielt
alone, but the enjoyment of them is communicat-
ed to the most distant regions.

B IR

B O O K IN proportion as the knowledge of the advan-

oI- tages derived from navigation and commerce con-

tinued to spread, the intercourse among nations
extended. The ambition of conquelt, or the ne-
ceffity of procuring a new settlement, were no
longer the sole motives of visiting distant lands.
The desire of gain became a new incentive to aAi-
vity, roused adventurers and fent,them forth upon
long voyages in search of countries, whose products
or wants might increase that circulation, which
nourishes and gives vigour to commerce. Trade
proved a great source of discovery, it opened un-
known seas, it penetrated into new regions, and
contributed more than any other cause, to bring
men acquainted with the situation, the nature, and
commodities of the different parts of the globe.
But even after a regular commerce was established
in the world, after nations were considerably civi-
lized, and the sciences and_arts were cultivated
with ardour and success, navigation continued to
be so imperfet, that it can hardly be said to have
advanced beyond the infancy of its improvement
in the ancient world.

Imperfei- AMONG all the nations of antiquity the ftruture
on of navi- of their vessels was extremely rude, and their me-
gation a-
mong the thod of working them no less defective. They

ciets. were unacquainted with ome of the great princi-

ples and operations in navigation, which- are now
confidered as the fi-rst elements on which that fci-
ence is founded. Though that property of the
magnet, by which it attracts iron, was well known
to the ancients, its most important and amazing
virtue of pointing to the poles had entirely escaped
their observation. Destitute of this faithful guide,.
which now conducts the pilot with so much cer-
tainty in the unbounded ocean, during the darkness
of night, and when the heavens are covered with
clouds, the- ancients had no other method of regu-

lating

lating their course than by obfqrving the fun and B O K
itars. Their navigation was of consequence uncer- I.
tain and timid. They durst seldom quit fight of -v,
land, but crept along the coast, exposed to all the
dangers, and retarded by all the obfirutions, un-
avoidable in holding such an aukward course. An
incredible length of time was requisite for perform-
ing voyages, which are now finished in a short
space. Even in the mildeif climates, and in seas
the least tempestuous, it was only during the fum-
mer months that the ancients ventured out of their
harbours. The remainder of the year was loft in
inactivity. It would have been deemed most in-
considerate rashness to have braved the fury of the
winds and waves during the winter a

WHILE both the science and pratice..of naviga-

tion continued to be so defecive, it was an under-
taking of no small difficulty and danger to visit any
remote region of the earth. Under every difad-
vantage. however, the ative spirit of commerce
exerted itself. The Egyptians, soon after the efta- Navigatien
blilhment of their monarchy, are said to have open- mdrcf th
ed a trade between the Arabian Gulph or Red Sea, Egyptians
and the western coast of the great Indian continent.
The commodities which they imported from the
eafi, were carried by land from the Arabian Gulph
to the.banks of the Nile, and conveyed down that
river to the Mediterranean. But if the Egyptians
in early times applied themselves to commerce,
their attention to it was of short duration. The
fertile foil and mild climate of Egypt produced the
necessaries and comforts of life with such profusion,
as rendered its inhabitants so independent of other
countries, that it became an established maxim
among that people, whose ideas and institutions
differed in almost every point from those of other
nations, to renounce all intercourse with foreigners.

a Vegetius de R milit. lib. iv.

In

B 0.0 K In consequence of this, they never went out of their

I- own country; they held all sea-faring persons in

deteitation, as impious and profane; and fortify-
ing their own harbours, they denied strangers ad-
mittance into them b; and it was in the decline of
their power, that they again opened their ports,
and resumed any communication with foreigners.

OflhePhe- THE character and situation of the Phenicians
nicians.

nlca were as favourable to the spirit of commerce and

discovery as those of the Egyptians were adverse
to it. They had no distinguishing peculiarity in
their manners and institutions ; they were not ad-
dieted to any singular and unsocial form of super-
flition; they could mingle with other nations with-
out scruple or reluctance. The territory which they
pofieffed was neither large nor fertile. Commerce
was the only source from which they could derive
opulence or power. Accordingly, the trade car-
ried on by the Phenicians of Sidon and Tyre, was
more extensive and enterprizing than that of any
slate in the ancient world. The genius of the Phe-
nicians, as well as the objea of their policy and
the spirit of their laws, were entirely commercial.
They were a people of merchants who aimed at
the empire of the sea, and atually possessed it.
Their hips not only frequented all the ports in the
Mediterranean, but they were the firit who ven-
tured beyond the ancient boundaries of navigation,
and pafling the Streights of Gades, visited the
western coasts of Spain and Africa. In many of
the places to which they resorted, they planted co-
lonies, and communicated to the rude inhabitants
some knowledge of their arts and improvements.
While they extended their discoveries towards the
north and the weft, they did not neglect to pene-
trate into the more opulent and fertile regions of

b Diodi. Sicul. lib. i. p. 78. Ed. Weffelingi. Amn. 1756.
Strabo, lib. xvii. p. i !4z. Ed. Amft. 1707.

the

the south and east. Having rendered themselves B O o K
masters of several commodious harbours towards I.
the bottom of the Arabian Gulph, they, after the
example of the Egyptians, established a regular
intercourse with Arabia and the continent of India
on the one hand, and with the eastern coast of
Africa on the other. From these countries they
imported many valuable commodities, unknown
to the reft of the world, and, during a long period,
engrossed that lucrative branch of commerce with-
out a rival c.

THE vast wealth which the Phenicians acquired of the

by monopolizing the trade carried on in the RedJews.
Sea, incited their neighbours the Jews, under the
prosperous reigns of David and Solomon, to aim
at being admitted to some share of it. This they
.obtained, partly by their conquest of Idumea, which
firetches along the Red Sea, and partly by their
alliance with Hiram king of Tyre. Solomon fitted
out fleets, which, under the direction of Phenician
pilots, failed from the Red Sea to Tarshish and
Ophir, which it is probable were ports in India and
Africa that their conductors were accustomed to
frequent, and returned with such valuable cargoes
as suddenly diffused wealth and splendour through
the kingdom of Israel d. But the singular inifitu-
tions of the Jews, the observance of which was en-
joined by their divine legislator, with an intention
of preserving them a separate people, uninfe&ed
by idolatry, formed a national character incapable
of that open and liberal intercourse with strangers
which commerce requires. Accordingly, this un-
social genius of the people, together with the dif-
afters which befell the kingdom of Israel, prevent-

c See N O T E I. at the End of the Volume.
d Memoire fur le Pays d'Ophir par M. D'Anville Mem. de
rAcadem. des Infcript. &c. tom. xxx. 83.

ed

o o0 K ed the commercial spirit which their monarchs Ia-

boured to introduce, and to cherish, from spread-
ing among them. The Jews cannot be numbered
among the nations which contributed to improve
navigation, or to extend discovery.
Of the Car. BUT though the instructions and example of the

aginian. Phenicians were unable to mould the manners and

temper of the Jews, in opposition to the tendency
of their laws, they transmitted the commercial fpi-
rit with facility, and in full vigour, to their own
descendants the Carthaginians. The commonwealth
of Carthage applied to trade and to naval affairs,
with no less ardour, ingenuity, and success, than
its parent Rate. Carthage early rivalled, and oon
surpassed Tyre, in opulence and power, but seems
not to have aimed at obtaining any share in the
commerce with India. The Phenicians had en-
grossed this, and had such a command of the Red
Sea as secured to them the exclusive possession of
that lucrative branch of trade. The commercial
activity of the Carthaginians was exerted in ano-
ther diretion. Without contending for the trade
of the ears with their mother-country, they ex-
tended their iavigation chiefly towards the weft
and north. Following the course which the Pheni-
cians had opened, they passed the Streights of
Gades, and puthing their discoveries far beyond
theirs, not only visited all the coafis of Spain, but
those of Gaul, and penetrated at last into Britain.
At the fame time that they acquired knowledge of
new countries in this part of the globe, they gra-
dually carried their researches towards the south.
They made considerable progress, by land, into
the interior provinces of Africa, traded with some
of them, and fiibjeaed others to their empire.
They failed along the western coast of that great
continent, almolt to the tropic of Cancer, and

planted

planted several colonies, in order to civilize the B o o K
natives, and accuftoi them to commerce. They I.
discovered the Fortunate Islands, now known by - ~
the name of the Canaries, the utmost boundary of
ancient navigation in the western ocean e.

NOR was the progress of the Phenicians and

Carthaginians in their knowledge of the globe,
owing entirely to the desire of extending their
trade from one country to another. Commerce
was followed by its usual effects among both
these people. It awakened curiosity, enlarged the
ideas and desires of men, and incited them to
bold enterprises. Voyages were undertaken, the
sole obje of which was to discover new coun-
tries, and explore unknown seas. Such, during
the prosperous age of the Carthaginian republic,
were the famous navigations of Hanno and Hi-
milco. Both their fleets were equipped by autho-
rity of the senate, and -at public expence. Hanno
was directed to fleer towards the south, along
the coast of Africa, and seems to have advanc-
ed mutch. nearer the equinoaial line tan any for-
mer navigator . Hinilco had it in charge to
proceed towards the north, and to examine the
wefter coasts of the European continent g. Of
the fame nature was the extraordinary navigation
of the Phenicians round Africa. A Phenician
fleet, we are told, fitted out by Necho king of
Egypt, took its departure about fix hundred and
four years before the Christian era, from a port
in the 'Red Sea,, doubled the fouthern-promontory

e Plinii Nat. Hilt. lib. vi . . edit. in ufum lDelph.
4to0. 685.

f Plinii Nat. Hist. lib. v. c. . Hannonis Periplus ap.
Geograph minores, edit. Hudfoni, vol. i. . .

g Plinii Nat. Hist. lib. ii. c. 67. Fe-tus Avienus apu4

Bochart. Geogr. facr. lib. i. c. 60. p. 652. per. vol. iii.
L. Bat. 1707.

of

B O OK of Africa, and, after a voyage of three years, re-

I. turned by the Streights of Gades, to the mouth of
"' the Nile h Eudoxus of Cyzicus is said to have

held the fame course, and to have accomplihed
the fame arduous undertaking i.

THESE voyages, if performed in the manner

which I have related, may justly be reckoned the
greatest effort of navigation in the ancient world
and if we attend to the imperfet state of the art
at that time, it is difficult to determine, whether
we should most admire the courage and sagacity
with which the design was formed, or the con-
duct and good fortune with which it was executed.
But unfortunately, all the original and authentic
accounts of the Phenician and Carthaginian voy-
ages, whether undertaken by public authority, or
in prosecution of their private trade, have perish-
ed. The information which we receive concern-
ing them from the Greek and Roman authors,
is not only obscure and inaccurate, but, if we
except a hort narrative of Hanno's expedition,
is of suspicious authority k. Whatever acquaint-
ance with the remote regions of the earth the
Phenicians or Carthaginians may have acquired,
was concealed from the reft of mankind with a
mercantile jealousy. Every thing relative to the
course of their navigation was not only a mystery
of trade, but a secret of itate. Extraordinary fasts
are recorded concerning their solicitude to prevent
other nations from penetrating into what they
wished hould remain undivulged . Many of their
discoveries seem, accordingly, to have been scarcely
known beyond the precints of their own states.

h Herodot. lib. iv. c. 42,
i Plinii Nat. Hist. lib. ii. c. 67.
k See NOTE II.
1 Strab. Geogr. lib. iii. p. 265. lib. xviii. p. 1154.

The

The navigation round Africa, in particular, is re- B o o K.
corded by the Greek and Roman writers, rather I.
as a strange amusing tale, which they either did V
not comprehend, or did not believe, than as a
real tranfa&tion, which enlarged their knowledge
and influenced their opinion m. As neither the
progress of the Phenician and Carthaginian dif-
coveries, nor the extent of their navigation, were
communicated to the reft of mankind, all me-
morials of their extraordinary skill in naval affairs
seem, in a great measure, to have perished, when
the maritime power of the former was annihi-
lated by Alexander's conquest of Tyre, and the
empire of the latter was overturned by the Roman
arms.

LEA VING, then, the obscure and pompous ac- Of the

counts of the Phenician and Carthaginian voy-Greeks
ages to the curiosity and conjetures of antiqua-
ries, history must reft satisfied with relating the
progress of navigation and dicovery among the
Greeks and Romans, which, though less splendid,
is better ascertained. It is evident that the Pheni-
cians, who infiruded the Greeks in other useful
sciences and arts, did not communicate to them
that extensive knowledge of navigation which
they themselves poffefled; nor did the Romans
imbibe that commercial spirit and ardour for
discovery which distinguished the Carthaginians.
Though Greece be almost encompassed by the
sea, which formed many spacious bays and com-
modious harbours, though it be surrounded by a
vast number of fertile islands, yet, notwithftand-
ing such a favourable situation, which seemed to
invite that ingenious people to apply themselves
to navigation, it was long before this art attain-
ed any degree of perfection among them. Their
early voyages, the objet of which was piracy

t See NOTE III.

rather

B o o Krather than commerce, were so inconsiderable, that

1. the expedition of the Argonauts from the coast
^^ of Theflaly to the Euxine ea, appeared such an

amazing effort of kill and courage, as entitled
the condutors of it to be ranked among the de-
migods, and exalted the vessel in which they failed
to a place among the heavenly confiellations.
Even at a later period, when the Greeks engaged
in their famous enterprize against Troy, their
knowledge in naval affairs seems not to have been
much improved. According to the account of
Homer, the only poet to whom history ventures
to appeal, and who, by his scrupulous accuracy in
describing the manners and arts of early ages,
merits this difiin&ion, the science of navigation,
at that time, had hardly advanced beyond its
rudest Rate. The Greeks in the heroic age were
unacquainted with the use of iron, the most ser-
viceable of all the metals, without which no con-
fiderable progress was ever made in the mechanical
arts. Their velfels were of inconsiderable bur-
then, and mofily without decks. These had only
one mast, which they erected or took down at
pleasure. They were firangers to the use of an-
chors. All their operations in failing were clumsy
and unskilful. They turned their observation to-
wards fiars, which were improper for regulating
their course, and their mode of observing them
was inaccurate and fallacious. When they had
finished a voyage they drew their paltry barks
ashore, as savages do their canoes, and they re-
mained on dry land until the season of returning to
sea approached. It is not then in the early or
heroic ages of Greece, that we can expect to ob-
serve the science of navigation, and the spirit of
discovery making any considerable progress. Dur-
ing that period of disorder and ignorance, a thou-
sand causes concurred in refiraining curiosity and
enterprize within very narrow bounds.

BUT

BUT the Greeks advanced with rapidity to a B o K

itate of greater civilization and refinement. Go- I.
vernment, in its mofi liberal and perfet form,
began to be established in the communities of
Greece; equal laws and regular police were gra-
dually introduced; the sciences and arts that are
useful or ornamental in life were carried to a high
pitch of improvement, and several of the Grecian
commonwealths applled to commerce with such
ardour and success, that they were confidered,
in the ancient world, as maritime powers of the
first rank. Even then, however, the naval vito-
ries of the Greeks must be ascribed rather to the
native spirit of the people, and to that courage
which the enjoyment of liberty inspires, than to
any extraordinary progress in the science of navi-
gation. In the Persian war, those exploits which
the eloquence of the Greek historians have render-
ed so famous, were performed by fleets, composed
chiefly of vessels that were open, and without
decks n; the crews of which rushed forward with
impetuous valour, but little art, to board those
of the enemy. In the war of Peloponnefus, their
Ihips seem still to have been of inconsiderable bur-
then and of small force. The extent of their trade
was in proportion to this low condition of their
marine. The maritime ates of Greece hardly
carried on any commerce beyond the limits of the
Mediterranean sea. Their chief intercourse was
with the colonies of their countrymen, planted in
the lesser Asia, in Italy and Sicily. They some-
times visited the ports of Egypt, of Gaul, and of
Thrace, or, passing through the HeIIefpont, they
traded with the countries situated around the Eux-
ine ea. Amazing inflances occur of their igno-
rance, even of those countries, which lay within
the narrow precincts to which their navigation was

Thucyd. lib. i. c. 4.

confined.

B O O K confined. When the Greeks had assembled- their

I. combined fleet againit Xerxes at Egina, they
'-r thought it unadvifable to fail to Samos, because

they believed the distance between that island and
Egina to be as great as the distance between Egina
and the Pillars of Hercules . They were either
utterly unacquainted with all the parts of the globe
beyond the Mediterranean sea, or what knowledge
they had of them was founded on conjecture, or
derived from the informations of a few persons,
whom curiosity and the love of science had
prompted to travel by land into the Upper Asia,
or by ea into Egypt, the ancient feats of wis-
dom and arts. After all that the Greeks learn-
ed from them, they appear to have been igno-
rant of the most important fats, on which an
accurate and scientific knowledge of the globe is
founded.

THE expedition of Alexander the Great into the

east, considerably enlarged the sphere of naviga-
tion and of geographical knowledge among the
Greeks. That extraordinary man, notwithftand-
ing the violent passions which incited him, at ome
times, to the wildest actions, and the most extra-
vagant enterprises, possessed talents which fitted
him not only to conquer, but to govern the world.
He was capable of framing those bold and original
schemes of policy, which give a new form to hu-
man affairs. The revolution in commerce, brought
about by the force of his genius, is hardly in-
ferior to that revolution in empire, occasioned by
the success of his arms. It is probable, that the
opposition and efforts of the republic of Tyre,
which checked him so long in the career of his
viEtories, gave Alexander an opportunity of ob-
serving the vast resources of a maritime power,
and conveyed to him some idea of the immense

o Herodot. lib. viii. c. 132.

wealth

wealth which the Tyrians derived from their corn- B O O K
merce, especially that with the East Indies. As I
soon as he had accomplished the deftrution of "
that fate, and reduced Egypt to fubjeetion, he
forred the plan of rendering the empire, which
he proposed to establish, the centre of commerce
as well as the feat of dominion. With this
view he founded a great city, which he honoured
with his own name, near one of the mouths of
the river Nile, that by the Mediterranean ea,
and the neighbourhood of the Arabian Gulf, it
might command the trade both of the east and
weft P. This situation was chosen with such dif-
cernment, that Alexandria oon became the chief
commercial city in the world. Not only during
the subsistence of the Grecian empire in Egypt and
in the east, but amidst all the fucceflive revoluti-
ons in those countries, from the time of the Ptole-
mies to the discovery of the navigation by the
Cape of Good Hope, commerce, particularly that
of the East Indies, continued to flow in the chan-
nel which the sagacity and foresight of Alexander
had marked out for it.

His ambition was not satisfied with having

opened to the Greeks a communication with India
by sea; he aspired to the sovereignty of those re-
gions which furnished the reft of mankind with
so many precious commodities, and corrduted his
army thither by land. Enterprising, however, as
he was, he may be said rather to have discovered,
than to have conquered that country. He did
not, in his progress towards the east, advance be-
yond the banks of the rivers. that fall into the
Indus, which is now the western boundary of the
vast continent of India. Amidst the wild exploits
which distinguish this part of his history, he pursued

P Strab. Geogr. lib. xvii. p. 1143. 149.

measures

p

B OO K measures that mark the superiority of his genius,

I- as well as the extent of his views. He had pene-
"'J trated as far into India as to confirm his opinion of

its commercial importance, and to perceive that
immense wealth might be derived from interceurfe
with a country, where the arts of elegance having
been more early cultivated, were arrived at greater
perfe&ion than in any other part of the earth r.
Full of this idea, he resolved to examine the course
of navigation from the mouth of the Indus to the
bottom of the Persian Gulf; and if it hould be
found praticable, to establish a regular communi-
cation between them. In order to effect this, he
proposed to remove the catarats, with which, the
jealousy of the Persians, and their aversion to cor-
refpondence with foreigners, had obftruced the
entrance into the Euphrates ; to carry the com-
modities of the east up that river, and the Tigris,
which unites with it, into the interior parts of his
Asiatic dominions; while, by the way of the
Arabian Gulf, and the river Nile, they might he
conveyed to Alexandria, and difiributed to the
reft of the world. Nearchus, an officer of emi-
nent abilities, was entrusted with the command
of the fleet fitted out for this expedition. He
performed this voyage, which was deemed an
enterprise so arduous and important, that Alex-
ander reckoned it one of the most extraordinary
events which distinguished his reign. Inconfider-
able as it may now appear, it was, at that time,
an undertaking of no little merit and difficulty.
In the prosecution of it, striking instances occur
of the small progress which the Greeks had
made in naval knowledge t. Having never failed

r Strab. Geogr. lib. xv. p. 1036. QCurtius, lib. xviii.
c. 9.

S Strab. Geogr. lib. xvi. p. 1075.
t See NOTE IV.

beyond

beyond the bounds of the Mediterranean, where B o o K
the ebb and flow of the ea are hardly perceptible, I
when they first observed this phenomenon at the
mouth of the Indus, it appeared to them a prodi-
gy, by which the gods testified the displeasure of
Heaven against their enterprise t. During their
whole course, they seem never to have loft fight of
land, but followed the bearings off the coast so ser-
vilely, that they could not much avail themselves of
those periodical winds, which facilitate navigation
in the Indian ocean. Accordingly, they spent no
less than ten months w in performing this voyage,
which, from the mouth of the Indus to that of the
Persian gulf, does not exceed twenty degrees. It
is probable, that amidst the violent convulsions,
and frequent revolutions in the East, occasioned by
the conteits amongthe successors of Alexander, the
navigation to India, by the course which Nearchus
had opened, was discontinued. The Indian trade
carried on at Alexandria, not only subsisted, but
was so much improved under the Grecian monarchs
of Egypt, that it proved a great source of the wealth
which diftinguilhed that kingdom.

THE progress which the Romans made in navi- of the Ro-

gation and discovery, was still more inconsiderable mans.
than that of the Greeks. The genius of the Ro-
man people, their military education, and the fpi-
rit of their laws, concurred in estranging them from
commerce and naval affairs. It was the necefiity of
opposing a formidable rival, not the desire of ex-
tending trade, which first prompted them to aim
at maritime power. Though they oon perceived
that, in order to acquire the universal dominion as-
ter which they aspired, it was necessary to render
themselves masters of the sea, they still confidered

t See NOTE V. w Plin. Hist. Nat. lib. vi. c. 23.
VOL.. I. C the

B OO K the naval service as a subordinate fiation, and re-

'_'^ served for it filch citizens as were not of a rank to

be admitted into the legions x. In the history of
tlie Roman republic, hardly one event occurs, that
marks attention to navigation any farther than as it
was instrumental towards conquelt. When the Ro-
man -valour and discipline had subdued all the mari-
time fiates known in the ancient world; when Car-
thage, Greece, and Egypt, had fibmitted to their
power, the Romans did not imbibe the commercial
ipirit of the conquered nations. Among that peo-
ple of soldiers, to have applied to trade would have
been deemed a degradation of a Roman citizen.
They abandoned the mechanical arts, commerce,
and navigation, to laves, to freedmen, to provin-
cials, and to citizensof the lowest clas. Even as-
ter the subversion of liberty, when the severity and
haughtiness of ancient manners began to abate,
commerce did not rife into high estimation among
the Romans. The trade of Greece, Egypt, and
the other conquered countries, continued to be car-
ried on in their ancient channels, after they were
reduced into the form of Roman provinces. As
'Rome was the capital of the world, and the feat of
government, all the wealth and valuable produc-
tions of the provinces flowed naturally thither. The
Romans, satisfied with this, seem to have suffered
commerce to remain almost entirely in the hands of
the natives of the respective countries. The extent,
however, of the Roman power, which reached
over almost the whole known world, the vigilant
infpedion of the Roman rnagi;tates, and the spirit
of the Roman government, no lets intelligent than
adive, gave fch additional security to commerce,
as animated it with new vigour. The union among
nations was never so entire, nor tile intercourse io
perse&, as within the bounds of this v.ft empire.

x Polyb. lib. v.

Commerce,

Commerce, under their dominion, was not ob- B 0 K
ftru&ed by the jealousy of rival Rfates, interrupted .
by frequent hostilities, or limited by partial re-
firieions. One superintending power moved and
regulated the industry of mankind, and enjoyed the
fruits of their joint efforts.

NAV I G AT N felt this influence, and improved

under it. As oon as the Romans acquired a taste
for the luxuries of the East, the trade with India
through Egypt was pushed with new vigour, and
carried on to greater extent. By frequenting the
Indian continent, navigators became acquainted
with the periodical course of the winds, which, in
the ocean that separates Africa from India, blow
with little variation during one half of the year
from the east, and during the other half fix with
equal steadiness in the weft. Encouraged by ob-
serving this, they abandoned their ancient flow and
dangerous course along the coast, and as soon as the
western monsoon set in, took their departure from
Ocelis, at the mouth of the Arabian gulf, and
firetched boldly across the ocean Y. The uniform
direction of the wind, supplying the place of the
compass, and rendering the guidance of the fiars less
neceIfary, conducted them to the port of Mufiris,
on the western shore of the Indian continent. There
they took on board their cargo, and-returning with
the eaitern monsoon, finished their voyage to the
Arabian gulf within the year. This part of India,
now known by the name of the Malabar coast,
seems to have been the utmost limit of ancient navi-
gation in that quarter of the globe. What imper-
fedt knowledge the ancients had of the immense
countries which stretch beyond this towards the east,
they received from a few adventurers, who had vi-
fited them by land. Their excursions were not ex-
tensive, and it is probable, that while the Roman

Y Plin. Hist. Nat. lib. vi. c. 23.

C 2 inter-

B O O K intercoirfe with India subsisted, no traveller ever
^_x penetrated further than to the banks of the Gan-

ges . The fleets from Egypt which traded at
Mufiris were loaded, it is true, with the spices and
other rich commodities of the continent and islands
of the farther India ; but these were brought to that
port, which became the fiaple of this commerce,
by the Indians themselves, in canoes made of one
tree a. The Egyptian and Roman merchants, fa-
tisfied with acquiring these commodities in this
manner, did not think it necessary to explore un-
known seas, and venture upon a dangerous naviga-
tion, in quest of the countries which produced them.
But though the difcoveriesofthe Romans in India
were so limited, their commerce there was such as
will appear considerable, even to the present age,
in which the Indian trade has been extended far be-
yond the practice or conception of any preceding
period. We are informed by one author of cre-
dit b, that the commerce with India drained the
Roman empire every year of more than four hun-
dred thousand pounds; and by another, that one
hundred and twenty hips failed annually from the
Arabian Gulf to that country c.

Discoveries THE discovery of this new method of failing to
of the anci- ipoe n
ents by India is the molt considerable improvement in navi-
laud. gation made during the continuance of the Roman

power. But in ancient times, the knowledge of
countries was acquired more by land than by sea d;
and the Romans, from their peculiar disinclination
to naval affairs, may be said to have neglected to-
tally the latter, though a more easy and expediti-
ous method of discovery. The progress, however,
of their vitorious armies contributed greatly to
extend discovery by land, and even opened the
navigation of new and unknown eas. Previous to

z Strab. Geogr. lib. xv. p. oo6. Ioo1. See NOTE VI.
a Plin. Nat. Hilf. lib. vi. c. 26. b Ibid.
c Strab. Geogr. lib. ii. p. 179. d See NOTE VII.

the

the Roman conquerss, the civilized nations of an- B K
tiquity had no communication with those countries a
in Europe, which now form its most opulent and
powerful kingdoms. The interior parts of Spain
and of Gaul were little known. Britain, separated
from the reft of the world, had never been visited,
except by its neighbours the Gauls, and by a few
Carthaginian merchants. The name of Germany
had scarcely been heard of. Into all there countries
the arms of the Romans penetrated. They entirely
subdued Spain and Gaul; they conquered the
greatest and most fertile part of Britain ; they ad-
vanced into Germany, as far as the banks of the
river Elbe. In Africa, they acquired a confidera-
ble knowledge of the provinces, which stretch
along the Mediterranean ea, from Egypt westward
to the straits of Gades. In Asia, they not only sub-
jeted to their power most of the provinces which
composed the Persian and Macedonian empires,
but, after their victories over Mithridates.and Ti-
granes, they seem to have surveyed the countries
contiguous to the Euxine and Caspian eas, more
accurately than they had been formerly, and to
have carried on a more extensive trade than that of
the Greeks with the opulent and commercial na-
tions, then feated around the Euxine sea.

FR o M this fuccina survey of discovery and navi- Imperfeci-

gatidn, which I have traced from the earliest dawn onoapigel
of historical knowledge to the full establishment of knowledge

among the

the Roman dominion, their progress appears to be ancients.
wonderfully flow. It seems neither adequate to
what we might have expected from the activity
and enterprise of the human mind, norto what
might have been performed by the power of the
great empires that fucceflively governed the world.
If we reject accounts that are fabulous and obscure;
if we adhere steadily to the light and information of

authentic

B O O K authentic history, without substituting in its place

I. the conjetures of fancy, or the dreams of etymo-

logifts, we mult conclude, that the knowledge
which the ancients had acquired of the habitable
globe was extremely confined. In Europe, the
extensive provinces in the eastern part of Germany
were hardly known to them. They were almost
totally unacquainted with the vast countries which
are now subjeCt to the kings of Denmark, Sweden,
Prussia, Poland, and the Ruffian empire. The
more barren regions, that firetch within the
arctic circle, were quite unexplored. In Africa,
their researches did not extend far beyond the pro-
vinces which border on the Mediterranean, and
tlofe situated on the western shore of the Arabian
gulf. In Asia, they were unacquainted, as I
formerly observed, with all the fertile and opulent
countries beyond the Ganges, which furnish the
morl valuable commodities that, in modern times,
have been the great object of the European com-
merce with India ; nor do they seem to have ever
penetrated into those immense regions occupied by
the wandering tribes, which they called by the ge-
neral name of Sarmatians or Scythians, and now
pofieffed by Tartars of various denominations, and
by the Asiatic fubjeds of Rufia.

A rernarks- Bu T there is one opinion, that universally pre-
ble proof of
this. vailed among the ancients, which conveys a more

striking idea of the finall progress they had made in
the knowledge of the habitable globe, than can be
derived from any detail of their discoveries. They
supposed the earth to be divided into five regions,
which they distinguished by the name of Zones.
Two of these, which were nearest the poles, they
termed frigid zones, and believed that the extreme
cold which reigned perpetually there, rendered them
tuiinhabitable. Another, feated under the line, and

extending

extending on either fide towards the tropics, they B o o K
called the torrid zone, and imagined it to be so .
burnt up with unremitting heat, as to be equally
destitute of inhabitants. On the two other zones,
which occupy the remainder of the earth, they be-
flowed the appellation of temperate, and taught
that these, being the only regions in which life
could subsist, were allotted to man for his habita-
tion. This wild opinion was not a conceit of the
uninformed vulgar, or a fanciful fiction of the po-
ets, but a fyflem adopted by the most enlightened
philosophers,- the most accurate historians and geo-
graphers in Greece and Rome. According to this
theory, a vast portion of the habitable earth
was pronounced to be unfit for fuflaining the hu-
man species. Those fertile and populous regions
within the torrid zone, which are now known not
only to yield their own inhabitants the necessaries
and comforts of life, with most luxuriant profusion,
but to communicate their superfluous itores to the
reft of the world, were supposed to be the mansion
of perpetual sterility and desolation. .As all the
parts of the globe, which the ancients had disco-
vered, lay within the northern temperate zone,
their opinion that the other temperate zone was
filled with inhabitants, was founded on reasoning
and conjecture, not on discovery. They even be-
lieved that, by the intolerable heat of the torrid
zone, such an insuperable barrier was placed be-
tween the two temperate regions of the earth, as
would prevent for ever any intercourse between their
refpetive inhabitants. Thus this extravagant the-
ory not only proves that the ancients were unac-
quainted with the true fiate of the globe, but it
tended to render their ignorance of it perpetual, by
representing all attempts towards opening a com-
munication with the remote regions of the earth, as
utterly impraCticable f.

f See NOTE VIII.

BUT,

B O O K Bu T, however imperfect or inaccurate the geo-
__-w- graphical knowledge which the Greeks and Ro-

mans had acquired may appear, in refpe& of the
present improved slate of that science, their pro-
grefs in discovery will seem considerable, and the
extent to which they carried navigation and com-
merce must be reckoned great, when compared
with the ignorance of early times. As long as the
Roman empire retained such vigour as to preserve
its authority over the conquered nations, and to
keep them united, it was an objec of public po-
lice, as well as of private curiosity, to examine and
describe the countries which compoed this great
body. Even when the other sciences began to de-
cline, geography, enriched with new observations,
and receiving some acceflion from the experience of
every age, and the reports of every traveller, con-
tinued to improve. It attained to the highest point
of perfection and accuracy to which it ever arrived
in the ancient world, by the indufiry and genius of

improve- Ptolemy the philosopher. He flourished in the fe-
ments in cond century of the ChriRian ra, and published a
gby Ptoley. description of the terrefirial globe, more ample and

exa& than that of any of his predecessors.

'The inv- BUT, oon after, violent convulsions began to
Lion ofthe hake the Roman Rate; the fatal ambition or ca-
Romr by m price of Conlantine, by changing the feat of go-
barous na- vernment, divided and weakened its force; the
tions. barbarous nations, which Providence prepared as

its instruments to overturn the mighty fabric of the
Roman power, began to afiemble and to muster their
arms on its frontier ; the empire tottered to its fall.
During this decline and old age of the Roman slate,
it was impoflible that the sciences Ihould go on im-
proving. The efforts of genius were, at that pe-:
riod, as languid and feeble as those of government.

From

From the time of Ptolemy, no considerable addi- B o o K
tion seems to have been made to geographical know-
ledge, nor did any important revolution happen in
trade, excepting that Conflantinople, by its advan-
tageous situation, and the encouragement of the
eafiern emperors, became a commercial city of the
firfi note.

AT length, the clouds which had been so long Effeasof

their con-

gathering round the Roman empire, burfi into a quests on
itorm. The barbarous nations rushed in withirre- commercial
fifible impetuosity, and, in the general wreck, oc-
cafioned by the inundation which overwhelmed Eu-
rope, the arts, sciences, inventions and difcove-
riCs of the Romans, perished and disappeared g. All
the various tribes, which conquered and fettled in
the different provinces of the Roman empire, were
uncivilized, firangers to letters, destitute of arts,
unacquainted with regular government, fubordina-
tion, or laws. The manners and inflitutions of
some of them were so rude and barbarous, as to be
hardly compatible with a ate of social union.
Europe, when occupied by fich inhabitants, may
be said to have returned to a second infancy, and
had to begin anew its career in improvement, fci-
ence, and civility. The firit effec of the fettle-
ment of those barbarous invaders was to dissolve the
union by which the Roman power had cemented
mankind together. They parcelled out Europe into
many small and independent fates, differing from
each other in language and cufoms. No inter-
course subsisted between the members of those di-
vided and hoffile communities. Accustomed to a
simple mode of life, and averse to indutfry, they
had few wants to supply, and no superfluities to
dispose of. The names of stranger and of enemy
became once more words of the fame import.

g Hil. of Charles V. vol. i. p. 18. 7z.

Cuoms

B OO K Customs every-where prevailed, and even lasss

a ,_, were eablifhed, which rendered it disagreeable

and dangerous to visit any foreign country h. Cities,
in which alone an extensive commerce can be car-
ried on, were few, inconsiderable, and destitute of
those immunities which produce security or excite
enterprise. The sciences, on which geography
and navigation are founded, were not cultivated.
The accounts of ancient improvements and disco-
veries, contained in the Greek and Roman authors,
were neglected or mifunderflood. The knowledge
of remote regions was loft, their situation, their
commodities, and almost their names, were un-
known.

Commer- ONE circumfiance prevented commercial inter-
cial know-
1dge till course with distant nations from ceasing altogether,
prelervedin Constantinople, though often threatened by the
empire, fierce invaders, who spread desolation over the reft

of Europe, was so fortunate as to escape their de-
ftruive rage. In that city, the knowledge of an-
cient arts and discoveries was preserved ; a taste for
splendour and elegance subsisted; the productions
,and luxuries of foreign countries were in request;
and commerce continued to flourish there, when it
was extinct in every other part of Europe. The ci-
tizens of Conflantinople did not confine their trade
to the ilands of the Archipelago, or to the adjacent
coasts of Asia ; they took a wider range, and fol-
lowing the course which the ancients had marked
out, imported the commodities of the East Indies
from Alexandria. When Egypt was torn from
the Roman empire by the Arabians, the industry
of the Greeks discovered a new channel, by
which the produtions of India might be convey-
ed to Constantinople. They were carried up

h Hist. of Cha les V. vol. i. p. 77. 327.

the

the Indus, as far as that great river is navigable; B o o K
thence they were transported by land to the banks
of the river Oxus, and proceeded down its
fiream to the Caspian sea. There they entered
the Volga, and failing up it, were carried by
land to the Tanais, which conduaed them into the
Euxine ea, where vefiels from Confiantinople
waited their arrival h. This extraordinary and te-
dious mode of conveyance merits attention, not
only as a proof of the violent passion which the
inhabitants of Confiantinople had conceived for
the luxuries of the east, and as a specimen of the
ardour and ingenuity with which they carried on
commerce, but because it demonfirates, that, dur-
ing the ignorance which reigned in the reft of
Europe, an extensive knowledge of remote coun-
tries was fill preserved in the capital of the Greek
empire.

AT the fame time, a gleam of 'light and know- and amo.n

ledge broke in upon the east. The Arabians, hav- ans.
ing contrated some relish for the sciences of the
people whose empire they had contributed to over-
turn, translated the books of several of the Greek
philosophers into their own language. One of the
first was that valuable work of Ptolemy, which
have already mentioned. The fudy of geography
became, of consequence, an early objet of atten-
tion to the Arabians. But that acute and ingenious
people cultivated chiefly the speculative and fcienti-
sic parts of geography. In order to ascertain the
figure and dimensions of the terreitrial globe, they
applied the principles of geometry, they had re-
course to afironomical observations, they employed
experiments and operations, which Europe, in more
enlightened times, has been proud to adopt and to
imitate. At that period, however, the fame of
the improvements made by the Arabians did not

h Ramufio, vol. i. p. 372. F.

reach

B O O K reach Europe. The knowledge of their difcove-

. _,ries was reserved for ages capable of comprehend-

ing and of perfectingthem.

Revival of BY degrees, the calamities and desolation brought
commerce upon the weern provinces of the Roman empire,
and naviga-
tion in Eu- by its barbarous conquerors, were forgotten, and
rope. in some measure repaired. The rude tribes which

fettled there, acquiring insensibly ome idea of re-
gular government, and some relish for the funti-
ons and comforts of civil life, Europe began to
awake from its torpid and unative state. The
firit symptoms of revival were discerned in Italy.
The northern tribes which took possession of this
country, made progress in improvement with great-
er rapidity than the people fettled in other parts of
Europe. Various causes, which it is not the object
of this work to enumerate or explain, concurred in
refloring liberty and independence to the cities of
Italy'. The acquisition of these routed indufiry,
and gave motion and vigour to all the active
powers of the human mind. Foreign commerce
revived, navigation was attended to and improved.
Constantinople became the chief mart to which the
Italians retorted. There they not only met with a
favourable reception, but obtained such mercantile
privileges as enabled them to carry on trade with
great advantage. They were supplied both with
the precious commodities of the east, and with
many curious manufactures, the product of the
ancient arts and ingenuity that fiill subsisted among
the Greeks. As the labour and expence of convey-
ing the produtions of India to Contfantinople by
that long and indirect course which I have described,
rendered them extremely rare, and of an exorbitant
price, the indufiry of the Italians discovered other

i Hist. of Charles V. vol. i. p. 33.

methods,

methods of procuring them in greater abundance, B o o K
and at an easier rate. They sometimes purchased
them in Aleppo, Tripoli, and other ports on the
coast of Syria, to which they were brought by a
route not unknown to the ancients. They were
conveyed from India by ea, up the Persian Gulf,
and ascending the Euphrates and Tigris, as far as
Bagdat, were carried by land across the Desert to
Palmyra, and from thence to the towns on the
Mediterranean. But from the length of the journey,
and the dangers to which the caravans were exposed,
this proved always a tedious, and often a preca-
rious mode of conveyance. At length, the Sol-
dans of Egypt, having renewed the commerce
with India in its ancient channel, by the Arabian
Gulf, the Italian merchants, notwithilanding the
violent antipathy to each other with which Chrifli-
ans and the followers of Mahomet were then pof-
sessed, repaired to Alexandria, and enduring, from
the love of gain, the insolence and exadions of
the Mahometans, established a lucrative trade in
that port. From that period, the commercial
-fpiiit of Italy became ative and enterprising. Ve-
nice, Genoa, Pisa, rose from inconsiderable towns,
to be populous and wealthy cities. Their naval
power increaed; their vessels frequented all the
ports in the Mediterranean ; they ventured some-
times beyond the Streights ; visited the maritime
towns of Spain, France, the Low Countries, and
England; and, by distributing their commodities
over Europe, began to communicate to its various
nations some knowledge of the valuable produc-
tions of the east, as well as some ideas of manu-
fatures and arts, with which they had hitherto
been unacquainted.

WHILE the cities of Italy were thus advancing Their pro-
in their career of improvement, an event happen- greifavo r-

ed by the
ed, the most extraordinary perhaps in the history Crutades,

of

B o0 K of mankind, which, instead of retarding the comr

-_, mercial progress of the Italians, rendered it more

rapid. The martial fiirit of the Europeans, heigh-
tened and inflamed by religious zeal, prompted
them to deliver the Holy Land from the dominion
of infidels. Vast armies, composed of all the na-
tions of Europe, marched towards Asia, upon this
wild enterprise. The Genoese, the Pifans, and Ve-
netians furnished the transports which carried them
thither. They supplied them with provisions and
military flores. Betide the immense fums which
they received on this account, they obtained com-
mercial privileges and efablifhments, of great
consequence in the settlements which the Crusaders
made in Palestine, and in other provinces of Asia
From those sources, prodigious wealth flowed into
the cities which I have mentioned. A proportional
increase of power accompanied this, and by the
end of the Holy War, Venice, in particular, be-
came a great maritime slate, possessing an extensive
commerce, and ample territories k Italy was not
the only country in which the Crusades contributed
to revive and diffuse such a spirit as prepared Europe
for future discoveries. By their expeditions into
Asia, the other European nations became well ac-
quainted with remote regions, which formerly they
knew only by name, or by the reports of ignorant
and credulous pilgrims. They had an opportunity
of observing the manners, the arts, and the accorn-
modations of people more polished than themselves.
This intercourse between the eafi and weft subsist-
ed almost two centuries. The adventurers, who
returned from Asia, communicated to their country-
men the ideas which they had acquired, and the ha-
bits of life they had contracted by visiting more
refined nations. The Europeans began to be fenfi--

k Effaide 1'HItoire du Commerce de Venife, p. 52, &c.

blh

ble of wants with which they were formerly unac- B o o K
quainted; new desires were excited; and such a _
taste for the commodities and arts of other countries
gradually spread among them, that they not only
encouraged the resort of foreigners to their har-
bours, but began to perceive the advantage and ne-
ceflity of applying to commerce themselves '

THIS communication, which was opened be- by thedifco-

tween Europe and the western provinces of Asia, traellrs by
encouraged several persons to advance far beyond land.
the countries in which the Crusaders carried on their
operations, and to travel by land into the more
remote and opulent regions of the east. The wild
fanaticifin, which seems at that period to have
mingled in all the schemes of individuals, no less
than in all the counsels of nations, first incited men
to enter upon those long and dangerous peregrina-
tions. They were afterwards undertaken-from
profpeEs of commercial advantage, or from mo-
tives of mere curiosity. Benjamin, a Jew of Tudela,
in the kingdom of Navarre, pofifefed with a super-
fitious veneration for the law of Moses, and soli-
citous to visit his countrymen in the east, whom he
hoped to find in such a slate of power and opu-
lence, as might redound to the honour of his et,
set out from Spain in the year i i 60, and travelling
by land to Contfantinople, proceeded through the
countries to the north of the Euxine and Caspian
seas, as far as Chinese Tartary. From thence he
took his route towards the south, and after traversing
various provinces of the farther India, he embarked
on the Indian ocean, visited several of its islands,
and returned at the end of thirteen years, by the
way-of Egypt, to Europe, with much information
concerning a large difirict of the globe, altogether

1 Hilt. of Charles V. vol. i. p. 25, &c.

unknown

B O o K unknown at that time to the weflern world '. The

z eal of the head of the Christian church co-operat-
ed with the superstition of Benjamin the Jew, in
discovering the interior and remote provinces of
Asia. All Christendom having been alarmed with
accounts of the rapid progress of the Tartar arms
under Zengis Khan, Innocent IV. who entertained
most exalted ideas concerning the plenitude of his
power, and the fubmiflion due to his injuntions,
1246. lent father John de Piano Carpini, at the head of a

miflion of Franciscan monks, and father Afcolino,
at the head of another of Dominicans, to exhort
Kayuk Khan, the grandson of Zengis, who was
then at the head of the Tartar empire, to embrace
the Christian faith, and to desist from desolating the
earth by his arms. The haughty descendant of the
greatest conqueror Asia had ever beheld, astonish-
ed at this firange mandate from an Italian priest,
whose name and power were alike unknown to
him, received it with the contempt which it merit-
ed, though he dismissed the mendicants who deli-
vered it with impunity. But as they had penetrat-
ed into the country by different routes, and fol-
lowed for some time the Tartar camps, which were
always in motion, they had an opportunity of vi-
fiting a great part of Asia. Carpini, who proceed-
ed by the way of Poland and Ruflia, travel!ed
through its northern provinces as far as the extre-
mities of Thibet. Afcolino, who seems to have
landed somewhere in Syria, advanced through its
ibuthrn provinces, into the interior parts of
Perfi.".
1±53. NOT long after, St. Louis of France contributed

farther towards extending the knowledge which
the Europeans had begun to acquire of those distant
regions. Some designing impostor, who took ad-

m Bergeron Recueil des Voyages, &c. tom. i.p. i.
n Hakluyt. i. i. Bergeron, tom. i.

vantage

vantage of the slender acquaintance of the Chris- B.oo ,.
tians with the state and character of the-Afiatic na- I
tions, having informed him that a powerful Chan '
of the Tartars had embraced the Christian faith,
the monarch listened to the tale with pious credulity,
and instantly resolved to fend ambafladors to this
illustrious convert,. with a view of inciting him to
attack their common enemy the Saracens.on one
quarter, while he fell upon them on the other. As
monks were the only persons in that age who pof-
sessed such a degree of knowledge as qualified them
for a service of this kind, he employed in it father
Andrew, a Jacobine, who was followed by father
William de Rubruquis, a. Franciscan. With refpet
to the progress of the former, there isno memorial
extant. The journal of the latter has been pub-
lifhed. He was admitted into the pretence of
Mangu, the third khan in fucceflion from Zengis,
and made a circuit through the interior parts of
Asia, more extensive than that of any European
who had hitherto explored them o°

To those travellers, whom religious zeal ent

forth to visit Asia, succeeded others who ventured
into remote countries, from the profpeEt of com-
mercial advantage, or from motives of mere curi-
ofity. The firfi and motl eminent of these was
Marco Polo, a Venetian of a noble family. Hav-
ing engaged early in trade, according to the custom 169
of his country, his aspiring mind wished for a
f)here of ativity more extensive than was afforded
to it by the efablithed traffic carried on. in those
ports of Europe and Asia, which the Venetians fre-
quented. This prompted him to travel into un-
known countries, in expectation of opening with
them a commercial intercourse, more suited to the
ianguine ideas and hopes of a young adventurer.

o Hakl. i. 71. Recuell de Voyages par Bergeron, tom. i.
VOL I. D As

B O O K As his father had already carried some European

commodities to the court of the great Chan of the
Tartars, and had disposed of them to advantage,
he resorted thither. Under the protection of Kublay
Chan, the most powerful of all the fucceflors of
Zengis, he continued his mercantile peregrinations
in Aria upwards of twenty-fix years; and during
that time advanced towards the east, far beyond the
utmost boundaries to which any European traveller
had ever proceeded. Instead of following the course
of Carpini and Rubruquis, along the vast unpeopled
plains of Tartary, he passed through the chief
trading cities in the more cultivated parts of Asia,
and penetrated to Cambalu, or Peking, the capital
of the great kingdom of Cathay, or China, subject
at that time to the successors of Zengis. He made
more than one voyage on the Indian ocean, he
traded in many of the islands, from which Europe
had long received fpiceries and other commodities,
which it held in high estimation, though unac-
quainted with the particular countries to which it
was indebted for those precious produaions; and
he obtained information concerning several coun-
tries, which he did not visit in person, particularly
the island Zipangri, probaby the fame now known
by the name of Japan P. On his return, he afto-
nifhed his contemporaries with his descriptions of
vast regions, whose names had never been heard of
in Europe, and with such pompous accounts of
their fertility, their populousness, their opulence,
the variety of their manufactures, and the extent
of their trade, as rose far above the conception of
an uninformed age.
3P. ABOUT half a century after Marco Polo, Sir

John Mandeville, an Englishman, encouraged by
his example, visited most of the countries in the east

P Viaggi di Marco Polo. Ramus, ii. z. Bergeron, tom. ii.

which

which he had described, and, like him, published B OO K
an account of them on his return a. The narrations 1.
of those early travellers abound with many wild in-
coherent tales, concerning giants, enchanters, and
rnonfters. But they were not, from that circum-
fiance, less acceptable to an ignorant age, which
delighted in what was marvellous. The wonders
which they told, mofily on hearsay, filled the mul-
titude with admiration. The faas which they relat-
ed from their own observation, attracted the attenti-
on of the more discerning. The former, which may
be confidered as the popular traditions and fables of
the countries through which they had passed, were
gradually disregarded as Europe advanced in know-
ledge. The latter, however incredible some of
them may have appeared in their own time, have
been confirmed by the observations of modern tra-
vellers. By means of both, however, the curiosity
of mankind was excited with refpe to the remote
parts of the earth, their ideas were enlarged, and
they were not only insensibly disposed to attempt
new discoveries, but received such information as
directed them to that particular course in which
they were afterwards carried on.

WVHILE this spirit was gradually forming in and by the

Europe, a fortunate discovery was made, which ievenionef
contributed more than all the efforts and ingenuity compaf3.
of preceding ages, to improve and to extend navi-
gation. That wonderful property of the magnet, by
which it communicates such virtue to a slender rod
of iron or needle, as to point towards the poles of
the earth, was observed. The use which might be
made of this in directing navigation was imme-
diately perceived, and that most valuable, but now
familiar instrument, the mariners compass, was

q Voyages and Travels, by Sir John Mandeville.

D z formed.

B o o K formed. When, by means of it, navigators found

that at all seasons, and in every place, they could
discover the north and south with so much ease and
accuracy, it became no longer necessary to depend
merely on the light of the stars and the observation
of the ea coast. They gradually abandoned their
ancient timid and lingering course along the ihore,
ventured boldly into the occean, and relying on.
this new guide, could fleer in the darkest night,
and under the most cloudy fIky, with a security and
precision hitherto unknown. The compass may be
said to have opened to man the dominion of the sea,
and to have put him in full pofieflion of the earth,
by enabling him to visit every part of it. Flavio
Gioia, a citizen of Amalfi, a town of considerable
trade in the kingdom of Naples, was the author of
this great difcovcry, about the year one thousand
three hundred and two. It hath been often the fate
of those illustrious benefactors of mankind, who
have enriched science and improved the arts by their
inventions, to derive more reputation than benefit
from the happy efforts of their genius. But the
lot of Giola has been fill more cruel; through
the inattention or ignorance of contemporary his-
torians, he has been defrauded even of the fame
to which he had such a just title. e receive from
them no information with refpe& to his profeflion,
his character, the precise ime when he-made this
important discovery, and the accidents or inquiries
which led to it: the knowledge of this event,
though produtive of greater effects than any re-
corded in the annals of the human race, is tranf-
mitted to us without any of those circumfiances,
which can gratify the curiosity, that it naturally
awakens r. Though the use of the compass might
enable the Italians to perform the short voyages to
which they were accuflomed, with greater security

r Collinas & Tromlbellus de Acus nautica: Inventore. Infit.
Acad. Bonon. tom. ii. part iii. p. 372.

and

and expedition, its influence was not so sudden or B o o K
extensive, as immediately to render navigation ad- ..
venturous, and to excite a spirit of discovery. Ma-
ny causes combined in preventing this beneficial
invention from producing its full effect infiantane-
oufly. Men relinquish ancient habits slowly, and
with reluatance. They are averse to new experi-
ments, and enture upon them with timidity.
The commercial jealousy of the Italians, it is pro-
bable, laboured to conceal the happy discovery of
their countryman from other nations. The art of
fleering by the compass, with such Ikill and accu-
racy as to inspire a full confidence in its diretion,
was acquired gradually. Sailors, long accustomed
not to quit fight of land, durst not launch out at
once and commit themselves to unknown leas. Ac-
cordingly, near half a century elapsed, from the
time of Gioia's discovery, before navigators -ven-
tured into any eas which they had not been accuf-
tomed to frequent!

THE firfi appearance of a blder spirit may be Some ap.
dated from the voyages of the Spaniards to the pearance of

a bolder fpi.

Canary or Fortunate Islands. By what accident rit in navi-
they were led to the discovery of those small isles, gauoL"
which lie near five hundred miles from the Spanish
coast, and above a hundred and fifty miles from
the coast of Africa, contemporary writers have not
explained. But about the middle of the fourteenth
century, the people of all the different kingdoms
into which Spain was then divided, were accustom-
ed to make piratical excursions thither, in order to
plunder the inhabitants, or to carry them off as
saves. Clement VI. in virtue of the right claimed
by the holy fee to dispose of all countries possessed
by infidels, ereced those isles into a kingdom, in the
year one thousand three hundred and forty-four,
and conferred it on Lewis de la Cerda, descended

.from

B e o K from the royal family of Castile. But that unfor-

"_- tunate prince, deflitute of power to aflert his nomi-

nal title, having never visited the Canaries, John de
Bethencourt, a Norman baron, obtained a grant
of them from Henry III. of Castile r. Bethencourt,
with the valour and good fortune which distinguish-
ed the adventurers of his country, attempted and
effected the conquest, and the pofieflion of the Ca-
naries remained for sometime in his family, as a
fief held of the crown of Castile. Previous to
this expedition of Bethencourt, his countrymen are
1365. faidto have visited the coast of Afiica, and to have

proceeded far to the south of the Canary islands.
But their voyages thither seem not to have been
undertaken in consequence of any public or regu-
lar plan for extending navigation and attempting
new discoveries. They were either excursions
suggested by that roving piratical spirit, which def-
cended to the Normans from their ancestors, or the
commercial enterprises of private merchants,
which attracted so little' notice, that hardly any
memorial of them is to be found in contemporary
authors. In a general furveyof the progress of
discovery, it is iufficient to have mentioned this
event; and leaving it among those of dubious ex-
iftence, or of small importance, we may conclude,
that though much additional information concern-
ing the remote regions of the EaR had been receiv-
ed by travellers who visited them by land, naviga-
tion, at the beginning of the fifteenth century, had
not advanced beyond the state to which it had at-
tained before the downfal of the Roman empire.

Sirs regular AT length the period arrived, when Providence
plan of di- decreed that men were to pass the limits within
CQvery' which they had been so long confined, and open to

themselves a more. ample field wherein to display

r Viera y Clavijo Notic. de la Hiftor. de Canaria, I. 268, &c.
Gias Hilt. c. x.

their

their talents, their enterprise, and courage. The B o K
first considerable efforts towards this were not ,
made by any of the more powerful states of Eu-
rope, or by those who had applied to navigation.
with the greatest assiduity and success. The glory formed by
of leading the way in this new career was reserved the Portu-
for Portugal, one of the smallest and most incon-
fiderable of the European kingdoms. As the at-
tempts of the Portuguese to acquire the knowledge
of those parts of the globe with which mankind
were then unacquainted, not only improved and
extended the art of navigation, but roused such a
fpiit of curiosity and enterprise, as led to the dif-
covery of the New world of which I propose to
write the history, it is necessary to take a view of
the rife, the progress, and success of their various
naval operations. It was in this school that the dif-
coverer of America was trained; and unless we
trace the steps by which his inftrutors and guides
advanced, it will be impossible to comprehend the
circumstances which suggested the idea, or facilitat-
ed the execution of his great design,

VARIOUS circumstances prompted the Portu- Circumfian-
guefe to exert their ativity in this new direction, ces whick

led to this.

and enable them to accomplish undertakings appa-
rently superior to the natural force of their monar-
chy. 'The kings of Portugal, having driven the
Moors out of their dominions, had acquired power,
as well as glory, by the success of their arms againit
the infidels. By their victories over them, they
had extended the royal authority beyond the nar-
row limits within which it was originally circum-
fcribed in Portugal, as well as in other feudal king-
doms. They had the command of the national
force, could route it to at with united vigour, and,
after the expulsion of the Moors, could employ it
without dread of interruption from any domestic en.-
my. By the perpetual hostilities carried on for fe-

veral

B o o K veral centuries against the Mahometans, theJnartial

and adventurous spirit that distinguished all the Eu-
ropean nations during the middle ages, was improv-
ed and heightened among the Portuguese. A fierce
civil war, towards the close of the fourteenth cen-
tury, occaficned by a disputed succession, augment-
ed the military ardour of the nation, and formed
or called forth men of such adtive and daring genius,
as are fit for bold undertakings. The situation of the
kingdom, bounded on every fide by the dominions
of a more powerful neighbour, did not afford free
scope to the ativity of the Portuguese by land, as
the strength of their monarchy was no match for
that of Castile. But Portugal was a maritime state,
in which there were many commodious harbours;
the people had begun to make some progress in the
knowledge and practice of navigation; and the sea
was open to them, presenting the only field of
enterprise in which they could distinguish them-
selves.

irfi at- SUCH was the fiate of Portugal, and such the
tempt. disposition of the people, when John I. surnamed

the Eaftard, obtained secure pofellion of the crown
by the peace concluded with Castile in the year one
thousand four hundred and eleven. He was a prince
of great merit, who, by superior courage and abi-
litits, had opened his way to a throne which of
right did not belong to him. He instantly per-
ceived that it would be impo!lible to preserve pub-
lic order, or domeflic tranquillity, without finding
some employment for the refilefs spirit of his sub-
jects. With this view, he aembled a numerous
fleet at Lifbcn, composcd of all the ships that he
could fit out in his own kingdom, and of many
1. hired from freigners. This great armament was

defined to attack the Moors fettled on the coast of
Barbary. While it was equipping, a few vef-
.is were appointed to fil along the western shore

of

of Africa bounded by the Atlantic ocean, and to B 0 O K
discover the unknown countries situated there. v-
From this inconsiderable attempt, we may date the
commencement of that spirit of discovery which
opened the barriers that had so long shut out man-
kind from te knowledge of one half of the terres-
trial globe.

AT the time when John ent forth these lhips on

this new voyage, the art of navigation was frill
very imperfe&. Though Africa lay so near to Por-
tugal, and the fertility of the countries already
known on that continent invited men to make far-
ther discoveries, the Portuguese had never ven-
tured to fail beyond Cape Non. That promon-
tory, as itsname imports, was hitherto confidered
as a boundary which could not be passed. But the
nations of Europe had now acquired as much knovw-
ledge, as emboldened them to disregard the preju-
dices and to correct the errors of their ancestors.
The long reign of ignorance, the conflant .enemy
ps every curious inquiry, and of every new under-
taking, was approaching to its period. The light
of science began to dawn. The works of the an-
cient Greeks and Romans began to be read with
admiration and profit. The sciences cultivated by
the Arabians were introduced into Europe by the
Moors fettled in Spain and Portugal, and by the
Jews, who were very numerous in both these king-
doms. Geometry, astronomy, and geography,
the sciences on which the art of navigation is found-
ed, became objets of studious attention. The me-
mory of the discoveries made by the ancients was
revived, and the progress of their navigation and
commerce began to be traced. Some of the causes
which, during this century and the last, have ob-
struted the cultivatioh of science in Portugal, did
pot exist, or did not operate in the fame manner,

in

B 0-0 K in the fifteenth century S; and the Portuguese, at
a ._ , that period, eem to have kept pace with other na-

tions on this fide of the Alps in literary pursuits.
irs uccefs. As the genius of the age favoured the execution

of that new undertaking, to which the peculiar slate
of their country invited the Portuguese, it proved
fuccelsful. The vessels sent on the discovery dou-
bled that formidable Cape, which had terminated
the progress of former navigators, and proceeded
a hundred and sixty miles beyond it, to Cape Bo-
jador. As its rocky cliffs, which stretched a con-
fiderable way into the Atlantic,' appeared more
dreadful than the promontory which they had pass-
ed, the Portuguese commanders durst not attempt
to fail round it, but returned to Lisbon, more fa-
tisfied with having advanced so far, than ashamed
at having ventured no farther.

Heicyhe INCONSIDERABLE as this voyage was, it in-
Henry the
direaor of created the paflion for discovery, which began to
thuef dilo- arise in Portugal. The extraordinary success of the
Veries. king's expedition againfi the Moors of Barbary;

'45' added firength to the spirit of enterprise in the n.-

tion, and pushed it on to new undertakings. In
order to render there iccefsful, it was neceflary
that they lhould be conducted by a person who pof-
sessed abilities capable of discerning what was at-
tainable, who enjoyed leisure to form a regular sys-
tem for prosecuting discovery, and who was ani-
mated with ardour that would persevere in spite of
obstacles and repulses. Happily for Portugal, he
found all those qualities in Henry duke of Viseo,
the fourth son of king John by Philippa of Lan-
caster, sifter of Henmy IV. king of England. That
prince, in his early youth, having accompanied his
father in his expedition to Barbary, distinguished

s See NOTE IX.

himself

himself by many deeds of valour. To the martial B o K
spirit, which was the charaterifiic of every man of _
noble birth at that time, he added all the accom-
plifihments of a more enlightened and polished age.
He cultivated the arts and sciences, which were
then unknown and despised by persons of his rank.
He applied with peculiar fondness to the fiudy of
geography; and by the inftruEtion of able masers,
as well as by the accounts of travellers, he early ac,
quired such knowledge of the habitable globe, as
discovered the great probability of finding new and
opulent countries, by failing along the coast of
Africa. Such an objet was formed to awaken the
enthusiasm and ardour of a youthful mind, and he
engaged with the utmost zeal to patronize a design
that might prove as beneficial, as it appeared to be
splendid and honourable. In order that he. might
pursue this great scheme without interruption, he
retired from court immediately after his return from
Africa, and fixed his residence at Sagres, near Cape
St. Vincent, where the profpe& of the Atlantic
ocean invited his thoughts continually towards his
favourite proje&, and encouraged him to execute
it. In this retreat he was attended by some of the
most learned men in his country, who aided him in
his researches. He applied for information to the
Moors of Barbary, who were accustomed to travel
by land into the interior provinces of Africa, in
quest of Ivory, gold-duff, and other rich commo-
dities. He consulted the Jews fettled in Portugal.
By promises, rewards, and marks of refpe&, he
allured into his service several persons, foreigners as
well as Portuguese, who were eminent for their skill
in navigation. In taking those preparatory fleps,
the great abilities of the prince were seconded by his
private virtues. His integrity, his affability, his
respect for religion, his zeal for the honour of his
Eountry, engaged persons of all ranks to applaud

his

B O 0 K his design, and to favour the execution of it. His

L_ I^ schemes were allowed by his countrymen to proceed

neither from ambition, nor the desire of wealth,
but to flow from the warm benevolence of a heart
eager to promote the happiness of mankind, and
which juitly entitled him to assume a motto for his
device, that described the quality by which he wish-
ed to be distinguished, the talent of doing good.

Discovery HI s firfi effort, as is ufial at the commencement
Santo, of any new undertaking, was extremely inconfide-

t1418 rable. He fitted out a tingle ship, and giving the

command of it to John Gonzalez Zarco and Tris-
tan Vaz, two gentlemen of his houfhold, who vo-
luntarily offered to condut the enterprise, lie in-
struted them to use their utmost efforts to double
Cape Bojador, and thence to fleer towards the
south. They, according to the mode of naviga-
tion which still prevailed, held their course along
the shore; and by following that diretion, they
must have encountered almofi insuperable difficul-
ties in attempting to pass Cape Bojador. But for-
tune came in aid to their want of skill, and pre-
vented the voyage from being altogether fruitless.
A sudden squall of wind arose, drove them out to
sea, and when they expeced every moment to pe-
rifh, landed them on an unknown island, which
from their happy escape they named Porto Santo.
in the infancy of navigation, the discovery of this
fimall island appeared a matter of such moment,
that they; instantly returned to Portugal with the
good tidings, and were received by Henry with
the applause and honour due to fortunate adven-
turers. This faint dawn of success filled a mind
ardent in the pursuit of a favourite object with such
sanguine hopes as were -ufficient encouragement to
419. proceed. Next year, Henry sent out three hips

under the lame commanders, to whom he joined
Bartholomew Perefirello, in order to take pof-

felion

pofeflion of the island which they had discovered. B o 0 K
When they began to fettle in Porto Santo, they
observed towards the south a fixed spot in the hor-
rizon, like a finall black cloud. By degrees, they of Madeira.
were led to conjecture that it might be land, and
fleering towards it, they arrived at a confiderabie
island, uninhabited, and covered with wood, which
on that account they called Madeira . As it was
Henry's chief object to render his discoveries useful
to his country, he immediately equipped a fleet to 141o.
carry a colony of Portuguese to these islands. By
h's provident care, they were furnished not only
with the feeds, plants., and domestic animals com-
mon in Europe; but as he foresaw that the warmth
of the climate and fertility of the foil would prove
favourable to the rearing of other produtions, he
procured flips of the vine from the island of Cyprus,
the rich wines of which were then in great request,
and plants of the sugar-cane from Sicily, into
which it had been lately introduced. These throve
so prosperously in this new country, that the bene-
fit of cultivating them was immediately perceived,
and the sugar and wine of Madeira quickly became
considerable articles in the commerce of Portugal u.

As soon as the advantages derived from this first Double

Caple Boja-

settlement to the weft of the European continent dor.
began to be felt, the spirit of discovery appeared
less chimerical, and became more adventurous.
By their voyages to Madeira, the Portuguese were
gradually accustomed to a bolder navigation, and
instead of creeping servilely along the coast, ven-
tured into the open sea. In consequence of taking
this course, Gilianez, who commanded one of

t Historical Relation of the first Discovery of Madeira, tranf-
lated from the Portuguese of Fran. Alcafarano, p. 1 I, &c.

u Lud.-Guicciardini Defcritt, de Paefi Baili, p. 18o, 18 .

prince

B o0 K prince Henry's ships, doubled Cape Bojador, the
v^ ^^ boundary of the Portuguese navigation upwards

of twenty years, and which had hitherto been
1433. deemed unpaffable. This successful voyage, which

the ignorance of the age placed on a level with the
most famous exploits recorded in history, opened a
new sphere to navigation, as it discovered the vast
continent of Africa, still waffed by the Atlantic
ocean, and firetching towards the south. Part of

Advance this was oon explored; the Portuguese advanced
ithin the within the tropics, and in the space of a few years

they discovered the river Senegal, and all the coast
extending from Cape Blanco to Cape de Verd.

Aflonifhed HITHERTO the Portuguese had been guided in
at what they * r
ditcovcred their discoveries, or encouraged to attempt them,
there by the light and information which they received

from the works of the ancient mathematicians and
geographers. But, when they began to enter the
torrid zone, the notion which prevailed among the
ancients, that the excessive heat, which reigned
perpetually there, was so fatal to life as to render it
uninhabitable, deterred them, for ome time, trom
proceeding. Their own observations, when they
firit ventured into this unknown and formidable re-
gion, tended to confirm the opinion of antiquity
concerning the violent operation of the diret rays
of the fun. As far as the river Senegal, the Por-
tuguefe had found the coast of Africa inhabited by
people nearly resembling the Moors of Barbary.
W, hen they advanced to the south of that river, the
human form seemed to put on a new appearance.
They beheld men with skins black as ebony, with
Ihort curled hair, flat noses, thick lips, and all the
peculiar features which are now known to diftinguifll
the race of negroes. This surprising alteration
they naturally attributed to the influence of heat,

aad

heat, and if they hould advance nearer to the line, B o o K
they began to dread that its effects would be fill
more fatal. Those dangers were exaggerated, and
many other objections against attempting farther
discoveries were proposed by some of the grandees,
who, from ignorance, from envy, or from that
cold timid prudence which rejets whatever has the
air of novelty or enterprise, had hitherto condemn-
ed all prince Henry's schemes. They represented,
that it was altogether chimerical to expet any ad-
vantage from countries situated in that region which
the wisdom and experience of antiquity had pro-
nounced to be unfit for the habitation of men;
that their forefathers, satisfied with cultivating the
territory which Providence had allotted them, did
not waste the strength of the kingdom by fruitless
projects, in quest of new settlements ; that Portu-
-gal was already exhausted by the expence of at-
tempts to discover lands which either did not. exist,
or which nature destined to remain unknown; and
was drained of men, who might have been em-
ployed in undertakings attended with more certain
success, and productive of greater benefit. But
neither their appeal to the authority of the ancients,
nor their reasonings concerning the interest of Por-
tugal, made any impression upon the determined
philosophic mind of prince Henry. The difcove-
ries which he had already made convinced him that
the ancients had little more than a conjectural
knowledge of the torrid zone. He was no less. fa-
tisfied that the political arguments of his opponents
with refpe to the interest of Portugal were male-
volent and ill-founded. In those sentiments he was
strenuously supported by his brother Pedro, who
governed the kingdom as guardian of their nephew
Alphonfo V. who had succeeded to the throne dur- ,433.
ing his minority; and inflead of slackening his

efforts,

B o o K efforts, Henry continued to pursue his discoverics

'_'_ with frelh ardour.

Papal grant BU T, in order to silence all the murmurs of op-
to PWrtgal position, he endeavoured to obtain the fandior of
of what
countriesit the highert authority in favour of his operations.

ould dir- With this view, he applied to the Pope, and re-

,presented, in pompous terms, the pious and un-
wearied zeal, with which he had exerted himself
during twenty years, in discovering unknown
countries, the wretched inhabitants of which were
utter firangers to true religion, wandering in heath-
en darknels, or led affray by the delusions of Ma-
homet. He besought the holy father, to whom, as
the vicar of ChritR, all the kingdoms of the earth
were subjea, to confer on the crown of Portugal a
right to all the countries possessed by Infidels, which
should be discovered by the industry of its fubjets,
and subdued by the force of its arms. He intreated
him to enjoin all Christian powers, under the
highest penalties, not to molest the Portuguese
while engaged in this laudable enterprise, and to
prohibit them from fettling in any of the countries
which they fllould discover. He promised that, in
all their expeditions, it Ihould be the chief object
of the Portuguese to spread the knowledge of the
Christian religion, to eftabliflh the authority of the
holy fee, and to increase the flock of the universal
pafior. As it was by improving with dexterity
every favourable conjunaure for acquiring new
powers, that the court of Rome had gradually ex-
tended its usurpations, Eugene IV. the pontiff to
whom this application was made, eagerly seized
the opportunity that now presented itself. He in-
ftantly perceived, that by complying with prince
Henry's request, he might exercise a prerogative
no less flattering in its own nature, than likely to

prove

prove beneficial in its consequences. A Bull was B o o K
accordingly issued, in which, after applauding in
.the firongeft terms the past efforts of the Portu-
guefe, and exhorting them to proceed in that lau-
dable career on which they had entered, he granted
them an exclusive right to all the countries which
they should discover, from Cape Non to the conti-
nent of India.

Ex T R AV AGANT as this donation, comprehend-

ing such a large portion of the habitable globe,
would now appear even in Catholic countries, no
person in the fifteenth century doubted that the
pope, in the plenitude of his apostolic power, had
a right to confer it. Prince Henry was soon fenfi-
ble of the advantages which he derived from this
tranfation. His schemes were authorized and fanc-
tified by the bull approving of them. The spirit of
discovery was connected with zeal for religion,
which, in that age, was a principle of such ativity
and vigour, as to influence the conduc of nations.
All Christian princes were deterred from intruding
into those countries which the Portuguese had dif-
covered, or from interrupting the progress of their
navigation and conquests ".

T H E fame of the Portugdefe voyages soon spread Fame and

over Europe. Men, long accuflomed to circum- phe'ortu
scribe the ativity and knowledge of the human guefe dilco-
mind within the limits to which they had been hi-
therto confined, were astonished to behold the
sphere of navigation so suddenly enlarged, and a
profpe6t opened of visiting regions of the globe, the
existence of which was unknown in former times.
The learned and speculative reasoned and formed
theories concerning those unexpected discoveries.
The vulgar inquired and wondered; and enter-

x See NOTE X.
VoL. I. E prifing

B o o K prifing adventurers crouded from every part of Eu-

I. rope, soliciting prince Henry to employ them

in this honourable service. Many Venetians and ·
Genoese, in particular, who were, at that time,
superior to all other nations in the science of
naval affairs, entered aboard the Portuguese ships,
and acquired a more perse& and extensive know-
ledge of their profeflion in that new school of
navigation. In emulation of these foreigners, the
Portuguese exerted their own talents. The na-
tion econded the designs of the prince. Private
merchants formed companies, with a view to search
1446. for unknown countries. The Cape de Verd islands,

which lie off the promontory of that name, were
1449. discovered, and oon after, the isles called Azores.

As the former of these are above three hundred
miles from the African coast, and the latter nine
hundred miles from any continent, it is evident, by
their venturing so boldly into the open seas, that the
Portuguese had, by this time, improved greatly in
the art of navigation.

Death of WHILE the paflion for engaging in new under-
Henry. takings was thus warm and active, it received an

1463- unfortunate check by the death of prince Henry,

whose superior knowledge had hitherto directed all
the operations of the discoverers, and whose pa-
tronage had encouraged and protected them. It is
true, that during his life, the Portuguese, in their
utmost progress towards the south, did not advance
within five degrees of the equinoctial line ; and,
after their continued exertions for half a century,
hardly fifteen hundred miles of the coast of Africa
were discovered. To an age acquainted with the
efforts of navigation in its slate of maturity and im-
provement, those essays of its early years must ne-

From 1412 ceffarily appear feeble and unskilful. But, incon-
to 463. fiderable as they may appear, they were sufficient

to

to turn the curiosity of the European nations into a B O o K
new channel, to excite an enterprising spirit, and
to point the way to future discoveries.

ALPHONSO, who possessed the throne of Portu- The paffio

gal at the time of prince Henry's death, was so for lnguifv-
much engaged in supporting his pretensions to the es for lone
crown of Castile, or in carrying on his expeditions time'
againfi the Moors in Barbary, that the force of his
kingdom being exerted in other operations, he could
not prosecute the discoveries in Africa with ardour.
He committed the conduct of them to Fernando Go-
mez, a merchant in Lisbon, to whom he granted
an exclusive right of commerce, with all the coun-
tries of which prince Henry had taken poffeflion.
Under the restraint and oppreflion of a monopoly,
the spirit of discovery languished. It ceased to be a
national object, and became the concern of a private
man, more attentive to his own gain, than to the
glory of his country. Some progress, however,
was made. The Portuguese ventured at length to 1471.
cross the line, and, to their astonishment, found
that region of the torrid zone, which was supposed
to be scorched with intolerable heat, to be not only
habitable, but populous and fertile.

JOHN II. who succeeded his father Alphonfo, 148:.

poifeffed talents capable both of forming and exe- Revives
cuting great designs. As part of his revenues, tionalar-
while prince, had arisen from duties on the trade dour.
with the newly discovered countries, this naturally
turned his attention towards them, and satisfied him
with refpea to their utility and importance. In
proportion as his knowledge of these countries ex-
tended, the poffelion of them appeared to be of
greater consequence. While the Portuguese pro-
ceeded along the coast of Africa, from Cape Non

E2 to

B O O K to the river of Senegal, they found all that exten-

'. five tract to be sandy, barren, and thinly inhabited

by a wretched people, profelling the Mahometaa
religion, and subjet to the vast empire of Moroc-
co. But to the south of that river, the power and
religion of the Mahometans were unknown. The
country was divided into small independent princi-
palities, the population was considerable, the foil
fertile Y, and the Portuguese soon discovered that it
produced ivory, rich gums, gold, and other valu-
able commodities. By the acquisition of there, com-
merce was enlarged, and became more adventu-
rous. Men, animated and.rendered active by the
certain profpet of gain, pursued discovery with
greater eagerness, than when they were excited
only by curiosity and hope.
Its progrers. THIS spirit derived no small reinforcement of

vigour from the countenance of such a monarch as
John. - He declared himself the patron of every at-
tempt towards discovery, and promoted it with all
the ardour of his grand-uncle prince Henry, and
1484. with superior power. The effects of this were im-

mediately felt. A powerful fleet was fitted out,
which, after discovering the kingdoms of Benin and
Congo, advanced above fifteen hundred miles be-
yond the line, and the Portuguese, for the first
time, beheld a new heaven, and observed the flars
of a another hemisphere. John was not only folici-
tous to discover, but attentive to secure the ponef-
sion of those countries. He built forts on the coast
of Guinea; he sent out colonies to fettle there ; he
established a commercial intercourse with the
more powerful kingdoms; he endeavoured to

Y Navigatio Aloyfi Cadamufti apud Novum Orbem Gry-

naxi, p. 2. 8. Navigat. all Ifola di San Tome per un pi-
lotto Poitugh. Ramufio. i. 5.

render

render such as were feeble or divided, tributary to B o K
the crown of Portugal. Some of the petty princes i.
voluntarily acknowledged themselves his vassals.
Others were compelled to do so by force of arms.
A regular and well digested fyflem was formed
with refpeat to this new object of policy, and by
firmly adhering to it, the Portuguese power and
commerce in Africa were etablifhed upon a solid
foundation.

BY their constant intercourse with the people of Hopes of
Africa, the Poituguefe gradually acquired ome discovering

a new route

knowledge of those parts of that country which tothe Eat
they had not visited. The information which they Indies.
received from the natives, added to what they had
observed in their own voyages, began to open prof-
pets more extensive, and to suggest the idea of
schemes more important, than those which had hi-
therto allured and occupied them. They had de-
teaed the error of the ancients concerning the na-
ture of the torrid zone. They found, as they pro-
ceeded southwards, that the continent of Africa,
instead of extending in breadth, according to the
dotrine of Ptolemy , at that time the oracle and
guide of the learned in the fludy of geography,
appeared sensibly to contrat itself, and to bend to-
wards the east. This induced them to give credit to
the accounts of the ancient Phenician voyages
round Africa, which had long been deemed fabu-
lous, and led them to conceive hopes that by follow-
ing the fame route, they might arrive at the East
Indies, and engross that commerce, which has been
thie source of wealth and power to every nation
possesed of it. The comprehensive genius of
prince Henry, as we may conjecture from the
words of the pope's bull, had early formed some
idea of this navigation. All the Portuguese pilots

z Vide Nov. Obis Tabul. Geograph. Secund. Polem.
Amil. 1730.

and

B O O K anid mathematicians now concurred in representing

i . it as practicable. The king entered with warmth

into their sentiments, and began to concert mea-
fures for this arduous and important voyage.

Schemes for BEFORE his preparations for this expedition
aconpthif were finished, accounts were transmitted from

Africa, that various nations along the coast had
mentioned a mighty kingdom lituated on their
continent, at a great distance towards the east,
the king of which, according to their de-
scription, professed the Christian religion. The
Portuguese monarch immediately concluded, that
this must be the emperor of Abyflinia, to whom
the Europeans, seduced by a mistake of Rubru-
quis, Marco Polo, and other travellers to the east,
absurdly gave the name Prester or Presbyter John;
and as he hoped to receive information and afflft-
ance from a Christian prince, in prosecuting a
scheme that tended to propagate their common
faith, he resolved to open, if pollible, ome inter-
course with his court. With this view he made
choice of Pedro de Covillam and Alphonfo de
Payva, who were perfect masters of the Arabic
language, and sent them into the east, to search for
the residence of this unknown potentate, and to
make him proffers of fiendfhip. They had it in
charge likewise to procure whatever intelligence the
nations which they visited could supply, with re-
spec to the trade of India, and the course of navi-,
gation to that continent a.

voyage of W HILE John made this new attempt by land,
BertDol- to obtain some knowledge of the country, which

he wished so ardently to discover, he did not neg-
le'rt the prosecution of this great design by sea.
1486. The conduct of this voyage, the mos arduous and

a Fariay Scufa Port. Asia, vol. i. p. 26. Lafitau Decouv.
de Port. . 46.

important

important which the portuguese had ever projected, B o o K
was committed to Bartholomew Diaz, an officer I.
whose sagacity, experience, and fortitude rendered 1486.
him equal to the undertaking. He firetched boldly
towards the south, and proceeding beyond the
utmost limits to which his countrymen had hitherto
advanced, discovered near a thousand miles of new
country. Neither the danger to which he was ex-
posed, by a succession of violent tempefis in un-
known seas, and by the frequent mutinies of his
crew, nor the calamities of famine which he sus-
sered from losing his store-ship, could deter him
from prosecuting his enterprise. In recompence of
his labours and perseverance, he at last descried that
lofty promontory which bounds Africa to the south.
But to efcry it, was all that was in his power,
The violence of the winds, the flattered condition
of his ships, and the turbulent spirit of his tailors,
compelled him to return, after a voyage of sixteen
months, in which he discovered an extent of coun-
try far greater than any preceding navigator. Diaz
had called the promontory which terminated his
voyage Cabo Torenetofo, or the formy Cape; but the
king his master, as he now entertainted no doubt of
having found the long desired route to India, gave it
a name more inviting, and of better omen, he
Cape of Good Hope b.

THOSE sanguine expectations of success were More cer-

confirmed by the intelligence which John received paes of f.c-
over land, in consequence of his embassy to Abyf- cess.
finia. Covillam and Payva, in obedience to their
master's inftrutions, had repaired to Grand Cairo.
From that city, they travelled along with a caravan
of Egyptian merchants, and crossed over to Aden,
on the Red Sea. There they separated; Payva
failed direcly towards Abyflinia; Covillam em-
barked for the East Indies, and having visited Ca-

h Faria y Sousa Port. Alfa, vol. i. p. 6.

lecut,

B O O K lecut, Goa, and other ilis oil the Malabar coail,

returned to Sofala, on the call fide of Africa, and
- --. thence to Grand Ciio, whllich Payva and he had

fixed upon as their place of rendezvous. Unfor-
tunately the former was cuelly murdered in Abyf-
finia, but Covillam found at Cairo two Portuguese
Jews, whom John, whose provident sagacity at-
tended to every circumstance that could facilitate
the execution of his fchemcs, had dispatched after
them, in order to receive a detail of their proceed-
ings, and to communicate to them new inftrutions.
By one cf these Jews, Covillam tranfiitted to Por-
tugal a journal of his travels by sea and land, his
remarks upon the trade of India, together w-ith
exa& maps of the coafis on which he had touched
and from what he himself had observed, as well as
from the information of skilful' seamen in different
countries, he concluded, that by failing round
Africa, a pafige might be found to the East Indies c.

Preparati- TH-E happy coincidence of Covillam's opinion
ons forano. and report, with the discoveries which Diaz had

oyglately made, left hardly any shadow of doubt with

refped to the poilibility of failing from Europe to
India. But the vast length of the voyage, and
ihe fl!rious riorls ywhich Diaz had encountered near
the Cape of Good Hope, alarmed and intimidated
the Portuguee to fch a degree, although by long
experience they were now become adventurous and
Ikilfuil mariners, that some time was requisite to
prepare their minds for this dangerous and extraor-
dinary voyage. The courage, however, and authori-
tv of the monarch, gradually dispellcd the vain fears
of his fubjecs, or made it necessary to conceal them.
As John thought himself now upon the eve of ac-
colmpliling that great design, which had been the

c Faiay Sousa Port. Aia, vol. i. p. 27. Lafitau Decouv.
i. 48.

principal

principal object of his reign, his earnefnefs in pro- B o o K
iecuting it became so vehement, that it occupied his 1.
thoughts by day, and bereaved him of sleep through
the night. While he was taking every precaution
that his wisdom and experience could suggest, in
order to ensure the iilccefs of the expedition, which
was to decide concerning the fate of his favourite
projet, the fame of the vast discoveries which the
Portuguese had already made, the reports con-
cerning the extraordinary intelligence which they
had received from the east, and the profped of the
; oyage which they now meditated, drew the atten- The atten-
tion of all the European nations, and held them in kind fixmedn
fufpence and expectation. By some, the maritime upon it.
skill and navigations of the Portuguese were com-
pared with those of the Phenicians and Carthagi-
nians, and exalted above them. Others formed
conjectures concerning the revolutions which the
success of their schemes might occasion in the course
of trade, and the political state of Europe. The
Venetians began to be disquieted with the appre-
henfion of losing their Indian commerce, the mono-
poly of which was the chief source of their power
as well as opulence, and the Portuguese already
enjoyed in fancy, the wealth of the East. But,
during this interval, which gave such scope to the
various workings of curiosity, of hope and of fear,
an account was brought to Europe of an event no
less extraordinary than unexpeted, the discovery turdnednt
of a New World situated in the weft, and the eyes new objea.
and admiration of mankind turned immediately
tovwards that great object.

BOOK

# BOOK II.

THE
HISTORY

O F
AMERICA.

BOOK II.

A M 0 N G the foreigners whom the fame of B o o K
the discoveries made by the Portuguese had allured U.
into their service, was Christopher Columbus, a Birth ande-
subjed of the republic of Genoa. Neither the time ducation f
nor place of his birth are known with certainty a;
but he was descended of an honourable family,
though reduced to indigence by various misfortunes.
His ancefiors having betaken themselves for sub-
fiftence to a seafaring life, Columbus discovered, in
his early youth, the peculiar character and talents
which mark out a man for that profeflion. His
parents, inltead of thwarting this original pro-
penfity'of his mind, seem to have encouraged and
confirmed it, by the education which they gave
him. After acquiring some knowledge of the Latin
tongue, the only language in which science was
taught at that time, he was infiruted in geometry,

cosmography,
a See NOTE Xl.

B 0 0 K cosmography, afironomy, and the art of draw-
_. _ .- ing. To these he applied with such ardour and

predilection, on account of their connetion with
navigation, his favourite object, that he advanced
with rapid proficiency in the study of them. Thus
1461. qualified, he went to sea at the age of fourteen, and

began his career on that element which conduted
him to so much glory. His early voyages were to
those ports in the Mediterranean which his country-
men the Genoese frequented. This being a sphere
1467. too narrow for his ative mind, he made an excur-

sion to the northern seas, and visited the coafis of
Iceland, to which the English and other nations
had begun to retort on account of its fishery. As
'navigation, in every direction, was now become
enterprizing, he proceeded beyond that island, the
Thule of the ancients, and advanced several degrees
within the polar circle. Having satisfied his curio-
fity by a voyage which tended more to enlarge his
knowledge of naval affairs, than to improve his
fortune, he entered into the service of a famous
fea-captain, of his own name and family. This
man commanded a small squadron, fitted out at
his own expence, and by cruising Sometimes againfi
the Mahometans, sometimes against the Venetians,
the rivals of his country in trade, had acquired both
wealth and reputation. With him Columbus con-
.tinued for several years, no less diftinguifled for
his courage, than for his experience as a ailor.
At length, in an obstinate engagement, off the
coast of Portugal, with ome Venetian caravels,
returning richly laden from the Low Countries,
the vessel on board which he served took fire, toge-
ther with one of the enemy's hips, to which it
was fast grappled. In this dreadful extremity his
intrepidity and pretence of mind did not forsake him.
He threw himself into the sea, laid hold of a floating
oar, and by the support of it, and his dexterity in

swimming,

swimming, he reached the shore, though above two B o o K
leagues distant, and saved a life reserved for great _,
undertakings b.

As oon as he recovered strength for the journey, He enters

into the

he repaired to Lisbon, where many of his country- Portuguese
men were fettled. They oon conceived such a fa- service.
vourable opinion of his merit, as well as talents,
that they warmly olicited him to remain in that
kingdom, where his naval ficill and experience could
not fail of rendering him conspicuous. To every
adventurer, animated either with curiosity to visit
new countries, or with ambition to distinguish him-
self, the Portuguese service was at that time ex-
tremely inviting. Columbus listened with a fa-
vourable ear to the advice of his friends, and having
gained the esteem of a Portuguese lady, whom he
married, fixed his residence in Lisbon. This alli-
ance, instead of detaching him from a seafaring life,
contributed to enlarge the sphere of his naval know-
ledge, and to excite a desire of extending it still
farther. His wife was a daughter of Bartholomew
Pereftrello, one of the captains employed by prince
Henry in his early navigations, and who, under his
protecion, had discovered and planted the islands
of Porto Santo and Madeira. Columbus got pof-
session of the journals and charts of this experienc-
ed navigator, and from them he learned the course
which the Portuguese had held in making their dif-
coveries, as well as the various circumstances which
guided or encouraged them in their attempts. The
study of these gratified and inflamed his favourite
paflion; and while he contemplated the maps, and
read the descriptions of the new countries which Pe-
refirello had seen, his impatience to visit them
became irresistible. In order to indulge it, he
made a voyage to Madeira, and continued dur-

ing

b Life of Columbus, c. v.
*

B o O K ing several years to trade with that island, with the

I. Canaries, the Azores, the settlements in Guinea,

and all the other places which the Portuguese had
discovered on the Continent of Africa c.

The effeas BY the experience which Columbus acquired,
of their dif-
coveriesup- during uch a variety of voyages to almost every
on him. part of the globe with which, at that time, any in-

tercourfe was carried on by sea, he was now be-
come one of the most skilful navigators in Europe.
But, not satisfied with that praise, his ambition
aimed at something more. The successful progress
of the Portuguese navigators had awakened a pirit
of curiosity and emulation, which set every man of
science upon examining all the circumstances that
led to the discoveries which they had made, or that
afforded a profpet of succeeding in any new and
bolder undertaking. The mind of Columbus, na-
turally inquisitive, capable of deep reflection, and
turned to speculations of this kind, was so often
employed in revolving the principles upon which
the Portuguese had founded their schemes of disco-
very, and the mode in which they had carried them
on, that he gradually began to form an idea of
improving upon their plan, and of accomplishing
discoveries which hitherto they had attempted in
vain.

He forms To find out a passage by sea to the East Indies,
the ideae a was the great objet in view at that period. From
to India. the time that the Portuguese doubled Cape de Verd,

this was the point at which they aimed in all their
navigations, and, in comparison with it, all their
discoveries in Africa appeared inconsiderable. The
fertility and riches of India had been known for
many ages; -its spices and other valuable com-
modities were in high request throughout Europe,
and the vast wealth of the Venetians, arising from

c Life of Columbus, c. iv. v,

¶heir

their having engrossed this trade, had raised the en- B o o K
vy of all nations. But how intent soever the Por- I
tuguefe were upon discovering a new route to those
desirable regions, they searched for it only by fleer-
ing towards the south, in hopes of arriving at India,
by turning to the east, after they had failed round
the farther extremity of Africa. This course, how-
ever, was still unknown, and, even if discovered,
was of such immense length, that a voyage from
Europe to India must have appeared an undertaking
extremely arduous, and of very uncertain iflue.
More than half a century had been employed in
advancing from Cape Non to the equator; a much
longer space of time might elapse before the more
extensive navigation from that to India could be ac-
compliihed. These refletions upon the uncertain-
ty, the danger and tediousness of the course which the
Portuguese were pursuing, naturally led Columbus to
confider whether a shorter and more direct paflage
to the East Indies might not be found out. And,
after revolving long and seriously every circum-
fiance suggested by his superior knowledge in the
theory as well as practice of navigation, after com-
paring attentively the observations of modern pilots
with the hints and conjectures of antient authors, he
at last concluded, that by failing diretly towards
the weft, across the Atlantic ocean, new countries,
which probably formed a part of the vast continent
of India, muff infallibly be discovered.

PRINCIPLES and arguments of various kinds, The princi-

and derived from different sources, induced him to hich his
adopt this opinion, seemingly as chimerical as it theory was
was new and extraordinary. The spherical figure soud.
of the earth was known, and its magnitude afcer-
tained with some degree of accuracy. From this
it was evident, that the continents of Europe, Asia,

and

B o o K and Africa, formed but a frmall portion of the ter-

n. raqueous globe. It was suitable to our ideas con-

cerning the wisdom and beneficence of the Author
of Nature, to believe that the vaRf space, ill unex-
plored, was not covered entirely by a waste unpro-
fitable ocean, but occupied by countries fit for the
habitation of man. It appeared likewise extremely
probable, that the continent, on this fide of the
globe, was balanced by a proportional quantity of
land in the other hemisphere. These conclusions
concerning the existence of another continent,
drawn from the figure and ftruture of the globe,
were confirmed by the obfervatidns and conjectures
of modern navigators. A Portuguese pilot, having
firetched farther to the weft than was usual at that
time, took up a piece of timber artificially carved,
floating upon the sea; and as it was driven towards
him by a westerly wind, he concluded that it came
from some unknown land, situated in that quarter.
Columbus's brother-in-law had found to the weft of
the Madeira isles, a piece of timber fashioned in
the fame manner, and brought by the fame wind;
and had seen likewise canes of an enormous size
floating upon the waves, which resembled those
described by Ptolemy as producions peculiar to
the East Indies . After a course of westerly winds,
trees torn up by the roots, were often driven upon
the coafis of the Azores, and at one time the dead
bodies of two men, with singular features, .which
resembled neither the inhabitants of Europe nor of
Africa, were cast ashore there.

As the force of this united evidence, arising from

theoretical principles, and practical observations,
led Columbus to expect the discovery of new coun-
tries in the Western Ocean, other reasons induc-
ed him to believe that there mufl be connected

J Lib.i. c. 17.

with

with tie continent of India. Though the ancients B o O K
had hardly ever penetrated into India farther than
the banks of the Ganges, yet some Greek authors
had ventured to defciibe the provinces beyond that
river. And, as men are prone, and at liberty, to
magnify what is remote and unknown, they re-
prelented them as regions of an immense extent.
Ctefias affirmed that India was as large as all the
reft of Asia. Oneficitus, whom Pliny the natu-
ralift follows , contended that it was equal to a
third part of the habitable earth. Nearchus aferted,
that it would take four months to march from one
extremity of it to the other, in a straight line f. ^
The journal of Marco Polo, who travelled into
Asia in the thirteenth century, and who had pro-
ceeded towards the East far beyond the limits to
which any European had ever advanced, seemed to
confirm thee exaggerated accounts of the ancients.
By his magnificent descriptions of the kingdoms of
Cathay and Cipantro, and of many other countries,
the names of which were unknown in Europe, In-
dia appeared to be a region of vast extent. From
these accounts, which, however defe&ive, were
the most accurate that the people of Europe had at
that period received, with refpea to the remote
parts of the East. Columbus drew a just conclu-
lion. He contended, that in proportion as the con-
tinent of India stretched out towards the East, it
must, in consequence of the spherical figure of the
earth, approach nearer to the islands which had
lately been discovered to the weft of Africa ; that
the distance from the one to the other was probably
not very considerable; and that the moRt diret, as
well as shortest course, to the remote regions of the
East, was to be found by failing due weft g

e Nat. His. lib. vi.c. 7. f Strab. Geogr. lib. xv. p. o .

See NOTE X1I.
VoL. I F This

B o0 K This notion concerning the vicinity of India to the

2~ 2 western parts of our continent, was countenanced

by some eminent writers among the ancients, the
fanedion of whose authority was necessary, in that
age, to procure a favourable reception to any tenet.
Aristotle thought it probable that the columns of
Hercules, or Straits of Gibraltar, were not far re-
moved from the East Indies, and that there might
be a communication by sea between them h. Se-
neca, in terms ill more explicit, affirms, that,
with a fair wind, one might fail from Spain to In-
dia in a few days. The famous Atlantic island
described by Plato, which many supposed to be a
real country, beyond which a vast unknown conti-
nent was situated, is represented by him as lying at
no great distance from Spain. After weighing all
these particulars, Columbus, in whose charater the
modesty and diffidence of true genius was united
with the ardent enthusiasm of a projector, did not
reft with such absolute assurance either upon his own
arguments, or upon the authority of the ancients,
as not to consult such of his contemporaries as were
capable of comprehending the nature of the evi-
dence which he produced in support of his opinion.
As early as the year one thousand four hundred and
feventy-four, he communicated his ideas concerning
the probability of discovering new countries, by
failing westwards, to Paul, a physician of Florence,
eminent for his knowledge of cosmography, and
who, on account both of the learning and candour
which he discovers in his reply, appears to have
been well intitled to the confidence which Colum-
bus placed in him. He warmly approved of his
plan, suggested several facts in confirmation of it,
and encouraged him to persevere in an undertak-
ing so laudable, and which must redound so much

h Ariftot. de Coelo, lib. ii. 'c. 14. edit. Du Val, Par. 1629,
Vol. i. p. 472z. Senec. Quest. Natur. lib. i. in proem.

to

to the honour of his country, and the benefit of B OO K
Europe k. I

To a mind less capable of forming and of ex- Hisfchemes

ecuting great designs than that of Columbus, all for carying
these reasonings, and observations, and authorities, cution.
would have served only as the foundation of some
plausible and fruitleis theory, which might have
furnished matter for ingenious discourse, or fan-
ciful conje&ure. But with his sanguine and en-
terprifing temper, peculation led diretly to ac-
tion. Fully satisfied himfelfwithrefpet to the truth of
his system, he was impatient to bring it to the test
of experiment, and to set out upon a voyage of dif-
covery. The first fRep towards this was to secure
the patronage of some of the considerable powers in
Europe, capable of undertaking such an enterprise.
As long absence had not extinguished the affetion
which he bore to his native country, he wished that
it should reap the fruits of his labours and inven-
tion. With this view, he laid his scheme before He applies
the senate of Genoa, and making his country the to the Ge
first tender of his service, offered to fail under the
banners of the republic, in quest of the new re-
gions which he expected to discover. But Columbus
had resided for so many years in foreign parts, that
his countrymen were unacquainted with his abili-
ties and character; and, though a maritime peo-
ple, they were so little accustomed to distant voy-
ages, that they could form no just idea of the prin-
ciples on which he founded his hopes of success.
They inconsiderately rejeted his proposal, as the
dream of a chimerical. projector, and loft for ever
the opportunity of restoring their commonwealth
to its ancient iplendor .

k Life of Columbus, c. viii,
I Herrera His. de las Indias Occid. Dec. i. lib. i. c: 7.

F HAVINq

B 0 0 K HAVING performed what was due to his coun-
\ -I try, Columbus was so little discouraged by the re-
to the king pulse which he had received, that, instead of relin-
QfPortugal; quifhing his undertaking, he pursued it with fresh

ardour. He made his next overture to John II.
king of Portugal, in whose dominions he had been
long eftabliflled, and whom he confidered, on that
account, as having the second claim to his service.
· Here every circumstance seemed to promise him a

more favourable reception. He applied to a mo-
narch of an enterp'iiing genius, no incompetent
judge in naval assails, and proud of patronising
every attempt to discover new countries.' His sub-
jeas were the moif experienced navigators in Eu-
rope, and the leafs apt to be intimidated either by
the novelty or boldness of any maritime expedi-
tion. In Portugal, Columbus's skill in his profef-
sion, as well as his personal good qualities, were
thoroughly known; and as the former rendered it
probable that his scheme was not altogether chime-
rical, the latter exempted him from the suspicion of
any sinister intention in proposing it. Accordingly,
the king listened to him in the moit gracious man-
ner, and referred the confideraticn of his plan to
Diego Ortiz, biflop of Ceuta, and two Jewith
phylicians, eminent cofmographels, whom he ws
accustomed to consult in matters of this kind. As
in Genoa, ignorance had ppofed and disappointed
Columbus ; in Lisbon, he had to combat with pre-
judice, an enemy no less formidable. The pcrfons,
according to u-hofe decision his scheme was to be
adopted or rejedted, had been the chief directors cf
the Portuguese navigations, and had advised to
search for a passage to Jndia, by fleering a couife
directly opposite to that ihich Columbus recom-
mended as shorter and more certain. They could
not, therefore, approve of his proposal, without
submitting to the double mortification, of con-

demning

demning their own theory, and of acknowledging B K
his superior sagacity, After teasing him with cap- _
tious questions, and starting innumerable objections, by whom he
with a view of betraying him into such a particular is deceived.
explanation of his fyitem, as might draw from him
a full discovery of its nature, they deferred passing a
final judgment with refpet to it. In the mean time,
they conspired to rob him of the honour and ad-
vantages which he expected from the success of his
scheme, advising the king to dispatch a vefel, fe-
cretly, in order to attempt the proposed discovery,
by following exatly the course which Columbus
teemed to point out. John, forgetting on this oc-
cafion the fentinents becoming a monarch, meanly
adopted this perfidious counsel. But the pilot, cho-
fen to execute Columbus's plan, had neither the ge-
nius, nor the fortitude of its author. Contrary
winds arose, no fight of approaching land appeared,
his courage failed, and he returned to Lisbon, ex-
ecrating the project as equally extravagant and
dangerous 1".

UPON discovering this dishonourable tranfa&ion, He leaves

Columbus felt the indignation, natural to an inge- aPotugap
nuous mind, and in the warmth of his resentment to the court
determined to break off all intercourse with a na- of Spain.
tion capable of such flagrant treachery. He in-
ftantly quitted the kingdom, and landed in Spain
towards the close of the year one thousand four hun-
dred and eighty-four. As he was now at liberty
to court the protection of any patron, whom he
could engage to approve of his plan, and to carry
it into execution, he resolved to propose it in per-
son, to Ferdinand and Isabella, who at that time
governed the united kingdoms of Castile and Ara-
gon. But, as he had already experienced the un- Sends his

brother into
m Life of Columbus, c. xi. Herrera, decad. . lib. i. . 7. England

certain

B O O K certain ilfue of applications to kings and ministers,

L. he took the precaution of fending into England his

brother Bartholomew, to whom he had fully com-
municated his ideas, in order that he might nego-
ciate, at the fame time with Henry VII. who was
reputed one of the most iagacious as well as opu-
lent princes in Europe.

Obtacles to IT was not without reason that Columbus enter-
his success
in Spain. tained doubts and fears with refpet to the recep-

tion of his proposals in the Spanish court. Spain
was, at that jundure, engaged in a dangerous war
with Granada, the lait of the Moorish kingdoms.
The wary and suspicious temper of Ferdinand was
not foimed to relish bold and uncommon designs.
Isabella, though more generous and enterpiifing,
was under the influence of her husband i all her
actions. The Spaniards had hitherto made no es-
foits to extend navigation beyond its ancient limits,
and had beheld the amazing progress of discovery
among their neighbours the Portuguese, without
one attempt to imitate or to rival them. The war
with the infidels afforded an ample field to the na-
tional activity and love of glory. Under circum-
itances so unfavourable, it was impossible for Co-
lumbus to make rapid progress with a nation, natu-
rally flow and dilatory in forming all its resolutions.
His character, however, was admirably adapted
to that of the people, whose confidence and pro-
tetion he solicited. He was grave, though cour-
teous in his deportment ; circumfpea in his words
and ations; irreproachable in his morals; and
exemplary in his attention to all the duties and func-
tions of religion. By qualities so refpetable, he not
only gained many private friends, but acquired
such general esteem, that, notwithitanding the
plainness of his appearance, suitable to the mediocri-
ty of his fortune, he was not confidered as a mere
adventurer, to whom indigence had suggested a vifi-

onary

onary projec, but was received as a person to BOOK
whose propositions serious attention was due.

SER DINAND and Isabella, though fully occupied His scheme

by their operations against the Moors, paid so by unilfu
much regard to Columbus, as to remit the confi- judges
deration of his plan to the queen's confeflbr, Ser-
dinand de Talavera. He consulted such of his
countrymen, as were supposed best qualified to de-
cide with refpea to a subjea of this kind. But
true science had, hitherto, made so little progress
in Spain, that those pretended philosophers, select-
ed to judge in a matter of such moment, did not
comprehend the first principles, upon which Co-
lumbus founded his conjetures and hopes. Some
of them, from mistaken notions concerning the
dimensions of the globe, contended that a voyage
to those remote parts.of the east, which Columbus
expected to discover, could not be performed in
less than three years. Others concluded, that ei-
ther he would find the ocean to be of infinite ex-
tent, according to the opinion of some ancient phi-
lofophers; or, if he should persist in fleering to-
wards the weft beyond a certain point, that the
convex figure of the globe would prevent his
return, and that he must inevitably perilh, in the
vain attempt, to open a .communication between
the two opposite hemispheres, which nature had for
ever disjoined. Even without deigning to enter into
any particular discussion, ome rejected the scheme
in general, upon the credit of a maxim, under
which the ignorant and unenterprifing shelter them-
selves in every age, " That it is presumptuous in
any person, to suppose that he alone pffefles know-
ledge superior to all the reft of mandkind united."
They maintained, that if there were really any
such countries as Columbus pretended, they could
not have remained so long concealed, nor would

the

B O K the M ifdom and sagacity of former ages have left

,the glory of this invention to an obscure Genoese

pilot.

who make IT required all Columbus's patience and addre's
an unfavou- to negociate with men capable of advancing such
rable report °

. S
concerning firange propositions. He had to contend not only

it. with the obstinacy of ignorance, but with what is

still more intractable, the pride of false knowledge.
After innumerable conferences, and wafting five
years in fruitless endeavours to inform and to satisfy
them. Talavera, at lait, made such an unfavouia-
ble report to Ferdinand and Iabella, as induced
them to acquaint Columbus, that until the war with
the Moors should be brought to a period, it was
impossible for them to engage in any new and ex-
pensive enterprise.

WH AT E V E R care was taken to soften the harsh-

ness of this declaration, Columbus confidered it as
a final rejecion of his proposals. But happily for
mankind, that superiority of genius, which is ca-
pable of forming great and uncommon designs, is
usually accompanied with an ardent enthusiasm,
which can neither be cooled by delays, nor damped
by disappointment. Columbus was of this sanguine
temper. Though he felt deeply the cruel blow
given to his hopes, and retired immediately from a
court, where he had been amused so long with vain
expecations, his confidence in the justness of his
own fyftem.did not diminish, and his impatience
to demonstrate the truth of it by an atual experi-
ment became greater than ever. Having courted
the protetion of sovereign fates without success,
he applied, next, to persons of inferior rank, and
addrefled successively the dukes of Medina Sidonia,
and Medina Celi, who, though fubjeas, were'
pofeifed of power and opulence more than equal

to

to the enterprise which he projeaed. His negoci- B K
ations with them proved as fruitless, as those in
which he had been hitherto engaged ; for there no-
blemen were either as little convinced by Colum-
bus's arguments as their superiors, or they were
afraid of alarming the jealousy, and offending the
pride of Ferdinand, by countenancing a scheme,
which he had rejected ".

AMI D the painful sensations occasioned by such Negociation

a succession of disappointments, Columbus had to ther in Eng-
sustain the additional distress, of having received I1nd.
no accounts of his brother, whom he had sent to
the court of England. In his voyage to that coun-
try, Bartholomew had been so unfortunate as to
fall into the hands of pirates, who having firipped
him of every thing, detained him a prisoner for
several years. At length, he made his escape, and
arrived in London, but in such extreme indigence,
that he was obliged to employ himself during a con-
derable time, in drawing and felling maps, in order
to pick up as much money as would purchase a
decent dress, in which he might venture to appear
at court. He then laid before the king the propo-
fals, with which he had been entrusted by his bro-
ther, and, notwithstanding Henry's excefive cau-
tion and parsimony, which rendered him averse to
new and expensive undertakings, he received Co-
1umbus's overtures, with more approbation, than
any monarch to whom they had hitherto been pre-
sented.

MEANWHILE, Columbus being unacquainted Columbus

with his brother's fate, and having now no prof- profe&s of
pea of encouragement in Spain, resolved to visit encourage-

ment in
Spain.
a L:fe of Columb. c. 13. Herrera, dec. . lib. i. c. 7.

the

B 0 0 K the court of England in person, in hopes of meeting

with a more favourable reception there. He had
already made preparations for this purpose, and
taken measures for the disposal of his children dur-
ing his absence, when Juan Perez, the Prior of the
monaitery of Rabida, near Palos, in which they
had been educated, earneitly olicited him to defer
his journey for a short time. Perez was a man of
considerable learning, and of ome credit with
Queen Isabella, to whom he was known perfbnally.
He was warmly attached to Columbus, with whole
abilities as well as integrity he had many oppor-
tunities of being acquainted. Prompted by curiofi-
ty or by friendship, he entered upon an accurate ex-
amination of his fyfiem, in conjunction with a
physician fettled in the neighbourhood, who was a
considerable proficient in mathematical knowledge.
This invetigation satisfied them so thoroughly,
with refpea to the solidity of the principles on
which Columbus founded his opinion, and the pro-
bability of success in executing the plan which he
proposed, that Perez, in order to prevent his coun-
try from being deprived of the glory and benefit,
which muit accrue to the patrons of such a grand
enterpiife, ventured to write to Isabella, conjur-
ing her to confider the matter anew, with the at-
tention which it merited.

MOVED by the representations of a person

whom she refpeted, Isabella desired Perez to re-
pair immediately to the village of Santa Fe, in
which, on account of the siege of Granada, the
court resided at that time, that she might confer
with him upon this important subjet. The firit
effect of their interview was a gracious invitation
1491. of Columbus back to court, accompanied with the

present of a finall fum to equip him for the jour-
ney. As there was now a certain profpet, that the

war

war withthe Moors would speed ly be brought to an B K
happy issue by the reduction of Granada, which I
would leave the nation at libeity to engage in new
undertakings; this, as well as the maK of royal
favour, with which Columbus had been lately ho-
noured, encouraged his fiiends to appear with greater
confidence than form.mrly i iuppoit of his 'clieme.
The chief of thcie, Alonib de t^iintanilla, comp-
troller of the finances in Caltile, and Luis de San-
tangel, receiver of the ecclesiastical revenues in
Aragon, whose meritorious zeal in promoting this
great design, entitles their names to an honourable
place in hiitory, introduced Columbus to many per-
sons of high rank, and intereited them warmly in
his behalf.

Bu T it was not an easy matter to inspire Ferdi- Is again dif-

nand with favourable entiments. His cold dif- appointe.
trufiful prudence fiill regarded Columbus's projet
as extravagant and chimerical, and in order to ren-
der the efforts of his partizans ineffectual, he had
the address to employ in this new negociation with
him, ome of the persons who had formerly pro-
nounced his scheme to be impracticable. To their
aftonifllment, Columbus appeared before them with
the fame confident hopes of success as formerly, and
insisted upon the fame high recompence. He pro-
posed that a small fleet should be fitted out, under
his command, to attempt the difc9very, and de-
manded to be appointed perpetual and hereditary
admiral and viceroy of all the eas and lands which
he should diicover, and to have the tenth of the
profits arifmg from them, fettled irrevocably upon
himself and his descendants. At the fame time,
he offered to advance the eight part of the fum ne-
ceffary for accomplishing his design, on condition
that he should be entitled to a proportional share
of benefit from the adventure. If the enterprise
should totally miscarry, he made no flipulation for

any

B O O K any reward or emolument whatever. Instead of

n. viewing this condut as the clearest evidence of his
' '
v full persuasion with refpel) to the truth of his own

system, or being firuck with that magnanimity,
which, after so many delays and repulies, would
stoop to nothing inferior to its original claims, the
persons with whom Columbus treated, began mean-
ly to calculate the expence of the expedition, and
the value of the reward which he demanded. The
expence, moderate as it was, they represented to be
too great for Spain, in the present exhausted state cf
its finances. They contended, that the honous
and emoluments claimed by Columbus, were ex-
orbitant, even if he should perform the utmofi of
what he had promised; and if all his sanguine
hopes hould prove illusive, such vast concefnions
to an adventurer would be deemed not only incon-
fiderate, but ridiculous. In this imposing garb of
caution and prudence, their opinion appeared so
plausible, and was so warmly fuppoited by Ferdi-
nand, that Isabella declined giving any countenance
to Columbus, and abruptly broke off the negocia-
tion with him which she had begun.

THIS was more mortifying to Columbus than

all the disappointments which he had hitherto met
with. The invitation to coui t from Isabella, like
an unexpected ray of light, had opened such prof-
peds of success, as encouraged him to hope that his
labours were at an end; but now darkness and un-
certainty returned, and his mind, firm as it Was,
could hardly support the shock of such an unfore-
seen reverse. He withdrew in deep anguish fromi
court, with an intention of prosecuting his voyage
to England, as his last reiburce.

AEOU T

ABOUT that time Granada surrendered, andSer- B K

dinand and Isabella, in triumphal pomp, took pof-
feilion of a city, the reduction of which extirpated Proves at
a foreign power from the heart of their dominions, las fuccefr-
and rendered them masters of all the provinces, 1492.
extending from the bottom of the Pyrenees to the January
frontiers of Portugal. As the flow of spirits which
accompanies fuccels elevates the mind, and renders
it enterprising, Quintanilla and Santangel, the vi-
gilant and discerning patrons of Columbus, took
advantage of this favourable situation, in order to
make one effort more in behalf of their friend.
They addressed themselves to Isabella, and, after
exprefling some surprise, that she, who had always
been the munificent patroness of generous under-
takings, lhould hesitate so long to countenance the
most splendid scheme that had ever been proposed
to any monarch, they represented to her, that
Columbus was a man of a found understanding and
virtuous character, well qualified, by his experience
in navigation, as well as his knowledge of geome-
try, to form jufi ideas with refpe& to the ftruure
of the globe and the situation of its various regions;
that, by offering to rifl his own life and fortune in
the execution of his flheme, he gave the moRl fa-
t:sfying evidence both of his integrity and hope
of fucces ; that the fum requisite for equipping such
an armament as he demanded was inconsiderable,
and the advantages which might accrue from his
undertaking were immense; that he demanded no
recompence for his invention and labour, but what
was to arise from the countries which he hould dif-
cover; that as it was worthy of her magnanimity to
make this noble attempt to extend the sphere of
human knowledge, and to open an intercourse with
regions hitherto unknown,- so it would afford the
highest fatisfadion to her piety and zeal, after re-
establishing the Christian faith in those provinces

of

B o o K of Spain from which it had been long banished, to

n.I^, discover a new world, to which she might commu-
r4. nicate the light and blessings of divine truth; that

if now he did not decide infiantly, the opportunity
would be loft irretrievably ; that Columbus was on
his way to foreign countries, where some prince,
more fortunate or adventurous, would close with his
proposals, and Spain would for ever bewail the fa-
tal timidity which had excluded her from the glory
and advantages that she had once in her power to
have enjoyed.

TH ESE forcible arguments, urged by persons of

such authority, and at a junture so well chosen,
produced the desired effet. They dispelled all
Isabella's doubts and fears; she ordered Columbus
to be inflantly recalled, declared her resolution of
employing him on his own terms, and regretting the
low fiate of her finances, generously offered to
pledge her own jewels, in order to raise as much
money as would be needed in making preparations
for the voyage. Santangel, in a tianfport of gra-
titude, kissed the queen's hand, and in order to save
her frcm having recourse to such a mortifying expe-
dient for procuring money, engaged to advance
immediately the fum that was requisite °.

The condi- COLUMBUS had proceeded some leagues on his
tirnet of h journey, when the messenger from Isabella overtook
with Spain. him. Upon receiving an account of the unexpet-

ed revolution in his favour, he returned directly to
Santa Fe, though some remainder of diffidence frill
mingled itself with his joy. But the cordial re-
ception which he met with from Isabella, toge-
ther with the near profped of setting out upon
that'voyage which had so long been the object
of his thoughts and wishes, oon effaced the

o Herrera, dec. i. lib. i. c. 8.

remembrance

remembrance of all that he suffered in Spain, dur- B o o K
ing eight tedious years of solicitation and suspense. i
The negotiation now went forward with facility and t492
dispatch, and a treaty or capitulation with Colum-
bus was signed on the seventeenth of April, one
thousand four hundred and ninety-two. The chief
articles of it were, i. Ferdinand and Isabella, as
sovereigns of the ocean, constituted Columbus their
high admiral in all the seas, islands, and continents
which should be discovered by his industry; and
flipulated, that he and his heirs for ever hould
enjoy this office, with the fame powers and prero-
gatives which belonged to the high admiral of
Carfile, within the limits of his jurifdidion. 2.
They appointed Columbus their viceroy in all the
islands and continents which he hould discover;
but if, for the better adminifiration of assai s, it
should hereafter be necessary to establish a separate
governor in any of those countiies, they authorised
Columbus to name three persons, of whom they
would chufe one for that office; and the dignity of
viceroy, with all its immunities, was likewite to be
hereditary in the family of Columbus. 3. They
granted to Columbus and his heirs for ever the tenth
of the free profits accruing from the productions
and commerce of the countries which he should
discover. 4. They declared, that if any contro-
verfy or law-suit shall arise with refpe to any mer-
cantile tranfation in the countries which should be
discovered, it should be determined by the sole
authority of Columbus, or of judges to be ap-
pointed by him. 5. They permitted Columbus,
to advance one-eighth part of what, should be ex-
pended in preparing for the expedition, and in car-
rying on commerce with the countries which he
ihould discover, and intitled him, in return, to an
eighth part of the profit .

P Life of Columbus, c. 15. Herrera, dec. . lib. i. c. 9.

THOUGH

B o O K THOUGH the name of Ferdinand appears con-

". joined with that of Isabella in this tranfation, his
.-'.- distrust of Columbus was still so violent, that he

refused to take any part in the enterprise, as king
of Aragon. As the whole expence of the expedi-
tion was to be defrayed by the crown of Castile,
Isabella reserved for her fubjeds of that kingdom
an exclusive right to all the benefits which might
redound from its success.

The pepa- As oon as the treaty was signed, Isabella, by
rations for. her attention and activity in forwarding the prepa-

rations for the voyage, endeavoured to make some
reparation to Columbus for the time which he had
loft in fruitles solicitation. By the twelfth of May,
all that depended upon her was adjuted ; and
Columbus waited on the king and queen, in order
to receive their final inftruaions. Every, thing re-
Ipeaing the destination and conduc of the voyage,
they committed implicitly to the disposal of his
prudence. But, that they might avoid giving any
just cause of offence to the king of Portugal, they
ftriCly enjoined him not to approach near to the
Portuguese settlements on the coast of Guinea, nor in
any of the other countries to which they claimed right
as difcoverels. Ilabella had ordered the ships, of
which Columbus was to take the command, to be
fitted out in the port of Palos, a small maritime
town in the province of Andalusia. As the prior
Juan Perez, to whom Columbus had already been
io much indebted, resided in the neighbourhood of
this place, le by the influence of that good ecclefi-
afeic, as well as by his own connection with the in-
habitants, not only railed among them what he
wanted of the fum that he was bound by treaty to
advance, but engaged several of them to accom-
pany him in the voyage. The chief of there afTo-
ciatcs were three brothers of the name of Pin; cn,

of

of considerable wealth, and of great experience in B o o K
naval affairs, who were willing to hazard their .,_
lives and fortunes in the enterprise . 49.

Bu T, after all the endeavours and efforts of Ifa-

bella and Columbus, the armament was not fuita-
table either to the dignity of the nation by which it
was equipped, or to the importance of the service
for which it was destined. It confited of three vef-
fels only. The largest, a ship of no considerable
burden, was commanded by Columbus, as admi-
ral, who gave it the name of Santa Maria, out of
refpet for the Blessed Virgin, whom he honoured
with singular devotion. Of the second, called the
Pinta, Martin Pinfon was captain, and his brother
Francis pilot. The third, named the Nigna,
was under the command of Vincent Yanez Pinzon.
These two were light vessels, hardly uperior in
burden or force to large boats. This squadron, if
it merits that name, was vitualled for twelve
months, and had on board ninety men, mostly
tailors, together with a few adventurers who fol-
lowed the fortune of Columbus, and some gentle-
men of Isabella's court, whom he appointed to ac-
company him. Though the expence of the un-
dertaking was one of the circumfiances that chiefly
alarmed the court of Spain, and retarded so long
the negotiation with Columbus, the fum employed
in fitting out this squadron did not exceed four
thousand pounds,

As the art of shipbuilding in the fifteenth cen-

fury was extremely rude, and the bulk and con-
ftrution of vessels were accommodated to the short
and easy voyages along the coast which they were
accustomed to perform, it is a proof of the courage
as well as enterprising genius of Columbus, that he

VoL. I. G ventured,

o O K ventured, with a fleet so unfit for a distant naviga-

,^ tion, to explore unknown eas, where he had no
,,. chart to guide him, no knowledge of the tides and

currents, and no experience of the dangers to which
he might be exposed. His eagerness to accomplish
the great design which had o long engrossed his
thoughts, made him overlook or disregard every
circumstance that would have intimidated a mind
less adventurous. He pushed forward the prepara-
tions with such ardour, and was seconded so effetu-
ally by the persons to whom Isabella committed the
filperint-ndence of th's business, that every thing
was oon in readiness for the voyage. But as Co-
lumbus was deeply impressed with sentiments of
religion, he would not set out upon an expedition
so arduous, and of which one great object was to
extend the knowledge of the Chriitian faith, with-
out imploring publicly the guidance and protec-
tion of Heaven. With this view, he, together
with all the persons under his command, marched
in solemn roceflion to the monastery of Rabida.
After confessing their fins, and obtaining absolution
from them, they received the holy sacrament from
the hands of the prior, who joined his prayers to
theirs, for the success of an enterprise which he had
so 2ealoufly patronized.

Hisdepar- NEXT morning, being Friday the third day of
Spain. August, in the year one thousand four hundred and

ninety-two, Columbus set fail, a little before fun-
rife, in pretence of a vast crowd of fpeeators, who
sent up their supplications to Heaven for the prof-
perous issue of the voyage, which they wished, ra-
ther than expeted. Columbus fleered directly
August 3. for the Canary Islands, and arrived there without

any occurrence that would have deserved notice on
any other occasion. But in a voyage of such ex-
petation and importance, every circumstance was

the

the objet of attention. The rudder of the Pinta B K
broke loose, the day after they left the harbour, .
and that accident alarmed the crew, no less super- ,41.
ftitious than unskilful, as a certain omen of the un-
fortunate destiny of the expedition. Even in the
short run to the Canaries, the ships were found to be
.Co crazy and ill appointed, as to be very improper
for a navigation which was expected to be both
long and dangerous. Columbus refitted them, how-
ever, to the best of his power, and having supplied
himself with fresh provisions, he took his departure
from Gomera, one of the most westerly of the
Canary Islands, on the sixth day of September.

HERE the voyage of discovery may properly be Thecoursh

said to begin; for Columbus holding his course due hli.
weft, left immediately the usual tra& of navigation,
and firetched into unfrequented and unknown seas.
The firfi day, as it was very calm, he made but
little way; but on the second, he loft fight of the
Canaries; and many of the ailors, dejected ali
ready and dismayed, when they contemplated the
boldness of the undertaking, began to beat their
breasts, and to shed tears, as if they were never
more to behold land. Columbus comforted them
with afiurances of success, and the profpe& of vast
wealth, in those opulent regions whither he was
conducting them. This early discovery of the fpi-
rit of his followers taught Columbus, that he'muft
prepare to struggle, not only with the unavoidable
difficulties which might be expected from the nature
of his undertaking, but with such as were likely to
arise from the ignorance and timidity of the people
under his command; and he perceived that the art
of governing the minds of men would be no less re-
quifite for accomplifhin the discoveries which he
lad in view, than naval skill and an enterprising

G z? courage.

B 0 O K courage. Happily for himself, and for the country

"·^. by which he was employed, he joined to the ar-
1 49. dent temper and inventive genius of a projeor,

virtues of another species, which are rarely united
with them. He possessed a thorough knowledge
of mankind, an insinuating address, a patient per-
severance, in executing any plan, the perfect go-
vernment of his own passions, and the talent of ac-
quiring the direEtion of those of other men. All
these qualities, which formed him for command,
were accompanied with that superior knowledge of
his profession, which begets confidence in times of

Vigilance difficulty and danger. To unskilful Spanish ailors,
and atten-
tion of o- accustomed only to coasting voyages in the Medi-
lumbus. terranean, the maritime science of Columbus, the

fruit of thirty years experience, improved by an
acquaintance with all the inventions of the Portu-
guefe, appeared immense. As oon as they put to
sea, he regulated every thing by his sole authority;
he uperintended the execution of every order;
and allowing himself only a few hours for sleep, he
was at all other times upon deck. As his course
lay through seas which had not formerly been visit-
ed, the founding-line, or instruments for obferva-
tion, were continually in his hands. After the ex-
ample of the Portuguese discoverers, he attended to
the motion of tides and currents, watched the flight
of birds, the appearance of fishes, of sea-weeds, and
of every thing that floated on the waves, and entered
every occurrence, with a minute exadtnefs, in the
journal which he kept. As the length of the voy-
age could not fail of alarming ailors habituated
only to lhort excursions, Columbus endeavoured to
conceal from them the real progress which they
made. With this view, though they run eighteen
leagues on the second day after they left Gomera,
he gave out that they had advanced only fifteen,
and he uniformly employed the fame artifice of

reckoning

reckoning short duringthe whole voyage. By the B o o K
fourteenth of September, the fleet was above two
hundred leagues to the weft of the Canary Isles, at 149z.
a greater difiance from land than any Spaniard had fopen^a-
been before that time. There they were struck larms of his
with an appearance no less aflonifhing than it was crew
new. They observed, that the magnetic needle,
in their compasses, did not point exactly to the po,
lar star, but varied a degree towards the weft; and
as they proceeded, this variation increased. This
appearance, which is now familiar, though it still
remains one of the mysteries of nature, into the
cause of which the sagacity of man hath not been
able to penetrate, filled the companions of Colum-
bus with terror. They were now in a boundless
unknown ocean, far from the usual course of navi-
gation ; nature itself seemed to be altered, and the
only guide whichthey had left was about to fail
them. Columbus, with no less quickness than in-
genuity, invented a reason for this appearance,
which, though it did not satisfy himself, seemed so
plausible to them, as dispelled their fears, or si-
lenced their murmurs.

HE still continued to lteer due weft, nearly in the

fame latitude with the Canary Islands. In this
course he came within the sphere of the trade wind,
which blows invaribly from east to weft, between
the tropics and a few degrees beyond them. He
advanced before this steady gale with such uniform
rapidity, that it was seldom necessary to shift a fail.
Whenabout four hundred leagues to the weft of the
Canaries, he found the sea so covered with weeds,
that it had a resemblance to a meadow of vast ex-
tent; and in ome places they were so thick, as to
retard the motion of the vessels. This strange ap-
pearance occasioned new alarm and disquiet. The
sailors imagined that they were now arrived at the

utmost

B 0 0 K utmost boundary of the navigable ocean; that these
,--, floating weeds would obftrut their farther progress,

149X. and concealed dangerous rocks, or some large tract

of land, which had funk, they knew not how, in
that place. Columbus endeavoured to persuade
them, that the appearance which had alarmed,
ought rather to have encouraged them, and was to
be confidered as a sign of approaching land. At
the fame time, a brik gale arose, and carried them
forward. Several birds were seen hovering about
the ship q, and direting their flight towards the
weft. The desponding crew resumed some degree
of spirit, and began to entertain fresh hopes.

These in- UPON the first of October they were, according
crease' to the admiral's reckoning, seven hundredand fe-

venty leagues to the weft of the Canaries, but left
his men flould be intimidated by the prodigious
length of the navigation, he gave out that they had
proceeded only five hundred and eighty-four leagues;
and, fortunately for Columbus, neither his own pi-
lot, nor those of the other hips, had skill sufficient
to correEt this error, and discover the deceit. They
had now been above three weeks at sea; they had
proceeded far beyond what former navigators had
attempted or deemed possible; all their prognostics
ofdifcovery, drawn from the flight of birds and
other circumfiances, had proved fallacious; the ap-
pearances of land, with which their own credulity
or the artifice of their commander had from time to
time flattered and amused them, had been altoge-
ther illusive, and their profpest of success seemed now
to be as diltant as ever. These refletions occurred
often to men, who had no other object or occupation,
than to reason and discourse concerning the intention
and circumstances of their expedition. They made

q See NOTE XIII.

impreflion,

impression, at firfi, upon the ignorant and timid, B o o K
and extending, by degrees, to such as were better
informed or more resolute, the contagion spread at 1491.
length from ship to ship. From secret whispers
and-murmurings, they proceeded to open cabals
and public complaints. They taxed their fove-
reign with inconsiderate credulity, in paying such
regard to the vain promises and rash conjectures of
an indigent foreigner, as to hazard the lives of so
many of her own fubjecs, in prosecuting a chime-
rical scheme. They affirmed that they had fully
performed their duty, by venturing so far.in an un-
known and hopeless course, and could incur no
blame for refusing, at last, to follow a desperate
adventurer to certain deftrution. They contended,
that it was necessary to think of returning to Spain,
while their crazy vessels were still in a condition to
keep the sea, but expressed their fears that the at-
tempt would prove vain, as the wind, which had
hitherto been so favourable to their course, must
render it impoflible to fail in the opposite direction.
All agreed that Columbus hould be compelled by
force to adopt a measure on which their common
safety depended. Some of the more audacious pro-
polfd, as the most expeditious and certain method
for getting rid at once of his remonfirances, to
throw him into the sea, being peruaded that, upon
their return to Spain, the death of an unsuccessful
projetor would excite little concern, and be in-
quired into with no curiosity!

Co LU MBU s was fully sensible of his perilous fitua- The addrerf

of Colum-

tion. He had observed, with great concern, the bus infcoh,
fatal operation of ignorance and of fear in produc- ing hem.
ing difaffetion among his crew, and saw that it was
now ready to burst out into open mutiny. He re-
tained, however, perfect pretence of mind. He as-
seaed to seem ignorant of their machinations. Not-

withfianding

B o o K withstanding the agitation and solicitude of his own

,mind, he appealed with a cheerful countenance,
149X. like a man iatisfied with the progreis which he

had made, and confident of lucceis. Sometimes
he employed all the arts of insinuation to Ioothe
his men. Sometimes he endeavoured to work up-
on their ambition or ava ice, by magnificent de-
scriptions of the fame and wealth which they were
about to acquire. On other occasions, he assumed a
tone of authority, and threatened them with venge-
ance from their overeign, if, by their dastardly be-
haviour, they should defeat this noble effort to pro-
mote the glory of God, and to exalt the Spanish
name above that of every other nation. Even with
seditious ailors, the words of a man whom they
had been accustomed to reverence, were weighty
and persuasive. They not only retrained them
from those violent excesses, which they meditated,
but prevailed with them to accompany their admi-
ral for some time longer.

Their fears As they proceeded, the indications of approach-
eturn. ing land seemed to be more certain, and excited

hope in proportion. The birds began to appear in
flocks, making towards the south-west. Columbus,
in immitation of the Portuguee navigators, who
had been guided, in several of their discoveries, by
the motion of birds, altered his course from due
weft towards that quarter whither they pointed
their flight. But after holding on for several days
in this new diretion, without any better success
than formerly, having seen no obje6t, during thirty
days, but the sea and the sky, their hopes subsided
faster than they had risen; their fears revived with
additional force; impatience, rage, and despair,

Danger of a appeared in every countenance. All sense of sub-
mtiny' ordination was loft: the officers, who had hitherto

concurred with Columbus in opinion, and supported

his.

his authority, now took part with the men; they as- B K
fembled tumultuously on the deck, expoftulated with _
their commander, mingled threats with their ex-
postulations, and required him infiantly to tack
about and return to Europe. Columbus perceived
that it would be of no avail to have recourse to any
of his foimer arts, which having been tried so of-
tenl had loft their effets; and that it was impollible
to rekindle any zeal for the success of the enter-
prise among men, in whose breafis fear had extin-
guilhed every generous sentiment. He saw that iluefsof
it was no less vain to think of employing either
gentle or evere measures, to quell a mutiny so ge-
neral and to violent. It was necessary, on all thei
accounts, to soothe passions which he could no lcn-
ger command, and to give way to a torrent too
impetuous to be checked. He promised solemnly
to his men that he would comply with their request,
provided they would accompany him, and obey
his commands for three days longer, and if, during
that time, land were not discovered, he would
then abandon the enterprise, and direct his course
towards Spain r,

ENRAGED as the sailors were, and impatient to Encourag.

turn their faces aga.n towards their native country, aPPfear-
this proposition did not appear to them unreafona- cef.
ble. Nor did Columbus hazard much in confining
himself to a term so short. The presages of dif-
covering land were now so numerous and promising,
that he deemed them infallible. For some days the
founding line reached the bottom, and the foil
which it brought up indicated land to be at no great
distance. The flocks of birds increased, and were
cornpoed not only of sea. fowl, but of such land

r Oviedo, Hilt. ap. Ramus. vol. iii. p. 81. E.

birds

B O O K birds as could not be supposed to fly far from the

n. shore. The crew of the Pinta observed a cane

floating, which seemed to have been newly cut,
and likewise a piece of timber artificially carved.
The fiilors aboard the Nigna took up the branch of
a tree with red berries, perfecly fresh. The clouds
around the setting fun assumed a new appearance;
the air was more mild and warm, and, during
night, the wind became unequal and variable.
From all there symptoms, Columbus was so con-
sident of being near land, that on the evening of
the eleventh of O&tober, after public prayers for
success, he ordered the fails to be furled, and the
ships to lie by, keeping ftrit watch, left they
hould be driven ahore in the night. During this
interval of fufpence and expecation, no man shut
his eyes, all kept upon deck, gazing intently to-
wards that quarter where they expeced to discover
the land, which had been so long the objet of
their wiihes.

Landdifco- ABO UT two hours before midnight, Columbus,
vr~ed. standing on the forecastle, observed a light at a

distance, and privately pointed it out to Pedro Gut-
tierez, a page of the queen's wardrobe. Guttierez
perceived it, and calling to Salcedo, comptroller
of the fleet, all three saw it in motion, as if it were
carried from place to place. A little after mid-
night, the joyful found of land, land, was heard
from the Pinta, which kept always a head of the
other hips. But, having been so often deceived
by fallacious appearances, they were now become
flow of belief, and waited, in all the anguish of
uncertainty and impatience, for the return of day.
Fidav, As soon as morning dawned, their doubts and

fears were dispelled, they beheld an island
about two leagues to the north, whose flat and
verdant fields, well fored with wood, and
watered with many rivulets, presented to them

the

the afpe& of a delightful country. The crew of B o K
the Piita initantly began the Te Dezum, as a hymn _
of thanksgiving to God, and were joined by those
of the other hips, with tears of joy and transports
of congratulation. This office of gratitude to
Heaven was followed by an at of justice totheir
commander. They threw themselves at the feet of
Columbus, with feelings of felf-condemnation
mingled with reverence. They implored him to
pardon their ignorance, incredulity, and insolence,
which had created him so much unnecefiary disquiet,
and had so often obftruded the prosecution of his
well-concerted plan; and pafling, in the warmth
of their admiration, from one extreme to another,
they now pronounced the man, whom they had so
lately reviled and threatened, to be a person infpir-
ed by Heaven with sagacity and fortitude more than
human, in order to accomplish a design, so far be-
yond the ideas and conception of all former ages.

As soon as the fun arose, all the boats were man- Firlt inter-

ned and armed. They rowed towards the island he natis.
with their colours displayed, warlike music, and
other martial pomp; and as they approached the
coast, they saw it covered with a multitude of peo-
ple, whom the novelty of the fpedacle had drawn
together, and whose attitudes and gestures expressed
wonder and aftonilhment at the strange objets
which presented themselves to their view. Colum-
bus was the firlt European who set foot in the New
World which he had discovered. He landed in a
rich dress, and with a naked sword in his hand. His
men followed, and kneeling down, they all kissed
the ground which they had so long desired to fee.
They next ereated a crucifix, and proftating them-
selves before it, returned thanks to God for con-
ducting their voyage to such an happy iflue. They
then took solemn pofefiflon of the country for the

crown

B O O K crown of Cafile and Leon, with all the formalities
a_. ,which the Portuguese were accustomed to observe

in acts of this kind, in their new discoveries .

Thaeirmu- THE Spaniards, while thus employed, were
nihment. surrounded by many of the natives, who gazed, in

silent admiration, upon ations which they could
not comprehend, and of which they did not fore-
fee the consequences. The dress of the Spaniards,
the whiteness of their skins, their beards, their arms,
appeared firange and furpiifing. The vast ma-
chines in which they had traversed the occean, that
seemed to move upon the waters with wings, and
uttered a dreadful found resembling thunder, ac-
companied with lightning and smoke, struck them
with such terror, that they began to refped their
new guefis as a superior order of beings, and con-
cluded that they were children of the Sun, who had
descended to visit the earth.

THE Europeans were hardly less amazed at the

scene now before them. Every herb, and shrub,
and tree, was different from those which flourished
in Europe. The foil seemed to be rich, but bore
few marks of cultivation. The climate, even to
Spaniards, felt warm, though extremely delight-
ful. The inhabitants appeared in the simple inno-
cence of nature, entirely naked. Their black hair,
long and uncurled, floated upon their Ihoulders, or
was bound in tresses around their heads. They
had no beards, and every part of their bodies was
perfectly smooth. Their complexion was of a
dusky copper colour, their features singular, rather
than disagreeable, their afpe gentle and timid.
Though not tall, they were well fiaped, and ac-

S Life of Columbus, -c. 22, 23. Herrera, dec. . lib.
i.. 13.

tive.

tive. Their faces, and other parts of their body, Bo o K
were fantastically painted with glaring colours. n.
They were shy at first through fear, but oon be-
came familiar with the Spaniards, and with tranf-
ports of joy received from them hawks-bells, glass
beads, and other baubles, in return for which they
gave uch provisions as they had, and some cotton
yarn, the only commodity of value that they could
produce. Towards evening, Columbus returned
to his hips, accompanied by many of the islanders
in their boats, which they called canoes, and though
rudely formed out of the trunk of a tingle tree,
they rowed them with surprising dexterity. Thus,
in the first interview between the inhabitants of the
old and the new worlds, every thing was condu&t-
ed amicably, and to their mutual satisfaction. The
former, enlightened and ambitious, formed already
vast ideas with refpet to the advantages which
they might derive from those regions that began. to
open to their view. The latter, simple and undif-
cerning, had no foresight of the calamities and de-
folation which were now approaching their country.

CoLUMBUS, who now assumed the title and Columbus

authority of admiral and viceroy, called the island titeof -
whichhe had discovered San Salvador. It is better mriral and
known by the name of Guanahani, which the natives viceroy.
gave to it, and is one of that large cluster of islands
called the Lucaya or Bahama isles. It is situated
above three thousand miles to the weft of Gomera,
from which the squadron took its departure, and
only four degrees to the south of it; so little had
Columbus deviated from the westerly course, which
he had chosen as the most proper.

COLUMBUS employed the next day in visiting Proceedsto-

the coafis of the island; and from the universal po- u"s the
verty of the inhabitants, he perceived that this was

not

B o o, K not the rich country for which he fought. But, con-

11, formably to his theory concerning the discovery of

those regions of Asia which firetched towards the
east, he concluded that San Salvador was one of
the isles which geographers described as situated
in the vast ocean adjacent to India'. Having ob-
served that most of the people whom he had seen
wore.finall plates of gold, by way of ornament, in
their nostrils, he eagerly inquired where they got
that precious metal. They pointed towards the
south, and made him comprehend by signs, that
gold abounded in countries situated in that quarter.
Thither he immediately determined to direct his
course, in full confidence of finding there those
opulent regions which had been the object of his
voyage, and would be a recompence for all his toils
and dangers. He took along with him seven of
the natives of San Salvador, that, by acquiring
the Spanish language, they might serve as. guides
and interpreters; and those innocent people confi-
dered it as a mark of. dilfinion when they were
feleted to accompany him.

Discover HE saw several islands, and touched at three of
Cuba.

the largefi, on which he bestowed the names of Sti
Mary of the Conception, Fernandina, and Isabella.
But as their foil, productions, and inhabitants, near-
ly resembled those of San Salvador, he made no
flay in any of them. He inquired every where
for gold, and received uniformly for answer, that
it was brought from the south. He followed that
course, and oon discovered a country of vast ex-
tent, not perfectly level, like those which he had
already visited, but so diversified with rising grounds,
hills, rivers, woods and plains, that he was uncertain
whether it might prove an island, or part of the con-

t Pet. Mart. epift. 13c.

tinent.

tinent. The natives of San Salvador, whom he had Bs o i
on board, called it Cuba; Columbus gave it the name
of Juanna. He entered the mouth of a large river
with his squadron, and all the inhabitants fled to the
mountains as he approached the hore. But as hd
resolved to careen his ihips in that place, he sent
some Spaniards, together with one of the people
of San Salvador, to view the interior parts of the
country. They having advanced above sixty
miles from the shore, reported, upon, their return,
that the foil was richer and more cultivated than
any they had hitherto discovered that, besides
many scattered cottages, they had found one village
containing above a thousand inhabitants; that the
people, though naked, seemed to be more intelli-
gent than those of San Salvador, but had treated
them with the fame refpetful attention, kissing
their feet, and honouring them as sacred beings
allied to Heaven; that they had given them to eat
a certain root, the taste of which resembled roasted
chefiuts, and likewise a singular species of corn
called maize, which, either when roasted whole or
ground into meal, was abundantly palatable; that
there seemed to be no four-footed animals in the
country, but a species of dogs, which could not
bark, and a creature resembling a rabbit, but of a
much smaller size; that they had observed some
ornaments of gold among the people, but of no
great value ".

THESE messengers had prevailed with some of His onjec-

.* ~ ~

~~i ..*~ ~~

|-~~ -i~ i~

-tures with

the natives to accompany them, who informed regard to it.
Columbus, that the gold of which they made their
ornaments was found in Cubanacan. By this word
they meant the middle or inland part of Cuba;
but Columbus, being ignorant of their language,
as well as unaccuflomed to their pronunciation, and
u Life of Columbus, c. 24-28. Herrera, dec. i. lib. i. c. 14.

his

B 0 o K his thoughts running continually upon his own the,

^,_ ory concerning the discovery of the East Indies, he

was led, by the resemblance of found, to suppose
that they spoke of the Great Khan, and imagined
that the opulent kingdom of Cathay, described by
Marco Polo, was not very remote. This induced
him to employ some time in viewing the country.
He visited almost every harbour, from Porto del
Principe, on the north coast of Cuba, to the eastern
extremity of the island; but, though delighted
with the beauty of the scenes, which every where
presented themselves, and amazed at the luxtriant
fertility of the foil, both which, from their novelty,
made a more lively ipreffion upon his imggina-
tion ', he did not find gold in such quantity as was
sufficient to satisfy either the avarice of his follow-
ers, or the expeaitions of the court to which he
was to return. The natives, as much astonished
at his eagerness; in quest of gold, as the Europeans
were at their ignorance and fimrplicity, pointed
towards the east, where an island which they called
Hayti was situated, in which that metal was moe
abundant than ahmong them.. Columbus ordered
his iquadron to bend its course thither; but Martii
Alonfo Pinzon, impatient to be the first who fhoukl
take pofleffion of the treasures which this country
was supposed to contain, quitted his companions;
regardless of all the admiral's signals to flacker
fail, until they should come up with him.

Discovers Co LU MBU , retarded by contrary winds, did not
Hispaniola. teach Hdyti till the sixth of December. He called the

port wherehe first touched St.Nicholas, and the island
itself Efpagnola, in honour of the kingdom by which
he was employed; and it is the only country, of
those he had yet discovered, which has retained the
name that he gave it. As he could neither meet

. See NOTE XIV,

-with

with the Pinta, nor have any intercourse with the B O K.
inhabitants, who fled in great coniernation towards ,.^
the woods, he bon quitted St. Nicholas, and failed 149X.
along the northern coast of the iflaid, he entered
another harbour, which he called Conception. Here
he was more fortunate; his people overtook a wo-
man who was flying from them, and after treating
her with great kindness, dismissed her with a pre-
sent of such toys as they knew were most valued in
those countries. The decription which he gave
to her countrymen of the humanity and wonderful.
qualities of the firangers; their admiration of the
trinkets, which she Ihewed with exultation; and
their eagerness to participate of the fame favours;
removed all their fears, and induced many of them
to repair to the harbour. The strange objets which
they beheld, and the baubles which Columbus be-
llowed upon them, amply gratified their curiosity
and their wiflles. They nearly resembled the peo-
of Guanahani and Cuba. They were naked like
them, ignorant and simple; and seemed to be equally
unacquainted with all the arts which appear most
necessary in polished societies; but they were gen-
tle, credulous, and timid, to a degree which ren-
dered it easy to acquire the acendant over them,
especially as their exceflive admiration led them
into the fame error with the people of the other
islands, in believing the Spaniards to be more than
mortals, and descended immediately from Heaven.
They possessed gold in greater abundance than their
neighbours, which they readily exchanged for bells,
beads, orpins; and, in this unequal traffic, both
parties were highly pleased, each confidering them-
selves as gainers by the tranfa&ion. Here Colum-
bus was visited by a prince or cazique of the country.
He appeared with all the pomp known among a
simple people, being carried in a fort of palanquin

XVo L . H upon

B O O K upon the ihoulders of four men, and attended by

., many of his fubjeds, who served him with great
492,. refped. His deportment was grave aid stately,

very reserved towards his own people, but with
Columbus and the Spaniards extremely courteous.
He gave the admiral some thin plates of gold, and
a girdle of curious workmanship, receiving in re-
turn presents of imall value, but highly acceptable
to him Y.

Co LU MB U S, fill intent on discovering the mines

which yielded gold, continued to interrogate all the
natives with whom he had any intercourse concern-
ing their situation. They concurred in pointing
out a mountainous country, which they called i-
bao, at ome difiance from the sea, and farther to-
wards the east. Struck with this found, which ap-
peared to him the fame with Cipango, the name by
which Marco Polo, and other travellers to the east,
distinguished the islands of Japan, he no longer
doubted with refpecE to the vicinity of the countries
which he had discovered to the remote parts of Asia;
and, in full expectation of reaching soon those re-
gions which had been the object of his voyage, he
direaed his course towards the eat. He put into a
commodious haibour, which he called St. Thomas,
and found that diftri& to be under the government
of a powerful ca2ique, named Guacanahari, who, as
he afterwards learned, was one of the five fove-
reigns among whom the whole island was divided.
He immediately ent messengers to Columbus, who,
in his name, delivered to him the present of a maflk
curior.lv fashioned, with the ears, nose, and mouth
cf beaten gold, and invited him to the place of his
residence, near the harbour now called Cape Fran-
ois, some leagues towards the eart. Columbus dif-
patched some of his officers to visit this prince, who,
as he behaved with greater dignity, seemed to

Y Life of Columrbus, c. 32. Herrera, dec. I. Jib. i.
c. 15, &c.

claim

claim more attention. They returned, with such o o t
'avourable accounts both of the country and of the _
people, as made Columbus impatient for that inter- 149.
view with Guacanahari to which he had been in-
vited.

HE failed for this purpose from St. Thomas, on One of his

the twenty-fourth of December, with a fair wind, sips loft.
and the ea perfectly calm and as, amidst the
multiplicity of his occupations, he had not shut his
eyes for two days, he retired at midnight, in order
to take ome repose, having committed the helm
to the pilot, with firit injunctions not to quit it
for a moment. The pilot, dreading no danger,
carelessly left the helm to an unexperienced cabin-
boy, and the ship, carried away by a current, was
dahed against a rock. The violence of the lhock
awakened Columbus. He ran up to the deck.
There, all was confusion and despair. He alone
retained pretence of mind. He ordered ome of
the ailors to take a boat, and carry out an anchor
astern; but, inflead of obeying, they made offtou
wards the Nigna, which was about half aleague
ditlant. He then commanded the mails to be cut
down, in order to lighten the ship; but all his en- .
deavours were too late; the vessel opened near the
keel, and filled so fast with water, that its loss was
inevitable. The smoothness of the ea, and the
timely aiftance of boats from the Nigna, enabled
the crew to save their lives. As soon as the islanders
heard of this disaster, they crowded to the fhor
with their prince Guacanahari at their head. In '
of taking advantage of the distress in which they
beheld the Spaniards, to attempt any thing to their
detriment, they lamented their misfortune'with
tears of sincere condolance. Not satisfied with this
unavailing exprefion of their sympathy, they put
to sea a vast number of canoes, and, under the di-

H 2 ib :

B O O K reaion of the Spaniards, assisted in saving whatever

could be got out of the wreck; and by the united
,492. labour of so many hands, almost every thing of va-

lue was carried ashore. As fat as the goods were
landed, Guacanahari in perton took charge of them.
By his orders, they were all deposited in one place,
and armed centinels were posted, who kept the
multitude at a distance, in order to prevent them
not only from embezzling, but from inspecting too
curiously what belonged to their guests z. Next
morning this prince visited Columbus, who was
now on board the Nigna, and endeavoured to con-
sole him for his loss, by offering all that he pof-
sessed to repair it a.

Diftrefsof THE condition of Columbus was such, that he
Columbus. flood in need of consolation. He had hitherto pro-

cured no intelligence of the Pinta, and no longer
doubted but that his treacherous associate had set fail
for Europe, that he might have the merit of car-
rying the firfi tidings of the extraordinary discoveries
which they had made, and might so far pre-occupy
the ear of their sovereign, as to rob him of the glory
and reward to which he was jufily intitled. There
remained but one vessel, and that the iialleft and
most crazy of the squadron, to traverse such a vail
ocean, and carry so many men back to Europe.
Each of those circumfiances was alarming, and filled
the mind of Columbus with the utmot solicitude.
His desire of overtaking Pinzon, and of effacing
the unfavourable impreflions which his mifreprefen-
tations might make in Spain, made it neceifary to

fReallv pft return thither without delay. Th-e.difficulty of tak-
o his crew ing such a number of persons aboard the Nigna,
in the
island. confirmed him in an opinion, which the fertility

of the country, and the gentle temper of the peo-
ple, had already induced him to form. He re-

z See NOTE XV. a Herrera, dec. i. lib. i. c. 18.

solved

solved to leave a part of his crew in the island, that, B o o K
by residing there, they might learn the language of .
the natives, fiudy their disposition, examine the 1492.
nature of the country, search for mines, prepare
for the commodious settlement of the colony, with
which he proposed to return, and thus secure and
facilitate the acquisition of those advantages which
he expected from his discoveries. When he men-
tioned this to his men, all approved of the design;
and from impatience under the fatigue of a long
voyage, from the levity natural to tailors, or from
the hopes of amassing vast wealth in a country
which afforded such promising specimens of its
riches, many offered voluntarily to be among the
number of those who should remain.

NOTHING was now wanting towards the execu- Obtains the

o stconsent of

tion of this scheme, but to obtain the consent of the natives,
Guacanahari; and his unfufpicious simplicity soon
presented to the admiral a favourable opportunity
of proposing it. Columbus having, in the best man-
ner he could, by broken words and signs, expressed
some curiosity to know the cause which had moved
the islanders to fly with such precipitation upon the
approach of his ships, he informed him that the
country was much infested by.the incursions of cer-
tain people, whom he called Carribeans, who inha-
bited several islands to the south east. These he
described as a fierce and warlike race of men, who
delighted in blood, and devoured the flesh of the
prisoners who were so unhappy as to fall into their
hands; and as upon the firfi appearance of the Spa-
niards, they were supposed to be Carribeans, whom
the natives, however numerous, durfi not face in
battle, they had recourse to their usual method of
securing their safety, by flying into the thickest
and most impenetrable woods. Guacanahari, while
speaking of those dreadful invaders, discovered

such

B o o K such symptoms of terror, as well as such conscious-

neis of the inability of his own people to resist them,
149,. as led Columbus to conclude that he would not be

alarmed at the proposition of any scheme which as-
forded him the profpet of an additional security
against their attacks. He instantly offered him the
afiiftance of the Spaniards to repel his enemies; he
engaged to take him and his people under the pro-
tetion of the powerful monarch whom he served,
and offered to leave in the island such a number of
his men, as should be sufficient, not only to defend
the inhabitants from future incursions, but to avenge
their pall wrongs.
Bnildsa THE credulous prince closed eagerly with the

proposal, and thought himself already safe under
the patronage of beings sprung from Heaven, and
superior in power to mortal men. The ground
was marked out for a small fort, which Columbus
catted Navidad, because he had landed there on
Chrifimas day. A deep ditch was drawn around
it. The ramparts were fortified with pailiades,
and the great guns, saved out of the admiral's ship,
were planted upon them. In ten days the work
was finished; that simple race of men labouring
with inconsiderate assiduity in erecting this sift mo-
nument of their own servitude. During this time
Columbus, by his caresses and liberality, laboured
to increase the high opinion which the natives en-
tertained of the Spaniards. But while he endea-
voured to inspire them with confidence in their dif-
position to do good, he wished likewise to give
them some triking idea of their power to punish
and destroy such as were the objets of their just in-
dignation. With this view, in pretence of a vast
assembly, he drew up his men in order of bat-
tle, and made an ostentatious but innocent dif-
play of the flarpnefs of the Spanish swords,

of

of the force of their spears, and the operation0 of B 0'o .K
their cross-bows. These rude people, Afrangers tp ;.'
the use of iron, and unacquainted with any hostile 1491.
weapons, but arrows of reeds pointed with the
bones of fishes, wooden swords, andjavelins hard-,
ened in the fire, wondered and trembled. Before.
this surprise or fear had time to abate, he ordered
the great guns to be fired, The sudden explosion
firuck them with such terror, that they fell flat to
the ground, covering their faces with their hands:;
and when they beheld the atonifhing effe& of the
bullets, they concluded that it was impoflible to re-,.
sift men, who had-the command of .such deftruc-,
tive instruments, and who came armed with thud-
der and lightning against their enemies.

AF'TER giving. such imprefflons both of the be- His;nftruc-

lions to

neficence and power of the Spaniards, as might thole heleft
have rendered it easy to preserve an afcenidant over iait
the minds of the natives, Columbus.appointed
thirty-eight of his people to remain in the- iflandl
He entrusted the command of these to Diego de
Arada, a gentleman of Cordova, inverting him
with the fame powers which he himself had received
from their Catholic Majesties; and furnished him
with every thing requisite for the subsistence or de-
fence of this infant colony. He itily-enjoined
them to maintain concord among themselves, to
yield an unreserved obedience to their commander,
to avoid giving offence to the natives by any-vio-
lence or exa&cion, to cultivate the friendship of Gua-
canahari, but not to put themselves in his power by
straggling in small parties, or marching too far
from the fort. He promised to revisit them oon,
with such a reinforcement of strength as might en-
able them to take full poffefflon of the country, and
to reap all the fruits of their discoveries. In the

mean

B o o K.~ mean time he engaged to mention their names to

_. t the king and queen, and to place their nerit and

services in the .most advantageous light b.

HAVING thus taken every precaution for the fe-

curity of the Colony, he left Navidad on the fourth
'493. of January, one thousand four hundred and ninety-

three, and fleering towards the east, discovered, and
gave names to molf of the harbours on the northern
coast of the island. On the sixth, he descried the
Pinta, and soon came up with her, after a fepara-
tion of more- than fix weeks. Pinzon endea-
voured to justify his condut, by pretending that
he-had been driven from his course by firess of
weather, and prevented from returning by con-
trary winds.' The admiral, though no firanger to
:; his.-perfidious intentions, or the frivolity as well as

fafehood of what he urged in his defence, was so
fenifible that this was not a proper time for venturing
Upon any high strain of authority, and felt such fa-
tisfa&tion in this junr&ion with his consort, which
delivered' him from many disquieting apprehen-
sions, that lame as Pin2on's apology was, he ad-
rmitted of it Without difficulty, and restored him to
favour. During his absence from the admiral, Pin-
zon had visited several harbours in the island, had
acquired some gold by trafficking with the natives,
but had made no discovery of any importance.

Rerolved to FROM the condition of his ships, as well as the
return to temper of his men, Columbus now found it necef-

fary to haften his return to Europe. The former,
having suffered much during a voyage of such un-
usual duration, were extremely leaky. The latter

b Oviedo ap. Ramufio. iii. p. 82. E. Herreia, dec, . lib.
i, c. zo. Life of Columbus, c. 34.

expreflcd

exprefled the utmost impatience to revisit their na- B o K
tive country, from which they had been so long I.
absent, and where they had things so wonderful 1493
and unheard-of to relate. Accordingly, on the
sixteenth of January, he direted his course towards
the north-eaf, and oon loft fight of land. He
had on board some of the natives, whom he had
taken from the different islands which he discover-
ed; and beides the gold, which was the chief ob-
set of research, he had colleted specimens of all
the productions which were likely to become sub-
jeds-of commerce in the several countries, as well
as many unknown birds, and other natural curio-
fities, which might attradt the attention and excite
the wonder of the people. The voyage was pro-
fperous to the fourteenth of February, and they had
advainced near five hundred leagues across the At-
lantic Ocean, when the wind began to rife, and A violent
continued to blow with increasing rage, which ter- tlorm arise.
minated in a furious hurricane. Every expedient
that the naval kill and experience of Columbus
could devise was employed, in order to save the
ships. But it was impoflible to withstand the vio-
lence of the florm, and as they were still far from
any land, deftrudion seemed inevitable. The
sailors had recourse to prayers to Almighty God, to
the invocation of faints, to vows and charms, to
every thing that religion ditates, or fuperfiiti-
on fuggefis to the affrighted mind of man. No
profped of deliverance appearing, they abandoned
themselves to deipair, and expected every moment
to be swallowed up in the waves. Besides the pas-
lions which naturally agitate and alarm the human
mind in such awful situations, when certain death,
in one of his most terrible forms, is before it, Co-
lumbus had to endure feelings of diftres peculiar to
himself. He dreaded that all knowledge of the Thecon
amazing discoveries which he had made was now to du o Co-
perish; mankind vwere to be deprived of every lumbus,

benefit

B O O K benefit that might have been derived from the hap-

Il- py success of his schemes, and his own name would
493. descend to posterity as that of a rash deluded adven-

turer, instead of being tranfmnitted with the honour
due to the author and conductor of the most noble
enterprise that had ever been undertaken. These
reflections extinguished all sense of his own perfo-
nal danger. Lets affected with the lots of life, than
solicitous to preserve the memory of what he had
attempted and atchieved, he retired to his cabbin,
and wrote, upon parchment, a short account of th>
voyage which he had made, of the course which he
had taken, of the situation and riches of the coun-
tries which he had discovered, and of the colony
that he had left there. Having wrapt up this in
an oiled cloth, which he inclosed in a cake of
wax, he put it into a calk carefully flopped up,
and threw it into the sea, in hopes that ome for-
tunate accident might preserve a deposit of so
much importance to the world c

Takes hel- AT length Providence interposed, to save a life
Azores. reserved for other services. The wind abated, the

sea became calm, and on the evening of the sis-
teenth they discovered land ; and though uncertain
what it was, they made towards it. They oon
knew it to be St. Mary, one of the Azores or wef-
tern isles, subject to the crown of Portugal. There
after a violent contelf with the governor, in which
Columbus displayed no less spirit than prudence,
he obtained a supply of fresh provisions, and what-
ever else he needed. One circumfiance, however,
greatly disquieted him. The Pinta, of which he
had loft fight on the firfi day of the hurricane, did
not appear; he dreaded for some time that he
had foundered at sea, and that all her crew had

c Life of Columbus, c. 37. Herrera, dec. . lib. ii. c. , 2.
See NOTE XVI.

periled:

perished: afterwards, his former suspicions recur- B o 0 K
red, and he became apprehensive that Pinzon had .
born away for Spain, that he might reach it before ,493.
him, and by giving the first account of his disco-
veries, might obtain obme hare of his fame.

IN order to prevent this, he lft the Azores as Feb. 4a.

Arrives at

soon as the weather would permit. At no great ibfson,
difiance from the coast of Spain, when almost at
the end of his voyage, and beyond the reach of
any disaster, another itorm arose, little inferior to
the former in violence; and after driving before it
during two days and two nights, he was forced to
take shelter in the river Tagus. Upon application March 4.
to the king of Portugal, he was allowed to come up
to Lisbon; and, notwitftanding the envy which it
was natural for the Portugueie to feel, when they
beheld another nation entering upon that province
of diicovery which they had hitherto deemed pecu-
liarly their own, and in its first essay, not only ri-
valling but eclipsing their fame, Columbus was re-
ceived with all the marks of diftintion due to a
man who had performed things so extraordinary
and unexpected. The king admitted him into hiw
pretence, treated him with the higheft-!-refpet, and
listened to the account which he gave of his voyage
with admiration mingled with .reget. While Co-
lumbus, on his part, enjoyed. the fatisfadion of
describing the importance of his discoveries, and
of being now able to prove the solidity of his
schemes to those very persons, who with an igno-
rance disgraceful to themselves, and fatal to their
country, had lately rejected them as the projects of
a visionary or designing adventurer d

d Life of Columbus, c. 4o, 4t. Herrera, dec. i. lib. ii. c3.

COLUMBUS

B O O K COLUMBUS was so impatient to return to Spain,

. that he remained only five days in Lisbon. On the

1493. fifteenth of March he arrived in the port of Palos,
Retu:ns to seven months and eleven days from the time when

sin' he set out thence upon his voyage. As soon as his

ship was discovered approaching the port, all the in-
habitants of Palos ran eagerly to the shore, in or-
der to welcome their relations and fellow-citizens,
and to hear tidings of their voyage. When the
prosperous issue of it was known, when they be-
held the strange people, the unknown animals, and
singular productions brought from the countries
which had been discovered, the effusion of joy was
general and unbounded. The bells vere rung,
the cannon fired; Columbus was received at land-
ing with royal honours, and all the people, in so-
lemn proceflion, accompanied him and his crew to
the church, where they returned thanks to Heaven,
which had so wonderfully conducted and crowned
with success, a voyage of greater length and of more
importance, than had been attempted in any former
age. On the evening of the fame day, he had
the satisfaction of feeing the Pinta, which the vio-
lence of the tempest had driven far to the north,
enter the harbour.
i4s recep- THE si rft care of Columbus was to inform the

tn' king and queen, who were then at Barcelona, of his

arrival and success. Ferdinand and Isabella, no less
af-cnifhed than delighted with this unexpected event,
returned an answer in terms the most respectful and
flattering to Columbus, requefling him to repair
immediately to court, that from his own mouth,
they might receive a full detail of his extraordinary
services and discoveries. Du: ing his journey to Bar-
celona, the people crowded from the adjacent coun-
try, following him every where with admiration

and

and applause. His entrance into the city was con- B o O K
duted, by order of Ferdinand and Iiabella, with .,
pomp suitable to the great event, which added ,493.
iuch distinguishing lufitre to their reign. The peo-
ple whom he brought along with him from the
countries which he had discovered, marched firfr,
and by their singular complexion, the wild peculia-
rity of their features, and uncouth finery, appeared
like men of another species. Next to them were
carried the ornaments of gold, fashioned by the
rude art of the natives, the grains of gold found in
the mountains, and dust of the fame metal gathered
in the rivers. After there appeared the various
commodities of the new discovered countries, to-
gether with their curious producions. Columbus
himself closed the procession, and attrated the eyes
of all the fpetators, who gazed with admiration
on the extraordinary man, whose superior sagacity
and fortitude had conduEted their countrymen, by
a route concealed from past ages, to the knowledge
of a new world. Ferdinand and Isabella received
him clad in their royal robes, and feated upon a
throne, under a magnificent canopy. When he
approached they stood up, and railing him as he
kneeled to kifs their hands, commanded him to
take his feat upon a chair prepared for him, and to
give a circumstantial account of his voyage. He
delivered it with a gravity and composure no less
suitable to the disposition of the Spanish nation,
than to the dignity of the audience in which he
spoke, and with that modest simplicity which cha-
raderifes men of superior minds; who, satisfied
with having performed great ations, court not
vain applause by an ofientatious dilplay of their ex-
ploits. When he had finished his'narration, the
king and queen, kneeling down, offered up so-
lemn thanks to Almighty God for the discovery of
those new regions, from which they expected so

many

B O O K many advantages to flow in upon the kingdoms

iibjet to their government e. Every mark of ho-
1493. nour that gratitude or admiration could suggest was

conferred upon Columbus. Letters patent were
issued, confirming to him and to his heirs all the
privileges contained in the capitulation concluded at
Santa Fe; his family was ennobled; the king and
queen, and, after their example, the courtiers,
treated him, on every occasion, with all the cere-
monious respect paid to persons of the highest rank.
But what pleased him most, as it gratified the en-
terprifing ativity of his mind, bent continually
upon great objects, was an order to equip, without
delay, an armament of such force, as .ht enable
him not only to take poffefion of the countries
which he had already discovered, but to go in
search of those more opulent regions, which he still
confidently expected to finds.

Aftoni- WHILE preparations were making for this ex-
mankind at pedition, the fame of Columbus's successful voyage
his difcove- spread over Europe, and excited general attention.

ies. The multitude, firuck with amazement when they

heard that a new world had been found, could hard-
ly believe an event so much above their conception.
Men of science, capable of comprehending the na-
ture, and of discerning the effects, of this great
discovery, received the account of it with admiration
and joy. They spoke of it with rapture, and con-
gratulated one another upon their felicity, in hav-
ing lived at the period when, by this extraordinary
event, the boundaries of human knowledge were
so much extended, and such a new field of inquiry

e See NOTE XVII.
f Life of Columbus, c. 42, 43, Herrera, dec. . lib. ii. . 3.

and

and observation opened, as would lead mankind to B o o K
a perfect acquaintance with the ftruEture and pro- ,n-
dutions of the habitable globe h Various opini-
ons and conjectures were formed concerning the
new-found countries, and what division of the earth
they belonged to. Columbus adhered tenaciously
to his original opinion, that they should be reckon-
ed a part of those vast regions in Asia, compre-
hended under the general name of India. This
sentiment was confirmed by the observations which
he made concerning the productions of the countries
which he had discovered, Gold was known to
abound in India, and he had met with such promif-
ing samples of it in the islands which Hi visited, as
led him to believe that rich mines of it might be
found. Cotton, another production of the East
Indies, was common there. The pimento of the
islands he imagined to be a species of the Eaft-In-
dian pepper. He mistook a root, somewhat re-
fembling rhubarb, for that valuable drug, which
was then supposed to be a plant peculiar to the
East Indies'. The birds which he had brought
home were adorned with the fame rich plumage
that distinguishes those of India, The alligator of
the one country appeared to be the fame with the
crocodile of the other. After weighing all these
circumstances, not only the Spaniards, but the
other nations of Europe, seem to have adopted the
opinion of Columbus. . The countries which he
had discovered were confidered as a part of India.
In consequence of this notion, the name of Indies is Difinguih.
given to them by Ferdinand and Isabella, in a ratifi- ed by the
cation of their former agreement, which was granted the Wefi
to Columbus upon his return . Even after the Indies.
error which gave rife to this opinion was detected,
and the true position of the.New world was afcer-

h P. Mart. epif. 133, 134, 135. See NOTE XVIII.

Herrera, dec. i. lib. i c. 20. Gomara Hifl. c. 17.
k Life of Columbus, c. 44.

tained,

B o O K tained, the name has remained, and the appella-

n. tion of tVeft Indies is given by all the people of Eu-
1493. rope to the country, and that of Indians to its inha-

bitants.

prepaitions THE name by which Columbus diflinguihed
voya ,e. the countries which he had discovered was so invit-

ing; the specimens of tllhir riches and fertility,
which he produced, were so considerable ; and the
reports of his companions, delivered frequently with
the exageration natural to travellers, so favourable;
that they exciied a wonderful spirit of enterprise
among the Spaniards. Though little accustomed
to naval expeditions, they were impatient to set
out upon another voyage. Volunteers of every
rank solicitcd to be employed. Allured by the vast
proilec s which opened to their ambition and ava-
rice, neither the length nor danger of the naviga-
tion intimidated them. Cautious as Ferdinand was,
and averse to every thing new or adventurous, he
seemed to have catched the fame spirit with his sub-
jedts. Under its influence, preparations for a fe-
cond expedition were carried on with a rapidity
unusual among the Spaniards, and to an extent that
would be deemed not inccnfiderable in the present
age. The fleet confifled of seventeen ships, some
of which were of gcod burden. It had on board
fifteen hundred perions, among whom were many
of noble familics, xho had fervedin honourable
fRations. The greater part of these being defined
to remain in the country, they were furnished with
every thing requisite for ccnqueft or settlement, with
all kinds of Eulopean domestic animals, with fucll
feeds and plants as vere most likely to thrive in the
climate cf the iWeit Indies, with utensils and in-
ftruments (cf every fort, and with such artificers as
might be most useful in an infant colony '.

i Herrera, dec. . lit. ii. c. 5. Life of Colunmbus, c. 45.

BUT,

BUT, formidable and well provided as this fleet B

was, Ferdinand and Isabella did not reft their title i
to the poffeflion of the newly-difcovered countries 1493.
upon its operations alone. The example of the pain to thf
Portuguese, as well as the superstition of the age, NewWold
made it necessary to obtain from the Roman pon- byfihrePop.
tiff a grant of those territories which they wiflled to
occupy. The Pope, as the vicar and reprefenta-
tive of Jesus Christ, was supposed to have a right
of dominion over all the kingdoms of the earth.
Alexander VI. a pontiff infamous for every crime
that disgraces humanity, filled the papal throne at
that time. As he was born Ferdinand's fubjeft,
and very solicitous to secure the protection of that
monarch, in order to facilitate the execution of his
.ambitious schemes in favour of his own family, he
infiantly complied with his request. By an at of
liberality which cost him nothing, and that served
to eflablifh the jurifdiaion and pretensions of the
papal fee, he betlowed on Ferdinand and Isabella
all the countries inhabited by Infidels, which they
had discovered, or should discover ; and in virtue
of that power which he derived from Jesus Christ,
he vested in the crown of Castile a right to vast re-
gions, to the poffeflion of which he himself was so
far from having any title, that he was unacquainted
with their situation, and even with their existence.
As it was necessary to prevent this grant from inter-
fering with that formerly made to the crown of Por-
tugal, he appointed that a line, supposed to be
drawn from pole to pole, a hundred leagues to the
westward of the Azores, should serve as the limit
between them; and, in the plenitude of his power,
conferred all to the east of this imaginary line
upon the Portuguese, and all to the weft of it upon
the Spaniards . Zeal for propagating the Chriflian
faith was the consideration employed by Ferdinand

m Herrera, dec. . lib. ii. c. 4. Torquemada Mon. Ind,
lib. xviii. c. 3.

VoL.I. I in

B o0 K in soliciting this bull, and is mentioned by Alexan-
.,-j der as his chief motive for issuing it. In order to

1493 manifest tome concern for this laudable object, fe-

veral friars, under the direction of Father Boyl, a
Catalonian monk of great reputation, as apoftolical
vicar, were appointed to accompany Columbus,
and to devote themselves to the inftrution of the
natives. The Indians whom Columbus had brought
along with him, having received ome tinture of
Chiffian knowledge, were baptized with much so-
lemnity, the king himself, the prince his son, and
the chief persons of his court, flanding as their god-
fathers. Those first fruits of the New World have
not been followed by such an increase as pious men
wished, and had reason to expect.

Second SER DINAND and Isabella having thus acquired a
Cvoyagen title, which was then deemed completely va-

lid, to extend their discoveries, and to efitabliih
their dominion over such a vast portion of the globe,
nothing now retarded the departure of the fleet.
Columbus was extremely impatient to revisit the co-
lony which he had left, and to pursue that career of
glory upon which he had entered. He set fail from
the bay of Cadiz on the twenty-fifth of September,
and touching again at the island of Gomera, he
fleered farther towards the south than in his former
voyage. By holding this course, he enjoyed more
ileadily the benefit of the regular winds, which
reign within the tropics, and was carried towards a
large cluster of islands, situated considerably to the
east of those which he had already discovered. On
the twenty-fixth day after his departure from Go-
Nv?. 2. mear, he made land n. It was one of the Caribbee

or Leeward iiands, to which he gave the name of
Del.ada, on account of the impatience of his crew
to discover some part of the New World. After

Oviedo ap. Ramus iii. 85. B.

this

this he visited fucceflively Dominica, Marigalante, B o o K
Guadalupe, Antigua, St. John de Porto Rico, and
several other islands, scattered in his way as he ad- ,493.
vanced towards the north-west. All there he found
to be inhabited by that fierce race of people whom
Guacanahari had painted in such frightful colours.
His descriptions appeared not to have been exagge-
rated, The Spaniards, as often as they landed,
met with such a reception as convinced them of
their martial and daring spirit; and they discovered
in their habitations the relics of those horrid feasts
which they had made upon the bodies of their ene-
nies taken in war.

BUT as Columbus was eager to know the state Arrives at

of the colony which he had planted, and to supply Hifnol.v
it with those neceflaries of which he supposed it to
be in want, he made no lfay in any of those islands,
and proceeded directly to Hispaniola . When he
arrived off Navidad, the ltation in which he had
left the thirty-eight men under the command of
Arada, he was astonished that none of them ap-
peared, and expeced every moment to fee them
running with transports of joy to welcome their
countrymen. Full of solicitude about their safety,
and foreboding in his mind what had befallen them,
he rowed instantly to land. All the. natives from
whom he might have received information had fled.
But the fort which he had built was entirely demo-
lifhed, and the tattered garments, the broken arms
and ute.ifils scattered about it, left no room to
doubt concerning the unhappy fate of the garri-
Con P.

0 P. Martyr. dec. p, r5. i8. Herrera, dec. i. ".i. ii. c. 7.

Life of Columbus, c. 46, &c. P Hist. de Cuia de los Pa.
lacios. MS.

I 2While

B O O K While the Spaniards were shedding tears over those

n. fad memorials of their fellow-citizens, a brother of
1493- the cazique Guacanahari arrived. From him Co-

Thefate of lumbus received a particular detail of what had
whomhe happened after his departure from the island. The
left hee, familiar intercourse of the Indians with the Spa-

nialds tended gradually to diminish the fuperflitrous
veneration with which their first appearance had in-
spired that simple people. By their own indifcre-
tion and ill conduct, the Spaniards speedily effaced
those favourable impreflions, and soon convinced
the natives, that they had all the wants, and weak-
neffes, and passions of men. As soon as the pow-
erful refhaints which the pretence and authority of
Columbus imposed was withdrawn, the garrison
threw off all regard for the officer whom he had in-
vested with command. Regardless of the prudent
inftrutions which he had given them, every man
became independent, and gratified his desires with-
out controul. The gold, the women, the provifi-
ons of the natives, were all the prey of those licen-
ticus opprefilbs. They ramned in finall parties
over the island, extending their rapacity and info-
lenceto every corner of it. Gentle and timid as
the people were, those unprovoked injuries at length
exhausted their patience, and rouzcd their courage.
The cazique of Cibao, whole territories the Spa-
niards chiefly infested on account of the gold which
they contained, surprised and cut off several of
them, while they straggled in as perfect security as
if their conduct had been altogether inoffensive.
He then am¢embe!d his fubjeds, and surrounding
the fort, set it on fire. Some of the Spaniards were
killed in defending it, the reft perified in attempt-
ing to make t r escape by crossing an arm of the
/ sea. Guacanahari, whom all their exactions had

not alienated from the Spaniards, took arms in their

beha!f,

behalf, and endeavouring to protect them, had re- B o O K
ceived a wound, by which he was still confined 4q .

THOUGH this account was far from removing Hisp,4uent

the suspicions which the Spaniards entertained with condua.
refipet to the fidelity of Guacanahari, Columbus
perceived so clearly that this was not a proper junc-
ture for inquiring into his conduct with scrupulous
accuracy, that he rejeAed the advice of several of his
officers, who urged him to seize the person of that
prince, and to revenge the death of their countrymen
by attacking his fubjedLs. He represented to them the
necessity of securing the friendship of some poten-
tate of the country, in order to facilitate the fettle-
ment which they intended, and the danger of driv-
ing the natives to unite in some desperate attempt
against them, by such an ill-timed and unavailing
exercise of rigour. Instead of wafting his time
in punishing past wrongs, he took precautions for
preventing any future injury. With this view, he
made choice of a fttuation more healthy and com-
modious than that of Navidad. He traced out the
plan of a town in a large plain near a spacious bay,
and obliging every person to put his hand to a work
on which their common safety depended, the houses
and ramparts were oon so far advanced by their
united labour, as to afford them shelter and fecu-
rity. This rising city, the firit that the Europeans
founded in the New world, he named Isabella, in
honour of his patroness the queen of Castile .

IN carrying on this neceflary work, Columbus Dircontentj

of his fol-
had not only to fuflain all the hardships, and to lowrs.'

q P. Martyr, decad. p. 2z, &c. Herrera, dec. . lib. ii.

c. 7. 9. Life of Columbus, c. 49, So. r Life ot Co-
hluibus, c. 51. Hetera, dec. . lib. ii. c. Io.

encounter

B O O K encounter all the difficulties, to which infant colo-

IL nies are exposed when they fettle in an uncultivated
1493. country, but he had to contend with what was

more insuperable, the laziness, the impatience, and
mutinous disposition of his followers. By the ener-
vating influence of a hot climate, the natural inac-
tivity of the Spaniards seemed to increase. Many
of them were gentlemen, unaccustomed to the fa-
tigue of bodily labour, and all had engaged in the
enterprise with the sanguine hopes excited by the
splendid and exaggerated descriptions of those who
returned with Columbus from his firit voyage, or
by his own mistaken idea that the country which
he had discovered was either the Cipango of Marco
Polo, or the Ophirr, from which Solomon im-
ported those precious commodities which suddenly
diffused such extraordinary riches through his king-
dom. But when, initead of that golden harvest
which they had expeted to reap without toil or
pains, the Spaniards saw that their profpeat of
wealth was remote as well as uncertain, and that it
could not be attained but by the flow and perfever-
ing efforts of industry, the disappointment of those
chimerical hopes occasioned such dejection of mind
as bordered on despair, and led to general difcon-
tent. In vain did Columbus endeavour to revive
their spirits by pointing out the fertility of the foil,
and exhibiting the specimens of gold daily brought
in from different parts of the island. They had
not patience to wait for the gradual returns which
the former might yield, and the latter they de-
fpiLd as scanty and inconsiderable. The spirit of
ditaffection spread, and a conspiracy was formed,
which might have been fatal to Columbus and the
colony. Happily he discovered it, and seizing the
ringleaders, punished fcme of them, sent others
priobners into Spain, whither he dispatched twelve

T P. Martyr. dec. p. 29.

of

of the ships which had served as transports, with an B K
earnest reqieft for a reinforcement of men and a v
large supply of provisions. .

MEANWHILE in order to banish that idleness 1494?

which by allowing his people leisure to brood over into the
their disappointment, nourished the spirit of dilcon- tate of the
tent, he planned several expeditions into the interior county.
part of the country. He sent a detachment, under
the command of Alonfo de Ojeda, a vigilant and
enterprising officer, to visit the diftri& of Cibao,
which was said to yield the greatest quantity of
gold, and followed him in person with the main March ir.
body of his troops. In this expedition, he displayed
all the pomp of military magnificence that he
could exhibit, in order to strike the imagination of
the natives. He marched with colours flying, with.
martial music, and with. a small body of cavalry
that paraded sometimes in the front and sometimes
in the rear. As those were the first horses that ap-
peared in the New World, they were objeas of
terror no less than admiration to the Indians, who
having no tame animals themselves, were unac-
quainted with that vast accession of power, which
man hath acquired by fubjeaing them to his do-
minion. They imagined them to be rational crea-
tures, that formed but one animal with their riders.
They were astonished at their speed, and confidered
their impetuosity and firength as irresistible. But
while Columbus endeavoured to inspire the natives
with a dread of his power, he did not neglet the
arts of gaining their love and confidence. He ad-
hered scrupulously to the principles of integrity
and justice in all his tranfaAions with them, and
treated them, on every occasion, not only with hu-

s Herrera, dec. I. lib ii. c. io, It.

manity,

B o o K manity, but with indulgence. The diftriC of Ci-

,. bao answered the description given of it by the na-
1,,.' tives. It was mountainous and uncultivated, but

in every river and brook gold was gathered eitherin
dust or in grains; tome of which were of considerable
size. The Indians had never opened any mines in
search of gold. To penetrate into the bowels of the
earth, and to refine the rude ore,-were operations too
complicated for their talents and industry, and they
had no such high value for gold as to put their in-
genuity and invention upon the firetch in order to
obtain it . The finall quantity of that precious
metal which they possesed, was either picked up in
the beds of the rivers, or washed from the moun-
tains by the heavy rains which fall within the tro-
pics. But, from those indications, the Spaniards
could no longer doubt that the country contained
rich treasures in its bowels, of which they hoped
soon to be masters u. In order to fecue the com-
mand of this valuable province, Columbus ereted
a fnali fort to which he gave the name of St. Tho-
mas, by way of ridicule upon some of his incredu-'
lous followers, who would not believe that the
country produced gold, until they saw it with their
own eyes, and touched it with their hands w.

The diirers THE account of those promising appearances
tand^orafC-of wealth in the country of Cibao came very
colony in- seasonably to comfort the defjIonding colony,
creae ' which was affe&ed with distresses of various kinds.

The flock of provisions which had been brought
from Europe was mofily consumed; what re-
mained was so much corrupted by the heat and
moiflure of the climate, as to be almost unfit

t Oviedo, lib iii. p. go. A. u P. Martyr. dec. p. 32.
w Herrera, dec. . lib. ii. c. 12. Life of Columbus, c. 52.

for

for use; the natives cultivated so small a portion B o o K
of ground, and with so little skill, that it hardly I.
yielded what .was sufficient for their own subsistence; 1494,
the Spaniards at Isabella had hitherto neither time
nor leisure to clear the foil, so as to reap any confi-
derable fruits of their own industry. On all these
accounts, they became afraid of perishing with
hunger, and were reduced to live already at short
allowance. At the fame time, the diseases predo-
minant in the torrid zone, and which rage chiefly
in those uncultivated countries, where the hand of
indufry has not opened the woods, drained the
marshes and confined the rivers within a certain
channel, began to spread among them. Alarmed
at their violence and unusual symptoms, they ex-
claimed against Columbus and his companions in
the former voyage, who, by their splendid but
deceitful descriptions of Hispaniola, had allured
them to quit their native country for a barbarous,
uncultivated land, where they must either be cut off
by famine, or die of unknown diftempets. Seve-
ral of the officers and persons of note, inflead of
checking, joined in those seditious complaints. Fa-
ther Boyl, the apoftolical vicar, was one of the
moit turbulent and outrageous. It required all the
authority and address of Columbus to re-establish
subordination and tranquillity in the colony. Threats
and promises were alternately employed for this
purpose; but nothing contributed more to sooth
the malcontents than the profpet of finding, in
the mines of Cibao, such a rich store of treasure as
would be a recompence for all their sufferings, and
efface the memory of former disappointments.

WHEN, by his unwearied endeavours, concord Columbus

and order were so far reflored, that he could venture atnmdifco-
to leave the island, Columbus resolved to pursue his veries.
discoveries, that he might be able to ascertain whe-

ther

B o o K ther those new countries with which he had opened

n. a communication, were connected with any region
494. of the earth already known, or whether they were

to be confidered as a separate portion of the globe,
hitherto unvisited. He appointed his brother Don
Diego, with the assistance of a council of officers,
to govern the island in his absence; and gave the
command of a body of ibldiers to Don Pedro Mar-
garita, with which he was to visit the different
parts of the island, and endeavour to eftabliih the
authority of the Spaniards among the inhabitants.
Haying left them very particular inftrutions with
refpet to their conduct, he weighed anchor on the
twenty-fourth of April, with one ship and two
small barks under his command. During a tedious
voyage of full five months, he had a trial of almost
all the numerous hardships to which persons of his
profeflion are exposed, without making any disco-
very of importance, except the island of Jamaica.
As he ranged along the southern coafi of Cuba ,
he was entangled in a labyrinth formed by an in-
credible number of small islands, to which le gave
the name of the Queen's Garden. In this unknown
course, among rocks and shelves, he was retarded
by contrary winds, aflaulted with furious florms,
and alarmed with the terrible thunder and light-
ning which is often almofi inceftant between the tro-
pics. At length his provisions fell short ; his crew,
exhausted with fatigue as well as hunger, murmur-
ed and threatened, and were ready to proceed to
the most desperate extremities against him. Beset
with danger in such various forms, he was obliged
to keep continual watch, to observe every occur-
rence with his own eyes, to issue every order, and
to superintend the execution of it. On no occasion,
was the extent of his ikill and experience as a na-
yigator so much tried. To there the squadron

owed
x See NOTE XIX.

owed its safety. But this unremitted fatigue of B o O K
body and intense application of mind, overpower- I.
ing his constitution, though naturally vigorous and
robust, brought on a feverish disorder, which ter-
minated in a lethargy, that deprived him of sense
and memory, and had almost proved fatal to his
life Y.

BUT, on his return to Hispaniola, the sudden Sept. zf.

emotion of joy which he felt upon meeting with his tur hfinsr
brother Bartholomew at Isabella, occasioned such a his brother

Bartholo-

flow of spirits as contributed greatly to his recove- mew at la-
ry. It was now thirteen years since the two bro- bella.
thers, whom similarity of talents united in close
friendship, had separated from each other, and
during that long period there had been no inter-
course between them. Bartholomew, after finish-
ing his negociation in the court of England; had
set out for Spain by the way of France. At Paris
he received an account of the extraordinary disco-
veries which his brother had made in his first voy-
age, and that he was then preparing to embark on
a second expedition. Though this naturally in-
duced him to pursue his journey with the utmost
dispatch, Columbus had failed for Hispaniola before
he reached Spain. Ferdinand and Isabella received
him with the refpea due to the brother of a man
whose merit and services rendered him so confpicu-
ous; and as they knew what consolation his pre-
fence would afford to Columbus, they persuaded
him to take the command of three ships, which
they had appointed to carry provisions to the colo-
ny at Isabella z.

y Life of Columbus, c. 4, &c. Herrera, dec. . lib. ii. c.
13, 4. P. Maityr. dec. p. 34, &c.

z Herrera, dec. . lib. ii. c. 5.

HE

B O K ' HE could not have arrived at any juncture when

a._, Columbus flood more in need of a friend capable of
1494. aflifiing him with his counsels, or of dividing with

The Indians him the cares and burden of government: For
take arms
against the although the provisions now brought from Europe,
Spaniards. afforded a temporary relief to the Spaniards from

the calamities of famine, the supply was not in
such quantity as to support them long, and the
island did not hitherto yield what was sufficient for
their fuflenance. They were threatened with ano-
ther danger, fill more formidable than the return
of scarcity, and which demanded more immediate
attention. No sooner did Columbus leave the
island on his voyage of discovery, than the fol-
diers under Margarita, as if they had been set free
from discipline and subordination, scorned all re-
itraint. Initead of conforming to the prudent in-
firuations of Columbus, they dispersed in firaggling
parties over the island, lived at discretion upon the
natives, wafted their provisions, seized their wo-
men, and treated that inoffensive race of men with
all the insolence of military oppreflion a.

As long as the Indians had any profpedt that

their sufferings might come to a period by the vo-
luntary departure of the invaders, they submitted
in silence, and difembled their sorrow ; but they
now perceived that the yoke would be as permanent
as it was intolerable. The Spaniards had built a
town, and surrounded it with ramparts. They had
erected forts in different places. They had inclosed
and own several fields. It was apparent that they
came not to visit the country, but to fettle in- it.
Though the number of those firangers was not con-
fiderable, the slate of cultivation among this rude

a P. Iartyr, dec. p. 47.

people

people was so imperfect, and in such exat propor- B o o K
tion to their own consumption, that it was with
difficulty they could afford fubfiftance to their new 494.
guefis. Their own mode of life was so indolent
and inative, the warmth of the climate so ener-
vating, the conflitution of their bodies naturally so
feeble, and so unacuftomed to the laborious exerti-
ons of industry, that they were satisfied with a pro-
portion of food amazingly small. A handful of
maize, or a little of the insipid bread made of the
caffada-root, was sufficient to support men, whose
itrength and spirits were not exhausted by any vi-
gorous efforts either of body or mind. The Spani-
ards, though the most abstemious, of all the European
nations, appeared to them excessively voracious. One
Spaniard consumed as much as several Indians. This
keenness of appetite surprised them so much, and
seemed to them to be so insatiable, that they sup-
posed the Spaniards had left their own country,
because it did not produce as much as was requisite
to gratify their immoderate desire of food, and had
come among them in quest of nourishment b. Self-
preservation prompted them to wish for the depar-
ture of guefis who wafted so fast their slender flock
of provisions. The injuries which they suffered,
added to their impatience for this event. They
had long expected that the Spaniards would retire
of their own accord. They now perceived that,
in order to avert the destruction with which they
were threatened, either by the flow consumption of
famine, or by the violence of their oppreflors, it
was neceflary to assume courage, to attack those
formidable invaders with united force, and drive
them from the settlements of which they had vio-
lently taken possession.

b Herrera, dec. . lib. ii. c. 17.

SUCH

B o o K SUCH were the sentiments which universally pre-

I. vailed among the Indians, when Columbus returned

to Isabella. Inflamed by the unprovoked outrages of

War with the Spaniards, with a degree of rage of which their
them. gentle natures, formed to susser and submit, eemed

hardly susceptible, they waited only for a signal
from their leaders to fall upon the colony. Some
of the casiques had already furprited and cut off
several of the stragglers. The dread of this im-
pending danger united the Spaniards, and re-efta-
blifhed the authority of Columbus, as they saw
no profpet of safety but in committing themselves
to his prudent guidance. It was now neceflary to
have recourse to arms, the employing of which
against the Indians, Columbus had hitherto avoided
with the greatest solicitude. Unequal as the con-
flit may seem, between the naked inhabitants of
the New World, armed with clubs, sticks hardened
in the fire, wooden swords, and arrows pointed
with bones or flints; and troops accustomed to the
discipline, and provided with the initruments of
deitruCtion known in the European art of war, the
situation of the Spaniards was far from being ex-
empt from danger. The vast superiority of the
natives in number, compensated many defects.
An handful of men was about to encounter a whole
nation. One adverse event, or even any unfore-
seen delay in determining the fate of the war,
might prove fatal to the Spaniards. Conscious that
iuccefs depended on the vigour and rapidity of his
operations, Columbus instantly assembled his forces.
They were reduced to a very small number. Difea-
fes, engendered by the warmth and humidity of the
country, had raged among them with much vio-
lence; experience had not yet taught them the art
either of curing there, or the precautions requisite
for guarding against them; two-thirds of the origi-
nal adventurers were dead, and many of those who

survived

!irvived were incapable of service . The body B 0 0 K
which took the field consisted only of two hundred -
foot, twenty horse, and twenty large dogs ; and how 1495.
firange soever it may seem to mention the last as March 4.
composing part of a military force, they, were not
perhaps the least formidable and deftruetive of the
whole, when employed against naked and timid
Indians. All the caziques of the island, Guacana-
hari excepted, who retained an inviolable attach-
ment to the Spaniards, were in arms to oppose
Columbus, with forces amounting, if we may be-
lieve the Spaniih historians, to a hundred thousand
men. Inflead of attempting to draw the Spaniards
into the fafneffes of the woods and mountains,
they were so imprudent as to take their flation in the
Vega Real, the most open plain in the country.
Columbus did not allow them time to perceive their
error, or to alter their position. He attacked them
during the night, when undisciplined troops are
least capable of ating with union and concert, and
obtained an easy and bloodless victory. The con-
fiernation with which the Indians were filled by the
noite and havoc made by the fire-arms, by the im-
petuous force of the cavalry, and the fierce onset of
the dogs was so great, that they threw down their
weapons, and fled without attempting resistance.
Many were slain; more were taken prisoners, and
reduced to servitude d, and so thoroughly were the
reft intimidated, that from that moment they
abandoned themselves to despair, relinquishing all
thoughts of contending with aggreflbrs whom
they deemed invincible.

Co LU ME U s employed several months in march- A tax im-

ing through the island, and in fubjeting it to the PtledU."p
Spanish goverment without meeting with any op-

9 Life of Columbus, c, 61. d See NOTE XX.

position.

B O O K position. He imposed a tribute upon all the inha-

ai^, bitants above'the age of fourteen. Each person
149S. who lived in those dihricts where gold was found,

was obligedto pay quarterly as much gold du as
filled a hawk's bell; from those in other parts of
the country, twenty-five pounds of cotton were
demanded. This was the firt -regular taxation of
the Indians, and served as a precedent for exations
fill more intolerable. Such an heavy imposition
was extremely contrary to thoie maxims which Co-
lumbus had hitherto inculcated with refpeat to the
mode of treating them. But intrigues were car-
rying on in the court of Spain at this juncture, in
order to undermine his power and diicedit his ope-
rations, which contrained him to depart from his
own system of adminiltration. Several unfavou-
rable accounts of his conduct, as well as of the
countries discovered by him, had been transmitted
to Spain. Margarita and Father Boyl were now at
court ; and in order to justify their own conduct, or
to gratify their efentment, watched with malevo-
lent attention for every opportunity of spreading
insinuations to his detriment. Many of the courti-
ers viewed his growing reputation and power with
envious eyes. Fonseca, the archdeacon of Seville,
who was intrusted with the chief direction of Indian
affairs, had conceived such an unfavourable opinion
of Columbus, for tbme reason which the contem-
porary wites have not mentioned, that he listened
with partiality to every invective against him. It
was not easy for an unfriended firanger, unpraiUfed
in courtly arts, to counteract the machinations of so
many enemies. Columbus saw that there was but
one method of supporting his own credit, and of
silencing all his adversaries. He must produce
such a quantity of gold, as would not only juflify

what

what he had reported with refpea to the richness of', o K
the country, but encourage Ferdinand and Isabella' 'a
to persevere in prosecuting his plans. The neceffi- 1455.
ty of obtaining it, forced him not only to impdfe
this heavy tax upon the Indians, but to exat pay-
ment of it with extreme rigour; and'may be plead-
ed in excuse for his deviating on this occasion from
the mildness and humanity with -which-he uniform-
ly treated that unhappy peoplee.

THE labour, attention, and foresight which the atal eS-

'

,. 11- 1 i « p * i seas o thit-

Indians were obliged to employ: in procuring the mearure.
tribute demanded of them, appeared the mofit into-
lerable of all evils, to men accustomed to pass their
days in'a careless, improvident indolence. They
were incapable of such a regular and p.ersevering ex-
ertion of industry, and felt it such a grievous Te-
firaint upon their liberty, that they -ha.drecourfe to
an expedient for obtaining deliverance'from-this yoke
which demonfirates the excess of their impatience
and despair. They formed a schem.e of starving
those oppressors whom they durst not attempt to ex-
pel; and from the opinion which they'.entertained
with refpet to the voracious appetite of the Spani-
ards, they concluded the execrtion of it to.be ve-
ry practicable. With this view, they suspended 'all
the operations of agriculture; they owed no maize,
they pulled up the roots of the manioc which were
planted, and retiring to the most inacceflble parts' c
the mountains, left the uncultivated plains to their
enemies. This desperate resolution produced some
part of the effets which they expected/ The Spa-
niards were reduced to extreme want; but they
received such seasonable supplies of provifions-from
Europe, and found so many resources in their own
ingenuity and industry, that they suffered no great
lots of men. The wretched Indians were the vic-

e Herrera, dec. . lib. ii, c. 7.
VOL. I. K timns

Bo o K tims of their own ill-concerted policy. A vast

\^J multitude shut up among barren mountains, with-
1495. out any food but the spontaneous produations of

the earth, oon felt the utmost distresses of famine.
This brought on contagious diseases; and, in the
cou-fe of a few months, more than a third part of
the inhabitants of the island perished, after expe-
riencing misery in all its various forms f.

Intrigues BUT while Columbus was thus successfully efta-
against Co- blifhing the foundations of the Spanish grandeur
lumbus in
the court of in the New World, his enemies laboured with un-
Spain. wearied afliduity to deprive him of the glory and

rewards to which his services and sufferings intitled
him. The hardships unavoidable in a new fettle-
ment, the calamities occasioned by an unhealthy
climate, the disasters attending a voyage in un-
known seas, were all represented as the fruits of his
restless and inconfideiate ambition. His prudent
attention to preserve discipline and subordination
was denominated excess of rigour; the punish-
mfents which he inflicted upon the mutinous and
disorderly were imputed to cruelty. These accufa-
tions gained such credit in a jealous court, that a
commiflioner was appointed to repair to Hispaniola,
and to infpedt into the conduct of Columbus. By
the recommendation of his enemies, Aguado, a
groom of the bed-chamber, was the person to
whom this important trust was committed. But in
this choice they seem to have been more influenced
by the obsequious attachment of the man to their
interest, than by his capacity for the station. Puff-
ed up with such fuddtn elevation, Aguado display-
ed, in the exercise of this office, all the frivolous

fHerrera, dec. i. lib. xi. c. 18. Life of Columbus, c. 61.

Oviedo, lib. iii. p. 93. D. Benzon Hill. Novi Orbis, lib. i. c. 9.
P. Martyr, dec. p. 48.

self-

felf-importance, and aed with all the disgusting B o o K
infolcnce, which are natural to little minds, 'when __
railed to unexpeted dignity, or employed in func- 1495.
tions to which they are not equal. By listening
with eagernefi to every accusation againfi Colum-
bus, and encouraging not only the malcontent
Spaniards, but even the Indians, to produce their
grievances, real or imaginary, he fomented the
the spirit of dissention in the island, without efta-
blifhing any regulation of public utility, or that
tended to redress the many wrongs, with the odium
of which he wished. to load the admiral's admini-
firation. As Columbus felt sensibly how humiliat-
ing his situation must be, if he should remain in
the country while such a partial infpeftor observed
his motions, and controuled his jurifdition, he
took the resolution of returning to Spain, irnorder to
lay a full account of all his tranfaaions, particularly
with refped to the points in dispute between him and
his adversaries, before Ferdinand and Isabella, from
whoie justice and discernment he expected an equal
and a favourable decision. He committed the ad-
minifiration of affairs, during his absence, to Don 1496.
Bartholomew, his brother, with the title of Ads-
lantado, or Lieutenant-Governor. By a choice
less fortunate, and which proved the source of ma-
ny calamities to the colony, he appointed Francis
Roldan chief justice, with very extensive powers .

IN returning to Europe, Columbus held a course Retrnsto

different from that which he had taken in his for- Spain.
mer voyage. He fleered almost due east from His-
paniola,-in the parallel of twenty-two degrees of
latitude; as experience had not yet discovered the
more certain and expeditious method of firetching
to the north, in order to fall in with the south-west
winds. By this ill advised choice, which, in the in-

g Herrera, dec. . lib. ii. c. iS. iib. iii. c. r.

K z f.incv

B OO K fancy of navigation between the New and Old

"_. Worlds, can hardly be imputed to the admiral as a
1496. defect in naval skill, he was exposed to infinite fa-

tigue and danger, in a perpetual firuggle with the
trade-winds, which blow without variation from
the east between the tropics. Notwithstanding the
almost insuperable difficulties of such a naviga-
tion, he persisted in his course with his usual pati-
ence and firmness, but made so little way, that he
was three months without feeing land. At length,
his provisions began to fail, the crew was reduced
to the scanty allowance of fix ounces of bread a-day
for each person. The admiral fared no better than
the meanest ailor. But, even in this extreme dif-
trefs, he retained the humanity which diflinguifhes
his character, and refused to comply with the earnest
solicitations of his crew, some of whom proposed
to feed upon the Indian prisoners whom they were
carrying over, and others insisted to throw them
over-board, in order to lessen the consumption of
their small flock. He represented, that they were
human beings, reduced by a common calamity to
the fame condition with themselves, and intitled to
(hare an equal fate. His authority and remonfiran-
ces diflipated those wild ideas suggested by despair.
Nor had they time to recur, as he came oon within
fight of the coast of Spain, and all their fears and
sufferings ended h.

His recepti- CoLU MBU S appeared at court with the modest
n there. but determined confidence of a man conscious not

only of integrity, but of having performed great
services. Ferdinand and Isabella, ashamed of their
own facility in lending too favourable an ear to fri-
volous or ill-founded accusations, received him with

h Herrera, dec. . lib. iii. c. i. Life of Columbus, c. 64.

such

such difiinguifhed marks of refpea, as covered his n o o K
eneimies with shame. Their censures and calum-
nies were no more heard of at that junture. The 1496.
gold, the pearls, the cotton, and other commodi-
ties of value which Columbus produced, seemed
fully to refute what the malcontents had propagated
with refpet to the poverty of the country. By re-
ducing the Indians to obedience, and impofinga
regular tax upon them, he had secured to Spain a
large accession of new fubjeas, and the establish-
ment of a revenue that promised to be considerable.
By the mines which he had found out and examin-
ed, a source of wealth fill more copious was open-
ed. Great and unexpected as those advantages
were, Columbus represented them only as preludes
to future acquisitions, and as the earnet of more im-
portant discoveries, which he fiill meditated, and
to which those he had already made would condu&t
hi m with ease and certainty .

T HE attentive consideration of all those circum- A plan

itances made such impression, not only upon Isabella, fhremed fr
who was flattered with the idea of being the patro- gar ea-
ness of all Columbus's enterprises, but even upon a colony.
Ferdinand, who having originally exprefled his dif-
approbation of his schemes, was still more apt to
doubt of their success, that they resolved to supply
the colony in Hispaniola with every thing that could
render it a permanent establishment, and to furnih
Columbus with such a fleet, that he might proceed
to search for those new countries, of whose existence
he seemed to be confident. The measures most
proper for accomplishing both there designs were
concerted with Columbus. Discovery had been
the sole objet of the firfi voyage to the New
World; and. though, in the second, settlement had

i Life of Colunmbus, c. 6.. Herrera, ec. . lib. iii. c. r.

been

B O O K been proposed, the precautions taken for that pur-

1. pose had either been insufficient, or were rendered
1496. ineffectual by the mutinous spirit of the Spaniards,

and the unforeseen calamities arising from various
causes. Now a plan was to be formed of a regular
colony, that might feive as a model in all future
establishments. Every particular was confidered
with attention, and arranged with a scrupulous ac-
curacy. The precise number of adventurers who
should be permitted to embark was fixed. They
were to be of different ranks and professions; and
the proportion of each was efiablifhed, according
to their usefulness and the wants of the colony. A
suitable number of women was to be chosen to ac-
company these new fettleis. As it was the first
object to raise provisions in a country where scarcity
of food had been the occasion of so much distress,
a considerable body of husbandmen was to be car-
ried over. As the Spaniards had then no concep-
tion of deriving any benefit from those produtions
of the New World which have since yielded such
large returns of wealth to Europe, but had formed
magnificent ideas, and entertained sanguine hopes
with refped to the riches contained in the mines
which had been discovered, a band of workmen,
skilled in the various arts employed in digging and
refining the precious metals, was provided. All
these emigrants were to receive pay and subsistence
for some years, at the public expence .
A defect in THUS far the regulations were prudent and well

it adapted to the end in view. But as it was foreseen

that few would engage voluntarily to fettle in a
country, whose noxious climate had been fatal to so
many of their countrymen, Columbus proposed to
transport to Hispaniola such malefactors as had been

k Herrera, dec. i. lib. iii. c. 2.

convicted

conviEted of crimes, which, though capital, were B o K
of a less atrocious nature; and that for the future a .
certain proportion of the offenders usually sent to 1496.
the gallies, should be condemned to labour in the
mines which were to be opened. This advice,
given without due reflecion, was as inconsiderately
adopted. The prisons of Spain were drained, in
order to collet members for the intended colony;
and the judges were infiruded to recruit it by their
future sentences. It is not, however, with such
materials, that the foundations of a society, deftin-
ed to be permanent, should be laid. Industry, so-
briety, patience, and mutual confidence are indif-
penfably requisite in an infant settlement, where
purity of morals must contribute more towards
establishing order than the operation or authority of
laws. But when such a mixture of what is corrupt
is admitted into the original confltitution of the po-
litical body, the vices of those unsound and incu-
rable members will probably infect the whole, and
must certainly be producive of violent and unhap-
py effects. This the Spaniards fatally experienc-
ed; and the other European nations having fuccef-
fively imitated their pratice in this particular, per
nicious consequences have followed in their fettle-
ments, which can be imputed to no other cause .

THOUGH Columbus obtained, with great facili- Executed

ty and dispatch, the royal approbation of every slowly
measure and regulation that he proposed, his endea-
vours to carry them into execution were so long re-
tarded, as must have tired out the patience of any
man, less accustomed to encounter difficulties and to
surmount them. Those delays were occasioned
partly by that tedious formality and spirit of pro-
craftination, with which the Spaniards conduct

1 Herrera, dec. . lib. iii. c. z. Touran Hist. Gener. de
l'Amerique, i. p. 51.

business;

B O o K business; and partly by the exhausted slate of the

II. treasury, which was drained by the expenoe of ce-
1496. lebrating the marriage of Ferdinand and Isabella's

only son with Margaret of Austria, and that of
Joanna, their second daughter, with Philip arch-
duke-of Austria ,: but must be chiefly imputed
to the malicious artsof Columbus's enemies. Afio-
nihed at the reception which -he met with upon his
return, and overawed by his pretence, they gave
way, for some time, to a tide of favour too strong
for them to oppose. Their enmity, however, was
too inveterate to remain long inactive. They re-
fumed their operations, and by the assistance of
Foufeca, the minister for Indian affairs, who was
now promoted to the bithopric of Badajos, they
threw in so many obstacles to protract the preparati-
ons for Columbus's expedition, that a year elapsed
before hen could procure two ships to carry over a
part of the supplies definred for the colony, and
almost two years were spent before the small fqua-
dron was equipped of which he himself was to take
the command °.

1498. THI s squadron consisted of fix ihips only, of no

Third voy- great burden, and but indifferently provided for a
nee of Co- o
lumbus. long or danigerous navigation. The voyage which

he now meditated was in a course different from
any he had undertaken. As he was fully perfuad-
ed that the fertile regions of India lay to the
south-west of those countries which he had dii-
covered, he proposed, as the most certain method
of finding out there, to stand directly south from
the Canary or Cape de Verd islands, until he
came under the equinoctial line, and then to
stretch to the weft before the favourable wind
for such a course, which blows invariably be-
My3 30. tween the tropics. With this idea he set fail, and

' P. Martyr. epift. 168. n Life of Columbus, c. 65.
P Herrera, dec. i. lib. iii. c. 9.

touched

touched first at the Canary, and then at the Cape B'o o K
de Verd islands. From the former he dispatched
three of his Ihips with a supply of provisions for 1498.
the colony in Hispaniola; with the other three, he July 4.
continued his voyage towards. the south. No re-
markable occurrence happened until they arrived
within five degrees of the line. There they were July 1S.
becalmed, and at the fame time the heat waxed so
excessive, that many of their wine calks buri, the
liquor in others oured, and their provisions cor-
rupted . The Spaniards, who had never ventur-
ed so far to the south, were afraid that the ships
would take fire, and began to apprehend the reality
of what the ancients had taught concerning the de-
itrudtive qualities of that torrid region of the globe.
They were relieved, in some measure, from their
fears by a seasonable fall of rain. This, however,
though so heavy and unintermitting that the men
could hardly keep the deck, did not greatly miti-
gate the intenseness of the heat. The admiral,
who with his usual vigilance had directed every
operation in person, from the beginning of the voy-
age, was so much exhausted by fatigue and want of
sleep, that it brought on a violent fit of the gout,
accompanied with a fever. All these circumfiances
constrained him to yield to the importunities of his
crew, and to alter his course to the north weft, in
order to reach ome of the Carribee islands, where
he might refit, and be supplied with provisions.

ON the firfi of AuguR, the man Rationed in the Discovers

round top surprised them with the joyful cry of tinent of
land. They flood towards it, and discovered a America.
considerable island: which the admiral called Tri-
nidad, a name it rtill retains. It lies on the coafl

P P. Martyr, dec. p. 70.

of

B o o K of Guiana, near the mouth of the Orinoco. This,

n. though a river only of the third or fourth magnitude
1498. in the New World, far iurpaffes any of the fireams

that water our hemisphere. It rolls towards the
ocean such a vast body of water, and rushes into it
with such impetuous force, that when it meets the
tide, which on that coast rifes to an uncommon
height, their collificn occasions a swell and agita-
tion of the waves no l]es firprifing than formidable.
In this conflict, the irresistible torrent of the river
so far prevails, that it fiefhens the ocean many
leagues with its flood q. Columbus, before he could
perceive the danger, was entangled among those
adverse currents and tempestuous waves, and it was
with the utmofi difficulty that he escaped through a
narrow strait, which appeared so tremendous, that
he called it La Boca del Drago. As oon as the
confiernation which this occasioned permitted him
to reflec upon the nature of an appearance so ex-
traordinary, he discerned it in a source of comfort
and hope. He jufily concluded, that such a vafi
body of water as this river contained, could not, be
supplied by any island, but must flow through a
country of immense extent, and of consequence,
that he was now arrived at that continent which it
had long been the object of his withes to discover.
Full of this idea, he Rfood to the weft along the
coa of- thloe t.:cvinces which are now known by
the names of Paila and Cumana. He landed in fe-
veral places, and had ibme intercourse with'the
people, who resembled tllofe of Hispaniola in their
appearance and manner f life. They wore, as
ornriaments, small plates of gold, and pearls of con-
fiderable value, which they willingly exchanged
for European toys. They seemed to poisess a bet-

q Guniilla Hist. de 'Oienoque, torn. i. p. 14.

ter

ter underitanding, and greater courage, than the B o O K
inhabitants of the islands. The country produced It
four-footed animals of several kinds, as well as a 1498.
great variety of fowls and fruits r. The admiral
was ib much delighted with its beauty and fertility,
that with the warm enthusiasm of a difcove-
rer, he imagined it to be the paradise described in
Scripture, which the Almighty chose for the refi-
dence of man, while he retained innocence that
rendered him worthy of such a habitation s. Thus
Columbus had the glory not only of discovering to
mankind the existence of a New World, but made
considerable progress towards a perfe&t knowledge
of it; and was the firfi man who conducted the
Spaniards to that vast continent which has been the
chief feat of their empire, and the source of their
treasures in this quarter of the globe. The fhat-
tered condition of his ffips, carcity of provisions,
his own infirmities, together with the impatience of
his crew, prevented him from pursuing his disco-
veries any farther, and made it necessary to bear
away for Hispaniola. In his way thither he disco-
vered the islands of Cubagua and Margarita, which
afterwards became remarkable for their pearl-fifh-
ery. When he arrived at Hifpanipla, he was wafted Aug. 30.
to an extreme degree with fatigue and sickness ; but
found the affairs of the colony in such a situation,
as afforded him no prospect of enjoying that repose
of which lie flood so much in need.

MANY revolutions had happened in that coun- State of Hs-

try during his absence. His brother, the Adelan- his arriva
tado, in consequence of an advice which the admi- there.
ral gave' before his departure, had removed the
colony from Isabella to a more commodious fRation,
on the opposite fide of the island, and laid the foun-

rHerrera, dec. . lib. iii. c. 9, o1, Ir. Life of Colum-
bus, c. 66-73

S Herrera, dec. . lib. iii. c. 2. Gomera c. 84. See
NOTE XXI.

dation

B o o K dation of St. Domingo u, which was long the most

considerable European town in the New World,
1498. and the feat of the supreme courts in the Spanish do.

minions there. As soon as the Spaniards were efta-
blifhed in this new settlement, the adelantado, that
they might neither languish in inativity, nor have
leisure to fqfm new cabals, marched into those parts
of the iland which his brother had not yet visited
or reduced to obedience, As the people were un-
able to resist, they submitted every where to the tri-
bute which he imposed. But they soon found the
burden to be so intolerable, that, overawed as they
were by the uperior power of their opprefors, they
took arms againfi them. Those infurretions, how-
ever, were not formidable. A cnflit with timid
and naked Indians was neither dangerous nor of
doubtful ilfue.

Mutiny of BUT while the adelantLdo . as employed againit
R *dan. them in the field, a mitoinr.. of an aspet far more

alarming, broke out arnmng the Spaniards. The
ringleader of it was Francis Roldan, whom Co-
lumbus had placed in a flation which required him
to be the guardian of order and tranquillity in the
colony. A turbulent and inconsiderate ambition
precipitated him into this desperate measure, so
unbecoming his rank. The arguments which he
employed to seduce his countrymen were frivolous
and ill-founded. He accused Columbus and his
tvo brothers of arrogance and severity; he pre-
tended that they aimed at eflablifhing an indepen-
dent dominion in the country; he taxed them with
an intention of cutting off part of the Spaniards
by hunger and fatigue, that they might more ea-
fily reduce the remainder to fubjetion; he epre-
sented it as unworthy of Castilians, to remain the

u P. Martyr. dec. p. 56.

tame

tame and passive slaves of tfree Gernefe adventu- B 0 K
rers. As men have always a propensity to impute .
the hardships of which they feel the preuiwe, to 14A8.
the mifcoqdut of their rulers; as every nation
views with a jealous eye the power and exaltation
of foreigners, Roldan's infmuations made a deep
impression on his countrymen. His charater and
rank added weight to them. A considerable num-
ber of the Spaniards made choice of him as their
leader, and taking arms agginfi the adelantado and
his brother, seized the king's magazine of provifi-
ons, and endeavoured to firpriie the frt at St.
Domingo. This was preserved by the vigilance
and courage of Don Diego Columbus. The mu-
tineers were obliged to retire to the province of
Xaragua, where they continued not only to disclaim
the adelantado's authority themselves, but excited
the Indians to throw of the yoke w.

SUCH was the dra&ed state of the colony
when Columbs landed at St. Domingo. He was
aftonifled to find that the three ships which he had
dispatched from the Canaries were not yet arrived.
By the unflilfulnefs of the pilots, and the violence
of currents, they had been carried a hundred and
sixty miles to the weft of St. Domingo, and forced
to take helter in a harbour of the province of Xara-
gua, where Roldan and his seditious followers were
cantoned. Roldan carefully concealed from the
commanders his infurre&tion against the adelanta-
do, and employing his utmost address to gain their
confidence, persuaded them to set on shore a con-
fiderable part of the new settlers whom they brought
over, that they might proceed by land to St. Do-
mingo. It required but few arguments to prevail

w Herrera, dec. . lib. iii. c. 5-8. Life of Columbus, c.
74-77. Gomara, c. 23. P. Martyr, p. 78.

with

B o O K with those men to espouse his cause. They were
_I, the refute of the jails of Spain, to whom idleness,

1498. licentiousness, and deeds of violence were familiar;

and they returned eagerly to a course of life nearly
resembling that to which they had been accustomed.
The commanders of the ships perceiving, when it
was too late, their imprudence in difermbarking so
many of their men, flood away for St. Domingo,
and got safe into the port a few days after the ad-
miral; but their flock of provisions was so wafted
during a voyage of such long continuance, that
they brought little relief to the colony .

Composed BY this juncion with a band of such bold and
by the pru- detperate abciates, Roldan became extremely for-
dJent con- p
du of Co- midable, and no less extravagant in his demands.
luabus. Columbus, though filled with resentment at his in-

gratitude, and highly exasperated by the insolence
of his followers, made no hafle to take the field.
He trembled at the thoughts of kindling the flames
of a civil war, in which, whatever party prevailed,
the power and -irength of both must be so much
wafted, as might encourage the common enemy to
unite and complete their deftruEion. At the fame
time he observed, that the prejudices and paflions
which incited the rebels to take arms, had to far
inseted those who still adhered to him, that many
of them were adverse, and all cold to the service.
From such sentiments, with refpeA to the public
interest, as well as from this view of his own situ-
ation, he chose to negociate rather than to fight.
By a seasonable proclamation, offering free pardon
to such as flould merit it by returning to their duty,
he made imprellion upon iome of the malcontents.

x Herrera; dec. . lib. iii. c. 2. Life of Columbus, c
78, 79-

By

By engaging to grant such as should desire it the li- B o o K
berty of returning to Spain, he allured all those I.
unfortunate adventurers, who, from sickness and 49s
disappointment, were disgusted with the country.
By promising to re-eftablih Roldan in his former
office, he oothed his pride; and by complying
with most of his demands in behalf of his followers,
he satisfied their avarice. Thus, gradually and
without bloodshed, but after many tedious negoci-
ations, he dissolved this dangerous combination
which threatened the colony with ruin; and re-
stored the appearance of order, regular government,
and tranquillity Y.

IN consequence of this agreement with the muti- A new

neers, lands were allotted them in different parts tode ofret-
of the island, and the Indians fettled in each difirit stablished.
were appointed to cultivate a certain portion of
ground for the use of those new masters. The per- 1499-
formance of this work was substituted in place of
the tribute formerly imposed; and how nieceffary
soever such a regulation might be in a sickly and fee-
ble colony, it introduced among the Spaniards the.
Repartimientos, or distributions of Indians eftablifled
by them in all their settlements, which brought
numberless calamities upon that unhappy people,
and subjected them to the most grievous oppref-
sion . This was not the only bad effect of the in-
furretion in Hispaniola; it prevented Columbus
from prosecuting his discoveries on the continent,
as felf-prefervation obliged him to keep near his
person his brother the adelantado, and the ailors
whom he intended to have employed in that ser-
vice. As oon as his affairs would permit, h sent
some of his ships to Spain with a journal of the

Y Herrera, dec. i. lib. iii. c. 13, 14. Life of Columbus,
c. 80, &c.

z Herrera, dec. . lib. iii. c. 14, &c.

voyage

B o o K voyage which he had made, a description of the

aH_< new countries which he had discovered, a chart of
,499. the coast along which he had failed, and specimens

of the gold, the pearls, and other curious or valu-
able produtions which he had acquired by traffick-
ing with the natives. At the fame time he tranf-
mitted an account of the infurre&tion in Hifpani-
ola; he accused the mutineers not only of having
thrown the colony into such violent convulsions as
threatened its dissolution, but of having obftrued
every attempt towards discovery and improve-
ment, by their unprovoked rebellion againit their
superiors, and proposed several regulations for the
better government of the island, as well as the ex-
tination of that mutinous spirit, which, though
suppressed at present, might soon burff out with
additional rage. Roldan and his aflociates did not
neglea to convey to Spain, by the fame ships, an
apology for their own conduct, together with their
recriminations upon the admiral and his brothers.
Unfortunately for the honour of Spain, and the
happiness of Columbus, the latter gained most cre-
dit in the court of Ferdinand.and Isabella, and pro-
duced unexpected effects a.

The voy- BUT, previous to these, events had happened
ageof fco which merit attention, both on account of their
de Gama to
the Ealt own importance, and their conne&tion with the his-
ndies, by tory of the New World. \hile Columbus was
thle Cape of o'
Good engaged in his fucceflive voyages to the weft, the
Hope. spirit of discovery did not languish in Portugal, the

kingdom where it first acquired vigour, and be-
came enterprising. Self-condemnation and regret
were not the only sentiments to which the success
of Columbus, and reflection upon their own impru-

a Herrera, dec. i. lib. iii. c. 14. Benson, Hit. Nov. Orb.
lib. i. c. 2.

dence

dence in rejeting his proposals, gave rife among B K
the Portuguese. They excited a generous emula- .
tion to surpass his performances, and an ardent de- 1499.
fire to make ome reparation to their country for
their own error. With this view, Emmanuel, who
inherited the enterprifmg genius of his predeceflors,
perfited in their grand scheme of opening a pafage
to the East Indies by the Cape of Good Hope; and
soon after his acceflion to the throne, equipped a
squadron for that important voyage. He gave the
command of it to Vasco de Gama, a man of noble
birth, poefled of virtue, prudence, and courage,
equal to the fiation. The squadron, like all those
fitted out for discovery in the infancy of navigation,
was extremely feeble, consisting only of three vef-
fels, of neither burden nor force adequate to the
service. As the Europeans were at that time alto-
gether unacquainted with the course of the trade-
winds and periodical monsoons, which render na-
vigation in the Atlantic ocean, as well as in the sea
that separates Africa from India, at ome seasons
easy, and at others not only dangerous, but almost
impracticable, the time chosen for Gama's depar-
ture was the moit improper during the whole year.
He set fail from Lisbon on the ninth of July, and 1497.
fianding towards the south, had to iruggle for
four months with contrary winds, before he could
reach the Cape of Good Hope. Here their vio- Nov. o.
lence began to abate; and during an interval of
calm weather, Gama doubled that formidable pro-
montory, which had so long been the boundary of
navigation, and directed his course towards the
north-east, along the African coat. He touched
at several ports; and after various adventures,
which the Portuguese historians relate with high but
just encomiums upon his conduct and intrepidity,
he came to anchor before the city of Melinda.
Throughout all the vail countries which extend

VOL. I. L along

B o o K along the coast of Africa, from the river Senegal to
fl ,the confines of Zanguebar, the Portuguese had
1499. found a race of men rude and uncultivated, firan-

gers to letters, to arts and commerce, and differing
from the inhabitants of Europe no lets in their sea-
tures and complexion, than in their manners and in-
ftitutions. As they advanced from this, they ob-
served, to their inexpressible joy, that the human
form gradually altered and improved, the Asiatic
features began to predominate, marks of civiliza-
tion appeared, letters were known, the Mahome-
tan religion was established, and a commerce, far
from being inconsiderable, was carried on. At that
time several vessels from India were in the port of
Melinda. Gama now pursued his voyage with al-
most absolute certainty of success, and, under the
conduct of a Mahometan pilot, arrived at Calecut,
upon the coast of Malabar, on the twenty-fecond
of May one thousand four hundred and ninety-
eight. What he beheld of the wealth, the popu-
loufnefs, the cultivation, the industry and arts of
this highly civilized country, far surpassed any idea
.that he had formed, from the imperfeEt accounts
which the Europeans had hitherto received of it.
But as he possessed neither sufficient force to attempt
a ettlement, nor proper commodities with which
he could carry on commerce of any consequence, he
hastened back to Portugal, with an account of his
success in performing a voyage the longest, as well
as most difficult, that had ever been made since the
first invention of navigation. He landed at Lisbon
on the fourteenth of September one thousand four
hundred and ninety-nine, two years, two months,
and five days, from the time he left that port a.

THUS, during the course of the fifteenth cen-
tury, mankind made greater progress in exploring

t Ramuflo, vol. i. i9, D.

the

the slate of the habitable globe, than in all the ages B o o K
which had elapsed previous to that period. The
spirit of discovery, feeble at firit and cautious, ,
moved within a very narrow sphere, and made its
efforts with hesitation and timidity. Encouraged by
success, it became adventurous, and boldly extend-
ed its operations, in the course of its progression, it
continued to acquire vigour, and advanced at length
with a rapidity and force which burt through all the
limits within which ignorance and fear had hitherto
circumscribed the ativity of the human race. Al-
moit fifty years were employed by the Portuguese
in creeping along the coast of Africa from Cape
Non to Cape de Verd, the latter of which lies only
twelve degrees to the south of the former. In less
than thirty years, they ventured beyond the equi-
noaial line into another hemisphere, and penetrat-
ed to the southern extremity of Africa, at the dif-
tance of forty-nine degrees from Cape de Verd.
During the last seven years, a New World was dif-
covered in the weft, not inferior in extent to all the
parts of the earth with which mankind were at that
time acquainted. In the east, unknown eas and
countries were found out, and a communication,
long desired, but hitherto concealed, was opened
between Europe and the opulent regions of India.
In comparison with events so wonderful and unex-
peted, all that had hitherto been deemed great or
iplendid, faded away and disappeared. Vast ob-
jets now presented themselves. The human mind,
rouzed and interested by the profpet, engaged
with ardour in pursuit of them, and exerted its ac-
tive powers in a new direction.

THIS spirit of enterprise, though but newly Discoveries

awakened in Spain, began soon to operate exten- icarpd nby
fively. All the attempts towards discovery made privatead-
in that kingdom, had hitherto been carried on by venturer.

L 2 Columbus

B o K Columbus alone, and at the expence of the fove-

ijl3 .reign. But now private adventurers, allured by the
1499. magnificent descriptions he gave of the regions

which he had visited, as well as by the specimens
of their wealth which he produced, offered to fit
out squadrons at their own risk, and to go in quest
of new countries. The Spanish court, whose scanty
revenues were exhausted by the charge of its expe-
ditions to the New World, which, though they
opened vat profpeds of future benefit, yielded a
very sparing return of present profit, was extremely
willing to devolve the burden of discovery upon its
fubjets. It seized with joy an opportunity of ren-
dering the avarice, the ingenuity, and efforts of
projectors, infirumental in promoting designs of
certain advantage to the public, though of doubtful
Ojeda the success with refpe& to themselves. One of the firfi

irofthe propositions of this kind was made by Alonfo de

Ojeda, a gallant and ative officer, who had ac-
companied Columbus in his second voyage. His
rank and charater procured him such credit with
the merchants of Seville, that they undertook to
equip four hips, provided he could obtain the royal
licence, authorising the voyage. The powerful pa-
tronage of the bishop of Badajos, easily secured
success in a suit so agreeable to the court. Without
consulting Columbus, or regarding the rights and
jurifdition which he had acquired by the capitula-
tion in one thousand four hundred and ninety-two,
Ojeda was permitted to set out for the New World.
In order to direct his course, the bishop communi-
cated to him the admiral's journal of his last voy-
age, and his charts of the countries which he had
May. discovered. Ojeda struck out into no new path of

navigation, but adhering servilely to the route
which Columbus had taken, arrived on the coast of
Paria. He traded with the natives, and standing
to the weft, proceeded as far as Cape de Vela, and

ranged

ranged along a considerable extent of coast beyond B OO K
that on which Columbus had touched. Having
thus ascertained the opinion of Columbus, that this 49-
country was a part of the continent, Ojeda return- oaober.
ed by way of Hispaniola to Spain, with rome re-
putation as a difioverer, but with little benefit to
those who had raised the funds for the expedition b.

AMERIGO VESPUCCI, a Florentine gentleman, Is accom.

accompanied Ojeda in this voyage. In what fta- pamiedgb
tion he served, is uncertain; but as he was an ex- Vefpnci.
perienced tailor, and eminently skilful in all the fci-
ences subservient to navigation, he seems to have
acquired such authority among his companions, that
they willingly allowed him to have a chief share in
directing their operations during the voyage. Soon
after his return, he transmitted an account of his
adventures and discoveries to one of his country-
men ; and labouring with the vanity of a traveller
to magnify his own exploits, he had the address and
confidence to frame his narrative, so as to make it
appear that he had the glory of having first disco-
vered the continent in the New World. Ameri-
go's account was drawn up not only with art, but
with some elegance. It contained an amusing his-
tory of his voyage, and judicious observations upon
the natural productions, the inhabitants, and the
customs of the countries which he had visited. As
it was the first description of any part of the New
World that was published, a performance so well
calculated to gratify the passion of mankind for
what is new and marvellous, circulated rapidly, and
was read with admiration. The country of which From whom

the name of

Amerigo was supposed to be the discoverer, came America is
gradually to be called by his name. The caprice g to the
of mankind, often as unaccountable as unjust, has Ncw

V Herrera, dec. . lib. iv. c. , 2, 3.

perpetuated

B 0 0 K perpetuated this error. By the universal content of

_ , nations, AE RICA is the name bestowed on this
1499. new quarter of the globe. The bold pretensions of

a fortunate impostor have robbed the discoverer of
the New World of a diftin&tion which belonged to
him. The name of Amerigo has supplanted that
of Columbus; and mankind may regret an at of
injustice, which, having received the fanstion of
time, it is now too late to redress c.

Voyage of DURING the fame year, another voyage of dif-
Alonifo' -
Nigno. covery was undertaken. Columbus not only in-

troduced.the spirit of naval enterprise into Spain,
but all the first adventurers who distinguished them-
selves in this new career, were formed by his in-
ftrutions, and acquired in his voyages the skill and
information which qualified them to imitate his
example. Alonfo Nigno, who had served un-
der the admiral. in his last expedition, fitted out,
in conjunction with Christopher Guerra, a mer-
chant of Seville, a tingle ship, and failed to the
coast of Paria. This voyage seems to have been
conducted with greater attention to private emolu-
ment, than to any general or national objet. Nig-
no and Guerra made no discoveries of any impor-
tance; but they brought home such a return of gold
and pearls, as inflamed their countrymen with the
desire of engaging in imilar adventures d.

1;oo. SOON after, Vincent Yanez Pinzon, one of the

January 13. admiral's companions in his first voyage, failed from
Of Viuicent
Yanez Pin- Palos with four ships. He tsood boldly towards
ZOn. the south, and was the first Spaniard who ventured

to cross the equinoctial line but he seems to have
landed on no part of the coast beyond the mouth

c See NOTE XXII.
d P. Martyr, dec. p. 87. Herrera, dec. . lib. iv. c. .

of

of the Maragnon, or river of the Amazons. All B o K.
these navigators adopted the erroneous theory of _,
Columbus, and believed that the countries which so5o.
they had discovered were part of the vast continent
of India .

DU R ING this sirs year of the sixteenth century, The Portu-

that fertile difiriEt of America, on the confines of guefBdif.o-
which Pinzon had flopt short, was more fully dif-
covered. The successful voyage of Gama to the
East Indies, having encouraged the king of Portu-
gal to fit out a fleet so powerful, as not only to
carry on trade, but to attempt conquest, he gave
the command of it to Pedro Alvarez Cabral. In
order to avoid the coast of Africa, where he was
certain of meeting with variable breezes, or fre-
quent calms, to retard his voyage, Cabral flood
out to sea, and kept so far to the weft, that, to his
surprise, he found himself upon the shore of an un-
known country, in the tenth degree beyond the
line. He imagined, at first, that it was some
island in the Atlantic ocean hitherto unobserved;
but, proceeding along its coast for several days, he
was led gradually to believe, that a country so ex-
tensive formed a part of some great continent. This
latter opinion was well founded. The country
with which he fell in belongs to that province in
South America now known by the name of Brasil.
He landed; and having formed a very high idea
of the fertility of the foil, and agreeableness of the
climate, he took pofefleion of it for the crown of
Portugal, and dispatched a ship to Lisbon with an
account of this event, which appeared to be no less
important than it was unexpected f. Columbus's
discovery of the New World was the effort of an'
aftive genius, enlightened by science, guided by

' Herrera, dec. I. lib. iv. c. 6. P. Martyr, dec. p. 95.
f Herrera, dec. 1. lib. iv. c. 7.

experience,

B o K experience, and ating upon a regular plan, exe-

n. cuted with no less courage than perseverance. But

5 from this adventure of the Portuguese, it appears

that chance might have accomplished that great de-
sign, which it is now the pride of human reason to
have formed and perfected. If the sagacity of Co-
lumbus had not conducted mankind to America,
Cabral, by a fortunate -accident, might have led
them, a few years later, to the knowledge of that
extensive continent g.

Machina- WHILE the Spaniards and Portuguese, by those
Cioslumginf fucceflive voyages, were daily acquiring more en-

larged ideas of the extent and opulence of that quar-
ter of the globe which Columbus had made known
to them, he himself, far from enjoying the tran-
quillity and honours with which his services should
have been recompenfed, was firuggling with every
distress in which the envy and malevolence of the
people under his command, or the ingratitude of
the court which he served, could involve him.
Though the pacification with Roldan broke the
union and weakened the force of the mutineers, it
did not extirpate the feeds of discord out of the
island. Several of the malcontents continued in
arms, refuing to submit to the admiral. He and
his brothers were obliged to take the field alter-
nately, in order to check their incursions, or to pu-
n'fh their crimes. The perpetual occupation and
disquiet which this created, prevented him from
giving due attention to the dangerous machinations
of his enemies in the court of Spain. A good num-
ber of those who were moit dissatisfied with his ad-
minifiration, had embraced the opportunity of re-
turning to Europe with the ships which he dispatched
from St. Domingo. The final disappointment of all
their hopes inflamed the rage of these unfortunate

g Herrera, dec. . lib. vii. c. 5.

adventurers

adventurers against Columbus to the utmost pitch. B o o K
Their poverty and distress, by exciting companion, ._>
rendered their accusations credible, and their com- ,500.
plaints interesting. They teazed Ferdinand and
Isabella incessantly with memorials, containing the
detail of their own grievances, and the articles of
their charge against Columbus. Whenever either
the king or queen appeared in public, they fur-
rounded them in a tumultuary manner, infifiing
with importunate clamours for payment of the ar-
rears due to them, and demanding vengeance upon
the author of their sufferings. They insulted the
admiral's sons wherever they met them, reproach-
ing them as the offspring of the projector, whose
fatal curiosity had discovered those pernicious regi-
ons which drained Spain of its wealth, and would
prove the grave of its people. Those avowed en-
deavours of the malcontents from America to ruin
Columbus, were seconded by the secret, but more
dangerous insinuations of that party among the
courtiers, who had always thwarted his schemes,
and envied his success and credit h

FERDINAND was disposed to liften, not only Theirin-

with a willing but with a partial ear, to these accu- Fedincea
fations. Notwithstanding the flattering accounts and abella.
which Columbus had given of the riches of Ame-
rica, the remittances from it had hitherto been so
scanty, that they fell far short of defraying the ex-
pence of the armaments fitted out. The glory of
the discovery, together with the profped of re-
mote commercial advantages, was all that Spain
had yet received in return for the efforts which she
had made. But time had already diminished the
first sensations of joy which the discovery of a New
World occasioned, and fame alone was not an ob-
jeit to satisfy the cold interested mind of Ferdinand.

h Life of Culumbus, c. 85.

The

B o O K The nature of commerce was then so little under-

n'. flood, that, where immediate gain was not acquired,
5Soo. the hope of distant benefit, or of flow and mode-

rate returns, was totally disregarded. Ferdinand
confidered Spain, on this account, as a loser by the
enterprise of Columbus, and imputed it to his mif-
conduct and incapacity for government, that a
country abounding in gold had yielded nothing of
value to its conquerors. Even Isabella, who, from
the favourable opinion which she entertained of
Columbus, had uniformly proteted him, was
haken at length by the number and boldness of his
accusers, and began to fufpeEt that a disaffection so
general must have been occasioned by real griev-
ances, which called for redress. The bishop of Bada-
jos, with his usual animosity againfi Columbus, en-
couraged these suspicions, and confirmed them.
ofta effeas As soon as the queen began to give way to the

of ts torrent of calumny, a resolution fatal to Columbus

was taken. Francis de Bovadilla, a knight of Ca-
latrava, was appointed to repair to Hispaniola, with
full powers to inquire into the conduc of Colum-
bus, and, if he found the charge of mal-admini-
firation proved, to supersede him, and assume the
government of the island. It was impossible to
escape condemnation, when this preposterous com-
miflion made it the interest of the judge to find
the person whom he was sent to try, guilty.
Though Columbus had now composed all the dif-
fentions in the island ; though he had brought both
Spaniards and Indians to submit peaceably to his
government; though he had made such effecual
provision for working the mines, and cultivating
the country, as would have secured a considerable
revenue to the king, as well as large profits to in-
dividuals, Bovadilla, without deigning to attend

to

to the nature or merit of those services, discovered, B o o K
from the moment that he landed in Hispaniola, a
determined purpose of treating him as a criminal. ,50.
He took pofieffion of the admiral's house in St. Do-
mingo, from which he happened at that time to be
absent, and seized his effects, as if he had been al-
ready conviated; he rendered himself mailer of the
fort and of the king's stores by violence ; he requir-
ed all persons to acknowledge him as supreme go-
vernor; he set at liberty the prisoners confined by
the admiral, and summoned him to appear before
his tribunal, in order to answer for his conduct;
transmitting to him, together with the summons, a
copy of the royal mandate, by which Columbus
was enjoined to yield implicit obedience to his com-
mands.

CoLUMBUS, though deeply affe&ed with the Columbas

ingratitude and injustice of Ferdinand and Isabella, chain to
did not hesitate a moment about his own conduct. Spain.
He submitted to the will of his sovereigns with a
refpedful silence, and repaired directly to the court
of that violent and partial judge whom they had
authorised to try him. Bovadilla, without admit-
ting him into his pretence, ordered him instantly to
be arrested, to be loaded with chains, and hurried on oaober.
board a ship. Even under this humiliating reverse
of fortune, the firmness of mind which distinguish-
es the character of Columbus, did not forsake him.
Conscious of his own integrity, and solacing him-
self with reflecting upon the great things which he
had atchieved, he endured this insult offered to his
character, not only with composure, but with. dig-
nity. Nor had he the consolation of sympathy to
mitigate his sufferings. Bovadilla had already ren-
dered himself so extremely popular, by granting
various immunities to the colony, by liberal dona-
tions of Indians to all who applied for them, and

by

B o o K by relaxing the reins of discipline and government,
_., that the Spaniards, who were mofiy adventurers,

whom their indigence or crimes had impelled to
abandon their native country, exprefed the most
indecent fatisfaCion with the disgrace and impri-
fonment of Columbus. They flattered themselves,
that now they should enjoy an uncontrouled liberty,
more suitable to their disposition and former habits
of life. Among persons thus prepared to censure
the proceedings, and to afperie the character of Co-
lumbus, Bovadilla collected materials for a charge
againfi him. All accu:ations, the most improba-
ble as well as inconsistent, were received. No in-
former, however infamous, was rejected. The
result of this inquest, no lets indecent than partial,
he tranfritted to Spain. At the fame time, he or-
dered Columbus, with his two brothers, to be car-
ried thither in fetters ; and, adding cruelty to in-
fult, he confined them in different hips, and ex-
cluded them from the comfort of that friendly in-
tercourfe which might have oothed their common
distress. But while the Spaniards in Hispaniola
viewed the arbitrary and insolent proceedings of
Bovadilla with a general approbation, which reflets
dishonour upon their name and country, one man
fill retained the memory of the great actions
which Columblus had performed, and was touched
with the sentiments of veneration and pity due to
his rank, his age, and his merit. Alonfo de Val-
lejo, the captain of the veflel on board which the
admiial was confined, as soon as he was clear of
the island, approached his prisoner with great re-
spect, and offered to releaif him from' the fetters
with which he was unjufily loaded. " No," repli-
ed Columbus, with a generous indignation, "I
wear these irons in consequence of an order from
my overeigns. They shall find me as obedient to
this as to their other injuntions. By their com-

mand

mandI have been confined, and their' command o o K
alone ihall set me at liberty." L

FORTUNATELY, the voyage to Spain was ex- Nov. 3.
tremely short. As soon as Ferdinand and Isabella St at liber-

ty, but de-

were informed that Columbus was brought home a pYive of a
prisoner, and in chains, they perceived at once authority.
what universal astonishment this event must occafi-
on, and what an impreflion to their disadvantage it
must make. All Europe, they foresaw, would be
filled withindignation at this ungenerous requital of a
man who had performed actions worthy of the high-
eft recompence, and would exclaim against the injuf-
tice of the nation, to which he had been such an
eminent benefactor, as well as against the ingrati-
tude of the princes whose reign he had rendered
illustrious. Afliamed of their own conduct, and
eager not only to make some reparation for this in-
jury, butto efface the stain which it might fix upon
their character, they instantly issued orders to set
Columbus at liberty, invited him to court, and Dec. .
remitted money to enable him to appear there in a
manner suitable to his rank. When he entered the
royal pretence, Columbus threw himself at the
feet of his sovereigns. He remained for some time
silent; the various paflions which agitated his mind
suppressing his power of utterance. At length he
recovered himself, and vindicated his conduct in a
long discourse, producing the most satisfying proofs
of his own integrity as well as good intention, and
evidence, no less clear, of the malevolence of his
enemies, who, not satisfied with having ruined his
fortune, laboured to deprive him of what alone
was now left, his honour and his fame. Ferdinand
received him with decent civility, and Isabella with

i Life of Columbus, c. 86. Herrera, dec. i.l b. iv. c. 8-i 1.
Gomara Hilt. c. 23. Oviedo, lib. iii. c. 6.

tenderness

B O O K tenderness and respect. They both exprefed their

II. sorrow for what had happened, disavowed their
-*- knowledge of it, and joined in promifinghim pro-

tetion and fiture favour. But though they in-
fiantly degraded Bovadilla, in order to remove
from themselves any suspicion of having authorised
his violent proceedings, they did not restore to Co-
lumbus his jurifdidion and privileges as viceroy of
Ithofe countries which he had discovered. Though
willing to appear the avengers of Columbus's
wrongs, that illiberal jealousy which prompted
them to invest Bovadilla with such authority as put
it in his power to treat the admiral with indignity,
still subsisted. They were afraid to trust a man to
whom they were so highly indebted, and retaining
him at court under various pretexts, they appointed
Nicholas de Ovando, a knight of the military order
of Alcantara, governor of Hispaniola k.

COLUMBUS was deeply affected with this new

injury, which came from hands that seemed to be
employed in making reparation for his past susser-
ings. The sensibility with which great minds feel
every thing that implies any suspicion of their inte-
grity, or that wears the aspet of an affront, is ex-
quifite. Columbus had experienced both from the
Spaniards; and their ungenerous conduct exafpe-
rated him to such a degree, that he could no longer
conceal the sentiments which it excited. Wherever
he went, he carried about with him, as a memo-
rial of their ingratitude, those fetters with which he
had been loaded. They were constantly hung up
in his chamber, and he gave orders that when he
died they should be buried in his grave.

kHerrera, dec. . llb. iv. c. lo-12. Li'e ofColumbus, c. 87.
1 Life of Columbus, c. 86. p. 577.

MEANWHILE,

MEANWHILE, the spirit of discovery, notwith- B o O K

flanding the severe check which it received by the I.
ungenerous treatment of the man, who first excited 'A,7
it in Spain, continued active and vigorous. Rode- Progress of
rigo di Baftidas, a person of diftindtion, fitted out discovery.
two ships in co-partnery with John de la Cosa, who January.
having served under the admiral in two of his voy-
ages, was deemed the most skilful pilot in Spain.
They fleered directly towards the continent, arriv-
ed on the coast of Paria, and proceeding to the
weft, discovered all. the coast of. the province now
known by the name of Terra Firma, from Cape
de Vela to the gulf of Darien. Not long after
Ojeda, with his former associate Amerigo Vespucci,
set out upon a second voyage, and being unacquaint-
ed with the. deflination of Baftidas, held the fame
course, and touched at the fame places. The voy-
age of Baflidas was prosperous and lucrative, that
of Ojeda unfortunate. But both tended to increase
the ardour of discovery; for in proportion as the
Spaniards acquired a more extensive knowledge of
the American continent, their idea of its opulence
and fertility increased .

BEFORE these adventurers returned from their ovando ap-

voyages, a fleet was equipped, at the publicex- pointedgo-
pence, for carrying over Ovando, the new gover- Hifpanioi.
nor, to Hifpanioia. His pretence there was ex-
tremely requisite, in order to flop the inconsiderate
career of Bovadilla, whose imprudent adminifirati-
on threatened the settlement with ruin. Conscious
of the violence and iniquity of his proceedings
againfi Columbus, he continued to make it his sole
object to gain the favour and support of his coun-
trymen, by accommodating himself to their passions

m Herrera, dec. . lib. iv. c. II.

and

.B o o K and prejudices. With this view, he eftablithed re-

II- gulations, in every point the reverse of those which
so' Columbus deemed eflential to the prosperity of the

colony. Instead of the evere discipline, necessary
in order to habituate the difrolute and corrupted
members of which the society was composed, to the
restraints of law and subordination, he suffered them
to enjoy such uncontrouled licence, as encouraged
the wildest excesses. Inflead of protecting the In-
dians, he gave a legal sanction to the oppression of
that unhappy people. He took the exac number
of such as survived their past calamities, divided
them into diftinC classes, difiributed them in pro-
perty among his adherents, and reduced the whole
island to a state of complete servitude. As the ava-
rice of the Spaniards was too rapacious and impati-
ent to try any method of acquiring wealth but that
of searching for gold, this servitude became as grie-
vous as it was unjust. The Indians were driven in
crowds to the mountains, and compelled to work
in the mines by mailtes who imposed their tails
without mercy or discretion. Labour, so difpro-
portioned to their ftrcngth and former habits of
life, wafted that feeble race of men, with such
rapid consumption, as must have oon terminated
in the utter extinction of the ancient inhabitants of
the island n.

New regu- THE neceffiy of applying a speedy remedy to
blitod eta- those disorders, hastened Ovando's departure. He

had the command of the moi refpetable armament
hitherto fitted out for the New World. It consist-
ed of thirty-two hips, on board of which two
thousand five hundred persons embarked, with an
intention of fettling in the country. Upon the ar-
rival of the new governor with this powerful rein-

n Herrera, dec. i. lib. iv. c. , &c. Oviedo Hist. l1b. iii.
c. 6. p. 97. Benzon. Hist. lib. i. c. 12. p. 51.

forcement

fbrcement to the colony, Bovadilla resigned his B o
charge, and was commanded to return instantly to
Spain, in order to answer for his conduct. Roldan, o.
and the other ringleaders of the mutineers who
had been mofi active in opposing Columbus, were
required to leave the island at the fame time. A
proclamation was issued, declaring the natives to be
free subjects of Spain, of whom no service was to be
exated contrary to their own inclination, and with-
out paying them an adequate price for their labour.
With refpea to the Spaniards themselves, various
regulations were made, tending to suppress the li-
centious spirit which had been so fatal to the colony,
and to establish that reverence for law and order on
which society is founded, and to which it is indebt-
ed for its increase, and flability. In order to limit
the exorbitant gain which private persons were sup-
posed to make by working the mines, an ordinance
was publihed, direEting all the gold to be brought
to a public fmelting-houfe, and declaring one half
of it to be the property of the crown

WHI LE there feps were taking for securing the The dia-

tranquillity and welfare of the colony which Colum- gruatlo of
bus had planted, he himself was engaged in the un- Columbus.
pleasant employment of soliciting the favour of an
ungrateful court, and, notwithstanding all his me-
rit and services, he solicited in vain. He demand-
ed, in terms of the original capitulation in one
thousand four hundred and ninety-two, to be rein-
stated in his office of viceroy over the countries
which he had discovered. By a strange fatality,
the circumfiance which he urged in support of his
claim, determined a jealous monarch to reject it,

o Solorzano Politica Indiana, lib. i. c. 12. Herrera, dec. .
lib. iv. c. 12.

VOL.I. M The

B o o K The greatness of his discoveries, and the profpet

of their increasing value, made Ferdinand confider
1503. the concessions in the capitulation as extravagant

and impolitic. He was afraid of entrusting a sub-
jet with the exercise of a jurifdiaion that now ap-
peared to be so extremely extensive, and might
grow to be no less formidable. He inspired Isabella
with the fame suspicions; and under various pre-
texts, equally frivolous and unjust, they eluded all
Columbus's requisitions to perform that which a so-
lemn treaty bound them to accomplish. After at-
tending the court of Spain for near two years, as
an humble suitor, he found it impossible to remove
Ferdinand's prejudices and apprehensions; and per-
ceived, at length, that he laboured in vain, when
he urged a claim of justice or merit with an inte-
refted and unfeeling prince.

He forms Bu even this ungenerous return did not difcou-
z-ew fchernes
of difovery. rage him from pursuing the great objet which firfi

called forth his inventive genius, and excited him
to attempt discovery. To open a new passage to
the East Indies was his original and favourite scheme.
This still engrossed his thoughts; and either from
his own observations in his voyage to Paria, or
from ome obscure hint of the natives, or from the
accounts given by Baftidas and de la Cosa, of their
expedition, he conceived an opinion that, beyond
the continent of America, there was a ea which
extended to the East Indies, and hoped to find
some firait or narrow neck of land, by which a
communication might be opened with it and the
part of the ocean already known. By a very for-
tunate conjecture, he supposed this strait or isthmus
to be situated near the gulf of Darien. Full of
this idea, though he was now of an advanced age,
worn out with fatigue, and broken with infirmities,
he offered, with the alacrity of a youthful adven-

turer,

turer, to undertake a voyage which would afcer- B o o K
tain this important point, and perse& the grand I1.
scheme which from the beginning he proposed to i5o.
accomplish. Several circumstances concurred in
disposing Ferdinand and Isabella to lend a favoura-
ble ear to this proposal. They were glad to have
the pretext of any honourable employment for re-
moving from court a man with whose demands they
deemed it impolitic to comply, and whose services it
was indecent to neglec. Though unwilling to re-
ward Columbus, they were not insensible of his merit,
and from their experience of his skill and conduct,
had reason to give credit to his conjectures, and to
consid6 in his success. To there considerations, a
third must be added of Rill more powerful influence.
About this time the Portuguese fleet, under Cabral,
arrived from the Indies; and, by the richness of
its cargo, gave the people of Europe a more per-
set idea, than they had hitherto been able to form,
of the opulence and fertility of the east. The Por-
tuguefe had been more fortunate in their discoveries
than the Spaniards. They had opened a communi-
cation with countries where indufiry, arts, and ele-
gance flourished ; and where commerce had been
longer eftabliihed, and carried to greater extent
than in any region of the earth. Their first voy-
ages thither yielded immediate, as well as vast re-
turns of profit, in commodities extremely precious
and in great request. Lisbon became immediately
the feat of commerce and of wealth; while Spain
had only the expetation of remote benefit, and of
future gain, from the western world. Nothing,
then, could be more acceptable to the Spaniards
than Columbus's offer to conduct them to the east,
by a route which he expected to be shorter, as well
as less dangerous, than that which the portuguese
had taken. Even Ferdinand was rouled by such a

M 2 profpet,

B o K profpea, and warmly approved of the undertak-

-I ing.

i150. BuT, interesting as the objet of this voyage

His tourth
voyage. was to the nation, Columbus could procure only

four small barks, the largest of which did not ex-
ceed seventy tons in burden, for performing it.
Accustomed to brave danger, and to engage in ar-
duous undertakings with inadequate force, he did
not hesitate to accept the command of this, pitiful
squadron. His brother Bartholomew, and his fe-
cond son Ferdinand, the historian of his aions,
accompanied him. He failed from Cadiz on the
ninth of May, and touched, as usual, at the Canary
Islands; from thence he purposed to have flood di-
redtly for the continent, but his largest vessel was
so clumsy and unfit for service, as constrained him
to bear away for Hispaniola, in hopes of exchang-
ing her for ome ship of the fleet that had carried
June 29- over Ovando. When he arrived off St. Domingo,

he found eighteen of these ihips ready loaded, and
on the point of departing for Spain. Columbus
immediately acquainted the governor with the defti-
nation of his voyage, and the accident which had
obliged him to alter his route. He requeited per-
miflion to enter the harbour, not only that he might
negociate the exchange of his ship, but that he
might take shelter during a violent hurricane, of
which he discerned the approach from various prog-
noffics, which his experience and sagacity had
taught him to observe. On that account, he ad-
vised him likewise to put off for ome days the de-
parture of the fleet bound for Spain. But Ovando
refused his request, and despised his counsel. Un-
der circumitances in which humanity would have
afforded refuge to a stranger, Columbus was de-

nied

nied admittance into a country of which he had dif- B o O K
covered the existence, and acquired the poffeflion. I
His salutary warning, which might have been at-
tended to without any inconveniency, was regarded
as the dream of a visionary prophet, who arrogant-
ly pretended to predic an event beyond the reach
of human foresight. The fleet set fail for Spain.
Next night the hurricane came on with dreadful
impetuosity. Columbus, aware of the danger,
took precautions against it, and saved his little fqua-
dron. The fleet defined for Spain met with the
fate which the rashness and obstinacy of its com-
manders merited. Of eighteen ships two or three
only escaped. In this general wreck perished Bo-
vadilla, Roldan, and the greater part of those who
had been the most active in persecuting Columbus,
and oppressing the Indians. Together with them-
selves, all the wealth which they had acquired by
their injustice and cruelty was wallowed up.. It
exceeded in value two hundred thousand peso's; an
immense um at that period, and sufficient not only
to have screened them from any severe scrutiny into
their conduct, but to have secured them a gracious
reception in the Spanish court. Among the ships
that escaped, one had on board all the effets of Co-
lumbus which had been recovered from the wreck
of his fortune. Historians, firuck with the exact
diferimination of characters, as well as the just dif-
tribution of rewards and punishments, confpicu-
ous in those events, universally attribute them to
an immediate interposition of divine Providence,
in order to avenge the wrongs of an injured man,
and to punish the oppressors of an innocent people.
Upon the ignorant and superstitious race of men,
who were witnesses of this occurrence, it made a
different impression. From an opinion, which vul-
gar admiration is apt to entertain with iefpe to
persons who have distinguished themselves by their
sagacity and inventions, they believed Columbus

to

B o O K to be possesed of supernatural powers, and ima-
,I. gined that he had conjured up this dreadful storm

"501. by magical art, and incantations, in order to be

revenged of his enemies p.

July 4. COLUMBU S soon left Hispaniola, where he had
earche in
vain for a met with such an inhospitable reception, and flood
praTge to towards the continent. After a tedious and dange-
the Indian
ocean. rous voyage, he discovered Guanaia, an island not

far distant from the coast of Honduras. There he
<· had an interview with sone inhabitants of the con-

tinent, who arrived in a large canoe. They ap-
peared to be a people more civilized, and who had
made greater progress in the knowledge of useful
arts, than any whom he had hitherto discovered.
In return to the inquiries which the Spaniards
made, with their usual eagerness, concerning the
places where they got the gold which they wore by
way of ornament, they direted them to countries
situated to the weft, in which, according to their
description, gold was found in such profusion, that
it was applied to the mofi common uses. Instead
of fleering in quest of a country so inviting, which
would have condu&ted them along the coast of Yu-
catan to the rich empire of Mexico, Columbus was
so bent upon his favourite scheme of finding out
that itrait which communicated with the Indian
ocean, that he bore away to the east towards the
gulf of Darien. In this navigation he discovered
all the coast of the continent, from Cape Gracias
a Dios, to a harbour which, on account of its
beauty and security, he called Porto Bello. He
searched, in vain, for the imaginary strait,
through which he expected to make his way
into an unknown ea; and though he went on

P Oviedo, lib. iii. c. 7. 9. Herrera, dec. . lib. v. c. , 2.
Life of Colunibus, c 88.

shore

shore several times, and advanced into the country, B K
he did not penetrate so far as to cross the narrow
isthmus which separates the gulf of Mexico from 1502.
the great southern ocean. He was so much de-
lighted, however, with the fertility of the country,
and conceived such an idea of its wealth, from the
specimens of gold produced by the natives, that
he resolved to leave a small colony upon the river
Belem, in the province of Veragua, under the
command of his brother, and to return himself to 50o3.
Spain, in order to procure what was requisite for
rendering the establishment permanent. But the
ungovernable spirit of the people under his com-
mand, deprived Columbus of the glory of planting
the firfi colony on the continent of America.
Their insolence and rapaciousness provoked the na-
tives to take arms, and as they were a more hardy
and warlike race of men than the inhabitants of
the ilands, they cut off part of the Spaniards, and
obliged the reft to abandon a fation which they
were unable to maintain q.

TH s repulse, the firfR that the Spaniards met shipwreck.

with from any of the American nations, was not ed onth-
the only misfortune that befell Columbus; it was maica.
followed by a fucceflion of all the disasters to which
navigation is exposed. Furious hurricanes, with
violent storms of thunder and lightning, threatened
his leaky vessels with deftrution; while his difcon-
tentedcrew, exhausted with fatigue, and destitute
of provisions, was unwilling or unable to execute
his commands. One of his ships perished; he was
obliged to abandon another, as unfit for service;
and with the two which remained, he quitted that
part of the continent which in his anguish he nam-
ed the Coast of Vexation r, and bore away for His-
paniola. New distresses awaited him in this voy-

q Flerrera, dec. . lib. v. c. 5, &c. Life of Columbus, c.
89, &c. Oviedo, lib. iii. c. 9, r L. costa de los contrastes.

age,

B o 0 K age. He was driven back by a violent tempest

,J· from the coafl of Cuba, his ships fell foul of one
1503. another, and were so much shattered by the shock,

that with the utmofi difficulty they reached Ja-
June 14. maica, where he was obliged to run them aground,

to prevent them from finking. The meafume of his
calamities seemed now to be full. He was cait
ashore upon n iland at a considerable difiance
from the only settlement of the Spaniards in Ameri-
ca. His ihips were ruined beyond the possibility of
being repaired. To convey an account of his situ-
ation to Hispaniola, appeared impracticable; and
without this it was vain to expect relief. His ge-
nius, fertile in resources, and most vigorous in those
perilous extremities when feeble minds abandon
themselves to despair, discovered the only expedient
which affoided any profpea of deliverance. He
had recourse to the hospitable kindness of the na-
tives, who confidering the Spaniards as beings of a
superior nature, were eager, on every occasion, to
minifier to their wants. From them he obtained
two of their canoes, each formed out of the trunkl
of a tingle tree, hollowed with fire, and so mif-
hapen and aukward as hardly to merit the name
of boats. In these, which were fit only for creep-
ing along the coast, or crossing from one bay to
another, Mendez, a Spaniard, and Fiefchi, a
Genoese, two gentlemen particularly attached to
Columbus, gallantly offered to set out for Hifpani-
ola, upon a voyage of above thirty leagues . This
they accomplished in ten days, after urmounting
incredible dangers, and enduring such fatigue, that
several of the Indians who accompanied them funk
under it, and died. The attention paid to them by
the governor of Hispaniola was neither such as their
courage merited, nor the distress of the persons
from whom they came, required. Ovando, from a

f Oviedo, lib. iii. c. g.

mean

mean jealousy of Columbus, was afraid of allowing B o 0 K
him to set his foot in the island under his govern- ,_
ment. This ungenerous passion hardened his heart 1503.
against every tender sentiment, which reflection
upon the services and misfortunes of that great man,
or compafnion for his own fellow-citizens, involved
in the fame calamities, must have excited. Men-
dez and Fiefchi spent eight months in soliciting re-
lief for their commander and aflociates, without
any profpet of obtaining it.

DURING this period, various paflions agitated His diftrers

and fliTer-

the mind of Columbus, and his companions in ad- ings there.
verfity. At first the expectation of speedy delive-
rance, from the success of Mendez and Fiefchi's
voyage, cheered the spirits of the most despond-
ing. After some time the more timorous began
to fufpeet that they they had miscarried in their
daring attempt. At length, all concluded that so°4.
they had periihed. The ray of hope which had
broke in upon them, made their condition ap-
pear now more dismal. Despair, heightened by
disappointment, fettled in every breast. Their
last resource had failed, and nothing remained but
to end their miserable days among naked savages,
far from their country and their friends. The sea-
men, in a transport of rage, rose in open mutiny,
threatened the life of Columbus, whom they re-
proached as the author of all their calamities, seized
ten canoes, which he had purchased from the In-
dians, and despising his remonstrances and entrea-
ties, made off with them to a distant part of the
island. At the fame time, the natives murmured
at the long residence of the Spaniards in their coun-
try. As their industry was not greater than that of
their neighbours in Hispaniola, like them, they
found the burden of supporting so many firangers
to be altogether intolerable. They began to bring
in provisions with reluaance, they furnished them

with

B O o K with a paring hand, and threatened to withdraw

11, those supplies altogether. Such a resolution must
^v^' quickly have been fatal to the Spaniards. Their

safety depended upon the good-will of the Indians ;
and unless they could revive the admiration and re-
verence with which that simple people had at first
beheld them, defiruction was unavoidable. Though
the licentious proceedings of the mutineers had, in
a great measure, effaced those impreflions which
had been so favourable to the Spaniards, the inge-
nuity of Columbus suggested a happy artifice,
that not only restored but heightened the high opi-
nion which the Indians had originally entertained
of them. By his skill in afironomy, he knew that
there was shortly to be a total eclipse of the moon.
He assembled all the principal persons of the difirit
around him on the day before it happened, and,
after reproaching them for their fickleness in with-
drawing their affetion and afliftance from men
whom they had lately revered, he told them, that
the Spaniards were servants of the Great Spirit who
dwells in heaven, who made and governs the world;
that he, offended at their refuting to support men
who were the objects of his peculiar favour, was
preparing to punish this crime with exemplary fe-
verity, and that very night the moon should with-
hold her light, and appear of a bloody hue, as a
sign of the divine wrath, and an emblem of the
vengeance ready to fall upon them. To this mar-
vellous prediction some of them listened with the
careless indifference peculiar to the people of Ame-
rica; others, with the credulous alionifhment na-
tural to barbarians. But when the moon began
gradually to be darkened, and at length appeared
of a red colour, all were firuck with terror. They
run with conflernation to their houses, and return-
ing instantly to Columbus loaded with provisions,
threw them at his feet, conjuring him to intercede

With

with the Great Spirit to avert the deftrution with B oo K
which they were threatened. Columbus, seeming i
to be moved by their entreaties, promised to com- ,sos
ply with their desire. The eclipse went off, the
moon recovered its splendour, and from that day
the Spaniards were not only furnished profusely
with provisions, but the natives, with superstitious
attention, avoided every thing that could give them
offence .

DURING those tranfations, the mutineers had A cruel ac-

made repeated attempts to pass over to Hispaniola them.
in the canoes which they had seized. But, from
their own mifcondut, or the violence of the winds
and currents, their efforts were all unsuccessful. En-
raged at this disappointment, they marched to-
wards that part of the island where Columbus re-
mained, threatening him with new danger and in-
fults. While they were advancing, an event hap-
pened, more cruel and affliting that any calamity
which he dreaded from them. The governor of
Hispaniola, whose mind was still filled with ome
dark suspicions of Columbus, ent a small bark to
Jamaica, not to deliver his difireffed countrymen,
but to spy out their condition. Left the sympathy
of those whom he employed should afford them re-
lief, contrary to his intention, he gave the com-
mand of this vessel to Efcobar, an inveterate enemy
of Columbus, who adhering to his infirutions with
malignant accuracy, cast anchor at ome distance
from the island, approached the shore in a small
boat, observed the wretched plight of the Spa-
niards, delivered a letter of empty compliment to
the admiral, received his answer, and departed.
When the Spaniards firit descried the vessel fland-
ing towards the island, every heart exulted, as if the

t Life of Columbus, c. 103. Herrera, dec. . lib. vi. c.
5, '. Benzon, Hill. lib. i. c. i 4.

long

B oo K long expected hour of their deliverance had at

L_, length arrived; but when it disappeared so sudden-
504. ly, they funk into the deepest dejetion, and all

their hopes died away. Columbus alone, though
he felt most sensibly this wanton insult which Ovan-
do added to his past neglect, retained such compo-
sure of mind, as to be able to cheer his followers.
He assured them, that Mendez and Fiefchi had
reached Hispaniola in safety; that they would fpee-
dily procure hips to carry them off; and as Efco-
bar's vessel could not take them all on board, that
he had refused to go with her, because he was de-
termined never to abandon the faithful companions
of his distress. Soothed with the expectation of
speedy deliverance, and delighted with his apparent
generosity in attending more to their preservation
than to his own safety, their spirits revived, and he
regained their confidence u.

WITHOUT this confidence, he could not have

refifed the mutineers, who were now at hand. All
his endeavours to reclaim those desperate men had
no effect but to increase their frenzy. Their de-
mands became every day more extravagant, and
their intentions more violent and bloody. The com-
'mon safety rendered it necessary to oppose them
with open force. Columbus, who had been long
afflited xxith the gout, could not take the field.
His brother, the Adelantado, marched against
y °20. them. They quickly met. The mutineers re-

jected with scorn terms of accommodation, which
he once more offered them, and rushed on boldly to
the attack. They fell not upon an enemy unpre-
pared to receive them. In the first hock, several
of their molt daring leaders were slain. The Ade-
lantado, whose strength was equal to his courage,

v Life of Columbus, c. o14. Herrera, dec. i. lib. vi. c. 17

closed

closed with their captain, wounded, disarmed, and c o o K
took him prisoner x. At fight of this, the reft fled i
with a dastardly fear, suitable to their former info- 74-'
lence. Soon after, they submitted in a body to
Columbus, and bound themselves by the most so-
lemn oaths to obey all his commands. Hardly
was tranquillity re-eflablifhed, when the ships ap-
peared, whose arrival Columbus had promised with
great address, though he could foresee it with little
certainty. With transports of joy, the Spaniards
quitted an island in which the unfeeling jealufy of
Ovando had suffered them to languish above a year,
exposed to misery in all its various forms.

WHEN they arrived at St. Domingo, the go- Aug. 3.
vernor, with the mean artifice of a vulgar mind, His deiver-

ance~ and

that labours to atone for insolence by servility, arrival at
fawned on the man whom he envied, and had at- Hirpaxiol.
tempted to ruin. He received Columbus with the
most fudied refpet, lodged him in his own house,
and distinguished him with every mark of honour.
But, amidst those over-ated demonstrations of re-
gard, he could not conceal the hatred and malignity
latent in his heart. He set at liberty the captain of
the mutineers, whom Columbus had brought over,
in chains, to be tried for his crimes, and threatened
such as had adhered to the admiral with proceeding
to a judicial inquiry into their conduEt. Columbus
submitted in silence to what he could not redress;
but discovered an extreme impatience to quit a coun-
try under the jurifdition of a man who had treated
him, on every occasion, with inhumanity and injuf-
tice. His preparations were soon finished, and he
set fail for Spain with two ships. Disasters similar Sept. i1.
to those which had accompanied him through life

x Life of Columbus, c. 107. Herrera, dec. i. lib. vi. c. I.

continued

B o0 K continued to.purfue him to the end of his career.
_' -, One of his vessels being disabled, was soon forced
1504. back to St. Domingo; the other ihattered by vi-

olent storms, failed seven hundred leagues with
December. jury-mais, and reached with difficulty the port of

St. Lucar Y,

Death of THERE he received the account of an event the
Ifabelia.

Nov. . most fatal that could have befallen him, and which

completed his misfortunes. This was the death of
his patroness queen Isabella, in wlhofe justice, huma-
nity, and favour, he confided as his last resource.
None now remained to redress his wrongs, or to
reward him for his services and sufferings, but Ser-
dinand, who had so long opposed and so often in-
jured him. To solicit a prince thus prejudiced
against him, was an occupation no less irksome
than hopeless. In this, however, was Columbus
doomed to employ the close of his days. As soon
as his health was in ome degree re-established, he
repaired to court; and though he was received
there with civility barely decent, he plied Ferdinand
with petition after petition, demanding the punish-
ment of his oppressors, and the reflitution of all the
privileges bestowed upon him by the capitulation of
one thousand four hundred and ninety-two. Ser-
dinand amused him with fair words and unmean-
ing promises. Inflead of granting his claims, he
proposed expedients in order to elude them, and
spun out the affair with such apparent art, as plainly
discovered his intention that it should never be ter-
minated. The declining health of Columbus flat-
tered Ferdinand with the hopes of being soon de-
livered from an importunate suitor, and encouraged
him to persevere in this illiberal plan. Nor was he

Y Life of Columbus. c. jo8. Herrera, dec. i. lib. v.
C. 12.

/ deceived

deceived in his expeatations. Difgufed with the B o o K
ingratitude of a monarch whom he had served with .l
such fidelity and success, exhausted with the fa- 1504.
tigues and hardships which he had endured, and
broken with the infirmities which there brought
upon him, Columbus ended his life at Valladolid Death of
on the twentieth of May one thousand five hundred columbus.
and fix, in the fifty-ninth year of his age. He died
with a composure of mind suitable to the magnani-
mity which distinguished his characer, and with
sentiments of piety becoming that supreme refpet
for religion, which he manifested in every occur-
rence of his life z.

z Life of Columbus, c. Io8. Herrera, dec. i. lib. vi. c.
13, 14, 15.

TH E

# BOOK III.

THE
HISTORY

F
A M E R I C A.

B 0 0 K IlL
W H I L E Columbus was employed in his: B o

last voyage, several events worthy of no- .

tice happened in Hispaniola. The colony there, 1504.
the parent and nurse of all the subsequent efablih- State o thd
ments of Spain in the New World, gradually ac- iifpYnol.
quired the form of a regular and prosperous society.
The humane solicitude of Isabella to protect the In-
dians from oppression, and particularly the procla-
mation, by which the Spaniards were prohibited to
compel them to work, retarded, it is true, for some
time, the progress of improvement. The natives,
who confidered exemption from toil as supreme feli-
city, fcomed every allurement and reward by which
they were invited to labour. The Spaniards had
not a sufficient number of hands either to work the
mines or to cultivate the foil. Several of the first
coloniits, who had been accustomed to the service
of the Indians, quitted the island, when deprived
of those instruments without which they knew 'tot

VOL. I. N how

B O O K how to carry on any operation. Many of those

who came over with Ovando, were seized with the
104. distempers peculiar to the climate, and in a short

space above a thousand of them died. At the fame
time, the demand of one half of the product of the
mines as the royal hare, was found to be an exac-
tion so exorbitant, that no adventurers would en-
gage to work them upon such terms. In order to
save the colony from ruin, Ovando ventured to re-
5so5. lax the rigour of the royal edicts. He made a new

dif:ibution of the Indians among the Spaniards,
compelling them to labour, for a fiated time, in
digging the mines, or in cultivating the ground;
but, in order to screen himself from the imputation
of having ubjeted them again to servitude, he en-
joined their maiters to pay them a certain fum, as
the price of their work. He reduced the royal
share of the gold found in the mines from the half
to the third part, and soon after lowered it to a fifth,
at which it long remained. Notwithfianding Ifa-
bella's tender concern for the good treatment of
the Indians, and Ferdinand's eagerness to improve
the royal revenue, Ovando persuaded the court to
approve of both these regulations a.

War with Bu T the;Indians, after enjoying respite from op-
the Indians. pression, though; during a short interval, now felt

the yoke of bondage to be so galling, that they
made several attempts to vindicate their own liber-
ty. This.the Spaniards confidered as rebellion, and
took arms in order to reduce. them to fubje&ion.
When war is carried:on between nations whose fiate
of improvement is in any degree similar, the means
of defence bear some proportion to those employed
in the attack; and in this equal contel such efforts
must be made, such talents are displayed, and such

.- , . 3 Herrera; dec. i. lib. v. c. 3.

pafflons

paflions roused, as exhibit mankind to view in a s o o K.
lituation no less striking than interelting. It is one z-.
of the noblest functions of history, to observe and 1o.
to delineate men- at ajunture when their minds
are most violently agitated, and all their powers
and paflions are called forth. Hence the operations
of war, and the itruggles between contending flates,
have been deemed by hiftoiians, atkcient aswell as
modern, a capital and important article in the an-
nals of human ations, but in a contest between
naked savages and one of the most warlike of the
European nations, where science, courage, and dif-
ciplire on one fide, were opposed by timidity, ig-
norance, and disorder on the other, a particular de-
tail of events would be as unpleasant as uninftruc-
tive. If the firnplicity and innocence of the Indians
had inspired the Spaniards with humanity, bad soft-
ened the pride of superiority into compafion, and
had induced them to improve. the inhabitants of the
New World, initead of opprefiing them, some
sudden aats of violence, like the too rigorous chaf-
tifements of impatient inftrutors, might have been
related without horror. But, unfortunately, this
consciousness of superiority operated in a different
manner. The Spaniards were advanced so far be-
yond the natives of America in improvement of
every kind, that they viewed them with contempt.
They conceived the Americans to be beings of an
inferior nature, who were not intitled to the rights
and privileges of men. In peace, they ubjected
them to servitude. In war, they paid no regard to
those laws, which, by a tacit convention between
contending nations, regulate hostility, and set ome
bounds to its rage. They confidered them not as
men fighting in defence of their liberty, but as
slaves, who had revolted against their masters.
Their caziques, when taken, were condemned,
like the leaders of banditti, to the moil cruel and

N 2 ignominious

B O OK ignominious punishments; and all their fubjeds,

IlL , ithout regarding the diftinaion of ranks establish-

o. ed among them, were reduced to the fame state of

abjec slavery. With such a spirit and sentiments
were hostilities carried on against the cazique of
Higuey, a province of the eastern extremity of the
ifiand. This war was occasioned by the perfidy of
the Spaniards, in violating a treaty which they had
made with the natives, and it was terminated by
hanging up the cazique, who defended his people
with bravery so far superior to that of his country-
men, as intitled him to a better fate b.

The crel THE condu& of Ovando, in another part of the
handrea- ^fland, was fill more treacherous and cruel. The
condut of province anciently named Xaragua, which extends
Ovando. from the fertile plain where Leogane is now situ-

ated, to the western extremity of the island, was
fubje& to a female cazique, named Anacoana,
highly refpe&ed by the natives. She, from that
partial fondness with which the women of America
were attached to the Europeans, (the cause of which
shall be afterwards explained) had always courted
the friendship of the Spaniards, and loaded them
with good offices. But some of the adherents of
Roldan having fettled in her country, were so
much exasperated at her endeavouring to restrain
their excesses, that they accused her of having
formed a plan to throw off the yoke, and to exter-
minate the Spaniards. Ovando, though he knew
well how little credit was due to such profligate
men, marched, without further inquiry, towards
Xaragua, with three hundred foot and seventy
horsemen. To prevent the Indians from taking
alarm at this hostile appearance, he gave out that
his sole intention was to visit Anacoana, to whom

- b Herrera, dec. . ib. vi. c. 9, o.

his

his countrymen had been so much indebted, in the B o O
most refpetful manner, and to regulate with her ,
the mode of levying the tribute payable to the king 50.
of Spain. Anacoana, in order to receive this illut-
trious guest with due honour, assembled the prin-
cipal men in her dominions, to the number of three
hundred, and advancing at the head of these, ac-
companied by a vast croud of persons of inferior
rank, he welcomed Ovando with songs and dan-
ces, according to the mode of the country, and
conduted him to the place of her residence. 'There
he was feasted for some days, with all the kindness
of simple hospitality, and amused with the games
and fpetacles usual among the Americans upon oc-
cafions of mirth and festivity. But, amidst the fe-
curity which this inspired, Ovando was meditating
the deftru&ion of his unfufpicious entertainer and
her fubjets; and the mean perfidy with which he
executed his scheme, equalled his barbarity in form-
ing it. Under colour of exhibiting to the Indians
the parade of an European tournament, he ad-
vanced with his troops, in battle array, towards
the house in which Anacoana and the chiefs who at-
tended her were afembled. The infantry took
poffeflion of all the avenues which ledto the village.
The horsemen encompassed the house. These
movements were the object ps admiration without
any mixture of fear, until, upon a signal which had
been concerted, the Spaniards suddenly drew their
swords, and rushed upon the Indians, defenceless, and
astonished at an at oftreachery which exceeded the
conception of undesigning men. In a moment
Anacoana was secured. All her attendants, were
seized and bound. Fire was set to the house; and,
without examination or conviction, all there unhap-
py persons, the most illustrious in their own coun-
try, were consumed in the flames. Anacoanra was

reserved

B o o K reserved for a more ignominious fate. She was

m^_. carried in chains to St. Domingo, and, after the

formality of a trial before Spanish judges, he was
condemned upon the evidence of thole very men
who had-betrayed her, to be publicly hanged c.

Reduaion OVERAWED and humbled by this atrocious
dians, and treatment of their princes and nobles, who were
itseffeftE. objects of their highest reverence, the people in all

the provinces of H-ispaniola submitted, without far-
ther reiiftance, to the Spanish yoke. Upon the
death of Isabella, .all the regulations tending to mi-
tigate the rigour of their-fervitude were forgotten.
The inall gratuity paid to them as the price of
their labour was withdrawn; and at the fame time
io6. the talks imposed upon them wereincreafed. Ovan-

do, without.-any refraint, diftibuted Indians a-
mong his friends in the island. Ferdinand, to
whom the queen had les by will one half of the re,
.venue arifig from the settlements in the New
'Vorld, conferred grants of.a nimilar nature upon
his courtiers, -as the least expensive mode of re-
warding their services. They farmed out the In-
dians, of-whom they were rendered proprietors, to
their countrymen fettled in Hispaniola; and that
wretched people, being compelled to labour in or-
der to satisfy the rapacity of both, the exaaions of
their oppreflors no longer knew any.hounds. But,
barbarous as theirpolicy was,.and fatal to the inha-
bitants of Hispaniola, it produced for ome time,
very considerable effects. By calling forth the force
of a whole nation, and exerting it in one direction,
the working of the mines was carried on with amaz-
ing rapidity and success. During several years, the
gold brought into the royal fmelting-houfes in His-

c Oviedo, lib. iii. c. 12. Herrera, dec. i. lib. vi. c. 4. O-

viedo, lib. iii. c. 12. Relacion de detruyc. de las Indias, par
Bart. de las Casas, p. 8.

paniola

paniola amounted annually to four hundred -;and B o' K
sixty thousand pesos, above;a hundred thousand i-,
pounds sterling; which, if we.attend to the-great rgo6..
change in the value of money since the beginning
of the fifteenth century to the present :times, must
appear an immense fum. Vast fortunes were cre-
ated, of a iudden, by.fome. Others .dissipated in
ostentatious profusion, what they acquired with fa-
cility. Dazzled by both, new adventurers croudd
to America, with the most eager .impatience, to
share in those treasures which had enriched their
countrymen; and, notwithftanding.the mortality
occasioned by the unhealthiness of the climate, the
colony continued to increase d.

OVANDO governed the Spaniards with wisdom Progrefr of

and justice, not inferior to the rigour-with which he thecolony.
treated the Indians. He established equal laws, and,
by executing them with impartiality, accustomed
the people of the -colony to reverence them. He
founded several new towns in different parts of the
island, and allured inhabitants to them, by the
concefflon of various immunities. He endeavoured
to turn the attention of the Spaniards to -some
branch of indutry more useful than that of search-
ing for gold in the mines. Some flips of the sugar-
cane having been brought from the Canary islands
by way of experiment, they were found to thrive
.with such increafe,in the rich foil and warm climate
to which they were transplanted, that the cultiva-
tion of them soon became an objet of commerce.
Extensive plantations were begun; fugar-works,
which the Spaniards called ingenio's, from the va-
rious machinery employed in them, were erected,
and in a few years the manufactures of this
commodity wasthe great occupation of the inhabi-

d Herrera, dec. i. lib. vi. c. 18, &c.

tants

B o0 K tants 'of Hispaniola, and the most considerable
,m_ source of their wealth e.

Politcal're- THE prudent endeavours of Ovando, to promote
gulations of the welfare of the colony, were powerfully second-
Fcrdia"d. ed by Ferdinand. The large remittances which he

received from the New World, opened his eyes,
at length, with refpec to the importance of those
discoveries, which he had hitherto asseted to under-
value. Fortune, and his own address, having now
extricated him out of those difficulties in which he
,507. ha4 been involved by the death of his queen, and

by his disputes with his fon-in-law about the go-
vernment of her dominions f, he had full leisure to
turn his attention to the affairs of America. To
his provident sagacity, Spain is indebted for many of
those regulations which gr4aually formed that system
of profound, but jealous policy, by which he go-
verns her dominions in the New World. He eret-
ed a court, distinguished by the title of the Casa de
Contratacion, or Board of Trade, composed of per-

, sons eminent for rank and abilities, to whom he
* ~committed the administration of American affairs.

This board assembled regularly in Seville, and was
invested with a diftint and extensive jurifdition.
He gave a regular form to ecclesiastical government
in America, by rnominating archbishops, bishops,
deans, together with clergymen of subordinate
ranks, to take charge of the Spaniards established
there, as well as of the natives, who should em-
brace the Christian faith. But, notwithstanding
the obsequious deyotion of the Spanish court to the
Papal See, iuph: wa~ Ferdinand's solicitude to pre-
vent any foreign ppwer from claiming jurifdiaion,
or acquiring influence, in his new dominions, that

e Oviedo, lib. iv. c. 8. f Hist. of the Reign of
Fharle$ V. vol. ii. p. 6, &c.

he reserved to the crown of Spain theTole right of B 0O K
patronage to the benefices in America, and ftipu- I.
lated that no papal bull or mandate hould be pro- 1507.
mulgated there, until it was previously examined
and approved of by his council. With the fame
spirit ofjealoufy, he prohibited any goods to be ex-
ported to America, or any person to fettle there,
without a special licence from that council g.,

BUT, notwithstanding this attention to the po- Thenum-

lice and welfare of the colony, a calamity impend- ber of the
ed which threatened its dissolution. The original minises
inhabitants, on whose labour the Spaniards in His- fast
paniola depended for their prosperity, and even
their existence, wafted so fast, that the extirction
of the whole race seemed to be inevitable. When
Columbus discovered Hispaniola, the number of
its inhabitants was computed to be at least a mil-
lion h. They were now reduced to sixty thousand
in the space of fifteen years. This consumption of
the human species, no less amazing than rapid, was
the effee of several concurring causes. The natives
of the American islands were of a more feeble con-
ltitution thap the inhabitants of the other hemif-
phere. They could neither perform the fame work,
nor endure the fame fatigue with men whose organs
were of a more vigorous conformation. The in-
ative indolence in which they delighted to pass
their days, as it was the effet of their debility, con-
tributed likewise to increase it, and rendered them,
from habit as well as conltitution, incapable of hard
labour. The food on wlich they subsisted, afforded
little nourishment, and they were accustomed to
take it in fmrall quantities, not sufficient to invigo-
rate a languid frame, and render it equal to the

g Herrera, dec. .lib. vi. c. 1,: zo. h Ibid. dec. I-
lib. x. c. Iz.

efforts

B 0 0 K efforts of indufiry. The Spaniards, without at-
a__,i tending to those peculiarities in the confitution of

1507. the Americans, imposed talks upon them so difpro-

portioned to their 'Arength, 'that many funk under
the fatigue, and ended their wretched days. Others;
prompted by impatience and despair, cut short
their own lives with a violent hand. Famine,
brought on by compelling such numbers to abandon
the culture of their lands, in order .to labour in
the mines, proved fatal to many. Diseases of va-
rious kinds, ome occasioned by the hardships to
which they were exposed, and others by their inter-
course with the Europeans, completed the defola-
tion of the island. Being thus deprived of the in-
ftruments which they were accuftpmed to em-
ploy, the Spaniards found it impossible to extend
their improvements, or even to carry on the works
s0o8. which they had. already begun. In order to pro-

vide an immediate remedy for an evil so alarming,
Ovando proposed to transport the inhabitants of the
Lucayo islands to Hispaniola, under pretence that
they might be civilized with more facility, and in-
firuded to greater advantage in the Chriflian re-
ligion, if they were united to the Spanish colony,
and under the immediate infpedion of the mifliona-
ries fttled there. Ferdinand, deceived by this ar-
tifice, or willing to connive at an a of violence
which -policy represented as neceflary, gave his as-
sent to the proposal. Several vessels were fitted out
for the Lucayos, the commanders of which inform-
ed the natives, with whose language they were now
well acquainted, that they came from a delicious
country, in which their departed ancestors resided,
by whom they were sent to invite them to resort
thither, to partake of the bliss which they enjoyed.
.That finple people listened with wonder and cre-
dulity; and, fond of visiting their relations and
friends in that happy region, followed the Spaniards

witll

with eagerness. By this artifice, above forty thou- B K
sand were decoyed into Hispaniola, to share in the I
sufferings which were the lot of the inhabitants of iso8.
that' island, and to mingle their groans and tears
with those of that wretched :race of men '

THE Spaniards had, for ome time, carried on New dico-

their operations in the mines of Hispaniola with rfettleSe
such ardour as well as success, that they seemed to
have engrossed their whole attention. The spirit
of discovery languished; and, since the last voyage
of Columbus, no enterprise of any moment had
been undertaken But as -the decrease of the In-
dians rendered it impossible to acquire wealth in
that island with the fame rapidity as formerly, this
urged them to search for new countries, where their
avarice might be gratified with more facility. Juan
Ponce de Leon, who commanded under Ovando in
the eastern diftrit of Hispaniola, passed over to the
island of St. John de Porto Rico, which Columbus'
.had discovered in his .second voyage, and penetrated
into the interior part of the country. As he found
the foil to be fertile, and expeted from some fymp-
toms, as well as from the information of the inha-
bitants, to discover. mines of gold in the mountains,
Ovando permitted him to attempt making a fettle-
ment in the island. This was easily effeted
by an officer eminent for conduct no less than
for courage. In ;a few years Porto Rico was sub-
jeCed to the Spanish government, the natives were
reduced to servitude; and, being treated with the
fame inconsiderate rigour as 'their neighbours in
Hispaniola, the race of original inhabitants, worn
out with fatigue and sufferings, was soon extermi-
nated .k

iHerrera, dec. i. lib.vii. c. 3. Oviedo, lib. iii. c. 6.
Gomara Hist. c. 41.

k Herrera, dec. . lib. vii. c. i-4. Gomara Hilt. c. 44.
ielacion de B. de las Casas, p. io.

ABOUT

B o O K ABOUT the fame time, Juan Diaz de Solis, in

H,.I conjunction with Vincent Yanez Pinzon, one of
158o. Columbus's original companions, made a voyage

to the continent. They held the fame course
which Columbus had taken, as far as to the island
of Guanaios; but, fianding from thence to the
weft, they discovered a new and extensive province,
afterwards known by the name of Yucatan, and
proceeded a considerable way along the coaR of
that country '. Though nothing memorable oc-
curred in this voyage, it deserves notice, because
it led to discoveries of greater importance. For the
fame reason, the voyage of Sebastian de Ocampo
must be mentioned. By the command of Ovando,
he failed round Cuba, and first discovered, with
certainty, that this country, which Colurmbus once
supposed to be a part of the continent, was a large
island .

Diego Co- THIS voyage round Cuba was one of the last
lumbus ap-
pointedgo- occurrences under the adminifiration of Ovando.
vernor of Ever since the death of Columbus, his son Don

iio. Diego had been employed in soliciting Ferdinand

to grant him the offices of viceroy and admiral in
the New World, together with all the other im-
munities and profits which descended to him by in-
heritance, in consequence of the original capitula-
tion with his father. But if there dignities and re-
venues appeared so considerable to Ferdinand, that,
at the expence of being deemed unjust as well as
ungrateful, he had wrested them from Columbus, it
is not surprising that he should be unwilling to con-
ser them on his son. Accordingly, Don Diego
wafted two years in inceflant but fruitless importu-
nity. Weary of this, he endeavoured at length to
obtain by a legal sentence, what he could not pro-

I Herrera, dec i. lib. vi. c. 17. m Ibid. lib. vii. c. .

cure

cure from the favour of an interefled monarch B o K
He commenced a suit against Ferdinand before the .
council that managed Indian affairs, and that court, 8os.
with integrity which reflets honour upon its pro-
ceedings, decided againit the king, and sustained
Don Diego's claim of the vice-royalty, and all the
other privileges itipulated in the capitulation. Even
after this decree, Ferdinand's repugnance to put a
subjet in possession of such extensive rights, might
have thrown in new obstacles, if Don Diego had
not taken a fep which interested very powerful
persons in the success of his claims. The sentence
of the council of the Indies gave him a title to a rank
so elevated, and a fortune so opulent, that he found
no difficulty in concluding a marriage with Donna
Maria, daughter of Don Ferdinand de Toledo,
great commendator of Leon, and brother of the
duke of Alva, a grandee of the sirs rank, and
nearly related to the king. The duke and his fa-
mily espoused so warmly the'caufe of their new ally,
that Ferdinand could not resist their solicitations.
He recalled Ovando, and appointed Don Diego his 1509.
successor, though, even in conferring this favour,
he could not conceal his jealousy; for he allowed
him to assume only the title of governor, not that
of viceroy, which had been adjudged to belong to
him n.

HE oon repaired to Hispaniola, attended by his He repairs

brother, his uncles, his wife, whom the courtesy of tHifrPan"
the Spaniards honoured with the title of vice-queen,
and a numerous retinue of persons of both sexes,
born of good families. He lived with a splendour
and magnificence hitherto unknown in the New
World and the family of Columbus seemed now
to enjoy'the honours and rewards due to his inven-
tive genius, of which he himself had.been cruelly
defrauded. The colony itself acquired new lufrre

n Herrera, dec. i. lib. vii. c. 4, &c.

by

B o O K by the accession of so many inhabitants, of a differ-

m. ent rank and character from most of those who had
'p' hitherto migrated to America, and many of the most

illustrious families in the Spanish settlements are de-
scended from the persons who at that time accom-
panied Don Diego Columbus .

No benefit accrued to the unhappy natives from

this change of governors. Don Diego was not only
authorised by a royal edict to continue the reparti-
minentos, or distribution of Indians, but the particu-
lar number which he might grant to every person,
according to his rank in the colony, was specified.
He availed himself of that permiflion; and soon as-
ter he landed at St. Domingo, he divided such Indi-
ans as were still unappropriated, among his relations
and attendants P.

Pearl fihery THE next care of the new governor was to com-
of Cubagu. ply with an infirution which he received from the

king, about fettling a colony in Cubagua, a small
island which Columbus had discovered in his third
voyage. Though this barren spot hardly yielded
subsistence to its wretched inhabitants, such quanti-
ties of those oysters which produce pearls were found
on its coast, that it did not long escape the inquifi-
tive avarice of the Spaniards, and became a place
of considerable resort. Large fortunes were ac-
quired by the fishery of pearls, which was carried
on with extraordinary ardour. The Indians, efpe-
cially those from the Lucayo islands, were com-
pelled to dive for them; and this dangerous and
unhealthy employment was an additional calamity,
which contributed not a little to the extinction of
that devoted race q.

0 Oviedo, lib. iii. c. i. P Recopilacion de Leyes,
lib. vi. tit. 8. 1. I, 2. Herrera, dec. i. lib. vii. c. lo.

q Herrera, dec. x. lib. vii. c. 9. Gomara Hist. c. 78.

ABOU'T

ABOOU T this period, Juan Diaz de Solis and Pin- B o K

zon set out, in conjuntion, upon a second voyage. II.
They stood direEtly south, towards the equinoftial ';o.
line, which Pinzon had formerly crossed, and ad- New voy-
vanced as far as the fortieth degree of southern la- ages.
titude. They were aflonifhed to find that the con-
tinent of America firetched, on their right hand,
through all this vast extent of ocean. They landed
in different places, to take poffeflion in the name of
their sovereign; but though, the country appeared
to be extremely fertile and inviting, their force
was so small, having been fitted out rather for dif-
covery than making settlements, that they left no
colony behind them. Their voyage, served, how-
ever, togive the Spaniards more exalted and ade-
quate ideas with refpea to the dimensions of this
new quarter of the globe r.

THOUG H it was above ten years since Columbus. A fettle-

had discovered the main land of America, the Spa- ment on
niards had. hitherto made no Settlement in any part of nent at-
it. What had been so long, negleted was now fe- tempted.
rioufly attempted, and with considerable vigour,
though the plan for this purpose was neither formed
by the crown, or executed at the expence of the na-
tion, but carried on by the enterprising spirit of pri-
vate adventurers. This scheme took its rife from
Alonfo de Ojeda, who had already made two voya-
ges as a discoverer, by which he acquired confidera-
ble reputation, but no wealth. But his character for
intrepidity and condut easily procured him afio-
ciates, who advanced the money requisite to de-
fray the charges of the expedition. About the
fame time, Diego de Nicueffa, who had acquired a
large fortune in Hispaniola, formed a similar de-
sign. Ferdinand encouraged both; and though he,

r Herrera, dec. . lib. vii. c. 9.

refused

B 0 0 K refused to advance the smallest fum, was extremely

t,_ liberal of titles and patents. He erected two go-
so09. vernments on the continent, one extending from

Cape de Vela to the gulf of Darien, and the other
from that to Cape Gracias a Dios. The former
was given to Ojeda, the latter to Nicuefla. Ojeda
fitted out a ship and two brigantines with three
hundred men; Nicueffa, fix vessels, with seven
hundred and eighty men. They failed about the
fame time from St. Domingo for their refpetive
governments. In order to give their title to those
countries some appearance of validity, several of the
most eminent divines and lawyers in Spain were
employed to prescribe the mode in which they
ihould take possession of them . There is not in
the history of mankind any thing more singular or
extravagant than the form which they devised for
this purpose. They inftruted those invaders, as
soon as they landed on the continent, to declare to
the natives the principal articles of the Christian
faith; to acquaint them, in particular, with the fu-
preme jurifdition of the Pope over all the king-
doms of the earth; to inform them of the grant
which this holy pontiffhad made of their country to
the king of Spain ; to require them to embrace the
dotrines of that religion which they made known
to them; and to submit to the sovereign whose au-
thority they proclaimed. If they refused to com-
ply with this requisition, the terms of which must
have been utterly incomprehensible to an unin-
ilruted Indian, then Ojeda and NicuefTa were au-
thorifed to attack them with sword and fire; to re-
duce them, their wives and children, to a slate of
servitude; and to compel them by force to recog-
ni2e the jurifdition of the church, and the authority
of the monarch, to which they would not volunta-
rily subjet thefelves t.

f Herrera, dec. . ib. vii. c, ir. t See NOTE XXIII.

As

As the inhabitants of the contmnnt could not at B oo K

once yield afient to dorine. to rfined for their . I.
uncultivated underftandings,.and explaiined to them .
by interpreters imperfectly acquainted with their Thedi

. ...................... »afters at-

language; as they did not conceive how a.foreign tending it.
priest, of whom they had never heard, could have
any right to dispose of their country, or how an
unknown prince should claim jurifdiaipn over.them -
as his fubjets; they fiercely .opped the:ne.in-
vaders of their territories. Ojed,a. a.d Nicueff en-
deavoured to effect by force what they could not
accomplith by, persuasion. The contemporary wri-
ters enter into a very minute detail in relating their
tranfa6tions; but, as lhey rmaiden.odfcoyery of im-
portance, nor .established ,any permanent fettle-
ment, their adventures are not ititled .to any con-
fiderable: place in the.general ifiry of a period,
where romantic valour, struggling with incredible
hardihips, distinguish .every efort, of.-the Spanish
arms, They, found,,te . n. ativ.s in rtbofe c. ountries
of which they went to assume. ;e government, to
be of a charaer.very dif.e.rnt frgm .thatof their
countrymen in the islands. Tlley were.,fierce and
warlike. Their arrows were dipped in.a poison so
noxious, that every wound was,-followed.with. cer-
tain death. In one, encounter. they, .ct .off above
seventy of Ojeda's followers, and..the .Spaniards,
for the first time, were taught; to. :dread:the inhabi-
tants of the New World. .Nicuefla was p.pofed by
people .equally refolute.in defence of their poffeffi-,
ons. Nothing could soften their ferocity. Though
the Spaniards employed every art to soothe them,
and to gain their. confidence, they refused to hold
any intercourse,. or to exchange any friendly office,
with men whose .residence among them they confi-
dered as fatal to their liberty and independence. ;.o.
This implacable enmity of the natives, though it
rendered it extremely difficult as well as dangerous

VoL. . O to

Bo o K to establish a settlement in their country, might

I,. have been surmounted at length by the perfeve-

rance of the Spaniards, by the superiority of their
arms, and their kill in the art of war. But every
:disaster which can be accumulated upon the unfor-
tunate, combined to complete their ruin. The loss
of their ships by various accidents upon an un-
known coast, the diseases peculiar to a climate the
most noxious in all America, the want of provifi-
ons, unavoidable in a country imperfetly cultivated,
dissention among themselves, and the inceflant hof-
tilities of the natives, involved them in a fuccefflon
of calamities, the bare recital of which firikes one
with horror. Though they received two confidera-
ble reinforcements from Hispaniola, the greater
part of those who had engaged in this unhappy ex-
pedition, perished, in less than a year, in the molt
extreme misery. A few who survived, fettled as a
feeble colony at Santa Maria el Antigua, on the gulf
of Darien, under the command of Vasco Nugnez de
Balboa, who, in the most desperate exigencies, dif-
-played such courage and conduct, as first gained the
confidence of his countrymen, and marked him out
as their leader in more splendid and successful under-
takings. Nor was he the only adventurer in this
expedition who will appear with lustre in more im-
portant scenes. Francis Pizarro was one of Ojeda's
companions, and in the school of adversity acquir-
ed or improved the talents which fitted him for the
extraordinary ations which he afterwards per-
formed. Ferdinand Cortes, whose name became
still more famous, had engaged early in this enter-
prfe, which rouzed all the active youth of Hifpa-
niola to arms ; but the good fortune which accom-
panied him in his subsequent adventures, interposed
to save him from the disasters to which his com-
panions were exposed. .He was taken illat St. Do-

mingo
e

mingo before the departure of the fleet, and de- B o K
tained there by that indisposition u. U.

NoTWITHSTANDING the unfortunate issue of coef of

this expedition, the Spaniards were not deterred Cuba.
from engaging in new schemes of a similar nature.
When wealth is acquired gradually by the perse-
vering hand of industry, or accumulated by the
flow operations of regular commerce, the means
employed are so proportioned to the end attained,
that there is nothing to itrike the imagination, and
little to urge on the ative powers of the mind to
uncommon efforts. But when large fortunes were
created almost instantaneously; when gold and
pearls were procured in exchange for baubles;
when the countries which produced these rich com-
modities, defended only by naked savages, might
be seized by the first bold invader; objets so fin-
gular and alluring rouzed a wonderful spirit of en-
terprife among the Spaniards, who rushed with ar-
dour into this new path that was opened to wealth
and diftintion. While this spirit continued warm
and vigorous, every attempt either towards disco-
very or conquet was applauded, and adventurers
engaged in it with emulation. The passion for new
undertakings, which charaaerifes the age of discovery
in thelatter part of the fifteenth and beginning of the
sixteenth century, would alone have been sufficient to
prevent the Spaniards from flopping short in their
career. But circumstances peculiar to Hispaniola at
thisjunEture concurred with it in extending their na-
vigation and conquests. The rigorous treatment of
the inhabitants of that island having almost extirpated
the race, many of the Spanish planters, as I have al-

u Herrera, dec. i. lib. vii. c. iI, &c. Gomara Hist, c.

57, 58, 59. Benzon. Hilt. lib. i. c. 19.-3. P. Martyr,
decad. 122.

0 2 ready

B o.0 K ready observed, finding it impoflible to carry on

i. their works with the fame vigour and profit, were
'7. obliged to look out for settlements in ome country

whose people were not yet wafted by oppreflion.
Others, with the inconsiderate levity natural to men
upon whom wealth pours in with a sudden flow,
had squandered, in thoughtlef -prodigality, what
they had acquired with ease, and were driven by
necessity to embark:in the most desperate schemes,
';x. in order to retrieve their affairs. From all these

causes, when Don Diego Columbus proposed to
conquer the island of Cuba, and to establish a co-
lony there, many persons of chief distinction in
Hispaniola engaged with alacrity in the measure.
He gave the command of the troops destined for
that service to Diego Velasquez, one of his father's
companions in his second voyage, and who, having
been long fettled in Hispaniola, had acquired an
ample fortune, with such reputation for probity and
prudence, that he seemed to be well qualified for
conducting an expedition of importance. Three
hundred men were deemed sufficient for the con-
quert of an island above seven hundred miles in
length, and filled with inhabitants. But they were
of the fame unwarlike character with the people of
Hispaniola. They were not only intimidated by
the appearance of their new enemies, but unpre-
pared to resist them. For though, from the time
that the Spaniards took pofeffion of the adjacent
island, there was reason to expe& a descent on their
territories, none of the small communities into
which Cuba was divided, had either made any pro-
vision for its own defence, or had formed any con-
cert for their common safety. The only obftruc-
tion the Spaniards met with was from Hatuey, a
cazique, who had fled from Hispaniola, and taken
pofefion of the eastern extremity of Cuba. He
flood upon the defensive at their first landing, and
endeavoured to drive them back to their ships.

His

His feeble troops, however, were soon broken and B o K
dijperfed ; and he himself being taken prisoner, i
Velasquez, according to the barbarous maxim of i
the Spaniards, confidered him as a slave who had
taken arms againfi his master, and condemned him
to the flames. When Hatuey was fastened to the
flake, a Franciscan friar labouring to convert him,
promised him immediate admittance into the joys
of heaven, if he would embrace the Christian faith.
" Are there any Spaniards," fays he, after some
pause, " in that region of bliss which you describe ?"
" Yes," replied the monk, " but only such as are
worthy and good." " The bet of them," re-
turned the indignant cazique, c" have neither worth
nor goodness; I will not go to a place where I
may meet with one of that accursed race" x. This
dreadful example of vengeance firuck the people of
Cuba with such terror, that they scarcely gave any
opposition to the progress of their invaders; and
Velasquez, without the loss of a man, annexed this
extensive and fertile island to the Spanish mo-
narchy Y.

THE facility with which this important conquest Dicovery of

was completed, served as an incitement to other un- Florda.
dertakings. Juan Ponce de Leon, having acquired
both fame and wealth by the reduction of Porto
Rico, was impatient to engage in ome new enter-
prise. He fitted out three ships at his own ex- ,5,z.
pence, for a voyage of discovery, and his reputa-
tion soon drew together a refpe&table body of fol-
lowers. He direEted his course towards the Lucayo
islands; and after touching at several of them, as
well as of the Bahama isles, he flood to the south-
weft, and discovered a country hitherto unknown

x B. de las Casas, p. 40. Y Herrera, dec. . lib. ix.
c. 2, 3, &c. Oviedo, lib. xvii. c. 3, p. 179.

to

B o 0 K to the Spaniards, which he called Florida, either

ml, because he fell in with it on Palm Sunday, or on
J,62. account of its gay and beautiful appearance. He

attempted to land in different places, but met with
such vigorous opposition from the natives, who
were fierce and warlike, as convinced him that an
increase of force was requisite to effect a settlement.
Satisfied with having opened a communication with
a new country, of whose value and importance he
conceived very sanguine hopes, he returned to Porto
Rico, through the channel now known by the
name of the Gulf of Florida.

IT was not merely the paion of searching for

new countries that prompted Ponce de Leon to un-
dertake this voyage, he was influenced by one of
those visionary ideas which at that time often min-
gled with the spirit of discovery, and rendered it
more enterprising. A tradition prevailed among
the natives of Porto Rico, that in the isle of Bi-
mini, one of the Lucayos, there was a fountain of
such wonderful virtue as to renew the youth, and
recall the vigour of every person who bathed in its
salutary waters. In hopes of finding this grand re-
florative, Ponce de Leon and his followers ranged
through the islands, searching, with fruitless folici-
tude and labour for the fountain, which was the
chief objeEt of their expedition. That a tale so fa-
bulous hould gain credit among simple uninftruded
Indians is not surprising. That it should make any
impreiflon upon an enlightened people appears, in
the present age, altogether incredible. The fact,
lowever, is certain; and the most authentic Spa-
nifh historians mention this extravagant rally of their
credulous countrymen. The Spaniards, at that pe-
iicd, were engaged in a career of ativity which
gave a romantic turn to their imagination, and
daily presented to them strange and marvellous

objects.

objects. A New World was opened to their view. B o o K
They visited islands and continents of whole ex-
ifience mankind in former ages had no conception, 15,.
In those delightful countries nature seemed to assume
another form; every tree and plant and animal
was different from those of the ancient hemisphere.
They seemed to be tranfportedtoenchanted ground;
and, after the wonders which they had seen, in the
warmth and novelty of their admiration, nothing
appeared to them so extraordinary as to be beyond
belief. If the rapid fuccefflon of new and firiking
scenes made such impression even upon the found
understanding of Columbus, that he boafled of
having found the feat of Paradise, it will not ap-
pear frange that Ponce de Leon hould dream of
discovering the fountain of youth z.

SOON after the expedition to Florida, a disco- Progress of

very of much greater importance was made in ano- Daroin.
ther part of America. Balboa having been raited
to the government of the small colony at Santa
Maria in Darien, by the voluntary uffrage of his
aflociates, was so extremely desirous to obtain from
the crown a confirmation of their election, that he
dispatched one of his officers to Spain, in order to
solicit a royal commission, which might invest him
with a legal title to the supreme command. Con-
fcious, however, that he could not expet success
from the patronage of Ferdinand's ministers, with
whom he was unconnected, or from negociating in
a court to the arts of which he was a firanger, he
endeavoured to merit the dignity to which he
aspired, and aimed at performing ome signal ser-
vice that would secure him the preference to every

z P. Martyr, decad. p. 202. Enfayo Chronol. para la

Hist. de la Florida, por D. Gab. Cardenas, p. . Oviedo,
lib. xvi. c. . Herrera, dc. i. lib. ix. c. 5. Hift.delaConq.
de la Florida, par Garc de la Vega, lib. 1. c. 3.

competitor,

B o0 K competitor. Full of this idea, he made frequent
2,zL 1 inroads into the adjacent country, subdued several
151z. of the cazi4ueS, and colleated a considerable quan-

tity of gold, which abounded more in that part of
the continent than in the islands. In one of those
excursions, the Spaniards contended with such ea-
gernefs about the division of some gold, that they
were at the point of proceeding to ats of violence
againfi one another. A young cazique, who was
present, astonished at the high value which they set
upon a thing of which he did not discern the use,
tumbled the gold out of the balance with indigna-
tion; and, turning to the Spaniards, " Why do
you quarrel (fays he) about such a trifle ? If you are
so pafiionately fond of gold, as to abandon your
own country, and to diftitb the tranquillity of
distant nations for its fake, I will conduct you to a
region where the metal which seems to be the chief
objea of your admiration and desire, is so common
that the meanest. utensils are formed of it." Tranf-
ported with what they heard, Balboa and his com-
panions inquired eagerly where this happy country
lay, and how they might arrive at it. He informed
them that at the distance of fix funs, that is of fix
days journey towards the south, they should disco-
ver another ocean, near to which this wealthy king-
dom was situated; but if they intended to attack
that powerful slate, they must aemble forces far
superior in number and strength to those with which
they now appeared a.

Ther THIS was the first information which the Spa-
schemes
which he niards received concerning the great southern ocean,
forms, or the opulent and extensive country known after-

wards by the name of Peru. Balboa had now be-
fore him objects suited to his boundless ambition,

X Herrera, dec. . lib. ix. c. z. Gomara, c. 60. P. Mar-
tyr, Decad. p. 149.

and

and the enterprising ardour of his genius. He im- B o0 K
mediately concluded the ocean which the Cazique III
mentioned, to be that for which Columbus had
searched without success in this part of America, in
hopes of opening a more direct communication with
the Eafi Indies and he conjectured that the rich
territory which had been defceibed to him, must be
part of that vast and opulent region of the earth.
Elated with the idea of performing what so great a
man had attempted in vain; and eager to accom-
plih a discovery which he knew would be no less
acceptable to the king than beneficial to his coun-
try, he was impatient until he could set out upon
this enterprize, in comparison of which all his
former exploits appeared inconsiderable. But pre-
vious arrangement and preparation were requisite to
ensure success. He began with courting and fecur-
ing the friendship of the neighbouring Caziques.
He ent ome of his officers to Hispaniola with a
large quantity of gold, as a proof of his pafi fuc-
cess, and an earnest of his future hopes. By a pro-
per distribution of this, they secured the favour of
the governor, and allured volunteers into the ser-
vice. A considerable reinforcement from that
island joined him, and he thought himself in a
condition to attempt the discovery.

THE isthmus of Darien is not above sixty miles Difficulty

in breadth, but this neck of land, which binds to-, fexecun
gether the continents of North and South America,
is strengthened by a chain of lofty mountains
firetching through its whole extent, which render it
a barrier of solidity sufficient to resist the impulse of
two opposite oceans. The mountains are covered
with forests almost inaccessible. The valleys in that
moist climate, where it rains during two thirds of
the year, are marshy, and so frequently overflowed,
that the inhabitants find it necessary, in many pla-

ces,

E o o K ces, to build their houses upon trees, in order to be

elevated at some difiance from the damp foil, and
1,5,. the odious reptiles ingendered in the putrid wa-

ters b. Large rivers rush down with an impetuous
current from the high grounds. In a region thinly
inhabited by wandering savages, the hand of in-
dufiry had done nothing to mitigate or corret those
natural diiadvantages. To march across this unex-
plored country, with no other guides but Indians,
whose fidelity could be little trusted, was, all on these
accounts, the boldest enterprise on which the Spa-
niards had hitherto ventured in the New World.
But the intrepidity of Balboa was fuchas distinguished
him among his countrymen, at a period when every
s 3. adventurer was conspicuous for daring courage. Nor

was bravery his only merit, he was prudent in con-
dut, generous, affable, and possessed of those po-
pular talents which, in the most desperate under-
takings, inspire confidence and secure attachment.
Even after the junction of the volunteers from
Hispaniola, he was able to muster only an hundred
and ninety men for his expedition. But they were
hardy veterans, inured to the climate of America,
and ready to follow him through every danger. A
thousand Indians attended them to carry their pro-
visions; and to complete their warlike array, they
took with them several of those fierce dogs, which
were no less formidable than deftrutive to their
naked enemies.

Discovers BALBOA set out upon this important expedition
the South on the firfi of September, about the timethat the

periodical rains began to abate. He proceeded by
sea, and without any difficulty, to the territories of
a cazique whose friend(hip he had gained; but no
sooner did he begin to advance into the interior parl

b P. Martyr, decad. p. 158.

of

of the country, than he was retarded by every ob- B o o K
flacle, which he had reason to apprehend, from '-v.
the nature of the territory, or the disposition of its is,3
inhabitants. Some of the caziques, at his apt
proach, fled to the mountains with all their people,
and carried off or destroyed whatever could afford
subsistence to his troops. Others collected their sub-
jeets, in order to oppose his progress, and he quickly
perceived what an arduous undertaking it was, to
conduct such a body of men through hostile na-
lions, across swamps and rivers, and woods, which
had never been passed but by firaggling Indians.
But by sharing in every hardfiip with the meanest
soldier, by appearing the foremost to meet every
danger, by promising confidently to his troops the
enjoyment of honour and riches superior to the
most successful of their countrymen, he inspired
them with such enthusiastic resolution, that they fol-
lowed him without murmuring. When they had
penetrated a good way into the mountains, a pow-
erful cazique appeared in a narrow pass, with a
numerous body of his fubjeds to obftrut their pro-
grefs. But men who had surmounted so many ob-
fiacles, despised the opposition of such feeble ene-
mies. They attacked them With impetuosity, and
having dispersed them with much ease and great
slaughter, continued their march. Though their
guides had represented the breadth of the iihmus
to be only a journey of fix days, they had already
spent twenty-five in forcing their way through the
woods and mountains. Many of them were ready
to fink under such uninterrupted fatigue in that ful-
try climate, several were seized with the diseases pe-
cluliar to the country, and all became impatient to
reach the period of their labours and sufferings. At
length the Indians aured them, that from the top

of

B o K of the next mountain they fhoulddifcover the ocean

I". which wasthe obje of their wishes. When, with
1513 infinite toil, they had climbed up. the greater part

of that deep ascent, Balboa commanded his men to
halt, and advanced alone to the summit, that he
might be the first who should enjoy a fpetacle
which he had so long desired. As soon as he be-
held the South Sea itretching in endleis profped
below him, he fell on his knees, and lifting up his
hands to Heaven, returned thanks to God, who
had conducted him to a discovery so beneficial to
his country, and so honourable to himself. His
followers, observing his transports of joy, rushed
forward to join in his wonder, exultation and gra-
titude. They held on their course to the shore
with great alacrity, when Balboa advancing up to
the middle in the waves with his buckler and sword,
took possession of that ocean in the name of the
king his master, and vowed to defend it, with these
arms, againfi all his enemies c.

THAT part of the great Pacific or Southern ocean,

which Balboa first discovered, still retains the name
of the Gulf of St. Michael, which he gave to it,
and is situated to the east of Panama. From feve.
ral of the petty princes, who governed in the di-
tits adjacent to that gulf, he extorted provisions
and gold by force of arms. Others ent them to
him voluntarily. To these acceptable presents,
some of the caziques added a considerable quantity
of pearls ; and he learned from them, with much
falisfation, that pearl oysters abounded in the sea
which he had newly discovered.

c Herrera, dec. i. lib. x. c. , &c. Gomara, c. 62, &c.
P. Martyr, decad. p. 205, &c.

TOGETHER

TOG ET HER with the acquisition of this wealth, B o o K

which served to footheand encour-age his followers, mI.
he received accounts which confirmed his sanguine 15,3.
hopes of future and more extensive benefits from e receives
the expedition. All the people on the coaft'of the concerning
South Sea, concurred in informing him that there amoreopu-

lent coua-

was a mighty and opulent kingdom situated at a try.
considerable distance towards the east, the inhabi-
tants of which had tame animals to carry their
burdens. In order to give him an idea of these,
they drew upon the sand the figure of the Llamas
or sheep, afterwards found in Peru, which the Pe-
ruvians had taught toperform such services as they
described. As the Llama, in its form, nearly re-
fembles a camel, a beast of burden deemed peculiar
to Asia, this circumstance, in conjunction with the
discovery of the pearls, another noted production
of that country, tended to confirm the Spaniards in
their mistaken theory with refpet to the vicinity of
the New World to the East Indies d.

BUT though the information which Balboa re- Obliged to

ceived from the people;on the coast, as well as his retur".
own conjectures and hopes, rendered him extremely
impatient to visit this unknown country, his pru-
dence restrained him from attempting to invade it
with an handful of men, exhausted by fatigue, and
weakened by diseases e. He determined to lead
back his followers, at present, to their settlement at
Santa Maria in Darien, and to return next season
with a force more adequate to such an arduous en-
terprize. In order to acquire a more extensive
knowledge of the ithmus, he marched back by a
different route, which he found to be no less dan-
gerous and difficult than that which he had formerly
taken. But to men elated with success, and ani-

d Herrera, dec. . lib. x. c. 2. e See NOTE XXIV.

mated

B O O K mated with hope, nothing is unsurmountable. Bai-

, boa returned to Santa Maria, from which he had
15-4. been abient four months, with greater glory, and

more treasure, than the Spaniards had acquired in
any expedition in the New World. None of Bal-
boa's officers diflinguifhed himself more in this ser-
vice than Francisco Pizarro, or aflifted with greater
courage and ardour in opening a communication
with those countries, in which he afterwards aaed
such an illustrious parts.

Pedrarias BALBOA'S 'firfi care was to fend information to
appoDnted Spain of the important discovery which he had
Darien. made; and to demand a reinforcement of a thou-

sand men, in order to attempt the conquest of that
opulent country, concerning which he had received
such inviting intelligence. The first account of the
discovery of the New World hardly occasioned
greater joy than the unexpected tidings, that a pas-
sage was at last found to the great southern ocean.
The communication with the East Indies, by a
course to the westward of the line of demarkation,
drawn by the Pope, seemed now to be certain.
The vast wealth which flowed into Portugal from
its settlements and conquefis in that country, ex-
cited the envy and called forth the emulation of
other states. Ferdinand hoped now to come in for
a share in this lucrative commerce, and in his ea-
gernefs to obtain it, was willing to make an effort
beyond what Balboa required. But even in this ex-
ertion, his jealous policy, as well as the fatal anti-
pathy of Foufeca, now bishop of Burgos, to eve-
ry man of merit who distinguished himself in the
New World, were conspicuous. Notwithftand-
ing Balboa's recent services, which marked him
out as the most proper person to finish that great

f Herrera, dec. . lib. x. c. 3-6. Gomara, c. 64. P. Mar-
tyr, dec. p. 229, &c.

undertk{ing

mndertaking which he had begun, Ferdinand was B o K
so ungenerous as to overlook these, and to appoint Il.
Pedrarias Davilla governor of Darien. He gave ,4
him the command of fifteen flout vefels, and
twelve hundred soldiers. These were fitted out at
the public expence, with a liberality which Ferdi-
nand had never displayed in any former arma-
ment destined for the New World ; and such was
the ardour of the Spanish gentlemen to follow a
leader who was about to conduct them to a coun-
try, where, as fame reported, they had only to
throw their nets into the ea, and draw out gold g,
that fifteen hundred embarked on board the fleet,
and if they had not been refrained, a much great-
er number would have engaged in the service h.

PEDRARIAS reached the gulph of Darien with-

out any remarkable accident, and immediately sent
some of his principal officers ashore, to inform Bal-.
boa of his arrival, with the king's commission, to
be governor of the colony. To their astonish-
ment, they found Balboa, of whose great exploits
they had heard so much, and of whose opulence
they had formed such high ideas, clad in a canvas
jacket, with shoes made of packthread, employed,
together with some Indians, in thatching his own
hut with reeds. Even in this simple garb, which
corresponded so ill with the expeaations and wishes
of his new guefis, Balboa received them with dig-
nity. The fame of his discoveries had drawn so
many adventurers from the islands, that he could
now mufler four hundred and fifty men. At the
head of those daring veterans, he was more than
a match for the forces which Pedrarias brought
with him. But though his troops murmured loud-
ly at the injustice of the king in superseding their

g Herrera, dec. . lib. x. c. 14. h Ibid. dec. I. lib. x.
C. 6, 7. P. Martyr, dec. p. 177. 256.

commander,

B o O K commander, and complained that firangers would

"M.I now reap the fruits of their toil and success, Balboa
1514. ubmitted with implicit obedience to the will of his

overeign, and received Pedrarias with all the de-
ference due to his character .

Dissention NOTWITHSTANDING this moderation of Bal-
between
him and boa, to which Pedrarias owed the peaceable pof-
Balboa. fefflon of his government, he appointed a judicial

inquiry to be made into his conduEt, while under
the command of Nicueffa and Encifo, and impof-
ed a considerable fine upon him, on account of the
irregularities of which he had then been guilty.
Balboa felt sensibly the mortification of being sub-
jeted to trial and to punishment in a place where
he had so lately occupied the fifit Ration. Pedra-
rias could not conceal his jealousy of his superior
merit ; so that the resentment of the one, and the
envy of the other, gave rife to diffentionsextreme-
ly detrimental to the colony. It was threatened
with a calamity fill more fatal. Pedrarias had
July. landed in Darien at a most unlucky time of the

year, about the middle. of the rainy season, in that
part of the torrid zone where the clouds pour down
such torrents as are unknown in more temperate
climates k. The village of Santa Maria was feated
in a rich plain, environed with marshes and woods.
The conflitution of Europeans was. unable to with-
Rand the pestilential influence of such a situation,
in a climate naturally so noxious, and at a season so
peculiarly unhealthy. A violent and destructive
malady carried off many of the soldiers who ac-
companied Pedrarias. An extreme scarcity of
provisions augmented this distress, as it rendered
it impossible to find proper refreshment for the

i Herrera, dec. . lib. x. c. 13, 14. k Richard Hilt.
Naturelle de 'Air, tom. i. p. 204.

tick,

ick, or the necessary fuitenance for the heal-: o

B K

thy . In the space of a month, above fix III
hundred persons perished in the utmost misery. 1
Deje¢tion and despair spread through the colony.
Many principal persons solicited their diifmifon,
and were glad to relinquish all their hopes of
wealth, in order to escape from that pernicious re-
gion. Pedrarias endeavoured to divert those who
remained from brooding over their misfortunes, by
finding them employment. With this view, he
sent several detachments into the interior parts of
the country, to levy gold among the natives, and
to search for the mines in which it was produced.
Those rapacious adventurers, more attentive to
present gain than to he means of facilitating their
future progress, plundered without diftintion
wherever they rtarched. Regardless of the allian-
ces which Balboa had made with several of the ca-
ziques, they firipped them of every thing valuable,.
and treated them, as well as' their subje&s, with
the utmost insolence and cruelty. By their tyran-
ny and exactions, which Pedrarias, either from
want of authority or. of inclination, did not re-
strain, all the country from the gulf of Darien to
the lake of Nicaragua was desolated, and the Spa-
niards were inconsiderately deprived of the advan-
tages which they mighthave derived from the
friendship of the natives, in extending their con-
quefis to the South Sea. Balboa, who saw with
concern that such ill-judged proceedings retarded
the execution of his favourite scheme, ient violent
remonfirances to Spain againfi the imprudent go-
vernment of Pedrarias, which had ruined a happy
and flourishing colony. Pedrarias, on the other
hand, accused him of having deceived the king,

I Herrera, dec. . lib. x. c. 14. P. Martyr, dec p. 272.
VOL. I. P by

B o O K by magnifying iis own exploits, as well as by a

.false representation of the opulence and value of

1514. the country 1.

Violent FERDINAND became sensible at length of his
prcceeaint Bimprudence in superseding the most ative and ex-
b. perienced officer he had in the New World, and,

by way of compensation to Balboa, appointed him
Adelantado, or Lieutenant-governor of the coun-
tries upon the South Sea, with very extensive pri-
vileges and authority. At the fame time he en-
joined Pedrarias to support Balboa in all his enter-
prises, and to consult with him concerning every
5'ss. measure which he himself pursued. But to effect

such a sudden transition from inveterate enmity to
perfect confidence, exceeded Ferdinand's power.
Pedrarias continued to treat his rival with neglect;
and Balboa's fortune being exhausted by the pay-
ment of his fine, and. other exactions of Pedrarias,
he couldnot make suitable preparations for taking
pofleffion of his new government. At length, by
the interposition and exhortations of the bishop of
Darien, they were brought to a reconciliation; and,
in order to cement this union more firmly, Pe-
, 51. drarias agreed to give his daughter in marriage to

Balboa. The firfi effeEt of their concord was, that
Balboa was permitted to make several small incur-
sions into the country. These he conducted with
such prudence, as added to the reputation which he
had already acquired. Many adventurers resorted
to him, and, with the countenance and support of
Pedrarias, he began to prepare for his expedition
to the South Sea. In order to accomplish this, it
was neceflary to build vessels capable of conveying
his troops to those provinces which he purposed to

m Herrera, dec. . lib. x. c. 15. dec. . c. i, &c. Go.

mara, c. 66. P. Martyr, dec. 3. c. o. Relacion de B. de
kas Casas, p. I z.

invade.

invade. After surmounting many biftacles, and et- f o o k
during a variety of those hardships which were the 1-.
portion of the conquerors of America, he at length ,,7
finished four small brigantines. In these, with three
hundred chosen men (a force superior to that with
which Pikarro afterwards undertook the fame expe-
dition), he was ready to fail towards Peru, when
he received an unexpeted meilage from Pedra-
rias , As his reconciliation with Balboa had never
been cordial, the progress which he made revived
his ancient enriity, and added to its rancour He
dreaded the prosperity and elevation of a man
whom he had injured so deeply. He fufpeted that
success would encourage him to aim at independence
upon his jurifdition; and so violently did the pas-
sions of hatred, fear, and jealousy, operate upon
his mind, that, in order to gratify his vengeance,
he scrupled not to defeat an enterprise of the great-
eft moment to his country. Under pretexts which
were False, but plausible, he desired Balboa to post-
pone his voyage for a Ihort time, and to repair to
Acla, in order that he might have an interview
with him. Balboa, with the unfufpicious confi-
dence of a man conscious of no crime, instantly
obeyed the summons; but as soon as he entered the
place, he was arrefied by order of Pedrarias, whose
impatience to satiate his revenge did not susser him
to languish long in confinement. Judges were im-
mediately appointed to proceed to his trial. An
accusation of disloyalty to the king, and of an in-
tention to revolt against the governor, was pre-
ferred against him. Sentence of death was pro-
nouncedd; and though the judges who passed it,
Ieconded by the whole colony, interceded warmly
for his pardon, Pedrarias continued inexorable;
and, to their astonishment and sorrow, the Spa-

ti Herrera, dec;. l.ib. i. c. 3. Lib. ii. c. 1.. 13. 2i.

P , niards

B o o K niards beheld the public execution of a man whom
aj they universally deemed more capable than any who

1517. had borne command in America, of forming and

accomplishing great designs o. Upon his death, the
expedition which he had planned was relinquished.
Pedrarias, notwithflanding the violence and injuf-
ticeof his proceedings, was not only screened from
punishment by the powerful patronage of the bi-
Ihop of Burgos and other courtiers, but continued
in power. Soon after, he obtained permiflion to
remove the colony from its unhealthy flation at
Santa Maria to Panama, on the opposite fide of the
isthmus; and though it did not gain much in point
of healthfulness by the change, the commodious
situation of this new settlement contributed greatly
to facilitate the subsequent conquests of the Spa-
niards in the vast counties situated upon the South-
ern Ocean P.

'5s. D RING these tranfations in Darien, the his-

Nrew disco-
,'ies. tory of which it was proper to carry on in an un-

interrupted tenour, several important events oc-
curred with refpeEt to the discovery, the conquef,
and government of other provinces in the New
World. Ferdinand was so intent upon opening a
communication with the Molucca or Spice islands
by the weft, that, in the year one thousand five
hundred and fifteen, he fitted out two ships at his
own expence, in order to attempt such a voyage,
and gave the command of them to Juan Diaz de
Solis, who was deemed the most kilful navigator
in Spain. He flood along the coast of South Ame-
rica, and on the firfi of January one thousand
five hundred and sixteen, entered a river, which
he called Janeiro, where an extensive commerce is
now carried on. From thence he proceeded to a
fpaeius bay, which he supposed to be the entrance
into a firait that communicated with the Indian

0 Herrera, dec. 2, lib, ii. c. 21, zz. P Ibid. lib. iv. c. ...

ocean;

ocean; but upon advancing farther, he found it to B o o K
be the mouth of Rio de Plata, one of the vast ri- m.
vers by which the southem continent of America is 1517.
watered. In endeavouring to make a descent in
this country, De Solis and several of his crew were
slain by the natives, who, in fight of the hips, cut
their bodies in pieces, roasted and devoured them.
Discouraged with the loss of their commander, and
terrified at this shocking speCtacle, the surviving
Spaniards set fail for Europe, without aiming at
any farther discovery q. Though this attempt
proved abortive, it was not without benefit. It
turned the attention of ingenious men to this course
of navigation, and prepared the way for a more
fortunate voyage, in which, a few years posterior
to this period, the great design that Ferdinand had
in view was accompliihed.

THou Gc the Spaniards were thus aAively em- State of the

ployed in extending their discoveries and fettlec- c!ofi,
ments in America, they still confidered Hispaniola
as their principal colony, and the feat of govern-
ment. Don Diego Columbus wanted neither incli-
nation nor abilities to have rendered the members
of this colony, who were most immediately under
his jurisdiction, prosperous and happy. But he
was circumscribed in all his operations, by the sus-
picious policy of Ferdinand, who on every occa-
sion, and under pretexts the most frivolous, re-
trenched his privileges, and encouraged the treafu-
rer, the judges, and other subordinate officers, to
counterad his measures, and to dispute his autho-
rity. The most valuable prerogative which the go-
vernor possessed, was that of distributing Indians
among the Spaniards fettled in the island. The ri-
gorous servitude of those unhappy men having
been but little mitigated by all the regulations in

9 Herrera, dec. z. lib. i, c. 7. P. Martyr, decad. p. 317.

their

s o OQ thir favour, the power of parcelling out such ne-
. , ceflary intiruments of labour at pleasure, secured to.
; 157. the governor great influence in the colony. In or-

der to firip him of this, Ferdinand created a new
office, with a power of distributing the Indians,
and bestowed it upon Rodrigo Albuquerque, a re-
lation of Zapata, his confidential minister. Mor-
tified with the injustice, as well as indignity, of
this invasion upon his rights, in a point so essential~
Don Diego could no longer remain in a place
,here his power and consequence were almost an-
nihilated, He repaired to Spain with the vain
hopes of obtaining redress r. Albuquerque entered
upon his office with all the rapacity of an indigent
adventtwer, impatient to amass wealth. He began
with taking the exact number of Indians. in the
island, and found, that from sixty thousand, who,
in the year one thousand' five hundred and eight,
survived after all their sufferings, they were now
reduced to fourteen thousand. These he threw
into separate divisions or lots, andbeftowed them
upon such as were willing to purchase them at the
highest price. By this arbitrary distribution, feve-
ral of the natives were removed from their original
habitations, many were taken from their anci-
ent masters, and all of them fubjeted to hea-
vier burdens, and to more intolerable labour, in
order to reimburse their new proprietors. Those
additional calamities completed the misery, and
hastened on the extinction of this wretched and in-
nocent race of men s.

cith reope,,y THE violence of those proceedings, together
to the treat with the fatal consequences which attended them,
rept of the only
Indians. not only excited complaints among such as thought

themselves aggrieved, but touched the hearts of

t Herrera, dec. . libx c. . li. . . . . Ibid.
dec. t. lib. x. c. 12.

al

all who retained any sentiments of humanity. B o oK
From the time that ecclesiastics were sent into Ame- II
rica to inftrua and convert the natives, they per- 151
ceived that the rigour with which the Spaniards
treated them, rendered their ministry altogether
fruitless. The miflionaries, in conformity to the
mild spirit of that religion which they were em-
ployed to publish, early remonitrated against the
maxims of their countrymen with refpet to the
Americans, and condemned the repartimientos, or
distributions, by which they were given up as
slaves to their conquerors, as no less contrary to na-
tural justice and the precepts of Christianity, than
to found policy. The Dominicans, to whom the
inftru&tion of the Americans was originally com-
mitted, were most vehement in testifying against
the repartimientos. In the year one .thousand five
hundred and eleven, Montefino, one of their most
eminent preachers, inveighed against this pracice
in the great church at St. Domingo, with all the
impetuosity of popular eloquence. Don Diego Co-
lumbus, the principal officers of the colony, and
all the laymen who had been his hearers, com-
plained of the monk to his superiors;' but they, in-
fead of condemning, applauded his doctrine, as
equally pious and seasonable. The Franciscans,
influenced by the spirit of opposition and rivalfhip
which subsists between the two orders, discovered
some inclination to take part with the laity, and to
espouse the defence of the repartimientos. But as
they could not with decency give their avowed ap-
probation to a system of oppreflion, so repugnant
to the spirit of religion, they endeavoured to pal-
liate what they could not justify, and alleged, in
excuse for the condut of their countrymen, that
it was impossible to carry on any improvement in
the colony, unless the Spaniards poffeifed such do-

minion

B o o K minion over the natives, that they could compe

I__} them to labour '

Contrary TH E Dominicans, regardless of such political and
decisions interested considerations, would not relax in any
his poin. degree the rigour of their sentiments, and even re-

fuled to absolve, or admit to the sacraments, such
of their countrymen as held the natives in fervi-
tude u. Both parties applied to the king for his de-
cifion in a matter of such importance. Ferdinand
empowered a committee of his privy-council, as-
sised by some of the most eminent civilians and di.
vines in Spain, to hear the deputies ent from Hi(-
paniola, in support of their refpeEtive opinions.
After a long discussion, the speculative point in
controversy was determined in favour of the Domi-
nicans, the Indians were declared to be a free peo-
ple, intitled to all the natural rights of men; but,
notwithstanding this decision, the repartimientos were
continued upon their ancient footing w. As this
determination admitted the principle upon which
the Dominicans founded their opinion, it was not
calculated either to silence or to convince them. At
length, in order to quiet the colony,, which was
alarmed by their remonfirances and censures, Ferdi-
nand isSued a decree of his privy-council, declaring,
that after mature consideration of the Apostolic
5s-3. Bull, and other titles by which the crown of Castile

claimed a right to its possessions in the New World?
the servitude of the Indians, was warranted both
by the laws of God and of man; that unless they
were subjected to the dominion of the Spani-
ards, and compelled to reside under their in-
fpetion, it would be impossible to reclaim

t Herrera, dec. . lib. viii. c. i. Qviedo, lib. iii. c. 6. p.

97. u Oviedo, ibid.' w Herrera,dec. i.lib. viii. c. 12.
ib. ix. c 5.

t m

them from idolatry, or to inftru6t them in the Bo o- i
principles of the Christian faith; that no farther "'l
icrupie ought to be entertained concerning the ,517
lawiitlnefs of the repartimientos, as the king and
council were willing to take the charge of that
upon their own consciences ; and that there-
sole the Dominicans, and monks of other religi-
ous orders, hould abstain, for the future, from
those invectives, which, from an excess of charita-
ble, bat ill-informed zeal, they had uttered againfl
that pratice .

THAT his intention of adhering to this decree

might be fully understood, Ferdinand conferred
new grants of Indians upon several of his courti-
ers '. But, in order that he might not seem alto-
gether inattentive to the rights of humanity, he
published an edict, in which he endeavoured to
provide for the mild treatment of the Indians un-
der the yoke to which he fubje&ed them; he re-
gulated the nature of the work which they ihould
be required to perform, he prescribed the mode
in which they hould be clothed and fed, and gave
directions with refpea to their inftruEtion in the
principles of Christianity a.

B T the Dominicans, who, from their experi- Effe of

ence of what was past,. judged concerning the fu- thcre.
ture, oon perceived the inefficacy of those provi-
sions, and foretold, that as long as it was the inter-
eft of individuals to treat the Indians with rigour,
no public regulations could render their servitude
mild or tolerable. They confidered it as vain to
waste their own time and strength in attempting
to communicate the sublime truths of religion
to men, whose spirits were broken, and their facul-

Y Herrera, dec. . lib. ix. c. 14. 2 See NOTE XXV.
* Herrera, ibid.

ties

B o K ties impaired by opprefiion. Some of them, in

"it despair, requeied the permiflion of their fuperi-

ors to remove to the continent, and to purfie the
obje& of their miflion among such of the natives
as were not hitherto corrupted by the example of
the Spaniards, or alienated by their cruelty from
the Christian faith. Such as remained in Hifpani-
ola continued to remonfirate, with decent firmness,
against the feivitude of the Indians b

Bartholo- TH.E violent operations of Albuquerque, the
Cesde las new difiributor of Indians, revived the zeal of the
pezrs in de- Dominicans against the reparfimientos, and called
eneof the forth an advocate for that oppressed people, who

poffIfed: all the courage, the talents, and aivity
requisite in supporting such a desperate cause.
This was Bartholomew de las Casas, a native of
Seville, and one of t-hs clergymen ent out with
Columbus in his second voyage to Hispaniola, in
order to fettle in that ifiland. He early adopted
the opinion prevalent among ecclesiastics, with re-
(set to the unlawf.ilnefs of reducing the natives
to servitude ; and that he might demonstrate the
sincerity of his conviction, he relinquihied all the
Indians who had fallen to lhis own share in the di-
vision of the inhabitants among their conquerors,
declaring tbat he hould ever bewail his own mif-
fortune and guilt, in having exercised for a mo-
ment this impious dominion over his fellow-crea-
turesc. From that time, he was the avowed pa-
tron of the Indians; and by his bold interpofiti-
ons in their behalf, as well as by the refpet due
to his abilities and character, he had often the
merit of setting some bounds to the excesses of
his countrymen. He did not fail to remonstrate

b Herrera, dec. . lib. ix. c. 14. Touron. Hist. Gener. de

I'Ameriqpe, tom. i. p. 252. c Fr. Aug. Davila Padilla
-lift. de la Fundacion de la Provincia de St. JagQ de Mexico,
p. o3, 304. Herrera, dec. . lib. x c. . .

\varmly

warmly against the proceedings of Albuquerque; B o o X,
and, though he soon found that attention to his, .
own interest rendered him deaf to adnmonition, 15.7.
he did not abandon the wretched people whose
cause he had espoused. He instantly set out
for Spain, with the most sanguine hopes of
opening the eyes and softening the heart of
Ferdinand, by that striking picture of the op-
pression of his' new fubjets, which he would ex-
libit to his view.

H E easily obtained admittance to the king, UIsi.

whom he found in a declining fate of health. Shcits
With much freedom, and no less eloquence, here- in the court
presented to him all the fatal effets of the repartimi- of Spain
entos in the New World, boldly charging him with
the guilt of having authorised this impious mea-
sure, which had brought misery and detruCtion
upon a numerous and innocent race of men, whom
Providence had placed under his proteEtion. Ser-
dinand, whose mind as well as body was much en-
feebled by his difterper, was greatly alarmed at
this charge of impiety, which at another junture
he would have despised. He listened with deep
compunction to the discourse of Las Casas, and
promied to take into attentive consideration the
means of redressing the evil of which he com-
plained. But death prevented him from executing
his resolution. Charles of Austria, to whom all his
crowns devolved, resided at that time in his pater-
nal dominions in the Low Countries. Las Casas,
with his usual ardour, prepared immediately to set
out for Slanders, in order to occupy the ear of the
young monarch, when cardinal Ximenes, who, as
regent, assumed the rehns of government in Castile,
commanded him to desist from the journey, and
engaged to hear his complaints in person.

d Herrera, dec. I. lib. x. c. Iz. Dec . z lib, i. C. II. D
tila Padilla Hist. p. 304,

H.^

B 0 0 K HE accordingly weighed the matter with at-

Mv_^, tention equal to its importance; and as his im-
5s17. petuous mind delighted in schemes bold and

tonsoce- uncommon, he soon fixed upon a plan which
dintLXime- astonished the ministers trained up under the for-

"5' mal and cautious administration of Ferdinand.

Without regarding either the fights of Don Diego
Columbus or the regulations efablifhed by the
late king, he resolved to fend three persons to
America, as superintendents of all the colonies
there, with authority, after examining all cir-
cumfiances on the spot, to decide finally with
refpeF to the point in question. It was a matter
of deliberation and delicacy to chufe men qua-
lified for such an important fiation. As all the
laymen fettled in America, or who had been
consulted in the adminifiration of that depart-
ment, had given their opinion that the Spaniards
could not keep polfefflon of their new fettle-
ments, unless they were allowed to retain their
dominion over the Indians, he saw that he could
not rely on their impartiality, and determined
to commit the trust to ecclesiastics, As the Do-
minicans and Franciscans had already espoused
opposite fides in the controversy, he, from the
fame principle, excluded both these fraternities
from the cornmiflion. He confined his choice to
the monks of St. Jerome, a small, but refpecta-
ble order in Spain. With the Assistance of their
general, and in concert with Las Casas, he soon
pitched upon three persons whom he deemed equal
to the charge. To them he joined Zuazo, a pri-
vate lawyer of distinguished probity, with un-
bounded power to regulat all judicial proceed-
ings in the colonies. Las Casas was appointed to
accompany them, with the title of Protecor of
the Indians'.

e Herrera, dec. 2. lib. ii. c. 3.

To

To vest such extraordinary powers, as might B o O K

at once overturn the system of government eita-
blifhed in the New World, in four persons, who,
from their humble condition in life, were little in- The man-

ner in which

titled to possess this high authority, appeared to they were
Zapata, and other ministers of the late king, a executed.
measure so wild and dangerous, that they refused
to issue the dispatches neceflary for carrying it into
execution. But Ximenes was not of a temper pa-
tiently to brook opposition to any of his schemes.
He sent for the refractory ministers, and addressed
them in such a tone, that in the utmost confterna-
tion they obeyed his orders. The superintend-
ents, with their associate Zuazo, and Las Casas,
failed for St. Domingo. Upon their arrival, the
firfi at of their authority was to set at liberty al
the Indians who had been granted to the Spanilh
courtiers, or to any person not residing in Ame-
rica. This, together with the information which
had been received from Spain concerning the
objet of the commiflion, spread a general alarm.
The colonies concluded that they were to be de-
prived at once of the hands with which they car-
ried on their labour, and that, of consequence,
ruin was unavoidable. But the fathers of St. Je.
rome proceeded with such caution and prudence,
as soon dissipated all their fears. They discovered,
in every siep of their conduct, a knowledge of
the world, and of affairs which is seldom acquired
in a cloifier; and displayed a moderation and
gentleness still more rare, among persons trained
up in the solitude and austerity of monastic life,
Their ears were open to information from every
quarter, they compared the different accounts
which they received, and, after a mature confi-
deration of the whole, they were fully satisfied
that the fate of the colony rendered it impofli-

f H.errera, dec. 2 lib. ii. c. 6.

ble

B o o K ble to adopt the plan proposed by Las Casas, and

- '- recommended by the cardinal. They plainly per-
'sI7, ceived that the Spaniards fettled i America were

so few in number, that they could neither work
the mines which had been opened, nor cultivate
the country; that they depended for both upon
the labour of the natives, and if deprived of it,
they imuf instantly relinquish their conquefls, or
give up all the advantages which they derived
from them ; that no allurement was so powerful
as to surmount the natural aversion of the Indians
to any laborious efforts and that nothing but the
authority of a malter could compel them to work;
and if they were not kept conflantly under the eye
and discipline of a fiperior, so great was their na-
tural listlessness and indifference, that they would
neither attend to religious inftrution, not observe
those rites of Chriitianity which they had been al-
ready taught. Upon all those accounts, they found
it etefftary to tolerate tile repartimientos, and to sus-
ser the Ihdian to reimain under fubje&ion to their
Spanish masters. They used their utmost endea-
yours, h6wevei, to prevent the fatal effects of this
efiablifhment, and to secure the Indians the confo-
lation of the best treatment compatible with the
slate of servitude. For this purpose, they revived
former regulations, they prescribed new ones, they
neglected no circumfiance that tended to mitigate
the rigour of the yoke; and, by their authority,
their example, ad their exhortations, they laboured
to ifpire their countrymen with sentiments of equi
ty and gentleness towards the unhappy people up-
on whbfe induitry they depended. Zuazo, in his,
department, seconded the endeavours of the super-
intendents. He reformed the coltts of jufiice, in
such a manner as to render their deifins equita-
ble a well as epeditious, and introduced vari-
ous regulations which greatly improved the interior

police

police of the colony. The ratisfaaioh with his 6 6o
condut, an-d that of the superintendents, was now ii.
universal among the Spaniards fettled it the New
Word, and all admired the boldness of Ximenet,
in having departed from the ordinary path of bu-
finess in forming his plan, as well as his fgacity in
pitching upon persons, whose wifdomn, moderation,
and disinterestedness rendered them worthy of this
high trust .

LAS CASAS alone was dissatisfied. The pru- LsCafas

dential considerations which influenced the fuperin- d'fti,
tendents, made no impreflion upon him. He re-
garded their idea of accommodating their conduc
to the state of the colony, as the maxim of an n-
.hallowed timid policy, which tolerated what was
unjust, because it was beneficial. He contended,
that the Indians were by nature free, and, as their
protecor, he required the superintendents not to
bereave them of the common privilege of huma-.
nity. They received his most virulent remonftran-
ces without emotion, but adhered firmly to their
own system. The Spanish planters did not bear
with him so patiently, and were ready to tear him
in pieces for insisting in a requisition so odious
to them. Las Casas, i order to screen hinfelf
from their rage, found it necessary to take shelter
in a convent; and perceiving that all his efforts in
America were fruitless, he soon set out for Europe,
with a fixed resolution not to abandon the protec-
tion of a people whom he deemed to be cruelly
oppressed h.

HAD Ximenes retained that vigour of miind Hws nc^a-

with which he usually applied to business, Las ii^
Casas muff have met with no very gracious re- ters ofCh--

les V.

g Herrera, dec 2. lib. i. c. . Remefal. Hist. Gener.
lib 2. c. 14, i5, 6. h Herrera, dec. 2. lib. it. c. 6.

ception

B O O K ception upon his return to Spain. But he found
,_, the cardinal languishing under a mortal distemper,

1517. and preparing to resign his authority to the young

king, who was daily expeted from the Low
Countries. Charles arrived, took poffeiion of the
government, and, by the death of Ximenes, loft
a minister, whose abilities and integrity intitled
him to direa his affairs. Many of the Flemish
nobility had accompanied their sovereign to Spain,
From that warm prediletion to his countrymen,
which was natural at his age, he consulted them
with refpe& to all the tranfaaions in his new
kingdonm, and they, with an indiscreet eagerness,
intruded themselves into every business, and seized
almost every department of administration h. The
direction of American affairs was an objet too
alluring to escape their attention. Las Casas ob-
served their growing influence, and though pro-
je&tors are usually too sanguine, to conduct their
schemes with much dexterity, he possessed a bust-
ling indefatigable activity, which ometimes ac-
complifhes its purposes with greater success, than
the most exquisite discernment and address. He
courted the Flemish ministers with assiduity. He
represented to them the absurdity of all the max-
ims hitherto adopted with refped to the govern-
ment of America, and particularly the defe&s of
that arrangement which Ximenes had introduced.
The memory of Ferdinand was odious to the Flem-
ings. The superior virtue and abilities of Xime-
nes had long been the objeEt of their envy. They
fondly wished to have a plausible pretext for con-
demning the measures, both of the monarch and
of the minister, and of refleting ome discredit
on their political wisdom. The friends of Don
Diego Columbus, as well as the Spanish courtiers,

who
h Hill. of Chatles V. vol. ii. p. 43.

who had been diftatisfied with the cardinal's admini- B o K
firation, joined Las Casas in censuring the scheme of IU.
fending fuperintendants to America. This union 1517.
of so many interests and paflions was irresistible;
and, in consequence of it, the fathers of St. Jerome,
and their aflociate Zuazo, were recalled. Roderigo
de Figueroa, a lawyer of some eminence, was ap-
pointed chief judge of the island, and received in-
ftrudions, in compliance with the request of Las
Casas, to examine once more, with the utmost at-
tention, the point in controversy between him and
the people of the colony, with refpea to the treat-
ment of the natives; and in the mean time to do
every thing in his power to alleviate their fuffeiings,
and prevent the extinction of the race .

THIS was all that the zeal of Las Casas could Scheme of

procure, at that junaure, in favour of the Indians. the c aolonies
The impossibility of carrying on any improvement with ne.
in America, unless the Spanish planters could com- res
mand the labour of the natives, was an infupera-
ble objecion to his plan of treating them as free
fubjets. In order to provide ome remedy for
this, without which he found it was vain to mention
his scheme, Las Casas proposed to purchase a fuffi-
cient number of negroes from the Portuguese set-
tlements, on the coast of Africa, and to transport
them to America, in order that they might be em-
ployed as slaves in working the mines and cultivat-
ing the ground. One of the first advantages which
the Portuguese had derived from their discoveries
in Africa, arose from the trade in slaves. Various
circumstances concurred in reviving this odious
commerce, which had been long abolished in Eu-
rope, and which is no less repugnant to the feelings
of humanity, than to the principles of religion. As
early as the year one thousand five hundred and

i Herrera, dec. . lib. ii. c. 16, 19, z1. lib. iii. c. 7, 8.
VOL. 1. Q three,

B O O K three, a few negro-flaves had been ent into the
,__ New World k. In the year one thousand five hun-

1517. dred and eleven, Ferdinand permitted the importa-

tion of them in greater numbers'. They were
found to be a more robust and hardy race than the
natives of America. They were more capable
of enduring fatigue, more patient under servitude,
and the labour of one negro was computed to be
equal to that of four Indians I'. Cardinal Ximenes,
however, when solicited to encourage this com-
merce, peremptorily rejected the proposition, be-
cause he perceived the iniquity of reducing one race
of men to slavery, while he was consulting about
the means of restoring liberty to another ". But
Las Casas, from the inconsistency natural to men
who hurry with headlong impetuosity towards a
favourite point, was incapable of making this dif-
tihtion. While he contended earnestly for the li-
berty of the people born in one quarter of the
globe, he laboured to enslave the inhabitants of
another region; and in the warmth of his zeal to
save the Americans from the yoke, pronounced it
to be lawful and expedient to impose one still hea-
vier upon the Africans. Unfortunately for the lat-
ter, Las Cafas's plan was adopted. Charles granted
a patent to one of his Flemish favourites, contain-
ing an exclusive right of importing four thousand
negroes into America. He fold his patent to some
Genoese merchants for twenty-five thousand ducats,
and they were the first who brought into a regular
form that commerce for slaves between Africa and
America, which has since been carried on to such

1518. an amazing extent °.

Las Calas
proposes BUT theGenoefe merchants, conducting their
bourert operations, at first, with the rapacity of monopo-
Hispaniola.

k Herrera, dec. i. lib. v. c. z1. ! Ibid. lib. viii. c. 9.

m Ibid. lib. ix. c. 5. n Ibid. dec. . lib. ii. c. 8.
o Ibid. lib. ii. c. 2o.

lifts,

lilfs, demanded such an high price for negroes, B o K
that the number imported into Hispaniola made no 1iw
great change upon the state of the colony. Las, 517.
Casas, whose zeal was no less inventive than inde-
fatigable, had recourse to another expedient for the
relief of the Indians. He observed, that most of
the persons who had fettled hitherto in America,
were soldiers and ailors employed in the discovery
or conquest of the country; the younger sons of
noble families, allured by the profpeat of acquiring
sudden wealth; or desperate adventurers, whom
their indigence or crimes forced to abandon their
native land. Initead of such men, who were dif-
solute, rapacious, and incapable of that fober per-
fevering industry which is requisite in forming new
colonies, he proposed to fupplythe new settlements
in Hispaniola and the other islands with a sufficient
number of labourers and husbandmen, who hould
be allured by suitable premiums to remove thither.
These, as they were accustomed to fatigue, would
be able to perform the work, to which the Indians,
from the feebleness of their constitution, were un-
equal, and might soon become useful and opulent
citizens. But though Hispaniola stood much in
need of a recruit of inhabitants, having been vi-
fited at this time with the fmiall-pox, which swept
off many of the natives, and though Las Casas had
the countenance of the Flemish miniters, this
scheme was defeated by the bihop of Burgos, who
thwarted all his projets p.

LAS CASAs nowdefpaired of procuring any re- orms the

lief for the Indians in those places where the Spa- newcolony
niards were already fettled. The evil was become
so inveterate there, as not to admit of a cure. But
such discoveries were daily making in the continent,
as gave an high idea both of its extent and popu-

P Herrera, dec. 2. lib. ii. c. 2a.

Q.2 loufnefs.

B o o K loufnefs. In all those vast regions there was but one

il' feeble colony planted; and except a small spot on
,157. the isthmus of Darien, the natives still occupied the

whole country. This opened a new and more am-
ple field for the humanity and zeal of Las Casas,
who flattered himself that he might prevent a per-
nicious system from being introduced there, though
he had failed of success in his attempts to overturn
it, where it was already established. Full of this
idea, he applied for a grant of the unoccupied coun-
try, firetching along the sea-coast from the gulf of
Paria to the western frontier of that province now
known by the name of Santa Martha. He pro-
posed to fettle there with a colony composed of hus-
bandmen, labourers and ecclesiastics. He engaged,
in the space of two years, to civilize ten thousand
of the natives, and to inftrut them so thoroughly in
the arts of social life, that, from the fruits of their
industry, an annual revenue of fifteen thousand
ducats should arise to the king. In ten years, he
expected that his improvements would be so far ad-
vanced, as to yield annually sixty thousand ducats.
He stipulated, that no sailor or soldier hould ever
be permitted to fettle in this diitridt; and that no
Spaniard should enter it without his permission.
He even projeted to clothe the people whom he
took along with him in ome peculiar garment,
which did not resemble the Spanish dress, that they
might appear to the natives to be a different race of
men from those who had brought so many calami-
ties upon their country 1. From this scheme, of
which I have traced only the great lines, it is ma-
nifeft that Las Casas had formed ideas concerning
the method of treating the Indians, similar to
those by which the Jesuits afterwards carried on
their great operations in another part of the fame
continent. He supposed that the Europeans, by

q Herrera, dec. a. lib. iv. c. 2.

availing

availing themselves of that ascendant which they B I K
possessed in consequence of their fupetiorprogrefs __
in science and improvement, might gradually form 15'7.
the minds of the Americans to relish those comforts
of which they were destitute, might train them to
the arts of civil life, and render them capable of
its funaions.

BUT to the bishop of Burgos and the council of Favourably

the Indies this proje& appeared not only chimerical, received.
but dangerous in a high degree, They deemed
the faculties of the Americans to be naturally so
limited, and their indolence so excessive, that any
attempt to inftru& or improve them would be
fruitless. They contended, that it would be
extremely imprudent to give the command of a
country extending above a thousand miles along the
coast, to a fanciful, presumptuous enthusiast, a
itranger to the affairs of the world, and unacquaint-
ed with the arts of government. Las Casas, far
from being discouraged with a repulse, which he
had reason to expet, had recourse once more to
the Flemish favourites, who zealously patronized his
scheme, merely because it had been rejeted by
the Spanish ministers. They prevailed with their 1sr9.
master, who had lately been raised to the Imperial
dignity, to refer the consideration of this measure
to a fele& number of his privy-counfellos ; and as
Las Casas excepted against the members of the
council of the Indies, as partial and interested, all
of them were excluded, The decision of men
chosen by recommendation of the Flemings, was
perfectly conformable to their sentiments. They
warmly approved of Las Cafas's plan; and gave
orders for carrying it into execution, but reftrited
the territory allotted him to three hundred miles
along the coast of Cumana, allowing him, how-
ever, to extend it as far as he pleated towards the
interior part of the country r.

r Gomara His. Gener. C. 77. Herrera, dec. a. lib. iv. c. 3.
Ovicdo, lib. xix. c. .

THIS

B OOK THIS determination did not pass uncenfuired.

-L. Almost every person who had been in the Weft In-

L'"' dies exclaimed against it, and supported their opi-

A solemn nion so confidently, and with such plausible rea-
deoierninn sons, as made it advisable to pause and review the
the mode subjea more deliberately. Charles himself, though
theandis. accustomed, at this early period of his life, to

adopt the sentiments of his miniters, with such
submission and deference as did not promise that de-
cifive vigour of mind which distinguished his riper
years, began to fufpet that the eagerness with
which the Flemings took part in every affair relating
to America, flowed from some improper motive,
and discovered an inclination to examine in person
into the fiate of the question concerning the charac-
ter of the Americans, and the proper manner of
June o. treating them. An opportunity of making this

inquiry, with great advantage, soon occurred. Que-
vedo, the bishop of Darien, whp had accompanied
Pedrarias to the continent in the year one thousand
five hundred and thirteen, happened to land at
Barcelona, where the court then resided. It was
soon known, that his sentiments concerning the ta-
lents and disposition of the Indians differed from
those of Las Casas; and Charles naturally conclud-
ed, that by confronting two refpeaable persons,
who, during their long residence in America, had
full leisure to observe the manners of the people
whom they pretended to describe, he might be
able to discover which of them had formed his
opinion with the greatest discernment and accuracy.

A DAY for this solemn audience was appointed.

Theemperor appeared with extraordinary pomp, and
tookhis featon a thronein the great hallof thepalace.
His principal courtiers attended. Don Diego Colum-
bus, admiral of the Indies, was summoned to be pre-
sent. The bishop of Darien .was called upo,.firft

to

to deliver his opinion. He, in a short discourse, la- o or
mented the fatal desolation of America, by the I.
extinction of so many of its inhabitants; he ac- 7

.

knowledged that this must be imputed, in some de-
gree, to the excefiive rigour and inconsiderate pro-
ceedings of the Spaniards ; but declared, that all
the people of the New World, whom he had seen
either in the continent or in the islands, appeared to
him to be a race of men marked out, by the inferi-
ority of their talents, for servitude, and whom it
would be imppffible to inftrut or improve, unless
they were kept under the continual infpeaion of a
mailer. Las Casas, at greater lengtl, and with
more fervour, defended his own system. He re-
jeated with indignation the idea that any race of
men was born to servitude, as irreligious and inhu-
mane. He aferted, that the faculties of the Ame-
ricans were not naturally despicable, but unimprov-
ed; that they were capable of receiving infiruc-
tion in the principles of religion, as well as of ac-
quiring the industry and arts which would qualify
them for the various offices of social life; that the
mildness and timidity of their nature rendered
them so fubmifive and docile, that they might be
led and formed with a gentle hand. He profefled,
that his intentions in proposing the scheme now un-
der consideration were pure and disinterested; and
though, from the accomplishment of his designs,
inestimable benefits wouldrefult to the crown of
Castile, he never had claimed, nor ever would re-
ceive any recompence upon that account.

CHARLES, after hearing both, and consulting The fheme

with his ministers, did not think himself sufficiently asp ras cafO
informed to eftablih any general arrangement with is3o.
refpe& to the state of the Indians ; but as he had
perfect confidence in the integrity of Las Casas,
and as even the bishop of Darien admitted his

scheme

B O K scheme to be of such importance, that a trial should

_>, be made of its effects, he ifiued a patent, granting
1517. him the diftriEt in Cumana formerly mentioned,

with full power to establish a colony there accord-
ing to his own plan s.

HIs prepa. LA CASAS pushed on the preparations for his
rations for
executing voyage with his usual ardour. But, either from

ct. his own inexperience in the conduct of affairs, or

from the secret opposition of the Spanish nobility,
who universally dreaded the success of an inflitution
that might rob them of the indufirious and useful
hands which cultivated their estates, his progress in
engaging husbandmen and labourers was extremely
flow, and he could prevail on no more than two
hundred to accompany him to Cumana.

Departs for NOTHI NG, however, could damp his zeal,
America,
and meets With this slender train, hardly sufficient to take
w.ith formi- poffelon of such a vast territory, and altogether
d{able obla- p
ces. unequal to any attempt towards civilizing its inha-

bitants, he set fail. The firfi place at which he
touched was the island of Porto-Rico. There he
received an account of a new bbftacle to the exe-
cution of his scheme, more insuperable than any
he had hitherto encountered. When he left Ame-
rica in the year one thousand five hundred and fe-
venteen, the Spaniards had little intercourse with
any part of the continent, except the countries ad-
jacent to the gulf of Darien. But as every
species of internal industry began to flagnate in
Hispaniola, when, by the rapid decrease of the
natives, the Spaniards were deprived of those
hands with which they had hitherto carried on
their operations, this prompted them to try

s Herrera, dec. 2. lib. iv. c. 3, 4, 5. Argenfola Annale%
d Aragoa, 74. 97. Remifal Hill. Gener. lib. ii. c. 19, 2.

various

various expedients for upplying that loss. Con- B o o K
fiderable numbers of negroes were imported; but,
on account of their exorbitant price, many of the ,,
planters could not afford to purchase them. In or-
der to procure slaves at an easier rate, some of these
fitted out vessels to cruise along the coast of the con-
tinent, In places where they found themselves in-
ferior in itrength, they traded with the natives, and
gave European toys in exchange for the plates of
gold which they wore as ornaments; but, wherever
they could surprise or overpower the Indians, they
carried them off by force, and fold them as slaves
in Hispaniola . In those predatory excursions the
most atrocious ats of violence and cruelty were
committed. The Spanish name was held in detest-
ation all over the continent. Whenever any hips
appeared, the inhabitants either fled to the woods,
or rushed down to the shore in arms, to repel those
hated disturbers of their tranquillity. They forced
some parties of the Spaniards to retreat with preci-
pitation; they cut off others; and in the violence
of their resentment against the whole nation, they
murdered two Dominican missionaries, whose zeal
had prompted them to fettle in the province of
Cumana . This outrage againfi persons revered
for their fanEity, excited such indignation among
the people of Hispaniola, who, notwithstanding all
their licentious and cruel proceedings, were pofleffed
with a wonderful zeal for religion, and a fuperfti-
tious refpet for its ministers, that they determined
to inflict exemplary punishment, not only upon
the perpetrators of that crime, but upon the whole
nation. With this view, they gave the command
of five ships and three hundred men to Diego
Ocampo, with orders to lay waste the country of
Cumana with fire and sword, and to transport all

t Herrera, dec. 3. lib. ii. c . 3, Oviedo Hilt. lib. xix. c. 3.

the

B 0 o K the inhabitants as slaves to Hispaniola. This arma,

a,, ment Las Casas found at Porto Rico, in its way to the
1517. continent; and as Ocampo refused to defer his voy-

age, he immediately perceived that it would be im-
polible to attempt the execution of his pacific plan in
a country which was the feat of war and desolation x.

i:th April. IN order to provide against the effects of this un-
Labours to fortunate incident, he set fail immediately for St.
surmount
them. Domingo, leaving his followers cantoned out among

the planters in Porto Rico. From many concurring
causes, the reception which Las Casas met with in
Hispaniola was very unfavourable. In his negocia-
tions for the relief of the Indians, he had censured
the conduct of his countrymen fettled there with
such honest severity, as rendered him universally
odious to them. They confidered their own ruin as
the inevitable consequence of his success. They
were now elated with hope of receiving a large
recruit of slaves from Cumana, which must be re-
linquifhed if Las Casas were assisted in fettling his
projeced colony there. Figueroa, in consequence
of the infiructions he had received in Spain, had
made an experiment concerning the capacity of
the Indians, which was represented as decisive
against the system of Las Casas. He collected in
Hispaniola a good number of the natives, and set-
tled them in two villages, leaving them at perfect
liberty, and with the uncontiouled direction of their
own ations. But that people, accustomed to a
mode of life extremely different, incapable of as-
fuming new habits at once, and dejeted too with
their own misfortunes, as well as those of their
country, exerted so little indufiry in cultivating
the ground, appeared so devoid of solicitude or
foresight in providing for their own wants, and
were fiuch firangers to arrangement in conducting

x Herrera, dec. 2. lib. ix. c. 8, 9.

their

their affairs, that the Spaniards pronounced them B K
incapable of being formed to live like men in I.
social life, and confidered them as children, who ,5s7.
should be kept under the perpetual tutelage of
persons superior to themselves in wisdom and fa-
gacity Y.

No T H S T AND I N G all those circumstances, Final mir-

which alienated the people to whom he applied chriage of
from himself and from his measures, Las Casas,
by his activity and perseverance, by ome concef-
sions, and many threats, obtained at length a small
body of troops to protet him and his colony at
their first landing. But upon his return to Porto-
Rico, he found that the diseases of the climate had
been fatal to several of his people; and that others
having got employment in that island, refused to
follow him. With the handful that remained, he
set fail and landed in Cumana. Ocampo had ex-
ecuted his commission in that province with such
barbarous rage, having massacred many of the in-
habitants, ent others in chains to Hispaniola, and
forced the reft to fly for shelter to the woods, that
the people of a small colony, which he had planted
at a place which he named Toledo, were ready to
perish for want in a desolated country. There,
however, Las Casas was obliged to fix his refi-
dence, though deserted both by the troops appointed
to protet him, and by those under the command
of Ocampo,. who foresaw and dreaded the calami-
ties to which he must be exposed in that wretched
fation. He made the best provision in his power
for the safety and subsistence of his followers ; but
/s his utmost efforts availed little towards securing
either the one or the other, he returned to Hifpa-
niola, in order to solicit more effeaual aid for the
preservation of men, who from confidence in him

7 Herrera, dec. z. lib. x. c. 5-

ha4

B o o K had ventured into a post of so much danger. Soon
,_., after his departure, the natives, having discovered

,si. the feeble and defenceless state of the Spaniards,

aflembled secretly, attacked them with the fury
natural to men exasperated by many injuries, cut
off a good number, and compelled the reft to fly
in the utmost consternation to the island of Cuba-
gua, The small colony fettled there, on account
of the pearl fishery, catching the panic with which
they had been seized, abandoned the island, and
not a Spaniard remained in any part of the conti-
nent, or adjacent islands, from the gulf of Paria
to the borders of Darien. Astonished at such a
succession of disasters, Las Casas was ashamed to
shew his face after this fatal termination of all his
splendid schemes. He hut himself up in the con-
vent of the Dominicans at St. Domingo, and soon
after assumed the habit of that order ,

THOUGH the expulsion of the colony from

Cumana happened in the year oe thousand five
hundred and twenty one, I have chosen to trace
the progress of Las Cafas's negociations from their
first rife to their final ifiue without interruption.
His system was the objet of long and attentive
discussion; and though his efforts in behalf of the
oppressed Americans, partly from his own rashness
and imprudence, and partly from the malevolent
opposition of his adversaries, were not attended
with that success which he promised with too fan-
guine confidence, they gave rife to various regu-
lations which were of ome benefit to that un-
happy people. I return now to the history of
the Spanish discoveries, as they occur in the order
of timea.

Z Herrera, dec. 2. lib. x. c. . dec. 3. lib. ii. c 3. 4, .

Oviedo Hist. lib. xix. c. 5. Gomara, c. 77. Davilla Padilla,
lib. i. c. 97. Remefal Hilt. Gen. lib. 1 . c. z2, 23.

Herrera, dec. . lib. 1o. c. 5. p. 329.

DIEGO

DIEGO VELASQJUEZ, who conquered Cuba in B o oK

the year one thousand five hundred and eleven,
fiill retained the government of that island, as
the deputy of Don Diego Columbus, though he Newirco-
seldom acknowledged his superior, and aimed at wrdsthe
rendering his own authority altogether indepen- Wlt
dent b. Under his prudent administration Cuba
became one of the most flourishing of the Spa-
nifh settlements. The fame of this allured many
persons from the other colonies, in hopes of find-
ing there either ome permanent establishment,
or ome employment for their activity. As Cuba
lay to the weft of all the islands occupied by the
Spaniards, and as the ocean, which stretches be-
yond it towards that quarter, had not hitherto
been explored, these circumfiances naturally in-
vited the inhabitants to attempt new discoveries.
An expedition for this purpose, in which activity
and resolution might conduct to sudden wealth,
was more suited to the genius of the age, than the
patient industry requisite in clearing ground, and
manufacturing sugar. Infligated by this spirit,
several officers, who had served under Pedrarias in
Darien, entered into an association to undertake a
voyage of discovery. They persuaded Francisco
Hernandez Cordova, an opulent planter in Cuba,
and a man of distinguished courage, to join with
them in the adventure, and chose him to be their
commander. Velasquez not only approved of
the design, but assisted in carrying it on. As
the veterans from Darien were extremely indigent,
he and Cordova advanced money for purchasing
three small vessels, and furnishing them with every
thing requisite either for traffic or for war, a hundred
and ten men embarked on board of them, and failed
from St. Jago de Cuba, on the eighth of February

b Herrera, dec. a. lib. ii. c. 19.

one
I

B o o K one thousand five hundred and eventeen. By the
x'' advice of their chief pilot, Antonio Alaminos, who
1517. had served under the first admiral Columbus, they

flood directly weft, relying on the opinion of that
great navigator, who uniformly maintained that a
westerly course would lead to the mofi important
discoveries.

ON the twenty-firf day after their departure

from St. Jago, they saw land, which proved to be
Cape Cotoche, the eastern point of that large penin-
fula projecting from the continent of America,
Yucatan. which still retains its original name of ucatan.

As they approached the hore, five canoes came
off full of people decently clad in cotton gar-
ments; an astonishing fpeatacle to the Spaniards,
who had found every other part of America pof-
sessed by naked savages. Cordova endeavoured
by small presents to gain the good will of these
people. They, though amazed at the strange ob-
jets now presented for the firit time to their
view, invited the Spaniards to visit their habita-
tions, with an appearance of cordiality. They
landed accordingly, and as they advanced into the
country, they observed with new wonder some
large houses built with itone. But they soon
found that, if the people of Yucatan had made
progress in improvement beyond their country-
men, they were likewise more artful and warlike.
For though the Cazique received Cordova with
many tokens of friendship, he had posted a con-
fiderable body of filbjeets in ambush behind a
thicket, who upon a signal given by him, rushed
out and attacked the Spaniards with great bold-
ness, and some degree of martial order. At
the first flight of their arrows, fifteen of the Spa-
niards were wounded; but tha Indians were firuck
with such terror by the sudden explosion of the
fire-arms, and so surprised at the execution done

by

by them, by the cross-bows, and by the other B o o K
weapons of their new enemies, that they fled pre-
cipitately, and Cordova quitted a country where *$t7.
he had met with such a fierce reception, car-
rying off two prisoners, together with the orna-
ments of a small temple, which he plundered in
his retreat.

HE continued his course towards the weft with- CampedAy.

out losing fight of the coast, and on the sixteenth
day arrived at Campeachy. There the natives
received them more hospitably; but the Spaniards
were much surprised that on all the extensive coast
along which they had failed, and which they ima-
gined to be a large island, they had not observed
.any river'. As their water began to fail, they
advanced, in hopes of finding a supply; and at
length they discovered the mouth of a river at
Potonchan, ome leagues beyond Campeachy.

CO R DO A landed all his troops in order to pro-

te& the sailors while employed in filling the casks;
but notwithstanding this precaution, the natives
rufled down upon them with such fury, and in
such numbers, that forty-feven of the Spaniards
were killed upon the spot, and one man only of
the whole body escaped unhurt. Their com-
.mander, though wounded in twelve different pla-
ces, directed the retreat with presence of mind
equal lo the courage with which he had led them on
in the engagement, and with much difficulty they
regained their ships. After this fatal repulse, nothing
remained but to haften back to Cuba with their
shattered forces. In their paflage thither they suffered
the most exquisite distress for want of water, that
men wounded and sickly, shut up in small vessels,

c See NOTE XXVI

and

B 0 0 K and exposed to the heat of the torrid zone, can be
,." supposed to endure. Some of them, filiking un-

150s. der these calamities, died by the way; Cordova,

their commander, expired soon after they landed
in Cuba ,
Voyage of NOTWITHSTANDING the disastrous conclusion

rijalva. of this expedition, it contributed rather to animate

than to damp a spirit of enterprize among the Spa-
niards. They had discovered an extensive country,
situated at no great distance from Cuba, fertile in
appearance, and possessed by a people far superior
in improvement to any hitherto known in America.
Though they had carried on little commercial, in-
tercourfe with the natives, they had brought off
some ornaments of gold, not considerable in value,
but of singular fabric. These circumstances, re-
lated with the exaggeration natural to men desirous
of heightening the merit of their own exploits,
were more than sufficient to excite romantic hopes
and expectations. Great numbers offered to en-
gage in a new expedition. Velasquez, solicitous
to distinguish himself by ome service so meritori-
ous, as might entitle him to claim the government
of Cuba independent of the admiral, not only en-
couraged their ardour, but at his own expence fit-
ted out four ships for the voyage. Two hundred
and forty volunteers, among whom were several
persons of rank and fortune, embarked in this en-
terprife. The command of it was given to Juan
de Grijalva, a young man of known merit and
courage, with instructions to observe with attention
the nature of the countries which he should disco-
ver, to barter for gold, and if circumstances were

d Herrera, dec. 2. lib. ii. c. 17, 18. HiRor. Verdadera

de la Conquifta de la Nueva Efpana por Bernal Diaz del Caf-
tillo, cap. 1-7. Oviedo, lib. xvii. c. 3. Gomara, c. 52.
P. Martyr de infulis nuper inventis, p. 329.

inviting

Inviting, to fettle a colony in some proper fiation. B o o K
He failed from St. Jago de Cuba on the eighth of I
April one thousand five hundred and eighteen. 5s.8.
The pilot Alaminos held the fame course as in the Dt'pain,
former voyage, but the violence of the currents car-
rying the ships to the south, the first land which
they made was the island of Cozunel, to the east may 3.
of Yucatan. As all the inhabitants fled to the
woods and mountains at their approach, they made
no long flay there, and without any remarkable
occurrence they reached Potonchan on the opposite
fide of the peninsula. The desire of avenging
their countrymen who had been slain there, con-
curred with their ideas of good policy, in prompt-
ing them to land, that they might chastise the In-
dians of that difiriat with such exemplary rigour,
as might strike terror into all the people ar und
them: But though they difembaiked all their
troops, and carried ashore some field-pieces, the
Indians fought with such courage, that the Spa-"
niards gained the victory with difficulty, and were
confirmed in their opinion that the inhabitants of
this country would prove more formidable enemies
than any they had met with in other parts of Ame-
rica. From Potonchan, they continued their voy-
age towards the weft, keeping as near as poflible
to the shore, and casting anchor every evening,
from dread of the dangerous accidents to which
they might be exposed in an unknown ea. Dur-
ing the day, their eyes were turned continually
towards land, with a mixture of surprise and
wonder at the beauty of the country, and the no-
velty of the objets which they beheld. Many vil-
lages were scattered along the coast, in which they
could distinguish houses of stone that appeared
white and lofty at a distance. In the warmth of
their admiration, they fancied these to be cities
adorned with towers and pinacles; and one of the
soldiers happening to remark,that this country re-

Vo L. I. R fembled

B Ko o fembled Spain in its appearance, Grijalva, with

L universal applause, called it New Spain, the name

518. which fill distinguishes this extensive and opulent

June 9. province of the Spanish empire in America. They
abafco. landed in a river which the natives called 'abafco,

and the fame of their vitory at Potonchan having
reached this place, the Cazique not only received
them amicably, but bestowed presents upon them
of such value, as confirmed the high ideas which
the Spaniards had formed with respect to the wealth
and fertility of the country. These ideas were
raited still higher by what occurred at the place
where they next touched. This was considerably
to the weft of Tabasco, in the province fmice
Guaxact. known by the name of Guaxaca. There they were

received with the refped paid to superior beings.
The people perfumed them as they landed with
incense of gum copal, and presented to them as of-
ferings the most choice delicacies of their country.
They were extremely fond of trading with them,
and in fix days the Spaniards obtained ornaments
of gold, of curious workmanship, to the value of
fifteen thoufind pesos, in exchange for European
toys of small price. The two prisoners whom
Cordova had brought from Yucatan, had hitherto
served as interpreters; but as they did not under-
stand the language of this country, the Spaniards
learned from the natives by signs, that they were
subjects of a great monarch called Montezuma,
whose dominion extended over that and many other
provinces. Leaving this place, with which he had
so much reason to be pleased, Grijalva continued
June 19. his course towards the weft. He landed on a small

island, which he named the Isle of Sacrifices, be-
cause there the Spaniards beheld, for the first time,
the horrid fpetacle of human victims, which the
St. Jon de barbarous superstition of the natives offered to

Uua. their gods. He touched at another small island,

which

which he called St. John de Ulua. From this B o K
place he dispatched Pedro de Alverado, one of his .i
officers, to Velasquez, with a full account of the im- 1518.
portant discoveries which he had made, and with
all the treasure that he had acquired by trafficking
with the natives. After the departure of Alvarado,
he himself, with the remaining vefIels, proceeded
along the coast as far as the river Panuco, the
country fill appearing to be well peopled, fertile,
and opulent.

SEVERAL Of Grijalva's officers contended, that Reason, for

1 - not leaving

it was not enough to have discovered those delight- a colony
ful regions, or to have performed, at their different there
landing-places, the empty ceremony of taking
poffefllon of them for the crown of Castile, and
that their glory was incomplete, unless they planted
a colony in some proper station, which might not
only secure the Spanish nation a footing in the
country, but, with the reinforcements which they
were certain of receiving, might gradually subjet
*e whole. to the dominion of their sovereign. But
the squadron had now been above five months at
ea; the greatest part of their provisions was ex-
haufted, and what remained of their stores so much
corrupted by. the heat of the climate, as to be
almost unfit for use; they had loft some men by
death; others were sickly; the country was crowd-
ed with people who seemed to be intelligent as
well as brave; and they were under the govern-
ment of one powerful monarch, who could bring
them to a& againif their invaders with united force.
To plant a colony under so many circumstances of
disadvantage, was to expose it to inevitable deitruc-
tion. Grijalva, though possessed both of ambition
and courage, was destitute of the superior talents
capable of forming or executing such a great
plan. He judged it more prudent to-return to

R 2 Cuba,

B o O K Cuba, having fulfilled the purpose of his voyage,

and accomplished alL that the armament which- he
i518. commanded enabled him to perform. He returned.

to St. Jago de Cuba; on .the twenty-fixth of Oto-
ber, from which he had taken his departure about
fix months before .

Prepaorati- TH IS was the longest as well as the most success-
ons for ano.
therexpedi- ful voyage which the Spaniards had hitherto made
tion. in the New World. They had discovered that

Yucatan was not an island as they had supposed,
but part of the great continent of America. From
Potonchan they had pursued their course for many
hundred miles along a coast formerly unexplored,
stretching at first towards the weft, and then turn-
ing to the north; all the country which they had
ditcovered appeared to be no less valuable than ex-
tensive. As soon as Alvarado reached Cuba Ve-
lafquez, transported with success so far beyond his
most sanguine expectations, immediately dispatched
a person of confidence to carry this important intel-
ligence to Spain, to exhibit the rich productions of
the countries which had been discovered by his
means, and to solicit such an increase of authority
as might enable and encourage him to attempt the
conquest of them. Without waiting for the return
of his messenger, or for the arrival of Grijalva, of
whom he was become so jealous or distrustful, that
he resolved no longer to employ him, he began to
prepare such a powerful armament, as might prove
equal to an enterprise of so much danger and
importance.

BUT as the expedition upon which Velaf-

quez was now intent, terminated in conquefis
of greater moment than what the Spaniards had

u Herrera, dec. 1I. lib. iii. c. i,2, 9, o. Bernal Diaz. c. 8 17.
Oviedo Hilt. lib. xvii. c. 9, 2o. Gomara, c. 49.

hitherto

hitherto atchieved, and led them to the knowledge B o o K
of a people, who, if compared with such of the 1",..
Americans as were then known, may be confidered 1518.
as highly civilized; it is proper to pause before we
proceed to the history of events extremely different
from those which we have already related, in or-
der to take a view of the slate of the New World
when first discovered, and to contemplate the
policy and manners of the rude uncultivated
tribes, that occupied all the parts of it, with which
the Spaniards were at this time acquainted.

NOTES

# NOTES AND ILLUSTRATIONS.

N 0 T E

ILLSANDTON
ILLUSTRATtONS.

# NOTES AND ILLUSTRATIONS.

NOTES

AND
ILLUSTRATIONS.

NOTE I. p. 7.

T YRE was situated at such a diflance from the
Arabian Gulf or Red Sea, as made it impossible to
convey commodities from thence to that city by land-
carriage. This induced the Phenicians to render them-
selves matters of Rhinocrura, or Rhinocolura, the nearest
port in the Mediterranean to the Red Sea. They landed
the cargoes which they purchased in Arabia, Ethiopia,
and India, at Elath, the safest harbour in the Red Sea to-
wards the north. Thence they were carried by land to
Rhinocolura, the distance not being very considerable;
and being refhipped in that port, were transported to
Tyre, and distributed over the world. Strabon. Geogr.
Edit. Cafaub. lib. xvi. p. 1128. Diodor. Sicul. Biblioth.
Hitor. Edit. Weffelingi. lib. i. p. 70.

NOTE II. p. 1o.

T HE Periplus Hannonis is the only authentic mo-
nument of the Carthaginian skill in naval affairs,
and one of the mofl curious fragments transmitted to us
by antiquity. The learned and indultrious Mr. Dodwell,
in a dissertation prefixed to the Periplus of Hanno, in
the edition of the Minor Geographers published at
Oxford, endeavours to prove that this is a spurious
work, the composition of rome Greek, who assumed
jlanno's name, But M. de Mortefquieu, in his l'Efprit

(3es

des Loix, liv. xxi. c. 8. and M. de Bougainvile, in a
dissertation published tom. xxvi. of the Memoirs de
l'Academie des Inscriptions, &c. have eftablified its
authenticity by arguments which to me appear unan-
fwerable. Ramufio has accompanied his translation of
this curious voyage with a disertation tending to illus-
trate it. Racolte de Viaggi, vol. i. p. 12. M, de
Bougainville has, with great learning and ability, treated
the fame fubjets. It appears that Hanno, according to
the mode of ancient navigation, undertook this voyage
in small vessels, so conftruted that he could keep close
in with the coals. He failed from Gades to the iland of
Cerne in twelve days, This is probably what is known
to the moderns by the name of the Isle of Arguim. It
became the chief flation of the Carthaginians on that
coast; and M. de Bougainville contends, that the cif-
terns found there are monuments of the Carthaginian
power and ingenuity. Proceeding from Cerne, and still
following the winding of the coast, he arrived, in seven-
teen days, at a promontory which he called The Weft
Horn, probably Cape Palmas. From this he advanced
to another promontory, which he named The South Her,
and which is manifestly Cape de Tres Puntas, about
five degrees north -of the line. All the circumstances
contained in the short abltrat of his journal, which is
handed down to us, concerning the appearance and fiate
of the countries on the coast of Africa, are confirmed
and illustrated by a comparison with the accounts of
modern navigators. Even those circumstances, which,
from their seeming improbability, have been produced
to invalidate the credibility of his relation, tend to con-
firm it. He observes that in the country to the south of
Cerne, a profound silence reigned through the day;
but during the night, innumerable fires were kindled
along the banks of the rivers, and the air resounded
with the noise of pipes and drums, and cries of joy.
The fame thing, as Ramufio observes, still takes place.
The excessive heat obliges the negroes to take helter
in the woods, or in their houses, during the day. As
soon as the fun sets, they sally out, and by torch-light
enjoy the pleasure of music and dancing, in which
they spend the night. Ramus. i. I13, F. In another
place, he mentions the sea as burning with torrents of
fire. What occured to M. Adanfon, on the fame coast,
may explain this. " As soon," fays he, as the fun

f '

- : ',

.
/ ::.- - ..-:.

dipped beneath the horizon, and night overspread the
earth with darkness, the sea lent us its friendly
light. While the prow of our vessel ploughed the
foaming surges, it seemed to set them all on fire. Thus
we failed in a luminous inclofure, which surrounded us
like a large circle of rays, from whence darted in the
wake of the hip a long fiream of light." Voy. to
Senegal, p. 76.

NOTE II. p. I1.

LONG after the navigation of the Phenicians and of
Eudoxus round Africa, Polybius, the most intelli-
gent and best informed historian of antiquity, affirms,
that it was not known, in his time, whether Africa was
a continued continent, stretching to the south, or whe-
ther it was encompassed by the sea. Polybii Hist. lib.
iii. Pliny the naturalist aflerts, that there can be no
communication between the southern and northern tem-
perate zones. Plinii His. Natur. Edit. in ufum Delph.
4to, lib. ii. c. 68. If they had given full credit to the
accounts of those voyages, the former could not have
entertained such a doubt, the latter could not have deli-
vered such an opinion. Strabo mentions the voyage of
Eudoxus, but treats it as a fabulous tale, lib. ii. p. 155.;
and, according to his account, no other judgment can be
formed with refpe& to it. Strabo seems not to have
known' any thing with certainty concerning the form and
Rate of the southern parts of Africa. Geogr. lib. xvii.
p. 80. Ptolemy, the most inquisitive and learned of
all the ancient geographers, was equally unacquainted
with any part of Africa situated a few degrees beyond
the equinocial line; for he supposes that this great con-
tinent was not surrounded by the sea, but that it firetch-
ed, without interruption, towards the south pole: and
he so far mistakes its true figure, that he describes the
continent as becoming broader and broader as it ad-
vanced towards the south. Ptolomai Geogr. lib. iv. c.
9. Brietii Parlallela Geogr. veteris et nova, p. 86.

NOTE IV. p. I6.

A FACT, recorded by Strabo, affords a very frong
and singular proof of the ignorance of the ancients
yith refpeA to the situation of the various parts of the

.... earth,

earth. When Alexander marched along the banks of
the Hydafpes and Acefine, two of the rivers which
fall into the Indus, he observed that there were many
crocadiles in those rivers, and that the country produ-
ed beans of the fame species with those which were
common in Egypt. From these circumstances, he c6n-
cluded that he had diScovered the source of the Nile,
and prepared a fleet to fail down the Hydafpes to Egypt.
Strab. Geogr. lib. xv. p. o2o. This amazing error
did not arise from any ignorance of geography peculiar
to that monarch; for we are informed by Strabo, that
Alexander applied with particular attention in order to
acquire the knowledge of this science, and had accurate
maps or descriptions of the countries through which he
marched. Lib. ii. p. o. But, in his age, the know-
ledge of the Greeks did not extend beyond the limits of
the Mediterranean.

NOTE V. p. 17.

AS the flux and reflux of the sea is remarkably great
at the mouth of the river Indus, this would render
the phenomenon more formidable to the Greeks. Varen,
Geogr. vol. i. p. 25 .

N O T E VI. p. 20.

IT is probable that they were seldom induced to ad-
vance so far, either by motives of curiosity, or views
of commercial advantage. In consequence of this, the
idea of the ancients concerning the position of that great
river was very erroneous. Ptolemy places that branch
of the Ganges which he diltinguifhes by the name of
the Great Mouth, in the hundred and forty-fixth degree
of longitude from his firt meridian in the Fortunate
Islands. But its true longitude, computed from that
meridian, is now determined by astronomical obfervati-
ons to be only a hundred and five degrees. A geogra-
pher so eminent must have been betrayed into an error
of this magnitude by the imperfeEion of the informa-
tion which he had received concerning those diflant
regions; and this affords a striking proof of the inter-
course with them being extremely rare. With refpe&
to the countries of India beyond the Ganges, his intellii

gence

gence was still more defecive, and his errors more
enormous. I ihall have occasion to observe in another
place, that he has placed the country of the Seres, or
China, no less than sixty degrees farther east than its
true position. M. d'Anville, one of the most learned
and inquisitive of the modern geographers, has set this
matter in a clear light, in two dissertations published
in Mem. de l'Academ. des nfcript. &c. tom. xxxii. p.
573. 604.

NOTE VII. p. 2o,

IT is remarkable, that the discoveries of the ancients
were made chiefly by land; those of the moderns
are made chiefly by sea. The progress of conquest led
to the former, that of commerce to the latter. It is a
judicious observation of Strabo, that the conqueffs of
Alexander the Great made known the East, those of
the Romans opened the Welt, and those of Mithridates
king of Pontus the North. Lib. i. p. 26. When dif-
covery is carried on by land alone, its progress muff be
flow, and its operations confined. When it is carried
on only by sea, its sphere may be more extensive, and
its advances more rapid; but it labours under peculiar
defecs. Though it may make known the position of
different countries, and ascertain their boundaries as far
as these are determined by the ocean, it leaves us in
ignorance with refpelE to their interior slate. Above
two centuries and a half have elapsed since the Euro-
peans failed round the southern promontory of Africa,
and have traded in mods of its ports; but, in a confide-
rable part of that great continent, they have done little
more than survey its coafis, and mark its capes and har-
bours. Its interior regions are in a great measure
unknown. The ancients, who had a very imperfec
knowledge of its coasts, except where they .re wash-
ed by the Mediterranean or Red Sea, were accuflomed
to penetrate into its inland provinces, and, if we may
rely on the teflimony of Herodotus and DiodorusSiculus,
had explored many parts of it now altogether unknown.
Unless both modes of discovery be united, the geogra-
phical knowledge of the earth mut. remain incomplete
and inaccurate.

NOTE

NOTE VIII. p. 23.

T H E notion of the ancients concerning such an ex-
ceflive degree of heat in the tordid zone, as ren-
dered it uninhabitable, and their persisting in this error
long after they began to have some commercial inter-
course with everal parts of India lying within the tro-
pics, mull appear o singular and ablurd, that it may
not be unacceptable to some of my readers to produce
evidence of their holding this opinion, and to account
for the apparent inconsistence of their theory with their
experience. Cicero, who had beflowed attention upon
every part of philosophy known to the ancients, seems
to have believed that the torrid zone was uninhabitable,
and, of consequence, that there could be no intercourse
between the northern and southern temperate zones.
He introduces Africanus thus addressing the younger
Scipio: " You fee this earth encompassed and bound in
by certain girdles, of which, two, at the greatest
distance from each other, and sustaining the opposite
poles of heaven, are frozen with perpetual cold; the
the middle one, and the largest of all, is burnt with the
heat of the fun; two are habitable, the people in the
southern one are antipodes to us, with whom We have
no connection." Somnium Scipionis, c. 6. Geminus, a
Greek philosopher, contemporary with Cicero, delivers
the fame doctrine, not in a popular work, but in
his Eay^,, a' faoEamas a treatise purely scientific.
" When we speak," fays he, " of the southern
temperate zone, and its inhabitants, and concerning
those who are called antipodes, it must be always
underfiood, that we have no certain knowledge or
information concerning the fouthein temperate zone,
whether it be inhabited or not. But from the fphe-
rical figure of the earth, and the course which
the fun holds between the tropics, we conclude that
there is another zone, situated to the south, which en-
joys the fame degree of temperature with the northern
one which we inhabit." Cap. xiii. p. 3. ap. Petavii
Opus de Doar. Tempor. in quo Uranologium five Sys-
temata var. AuCtorum. Amis. 1705. vol. iii. The
opinion of Pliny the naturalilt, with refpet to both
these points, was the fame: " There are five divisions
of the earth, which are called zones. All that portion

which

which lies to near the two opposite poles is oppressed with
vehement cold, and eternal frost. There, unblet with
the aspea of milder stars, perpetual darkness reigns, or
at the utmost a feeble light refleced from surrounding
snows. The middle of the earth, in which is the orbit
of the fun, is scorched and burnt up with flames and
fiery vapour. Between these torrid and frozen diftri&s
lie two other portions of the earth, which are tempe-
rate; but on account of the burning region interpoled,
there can be no communication between them. Thus
Heaven has deprived us of three parts of the earth."
Lib. ii. c. 68. Strabo delivers his opinion to the fame
effet, in terms no less explicit: "The portion of the
earth which lies near the equator, in the torrid zone,
is rendered uninhabitable by heat." Lib. ii. p. 54.
To these I might add the authority of many other re-
fpedable philosophers and historians of antiquity.

IN order to explain the sense in which this doarine

was generally received, we may observe, that P.rmeni-
des, as we are informed by Strabo, was the firit who
divided the earth into five zones, and he extended the
limits of -the zone, which he fippofed to be unin-
habitable on account of heat, beyond the tropics.
Aristotle, as we learn likewise from Strabo, fixed the
boundaries of the different zones in the fame manner as
they are defined by modern geographers. But the pro-
grefs of discovery having gradually demonfirated that'
feverl regions of the earth which lay within the tropics
were not only habitable, but populous and fertile, this
induced later geographers to circumscribe the limits of the
torrid zone. It is not elfy to afceTtath with precision the
boundaries which they allotted to it. From a passage in
Strabo, who, as far as I know, is the only author of
antiquity from whom, we receive any hint concerning
this fubje&, I hould conjeture, that those who calcu-
lated according to the measurement of the earth by
Eratotlhenes, supposed the torrid zone to comprehend
near sixteen degrees, about eight on each fide of the
equator; whereas such as followed the computation of
Pofidonius allotted about twenty-four degrees, or some-
what more than twelve degrees on each fide of the
equator to the torrid zone. Strabo, lib. ii. p. iSr.
According to the former opinion, about two thirds of
that portion of the earth which lies between te tropics

was

was confidered as habitable; according to the latter,
about one half of it. With this reftri&ion, the dotrine
of the ancients concerning the torrid zone appears less
absurd; and we can conceive the reason of their aflert-
ing this zone to be uninhabitable, even after they had
opened a communication with several places within the
tropics. When men of science spoke of the torrid
zone, they confidered it as it was limited by the defini-
tion of geographers to sixteen, or at the utmost to
twenty-four degrees; and as they knew almolt nothing
of the countries nearer to the equator, they might fiill
suppose them to be uninhabitable. In loose and popular
discourse, the name of the torrid zone continued to be
given to all that portion of the earth which lies within
the tropics. Cicero ieems to have been unacquainted
with the ideas of later geographersj and according to
the division of Parmenides, describes the torrid zone as
the largest of the five. Some of the ancients rejeced
the notion concerning the intolerable heat of the torrid
zone as a popular error. This, we are told by Plu-
tarch, was the sentiment of Pythagoras, and we learn
from Strabo, that Eratosthenes and Polybius had adopt-
ed the fame opinion, lib. ii. I54. Ptolemy seems to
have paid no regard to the ancient doctrine and opinions
concerning the torrid zone.

N 0 T E IX. p. 4.

THE court of inquisition, which effetually checks
a spirit of liberal inquiry, and of literary improve-
ment, wherever it is established, was first introduced
into Portugal by John 1II. who began his reign, A. D.
1521.

NOTE X. p. 49.

AN instance of this is related by Hackluyt, upon
the authority of the Portugueze hiflorian Garcia de
Refende. Some English merchants having resolved to
open a trade with the coast of Guinea, John II. of Por-
tugal dispatched ambassadors to Edward IV, in order to
lay before him the right which he had acquired by the
Pope's bull to the dominion of that country, and to re-
quest of him to prohibit his fubjeas to prosecute their
eintended voyage. Edward was so much satisfied with

the

the exclusive title of the Portugueze, that he issued his
orders in the terms which they desired. Hackluyti
Navigations, Voyages) and Traffics of the Englih,
vol. ii. part ii. p. .

NOTE XI. p. 59.

T H E time of Columbus's birth may be nearly
ascertained by the following circumstances. It appears
from the fragment of a letter, addressed by him to
Ferdinand and Isabella, A. D. o50, that he had, at
that time, been engaged forty years in a sea-faring life.
In another letter, he informs them, that he went to sea
at the age of fourteen; from those fa6s it follows, that
he was born A. D. I447. Life of Christ. Columbus,
*by his son Don Ferdinand. Churchill's Colletion of
Voyages, vol. ii. p. 484, 485.

N OTE XII. p. 65.

H E spherical figure of the earth was known to the

ancient geographers. They invented the method,
still in use, of computing the longitude and latitude of
different places. According to their docrine, the
equator or imaginary line which encompafles the earth
contained three hundred and sixty degrees; these they
divided into twenty-four parts, or hours, each equal to
fifteen degrees. The country of the Seres or Sine,
being the farthest part of India known to the ancients,
was supposed, by Marinus Tyrius, the most eminent of
the ancient geographers before Ptolemy, to be fifteen
hours, or two hundred and twenty-five degrees to the
east of the first meridian, passing through the Fortu-
nate Islands. Ptolommi Geogr. lib. i. c. i . If this sup-
position was well-founded, the country of the Seres, or
China, was only nine hours, or one hundred and thirty-
five degrees weft from the Fortunate, or Canary
Islands; and the navigation, in that diretion, was
much ihorter than by the course which the Portuguese
were pursuing. Marco Polo, in his travels, had de-
fcribed countries, particularly the island of Cipango or
Zipangri, supposed to beJapan, cnfiderably to the east
of any part of Asia, known to the ancients. Marcus
Paulus de Region. Oriental. lib. ii. , 70. lib. iMi. 2.
Of course, this country, as it extended further to the

VOL .
I. S east,

eaR, was fill nearer to the Canary islands. The c6hctufi-
o6ns of Columbus, though drawn from innacurate 'ob-
servations, were just. If the fuppofittons of Marinus
had been well founded, and if the countries, which
Marco Polo visited, had been situated to the east of
those whose longitude Marinus lad ascertained, the
proper and nearest course to the East Indies must have
been to fleer direaly'weft.' Herrera,-dec. . lib. i. c. 2.
A more extensive knowledge of the globe has now dif-
covered the great error of Marinus, in supposing Chifa
to be fifteen hours, -or two hundred and twenty-five de-
grees east from the Canary Islands, and that even Pto-
lemy was mistaken, when he reduced the longitude bs
China to twelve-hours, or one hundred and eighty de-
grees. The longitude of the western frontier of that
vast empire is'feven hours, or one hundred and fifteen
degrees from the meridian of the Canary Islands. But
Columbus followed the light, which his age afforded,
and relied upon'the authority of writers, who were, at
that time, regarded as the infiruAors and guides-of
mankind in the science of geography.

N OT E XIII. p. 86.

'As the Portuguese, in making their discoveries, did
rot depart far from the coast of Africa, they con-
cluded that birds, whose flight they observed with great
attention, did not venture to any considerable 'diftarce
from land. In the infancy of navigation, it was fiot
known, that birds often firetch their flight at an im-
mense distance from1 any land. In failing towards the
Weft-Indian islands, birds are often seen at the distance
oftwoi hundred leagues from any land. Sloane's Nat.
Hilt. of Jamaica, vol. i. p. 30. Catefby saw an owl
at sea, when the ship was ix hundred leagues diflant
from land. Nat. Hist. of Carolina, pref. p. 7. Hist.
Naturelle de M. de Buffon, tom. xvi. p. 32. From
which it appears, that this indication of land, on which
Columbus seems to have relied with some confidence,
was extremely uncertain.

N T E XIV. p. 96.

. N'a letter of the admiral's to Ferdinand and Isabella,
he-defcribes'one of the harbours in'Cuba, with all

the

the enthufirftic, admiration of ,a discoverer.--" .I disco-
covered a river which a galley might easily. enter the
beauty of. it induced me to found, and 1 found from five
to eight fathoms of water. Having proceeded a confi-
.derable way up the river, every thing invited me to
fettle. there. .The. beauty of the. river, the clearness of
the water, through which I could fee the fandy.bottom,
the multitude of palm-trees of different kinds,, the tall-
eft and finest I had seen, and an infinite number of,
other large and flourishing trees, the birds, and. thever-
dure of the plains, are: so wonderfully beautiful, that
this country excels allothers as. far as the day furpafles
the night in brightness and splendour, so that I often
said, that it would be in vain forme to attempt to give
your highnesses a full account of it, for neither my tongue
nor my pen could come up to the truth; and indeed I am
so much amazed at the fight of such beauty, that I
know not how to describe it." Life of Columb. c.' 30.

NOTE XV. p. Ioo.

- H E account which Columbus gives of .the huma-
nity and orderly behaviour of' the natives on this
occasion is very striking. '" Theiking (fys'he, ii a
letter to Ferdinand and Isabella) having been inforied
of our misfortune, expressed great grief' for our loss,
and immediately sent aboard all the people in the'place
in many large canoes; we soon' unloaded the fihip'of
every thing that was upon deck, as the king gave us
great affiflance, he himself, with his brothers and rela-
tions, took all poflible care, that every thing should be
properly done both aboard and on shore. And, from time
to time, he sent some of his relations weeping,' to'beg of me
not to be dejeEted, for' he would give-me all that he had.
I can afure your highnesses, that there would not have
been so much care taken in fecuriig' our'effeas in any
part of Spain, as all our property- was put together in
one place near his palace, until the houses which'he
wanted to prepare for the custody of it, were emptied.
He immediately' placed a guard of armed men, who
watched during the whole night, and those on shore la-
mented as if they had been much intererled in our Ibfs.
The people are so affetionate, so tractable, and' so
peaceable, that I swear to your high'nesses, th't there
is not a better race of men, nor a better country in the

S 2 world.

world. They love their neighbour as themselves; their
conversation is the sweetest and mildest in the world,
cheerful, and always accompanied with a smile. And
although it is true that they go naked, yet your high-
neffes may be assured that they have many very com-
mendable customs; the king is served with great Rfate,
and his behaviour is so decent, that it is pleasant to
lee him, as it is likewise to observe the wonderful me-
mory which these people have, and their desire of
knowing every thing, which leads them to inquire into
its causes and effe&s. Life of Columbus, c. 32. It is
probable that the Spaniards were indebted for this offici-
ous attention, to the opinion which the Indians enter-
tained of them as a superior order of beings.

NOTE XVI. p. Io6.

EVERY monument of such a man as Columbus is
valuable. A letter which he wrote to Ferdinand
and Isabella, describing what passed on this occasion,
exhibits a mot itriking piaure of his intrepidity, his
humanity, his prudence, his public spirit, and courtly
address. " I would have been less concerned for this
misfortune, had I alone been in danger, both because
my life is a debt that I owe to the supreme Creator,
and because I have at other times been exposed to the
mod imminent hazard. But what gave me infinite
grief and vexation was, that after it had pleated our
Lord to give me faith to undertake this enterprize, in
which I had now been so successful, that my opponent
would have been convinced, and the glory of your
highnesses, and the extent of your territory increased
by me; it ihould please the Divine Majefly to flop all
by my death. All this would have been more tolerable,
had it not been attended with the loss of those men
whom I had carried with me, upon promise of the
greatefl prosperity, who feeing themselves in such dif-
trefs, cursed not only their coming along with me, but
that fear and awe for me, which prevented them from
returning as they often had resolved to have done.
But besides all this, my sorrow was greatly increased,
by recolleaing that I had left my two sons at school at
Cordova, deltitute of friends, in a foreign country,
when it could not in all probability be known that I had

done

done such services as might induce your highnesses to
remember them. And though I comforted myfelfwith
the faith that our Lord would not permit that, which
tended so much to the glory of his church, and which
I had brought about with so much trouble, to remain
imperfet, yet I confidered that, on account of my.fins,
it was his will to deprive me of that glory, which I
might have attained in this world. While in this con-
futed state, I thought on the good fortune which accom-
panies your highnesses, and imagined, that although I
ihould perish, and the vessel be loft, it was possible that
you might somehow come to the knowledge of my
voyage, and the success with which it was attended.
For that reason I wrote upon parchment with the brevi-
ty which the situation required, that I had discovered the
lands which I promised, in how many days I had done
it, and what course 1 had followed. I mentioned the
goodness of the country, the characer of the inhabi-
tants, and that your highnffles subje&s were left in
possession of all that I had discovered. Having fealed
this writing, I addressed it to your highnesses, and pro-
mifed a thousand ducats to any person who should deli-
ver it fealed, so that if any foreigners found it, the pro-
mifed reward might prevail on them not to give the in-
formation to another. I then caused a great calk to be
brought to me, and wrapping up the parchment in an
oiled cloth, and afterwards in a cake of wax, I put it into
the calk, and having ftopt it well, I cast it into the sea.
All the men believed that it was some a of devotion.
Imagining that this might never chance to be taken up,
as the ships approached nearer to Spain, I made another
packet like the firit, and placed it at the top of the
poop, so that if the hip funk, the calk remaining
above water might be committed to the guidance of
fortune." ,

N T XVII p. Iq.

SOME Spanish authors, with the meanness of natio-
nal jealousy, have endeavoured to detra&t from the
glory of Columbus, by insinuating that he was led to
the discovery of the New World, not by his own inven-
tive, or enterprising genius, but by information which
he had received. According to their account, a vessel

having

having been driven from its course by eaterly winds,
was carried before them far to the weft, and landed on
the coast of an unknown country, from which it re-
turned with difficulty; the pilot, and three sailors,' be-
ing the only persons of the crew that survived the dif-
tresses which they suffered, from want of provisions
and fatigue in this long voyage. In a few days after
their arrival, all the four died, but the pilot having
been received into the house of Columbus, -his intimate'
friend, disclosed to him before his death, the secret of
the discovery which he had accidentally made, and left
him his papers containing a journal of the voyage,
which served as a guide to Columbus in his undertaking.
Gomara, as sari as I know, is the sirs author who pub-
lified this flory, His. c. 13. Every circumitance is
deflitute-of evidence to support it. Neither the name
of the vessel nor its destination is known. Some pretend
that it belonged to one of the sea-port towns in Andalu-
fia, and was failing either to the Canaries, or to Madei-
ra; others, that it was a Bifcayner in its way to Eng-
land; others, a Portuguese ship trading o the coast of
Guinea. The name of the pilot is alike unknown, as
well as that of the port in which he landed on his re-
turn. According to some, it was in Portugal; accord-
ing to others, in Madeira, or the Azores. The year
in which this voyage was made is no less uncertain.
Monfon's Nav. Trads. Churchill, iii. 37I. No menti-
on is made of this pilot, or his discoveries, by And.
Bernaldes, or Pet. Martyr, the contemporaries of Co-
lumbus. Herrera, with his usual judgment, passes
over it in silence. Oviedo takes notice of this report,
but confiders it as a tale fit only to amuse the vulgar;
Hill. lib. ii. c. 2. As Columbus held his course diret-
ly weft from the Canaries, and ifever varied it, some
later authors have supposed, that this uniformity is a
proof of his being guided by some previous information.
But they do not recollect the principles on which he
founded all his hopes of success, that by holding a wef-
terly course, he muff certainly arrive at those regions of
the east described by the ancients. His firm belief of
his own fyflem led him to take that course, and to'pur-
sue it without deviation.

OTHER nations beside the Spaniards have called in
queflion Columbus's claim to the honour of having

discovered

discovered America. Some German authors ascribe it.
to Martin Behaim, whom they luppofe to be their
countryman. But they mention neither the year in
which he made the diicovery, nor the place from which
h.e failed, nor one circumRfance of the voyage. Jp.
Frid Stuvenius, in a Dissertation de vero Novi Orbis:
Inventore, published at Francfort in the year 1714,.
warmly asserts the title of Behaim, but without produc
ing in confirmation of it, any thing that has even the
shadow of: evidence. There was indeed.a Martin de 'oe-
mia, a noted cosmographer in the fifteenth century,
whom Herrera mentions as a fiiend to Columbus, dec. i.
lib. i. c. a. but he assures us that he was a Portuguese
and born. in the island of Fayal, one of the Azores.
Ibid. and.dec. 2. lib. ii. c. 19. Gomara informs us, that
Magellan was poffefied of a terrefttial globe, made by
this Martin de Boemia, on which he demonfrated the
course he purposed to hold, in searching for that frait
which he afterwards discovered. Hist. c. I9. 'It seems
probable, then, that the Germans have been induced,
merely by the name of this artist, to suppose him a na-
tive of Bohemia, and on that supposition, have raised,
their imaginary pretensions.

THOSE of the Wellh seem not to rell on a foun-

dation much more solid. In the' twelfth century, ac-
cording to Powell, a dispute having arisen among the
sons of Owen Guyneth, king of North-Wales, con-
cerning the fucceflion to his crown, Madoc, one of
their number, weary of this contention, betook him"
self to sea in quest of a more quiet settlement. He
fleered due weft, leaving Ireland to the north, and ar-
rived in an unknown country, which appeared to him so
desirable, that he returned to Wales, and carried thi-
ther several of his adherents and companions. This is
said to have happened about t'he year II 7o, and after
that, he and his colony were heard of no more. But it
is to be observed, that Powell, on whose testimony the
authenticity of this story refts, published his hiflory
above'four centuries from the date of the event which
he relates. Amone a people so rude and so illiterate as
the Welsh, at that period, the memory of a tranfa&ion
so remote mull have been very imperfetly peferved,
and would require to be confirmed by some author of
greater credit, and nearer to the aera of Madoc's voyage

than

than Powell. Later antiquaries have indeed appealed to
the testimony of Meredith ap Rhees, a Welsh bard,
who died A. D. 1477. But he too lived at such a dif-
tance of time from the event, that hecannot be confi-
dered as a witness of much more credit than Powell.
Besides his verfes.publiflied by Hackluyt, vol. iii. p. .
convey no information, but that Madoc, dissatisfied
with his domestic situation, employed himself in search-
ing the ocean for new possessions. But even if we ad-
mit the authenticity of Powell's story, it does not follow
that the nknown country which Madoc, discovered
by fleering weft, in such a course as to leave Ireland to
the north, was any part of America. The ikill of the
Welsh in the twelfth century was hardly equal to such a
voyage. If he made any discovery at all, it more pro-
bably might be Madeira, or some other of the western
isles. The affinity of the Welsh language with some
dialecs spoken in America, has been mentioned as a cir-
cumftance which confirms the truth of Madoc's voyage.
But that has been observed in so few inflances, and in
some of there the affinity is so obscure, or so fan-
ciful, that no conclusion can be drawn from the casual
resemblance of a small number of words. There is a
bird, which as far as is yet known, is found only on
the coasts of South America, from Port Desire to the
Straits of Magellan. It is distinguished by the name of
Penguin. This word in the Welsh language signifies
White-head. All the authors who favour the pretensions
of the Welsh to the discovery of America, mention this
as an irrefragable proof of the affinity of the Welsh
language with that spoken in that region of America.
But Mr. Pennant, who has given a scientific description
of the Penguin, observes, that all the birds of that ge-
nus have black heads, " so that we must resign every
hope (adds he) founded on this hypothesis of retrieving
the Cambrian race in the New World." Philof. Tranfa&.
vol. Iviii. p. 9, &c. Beside this, if the Welsh, to-
wards the close of the twelfth century, had fettled in
any part of America, some remains of the Christian
do&rine and rites must have been found among their
descendants, when they were discovered about three
hundred years pofRerior to their migration, a period so
Ahort, that, in the course of it, we cannot well suppose

that

that all European ideas and arts would be totally for-
gotten.

THE pretensions of the Norwegians to the discovery

of America, seem to be better founded than those of
the Germans or Welsh. The inhabitants of Scandina-
via were remarkable in the middle ages for the boldness
and extent of their maritime excursions. In 874, the
Norwegians discovered, and planted a colony in Iceland.
In 982, they discovered Greenland, and established set-
tlements there. From that, some of their navigators
proceeded towards the weft, and discovered a country
more inviting than those horrid regions with which they
were acquainted. According to their representation, this
country was sandy on the coasts, but in the interior parts
level and covered with wood, on which account they
gave it the name of Helle-land, and Mark-land, and
having afterwards found some plants of the vine which
bore grapes, they called it Win-land. The credit of
this story refts, as far as I know, on the authority of
the jaga, or chronicle of king Olaus, composed by
Snorro Sturlonides, or Sturlufons, published by Perin-
£kiold at Stockholm A. D. 1697. As Snorro was born
in the year I 79, his chronicle might be compiled about
two centuries after the event which he relates. His ac-
count of the navigation and discoveries of Biorn; and
his companion Lief, is a very rude confused tale,' p.
104. 1 o. 326. It is impossible to discover from him,
what part of America it was in which the Norwegians
landed. According to his account of the length of the
days and nights, it must have been as far north as the
fifty-eight degree of latitude, on some part of the coaf
of Labradore, approaching near to the entry of Hud-
son's Straits. GrApes, certainly, are not the produ&i-
on of that country. Torfeus supposes that there is an
error in the text, by retifying of which, the place
where the Norwegians landed may be supposed to be
situated in latitude 490. But that is not the region of
the vine in America. From perusing Snorro's tale, I
flould think that the situation of Newfoundland corre-
fponds best with that of the country discovered by the
Norwegians. But grapes are not the producion of that
barren island. Other conjectures are mentioned by M.
Mallet, Introd. a 'Hill. de Dannem. I75, &c. I
A4r not sufficiently acquainted with the literature of

' ' ~~~~~~~~to

the north, to examine them. It. seems. manifefi, that
if the Norwegians did discover any part of America at
that period, their attempts to plant colonies proved un-
fuccefiful, and all-knowledge, of it was foon'loft.

N 0; T E XVIII. p. in.

PETER MARTYR, ab- Anglcria, a. Milanese gen-
tleman, who resided at that time. in the court of Spain,
wholQ lett.r.s contain, an account of the tranfaaions of.
that: period, in the order wherein' they occured, de-
foribs. the fentimrnts with, which he himself and. his
lened correspondents were a.ffe&ed, in very. friking.
terjms, '. Prae Ifltitia profiltuifle te, vixque. a laIchry-
mis: prae gaudio temperafie, quando literas adfpexilt-i
meas quibus,. de antipodum orbe latenti ha&enus, te
c.eriorem feci, mi fuavifime Pomponi, infinuafti. Ex
tuis ipfe literis colligo, quid fenferis. Senftii autem,
tantique rem fecifi, quanti virum fumxma do&rina
irfignitum decuit. Quis namque cibus fublimibus praef-
tari potefl ingeniis, ito fuavior ? quod condimentum
gratius.? A me facio conjecturam. Beati fentio spiritus
meos, quando accitos alloquor prudentes aliquos ex his
qui ab ea redeunt provincia. Implicent animos pecuni-
arum cumulis augendis miferi avari, libidinibus obfccni;
nofiras nos mentes, poatquam Deo pleni aliquando sue-
rimus, contemplando, hujufcemodi rerum notitia demul-
ciamus." Epift. 152. Pomponio Laeto.

N 0OT E XIX. p. I22,

SO firmly were men of science, in that age, perfuad-
ed that the countries which Columbus had discovered
were connected with the East Indies, that Bernaldes, the
curate of Los Palacios, who seems to have been no in-
considerable proficient in the knowledge of cosmography,
contends that Cuba was not an island, but a part of the
continent, and united to the dominions of the Great
Khan. This he delivered as his opinion to Columbus
himself, who was his guest for some time on his return
from his second voyage; and he supports it by several
arguments, mostly founded on the authority of Sir John
Mandeville. MS. penes me. Antonio Gallo, who was
secretary to the magistracy of Genoa towards the close
of the fifteenth century, published a hort account of

the

the navigations' and discoveries of his' cbunttyma'n Co-
ldnibus, annexed to his Opufcula Hiftorica dterebus po--
p.llli etiuenfis; in' which he informs us, fom letters
of Columbus which he himself had: seen, that it was-
his-opinion, founded upon nautical observations, that
one of the islands he had discovered, was distant only
two hours or thirty degrees from. Cattigara, which, in
the charts of the geographers of that. age, was laid'
down, upon the authority of Ptolemy, lib. vii. c. 3. as
the rioft easterly place in Asia. From this he' conclud-
ed,-that if some' unknown conti ent did'nbt obftru the-
navigatioi, there' must be fIhort and easy access, by'
holding a westerly course, this extreme- region of the'
East. Muratori Scriptores Rer. Italicarum, vol. xxiii.
p. 304.

NOT E XX.p. I27.

BERNALDES, the curate de los Palacios, a contem-
porary writer, fays, that five hundred of these captives
were sent to Spain, and fold publicly in Seville as slaves;
but that, by the change of climate, and their inability
to bear the fatigue of labour, they all died in a ihort
time. MS. penes me.

NOTE XXI. p. I39.

COLUMBUS seems to have formed ome very fingu-
lar opinions concerning the countries which he had now
discovered. The violent swell and agitation of the wa-
ters on the coast of Trinidad led him to conclude, that
this was the highelt part of the terraqueous globe, and
he imagined that various circumstances concurred in
proving that the sea was here viffibly elevated. Having
adopted this erroneous principle, the apparent beauty of
the country induced him to fall in with a notion of Sir
John Mandeville, c. o02. that the terrefirial paradise
was the highest land in the earth ; and he believed that
he had been so fortunate as to discover this happy abode,
Nor ought we to think it' frange that a person of so
much sagacity should be influenced by the opinion or re-
ports of such a fabulous author as Mandeville. .Colum-
bus and the other discoveries were obliged to follow such
guides as they could find and it appears from several

passages

passages in the manuscript of Andr. Bernaldes,'the frien4
of Columbus, that no inconsiderable degree of credit
was given to the teRiimony of Mandeville in that age.
Bernaldes frequently quotes him, and always with
refpe&t.

NOTE XXII. p. 50.

IT is remaikable, that neither Gomara or Oviedo, the
most ancient Spanish historians of America, nor Her-
rera, confider Hojeda, or his companion Vespucci, as
the first discoverers of the continent of America. They
uniformly ascribe this honour to Columbus. Some have
supposed that national resentment against Vefeucci, for
deserting the service of Spain, and entering into that of
Portugal, may have prompted these writers to conceal
the aions which he performed. But Martyr and Ben-
zoni, both Italians, could not be warped by the fame
prejudice, Martyr was a contemporary author ; he re-
fided in the court of Spain, and had the be(t opportuni-
ty to be exatly informed with refpe& to all public
tranfaftions; and yet, neither in his Decads, the first
general history published of the New World, nor in
his Epiitles, which contain an account of all the re-
markable events of his time, does he ascribe to Vefpuc-
ci the honour of having firit discovered the continent,
Benzoni went as an adventurer to America in the year
1541, and resided there a considerable time. He ap-
pears to have been animated with a warm zeal for the
honour of Italy, his native country, and yet does not
mention the exploits and discoveries of Vespucci. Her-
rera, who compiled his general history of America from
the most authentic records, not only follows those early
writers, but accuses Vespucci of falsifying the dates of
both the voyages which he made to the New World,
and of confounding the one with the other, in order
that he might arrogate to himlelf the glory of having
discovered the continent. Her. dec. . lib. iv. c. 2.
He aferts, that in a judicial enquiry into this matter by
the royal fiscal, it was proved by the testimony of Ho-
jeda himself, that he touched at Hispaniola when re-
turning to Spain from his first voyage; whereas Vef-
pucci gave out that they returned diretly to Cadiz from
the coast of Pariah and touched at Hispaniola only in

their

their second voyage; and that he had finished the voy-
age in five months; whereas, according to Vespucci's
account, he had employed seventeen months in perform-
ing it. Viaggio primo de Am. Vespucci, p. 36. Viag.
fecundo, p. 45. - Herrera gives a more full account of
this inquest in another part of his book, and to the fame
effet. Her. dec. . lib. vii. c. 5. Columbus was in
Hispaniola when Hojeda arrived there, and had by that
time come to an agreement with Roldan, who opposed
Hojeda's attempt to excite a new infurredion, and, of
consequence, his voyage must have been posterior to
that of the admiral. Life of Columbus, c. 84. Ac-
cording to Vespucci's account, he set out on his first
voyage May oth, I497. Viag. primo, p. 6. At
that time Columbus was in the court of Spain pre-
paring for his voyage, and seems to have enjoyed a con-
fiderable degree of favour. The affairs of the New
World were at this juncture under the diretion of An-
tonio Torres, a friend of Columbus. It is not probable,
that at that period a commission would be granted to
another person to anticipate the admiral, by undertaking
a voyage which he himself intended to perform. Son-
feca, who patronized Hojeda, and granted the licence
for his voyage, was not recalled to court, and reinflated
in the diretion of Indian affairs, until the death of prince
John, which happened September 1497, P. Martyr,
Ep. 182. several months posterior to the time at which
Vespucci pretends to have set out upon his voyage. A
life of Vespucci was published at Florence by the Abate
Bandini, A. D. 745, 4to. It is a work of no merit,
written with little judgment and less candour. He con-
tends for his countryman's title to the discovery of the
continent with all the blind zeal of national partiality,
but produces no new evidence to support it. We learn
from him, that Vespucci's account of his voyage was
published as early as the year 1510, and probably sooner.
Vita di Am. Vefp. p. 52. At what time the name of
AMERICA came to be firR given to the New World, is
not certain.

N O T E XXIII. p. 192.

H E form employed on this occasion served as a mo-

del to the Spaniards in all their subsequent conquefs in
America. It is so extraordinary in its nature, and gives

us

-us such an: idea::of the: proceedings of, the Spaniards,
and. the, principles upon: whih they founded their right
to the extensive :dominions which they acquired in the
New World,. that it'well. merits the; attention .of the
reader. " I Alonfo de -Hojeda, servant .ps the most
high and-powerful kings of Cafile and Len, the con-
querors of- barbarous .nations, their. messenger and cap-
tain, notify, to you and declare, in as ample form as I
am capable, that God.our Lord,who is.one and eternal,
created :the heaven, and the earth, and one man and one
woman, of whom you and we, and all the. men. who
have.been or hall be in-the world, are descended.. But as
it has come :to- pas,. through the number of generations
- during more than five thousand years, that they have
been dispersed into different parts of the world, and are
divided into various kingdoms and provinces, because
one country.was not. able to contain- them, nor could
they have found in one the. means of subsistence and pre-
servation; therefore; God our Lord gave the charge.of
all those people to: one man, named St. Peter, whom
he conftituted.the lord and head of all the human race,
that all-;men, in. whatever place they are born,. or in
whatever faith:or place:they are educated, might yield
obedience: unto. him. He. hath fubjeted the .whole
world- to his jurifdi&tion,.a.nd commanded him tQ eRfa-
blifh his. residence in.Rome, as -the most proper.place
for the government of-the, world. He. likewise proomif-
ed and gave him .power to establish his authority, in eve-
ry other part of the world, and: to judge.and govern all
Christians,, Moors, .ews,. Gentiles, and all other peo-
ple, of whatever fed or faith they may. be. To him is
given -the name of Pope,; which signifies admirable, great
father-and guardian,. because !he is the father. and.go-
vernor of.all-men. Those w:ho lived in the time of.this
holy father:obeyed and acknowledged him as their lord
and.king,. and the.fupeior of -the universe. he fame
has been observed. with refpea to-them who, since his
time,,have been chosen to he .pntificate. Thus it now
continues, and will continue to the end of the world.

" ON of thefe.pontiffs, .as lord.of the world, hath

made a grant of these islands, and of the Terra:Firma
of- the ocean sea, -to the Catholic kings of Castile,' Don
Ferdinand: and Donna Isabella, of glorious: memory,
. and their-fucceffors, our sovereigns,, with all .they con-

tain,

tain,- as is 'moret fully,. epreffed! 'in :cetain -deedsi pasttd
upon' hat occasion,' which you 'may.'see, 'if you !defrre it.
Thus his'majefty is king and lord. of these islands, and
of the Terra Fiirma,' in virtue-of this-ddnation.; and:.'as
king and lord-aforefaid, moitoff the 'islands. taowhich his
title hath been notified, have. 'recbgnized his majesty,
'and now yield obedience aid fubjeion' to; him is their
lord, voluntarily and without resistance; and instantly,
as soon as they received- iformation,' :they obeyed the
religious men ent by the king to preach to them, and
to'in'firu' -them in our'holy.'faith ; and ll: t-hese, bs
their own free-will, 'without.any recomperice, or;: gratu-
ity,' became Christians, ! and'continue toabe fo.;'and his
-ajefty having received them graciously under his pro-
'te1ion,; has'commanded that they should be treated in
the fame manner as his other subje&s and .Vassals.
You are bound and obliged to a in the fame manner.
Therefore I now entreat and. require you to confider at-
tentively what I have declared to you; and that.you
-nay more perfectly comprehend it, 'that you' take' such
'time as' is' reafonablei iinorier that you:-mayi aknow-
ledgelthe 'Chiirch as the superior 'and.'guide of-'the uni-
verse, and likewise .thehol.yfather called.the Pope, in
his own: right, and his majesty by his appointment,
as'king' anid'fovereign lord iof these iflandsy. and of the
Terra Firma ; and that you donfent that the forefaid'ho-
ly fathers ihall declare and preach to you the dotrines
above mentioned. If.:you do this, you a well, and
perform that to which you are bound and obliged; and
his majesty, and I in - his, name, will.receive:you ith
love and kindness, and will leave you, 'your wives and
children, free and exempt from servitude, and in the
enjoyment of all you possess, in the fame manner as the
inhabitants of the islands. Besides this, his majesty will
-bestow' upon you many: privileges, exemptions,' and re-
wards. But if you will tmot comply, or maliciously de-
lay to obey my injuncion, then; with'the'help of.God, I
will enter your country by force, I will carry on war
againit you with the utiroft violence I will subjet you
to the-yoke of obedience to the church and the:king I
will take your wives and children;, -and .will make' th'em
slaves, and fell or dispose of them according to his majef-
ty's pleasure; I will seize your goods, and do you all the
michief--in'nmy power,- as rebellious subj'e&s, who will
not acknowledge or submit to their lawful sovereign.

And

And I protest, that all the bloodihed and calamities
which ihall follow are to be imputed to you, and not to
his majesty, or to me, or the gentlemen who erve
.under me; and as I have now made this declaration and
requisition unto you, I require the notary here present
to grant me a certificate of this, subscribed in proper
form." Herrera, dec. i. lib. vii. c. 14.

N O T E XXIV. p. 205.

BALBOA, in his letter to the king, observes, that of
the hundred and ninety men whom he took with him,
there were never above eighty fit for service at one time.
So much did they susser from hunger, fatigue, and
sickness. Herrera, dec. . lib. x. c. 6. P. Mart.
decad. p. 226.

NOTE XXV. p. 217.

FONSECA, bishop of Palencia, the principal direc-
tor of American affairs, had eight hundred Indians in
property; the commendator Lope de Conchillos, his
chief associate in that department, eleven hundred and
other favourites had different numbers. They lent
overseers to the islands, and hired out those slaves to the
planters. Herr. dec. i. lib. ix. c. 14. p. 325.

N O T E XXVI. p. 239.

T HOUGH America is more plentifully supplied with
water than the other regions of the globe, there is no
river or stream of water in Yucatan. This peninsula
projeas from the continent a hundred leagues, but
where broadest, does does not extend above twenty-five
leagues. It is a flat plain, without mountains. The in-
habitants are supplied with water from pits, and wherever
they dig them, find it in abundance. It is probable,
from all those circumstances, that this country was for-
merly covered by the ea. Herrere Defcriptio Indiae
Occidentalis, p. 14. Hiftoire Naturelle, par M. de
Buffon, tom. i. p. 593.

END OF TEFFIRST VOLUME.

, ' -' '' -.

.

- . .V
~'3 U';~~~~~./
