THE

HISTORT OF THE REIGN

OF THE

EMPEROR CHARLES V.

VOL. III.

ER~ONTIBPIE CE,

Thkm-

/i

r isi

THE

HISTORY OF THE REIGN

OF THE

EMPEROR CHARLES V,

By WILLIAM ROBERTSON, D.D.

RIENCIPAL OP THE UNIVERSITY OF EDINBURGH5

RISTORIOGRAPHER TO HIS MAJESTY

FOR SCOTLAND,

4ND MEMBER OF THE ROYAL ACAEEMY OF

HISTORY AT MADRID.

'THE NINTH £DITION.

IN FOUR VOLUMES.

VOL. III.

LONDON:

PPINTED FOR T. CATELL JUN. AND W. DAVIES

(SUCuESSORS TO MR. CADELL) IN THE STRAND3

AND E. BALFOURI EDISNUltGH.

1798.

# BOOK V.

THE

HIlS TORY OF THE RIGN

OF THE

EMPEROR CHARLES V.

BOOK V.

T HE account of the cruel manner in which
r the pope had been treated, filled all Europe
with astonishment or horror. To fee a Christian
emperor, who, by poffeffing that dignity, ought
to have been the protedor and advocate of the
holy fee, lay violent hands on him who repre-
fented Christ on earth, and detain his sacred
person in a rigorous captivity, was considered as
an impiety that merited the severest vengeance,
and which called for the immediate interposition
of every dutiful son of the church. Francis and
Henry, alarmed at the progress of the Imperial
arms in Italy, had, even before the taking of
Rome, entered into a closer alliance; and, in
order to give some check to the emperor's am*
bition, had agreed to make a vigorous diversion
in the Low Countries. The force of every mo-
tive which had influenced them at that time was
now increased; and to these were added the de-
fire of rescuing the pope out of the emperor's
hands, a measure no less politic than it appeared

VOL. III. B to

to be pious. This, however, rendered it necef-
fary to abandon their hostile intentions againit
the Low Countries, and to make Italy the feat
of war, as it was by vigorous operations there
they might contribute most effeaually towards
delivering Rome, and setting Clement at liberty.
Francis being now sensible that, in his system
with regard to the affairs of Italy, the spirit of
refinement had carried him too far; and that,
by an excess of remiflhefs, he had allowed Charles
to attain advantages which he might easily have
prevented; was eager to make reparation for an
error, of which he was not often guilty, by an
ativity more suitable to his temper. Henry
thought his interpolition necessary, in order to
hinder the emperor from becoming maiter of all
Italy, and acquiring by that means such fuperi-
ority of power, as would enable him for the fu-
ture to diriate without controul to the other
princes of Europe. Wolsey, whom Francis had
taken care to secure by flattery and presents,
the certain methods of gaining his favour, ne-
gleaed nothing that could incense his mailer
againil the emperor. Besides all these public
considerations, Henry was influenced by one of
a more private nature; having begun about this
time to form his great scheme of divorcing Ca-
therine of Aragon, towaids the execution of
which he knew that the fantion of papal autho-
rity would be necessary, he was desirous to ac-
quire as much merit as poflible with Clement,
by appearing to be the chief instrument of his
deliverance.

The negotiation, between princes thus dii-

posed, was not tedious. W1Volfey himfeif con-

duaed

duaed it, on the part of his sovereign, with un-
bounded powers, Francis treated with him in
person at Amiens [July ri], where the cardinal
appeared, and was received with royal magnifi-
cence. A marriage between the duke of Orleans
and the princess Mary was agreed to as the basis
of the confederacy; it was resolved that Italy
should be the theatre of war; the strength of
the army which should take the field, as well
as the contingent of troops or of money, which
each prince should fnrnifh, were fettled; and if
the emperor did not accept of the proposals
which they were jointly to make him, they
bound themselves immediately to declare war,
and to begin hoflilities [Aug. s8]. Henry,
who took every resolution with impetuosity, en-
tered so eagerly into this new alliance, that, in
order to give Francis the firongeft proof of his
friendihip and refpeft, he formally renounced
the ancient claim of the Engliih monarchs to the
crown of France, which had long been the pride
and ruin of the nation; as a full compensation
for which he accepted a pension of fifty thousand
crowns, to be paid annually to himself and his
successors a

The pope, being unable to fulfil the conditions

of his capitulation, still remained a prisoner under
the severe custody of Alarcon. The Florentines
no sooner heard of what had happened at Rome,
than they ran to arms in a tumultuous manner;
expelled the cardinal di Cortona, who governed
their city in the pope's name; defaced the arms
of the Medici; broke in pieces the statues of

a Herbert, 83, &c. Rym. Fed. xiv. zo3,

la2 Leo

Leo and Clement; and declaring themselves a
free fiate, re-efablifhed their ancient popular
government. The Venetians, taking advantage
of the calamity of their ally the pope, seized
Ravenna, and other places belonging to the
church, under pretext of keeping them in de-
pofite. The dukes of Urbino and Ferrara laid
hold likewise on part of the spoils of the unfor-
tunate pontiff, whom they considered as irretriev-
ably ruined b

Lannoy, on the other hand, laboured to de-

rive some solid benefit from that unforeseen
event, which gave such splendour and superiority
to his mafter's arms. For this purpose ·he
marched to Rome, together with Moncada,
and the marquis del Guafto, at the head of all
the troops which they could assemble in the
kingdom of Naples. The arrival of this rein-
forcement brought new calamities on the unhappy
citizens of Rome; for the soldiers envying the
wealth of their companions, imitated their licence,
and with the utmost rapacity gathered the glean-
ings, which had escaped the avarice of the Spa-
niards and Germans. There was not now any
army in Italy capable of making head again1t the
Imperialids; and nothing more was requisite to
reduce Bologna, and the other towns in the ec-
clefiaftical slate, than to have appeared before
them. But the soldiers having been so long ac-
cuftomed, under Bourbon, to an entire relax-
ation of discipline, and having tailed the sweets
of living at discretion in a great city, almof
without the controul of a superior, we e become

b Guk,. 1. xvill. 453*

averse to service, that they refused to leave
Rome, unless all their arrears were paid; a con-
dition which they knew to be impossible. At
the fame time, they declared, that they would
not obey any other person than the prince of
Orange, whom the army had chosen general.
Lannoy, finding that it was no longer safe for
him to remain among licentious troops, who
despised his dignity, and hated his person, re-
turned to Naples; soon after the marquis del
Guafto and Moncada thought it prudent to
quit Rome for the fame reason. The prince of
Orange, a general only in name, and by the
most precarious of all tenures, the good-will of
soldiers, whom success and licence had rendered
capricious, was obliged to pay more attention to
their humours, than they did to his commands.
Thus the emperor, instead of reaping any of the
advantages which he might have expeaed from
the reduaion of Rome, had the mortification
to fee the most formidable body of troops that
he had ever brought into the field, continue in
a fiate of inadivity, from which it was impof-
fible to rouse them c.

This gave the king of France and the Vene-

tians leisure to form new schemes, and to enter
into new engagements for delivering the pope,
and preserving the liberties of Italy. The newly-
restored republic of Florence very imprudently
joined with them, and Lautrec, of whose abili-
ties the Italians entertained a much more favour,
able opinion than his own maiter, was, in order

c Guic, 1. xviii. 454.

gto

to gratify them, appointed generaliflimo of the
league. It was with the utmost reluaance he
undertook that office, being unwilling to expose
himself a second time to the difficulties and dif-
graces, which the negligence of the king, or the
malice of his favourites, might bring upon him.
The best troops in France marched under his
command; and the king of England, though he
had not yet declared war again{t the emperor,
advanced a considerable fum towards carrying on
the expedition. Lautrec's firit operations were
prudent, vigorous, and fuccefsful. By the as-
fiftance of Andrew Doria, the ablest fea-officer
of that age, he rendered himself maiter of Genoa,
and re-efiablifhed in that republic the fadion of
the Fregofi, together with the dominion of
France. He obliged Alexandria to surrender
after a short siege, and reduced all the country
on that dide of the Tefirio. He took Pavia,
which had so long resifted the arms of his fove-
reign, by assault, and plundered it with that
cruelty, which the memory of the fatal disaster
that had befallen the French nation before its
walls naturally inspired. All the Milanese,
which Antonio de Leyva defended with a
small body of troops, kept together, and, sup-
ported by his own address and induifry, muff
have soon submitted to his power, if he had con-
tinued to bend the force of his arms against that
country. But Lautre durit not complete a
conqueRt which would have been so honourable
to himself, and of such advantage to the league.
Francis knew his confederates to be more de-
firous of circumscribing the Imperial power in
Italy, than of acquiring new territories for him ;

and

efablifhed in Milan, they would second but coldly
the attack which he intended to make on the
kingdom of Naples. For this reason he in-
flruoied Lautrec not to push his operations with
too much vigour inLombardy; and happily the
importunities of the pope, and the folicitations of
the Florentines, the one for relief, and the other
for proteaion, were so urgent as to furnish him
with a decent pretext for marching forward,
without yielding to the intreaties of the Vene-
tians and Sforza, who infifed on hislaying siege
to Milan d

While Lautrec advanced slowly towards Rome,
the emperor had time to deliberate concerning the
disposal of the pope's person, who frill remained
a prisoner in the cafile of St. Angelo. Notwith-
ifanding the specious veil of religion, with which
he usually endeavoured to cover his aaions,
Charles, in many infrances, appears to have
been but little under the influence of religious
considerations, and had frequently, on this oc-
cafion, expressed an inclination to transport the
pope ihto Spain, that he might indulge his
ambition with the fpedacle of the two most il-
luftrious personages in Europe successively pri-
foners in his court. But the fear of giving new
offence to all Chrifrendom, and of filling his own
fubjeds with horror, obliged him to forego
that fatisfadion*. The progress of the confede-
rates made it now necessary, either to set the
pope at liberty, or to remove him to some place

I Guk.1. xvii. 461, Bellay, 1o7, &c. Mauroc.Hil1.

Venet, lib.iii. 238. e Guic. i. xviii. 4;7*

of confinement more secure than the ca'dle of
St. Angelo. Many considerations induced him
to prefer the former, particularly his want of
the money, requifste as well for recruiting his
army, as for paying off the vast arrears due to it.
In order to obtain this, he had assembled the
Cortes of Calile at Valladolid about the begin-
ning of the year, and having laid before them
the itate of his affairs, and represented the ne-
ceflity of making great preparations to resist the
enemies, whom envy at the success which had
crowned his arms would unite againit him, he
demanded a large supply in the most pressing
terms LFeb. I1] ; but the Cortes, as the nation
was already exhauffed by extraordinary donatives,
refused to load it with any new burden, and in
spite of all his endeavours to gain or to intimidate
the members, persisted in this resolution f. No
resource, therefore, remained, but the extorting
from Clement, by way of ransom, a fum fufficient
for discharging what was due to his troops,
without which it was vain to mention to them
their leaving Rome.

Nor was the pope inadive on his part, or his

intrigues unfuccefsful towards hastening such a
treaty. By flattery, and the appearance of un-
bounded confidence, he disarmed the resentment
of cardinal Colonna, and wrought upon his
vanity, which made him desirous of Ihewing the
world, that as his power had at firfit depressed the
pope, it could now raise him to his former dig-
msty. By favours and promises he gained Mo-
rone, who, by one of those whimsical revolutions

f Sandov. i. p. 84.

which

itrongly display his charaAer, had now recovered
his credit and authority with the Imperialists.
The address and influence of two such men easily
removed all the obitacles which retarded an ac-
commodation, and brought the treaty for Cle-
ment's liberty to a conclusion, upon conditions
hard indeed, but not more severe than a prince
in his situation had reason to expea. He was
obliged to advance, in ready money, an hundred
thousand crowns for the use of the army; to pay
the fame fum at the distance of a fortnight; and
at the end of three months, an hundred and
fifty thousand more. He engaged not to take
part in the war againit Charles, either in Lom-
bardy or in Naples; he granted him a bull of
cruzado, and the tenth of ecclefiailical revenues
in Spain; and he not only gave hostages, but
put the emperor in poffeffion of several towns, as
a security for the performance of these articles E.
Having raised the firnt moiety by a sale of ecclefi-
adfical dignities and benefices, and other expe-
dients equally uncanonical, a day was fixed for
delivering him from imprisonment [Dec. 6].
But Clement, impatient to be free, after a
tedious confinement of fix months, as well as
full of the suspicion and difdruft natural to the
unfortunate, was so much afraid that the Impe-
rialidts might dtill throw in obitacles to put off
his deliverance, that he disguised himself, on the
night preceding the day when he was to be set
free, in the habit of a merchant, and Alarcon
having remitted romewhat of his vigilance upon

g Gukc. i. xvii. 467, &c.

the

the conclusion of the treaty, he made his escape
undiscovered. He arrived before next morning
at Orvietto, without any attendants but a single
officer; and from thence wrote a letter of thanks
to Lautrec, as the chiefinfirument of procuring
him liberty i.

During these tranfaaions, the ambassadors of

France and England repaired to Spain, in con-
sequence of the treaty which Wolsey had con-
cluded with the French king. The emperor,
unwilling to draw on himself the united forces of
the two monarchs, discovered an inclination to
relax somewhat the rigour of the treaty of
Madrid, to which, hitherto, he had adhered
inflexibly. He offered to accept of the two
millions of crowns, which Francis had proposed
to pay as an equivalent for the dutchy of Bur-
gundy, and to set his sons at liberty, on condi-
tion that he would recall his army out of Italy,
and restore Genoa, together with the other con-
quests which he had made in that country. With
regard to Sforza, he insisted that his fate lhould
be determined by the judges appointed to inquire
into his crimes. These propositions being made
to Henry, he transmitted them to his ally the
French king, whom it more nearly concerned to
examine and to answer them; and if Francis had
been sincerely solicitous, either to conclude peace
or preserve consistency in his own condudt, he
ought instantly to have closed with overtures
which differed but little from the propositions
which he himself had formerly made . But

h Guic. i. xviii. 467, &c. Jov. Vit. Colon. 269. Hauroc.

Hizt. Venet. lib. iii. 252.

i Recueil des Treitiz, ii. z49.

his

with Henry, Lautrec's progress in Italy, and
the superiority of his army there above that of
the emperor, hardly left him room to doubt of
the success of his enterprise againil Naples. Full
of those sanguine hopes, he was at no loss to find
pretexts for rejeding or evading what the empe-
ror had proposed. Under the appearance of
sympathy with Sforza, for whose intereits he
had not hitherto discovered much solicitude, he
again demanded the full and unconditional re-
eitablifhment of that unfortunate prince in his
dominions. Under colour of its being imprudent
to rely on the emperor's sincerity, he iniified
that his sons should be set at liberty before the
French troops left Italy, or surrendered Genoa.
The unreasonableness of these demands, as well
as the reproachful insinuation with which they
were accompanied, irritated Charles to such a
degree, that he could hardly listen to them with
patience; and repenting of his moderation, which
had made so little impression on his enemies, de-
clared that he would not depart in the smallest
article from the conditions which he had now
offered. Upon this the French and English
ambassadors (for Henry had been drawn unac-
countably to concur with Francis in these firange
propositions) demanded and obtained their au-
dience of leave k

Next day[Jan. 22, 7 28. ],two heralds,whohad

accompanied the ambaflidors on purpose, though
they had hitherto concealed their charater, hav-

k Rym. xiv. zoo. Herbert, 85. Guic. i. xviii. 471.

ing

ing affiumed the ensigns of their office, appeared
in the emperor's court, and being admitted into
his presence, they, in the name of their refpeaive
masters, and with all the solemnity customary on
such occasions, denounced war against him.
Charles received both with a dignity suitable to
his own rank, but spoke to each in a tone adapted
to the sentiments which he entertained of their
sovereigns. He accepted the defiance of the
English monarch with a firmness tempered by
some degree of decency and refpea. His reply
to the French king abounded with that acrimony
of expression, which personal rivalfhip, exafpe-
rated by the memory of many injuries inflided
as well as fuffered, natuially fuggets. He de-
iired the French herald to acquaint his sovereign,
that he would henceforth confider him not only
as a base violator of public faith, but as a liranger
to the honour and integrity becoming a gentle-
man. Francis, too high-fpirited to bear such an
imputation, had recourse to an uncommon ex-
pedient in order to vindicate his charader.
He instantly sent back the herald with a cartel
of defiance, in which he gave the emperor the
lie in form, challenged him to single combat,
requiring him to name the time and place of the
encounter, and the weapons with which he chose
to fight. Charles, as he was not inferior to his
rival in spirit or bravery, readily accepted the
challenge; but, after feveralmeffages concerning
the arrangement of all the circumitances relative
to the combat, accompanied with mutual re-
proaches, bordering on the most indecent fcur-
rility, all thoughts of this duel, more becom-
ing the herocs of romance than the two

greatest

greatest monarchs of their age, were entirely laid
afide' .

The example of two personage so illufdrious

drew Luch general attention, and carried with it
so much authority, that it had confsderable in-
fluence in producing an important change in
manners all over Europe. Duels, as has already
been observed, had long been permitted by the
laws of all the European nations, ard forming
a part of their jusifprudence, were authorised by
the magiffrate, _on many occasions, as the most
proper method of terminating questions with re-
gard to property, or of deciding those which
refpeaed crimes. But single combats being con-
fidered as solemn appeals to the omniscience and
justice of the Supreme Being, they Were allowed
only in public causes, according to the prefcrip-
tion of law, and carried on in a judicial form.
Men accuitomed to this manner of decisions in
courts of justice, were naturally led to apply it
to personal and private quarrels. Duels, which
at firdt could be appointed by the civil judge
alone, were fought without the interposition of
his authority, and in cafes to which the laws did
not extend. The tranfaaion between Charles
and Francis firongly countenanced this pradice.
Upon every affront, or injury, which seemed to
touch his honour, a gentleman thought himself
entitled to draw his sword, and to call on his
adversary to give him fatisfation. Such an
opinion becoming prevalent among men of fierce
courage, of high spirit, and of rude manners,

I Recueil des Traitiz, a. Mem. de Bellay, 1o3, &c.

Sandov. Hilt.i. 837.

VOL. III. c when

always prompt, produced mofd fatal consequences.
Much of the bedt blood in Chrifdendom was shed;
many useful lives were sacrificed; and, at some
periods, war itself hath hardly been more deftruc-
tive than these private conteds of honour. So
powerful, however, is the dominion of fashion,.
that neither the terror of penal laws, nor reve-
rence for religion, have been able entirely to
abolish a pradlce unknown among the ancients,
and not jufdifiable by any principle of reason;
though at the fame time it muf be admitted,
that to this absurd cudtom, we mud ascribe in
some degree the extraordinary gentleness and
complaisance of modern manners, and that re-
fpeaful attention of one man to another, which,
at present, render the social intercourfes of life
far more agreeable and decent, than among the
modt civilized nations of antiquity.

While the two monarchs seemed so eager to

terminate their quarrel by a personal combat,
Lautrec continued his operations, which pro-
mifed to be more decisive. His army, which
was now increased to thirty-five thouland men,
advanced bygreat marches towards Naples [Feb.].
The terror of their approach, as well as the re-
mondirances and the entreaties of the prince of
Orange, prevailed at ladt on the Imperial troops,
though with difficulty, to quit Rome, of which
they had kept poffeflion during ten months.
But of that flouriihing army which had entered
the city, scarcely one half remained; the redt,
cut off by the plague, or wadled by diseases, the
effefis of their inacivity, intemperance, and de-

bauchery,

Lautrec made the greatest efforts to attack them
in their retreat towards the Neapolitan territories,
which would have finilhed the war at one blow.
But the prudence of their leaders disappointed
all his measures, and condufted them with little
loss to Naples. The people of that kingdom,
extremely impatient to lhake off the Spanish
yoke, received the French with open arms,
wherever they appeared to take poffeffion; and
Gaeta and Naples excepted, hardly any place of
importance remained in the hands of the Im-
perialifts. The preservation of the former was
owing to the flrength of its fortifications, that
of the latter to the presence of the Imperial
army. Lautrec, however, fat down before Na-
ples; but finding it vain to think of reducing a
city by force while defended by a whole army,
he was obliged to employ the ilower, but less
dangerous method of blockade; and having
taken measures which appeared to him effeflual,
he confidently affiured his mailer, that famine
would soon compel the besieged to capitulate.
Thele hopes were firongly confirmed by the de-
feat of a vigorous attempt made by the enemy
in order to recover the command of the sea.
The gallies of Andrew Doria, under the com-
mand of his nephew Philippino, guarded the
mouth of the harbour. Moncada, who had
fucceded Lannoy in the viceroyalty, rigged out
a number of gallies fiuperior to Doria's, manned
them with a chosen body of Spanilh veterans, and
going on board himself, together with the mar-

In Guic. i. xvili. 478*

Ca quis

quis del Guaflo, attacked Philippino before the
arrival of the Venetian and French fleets. But
the Genoese admiral, by his superior skill in naval
operations, easily triumphed over the valour and
number of the Spaniards. The viceroy was
killed, most of his fleet deflroyed, and Guaflo,
with many officers of difiinacion, being taken
prisoners, were put on board the captive gallies,
and sent by Philippino as trophies of his viaory
to his uncle ".

Notwithifanding this flattering profpe& of

success, many circumstances concurred to fruf-
trate Lautrec's expeaations. Clement, though
he always acknowledged his being indebted to
Francis for the recovery of his liberty, and often
complained of the cruel treatment which he had
met with from the emperor, was not influenced
at this junaure by principles of gratitude, nor,
which is more extraordinary, was he swayed by the
desire of revenge. His past misfortunes rendered
him more cautious than ever, and his recolleaion
of the errors which he had committed, increased
the natural irresolution of his mind. While he
amused Francis with promises, he secretly nego-
tiated with Charles; and being solicitous, above
all things, to re-establish his family in Florence
with its ancient authority, which he could not
expeat from Francis, who had entered into firit
alliance with the new republic, he leaned rather
to the fide of his enemy than to that of his bene-
faaor, and gave Lautrec no afliftance towards
carrying on his operations. The Venetians,
viewing with jealousy the progress of the French

a' Guic. 1. xix. 487. P. Heuter. lib. x. c. z. p. 2.3T

arms,

arms, were intent only upon recovering such
maritime towns in the Neapolitan dominions as
were to be poffeffed by their republic, while they
were altogether careless about the reduaion of
Naples, on which the success of the common
cause depended'. The king of England, infiead
of being able, as had been projeaed, to embar-
rafs the emperor by attacking his territories in
the Low Countries, found his fubjeas so averse
to an unnecessary war, which would have ruined
the trade of the nation, that in order to silence
their clamours and put a stop to the infurredions
ready to break out among them, he was com-
pelled to conclude a truce for eight months with
the governess of the Netherlands P. Francis
himself, with the fame unpardonable inattention
of which he had formerly been guilty, and for
which he had fuffered so severely, negleaed to
make proper remittances to Lautrec for the sup-
port of his army q.

These unexpeaed events retarded the progress

of the French, discouraging both the general
and his troops ; but the revolt of Andrew Doria
proved a fatal blow to all their measures. That
gallant officer, the citizen of a republic, and
trained up from his infancy in the sea service,
retained the spirit of independence natural to
the former, together with the plain liberal man-
ners peculiar to the latter. A firanger to the
arts of submission or flattery necessary in courts,
but conscious at the fame time of his own merit
and importance, he always offered his advice

0 Guc. ?. xix. 495. P Herbert, 90. Rymer, 14.158*
9 GulcI. xvili. 47S.

c 3 with

with freedom, and often preferred his complaints
and remenitrances with holdnefs. The French
ministers, unaccuitomed to such liberties, deter-
mined to ruin a man who treated them with so
little deference ; and though Francis himself had
a just sense of Doria's services, as well as an high
esteem for his charaaer, the courtiers, by continu-
ally representing him as a man haughty, intrat-
able, and more solicitous to aggrandize himself,
than to promote the interest of France, gradually
undermined the foundations of his credit, and
filled the king's mind with suspicion and diftruit.
From thence proceeded several affronts and in-
dignities put upon Doria. His appointments
were not regularly paid; his advice, even in naval
affairs, was often slighted; an attempt was made
to seize the prisoners taken by his nephew in
the fea-fight off Naples; all which he bore with
abundance ofill.humour. But an injury offered
to his country transported him beyond all bounds
of patience. The French began to fortify Sa-
vona, to clear its harbour, and removing thither
some branches of trade carried on at Genoa,
plainly fihewed that they intended to render that
town, which had been long the objed of jealousy
and hatred to the Genoese, their rival in wealth
and commerce. Doria, animated with a patri-
otic zeal for the honour and interest of his
country, remoifirated against this in the high-
et tone, not without threats, if the measure were
not instantly abandoned. This bold adion, ag-
gravated by the malice of the courtiers, and
placed in the most odious light, irritated Francis
to such a degree, that he commanded Barbelieun,
whom he appointed admiral of the Levant, to

fail

fail direaly to Genoa with the French fleet,
to arrest Doria, and to seize his gallies. This
rash order, the execution of which could have
been secured only by the most profound secrecy,
was concealed with so little care, that Doria
got timely intelligence of it, and retired with
all his gallies to a place of safety. Guafto, his
prisoner, who had long observed and fomented
his growing discontent, and had often allured
him by magnificent promises to enter into the
emperor's service, laid hold on this favourable
opportunity. While his indignation and resent-
ment were at their height, he prevailed on him
to dispatch one of his officers to the Imperial
court with his overtures and demands. The
negotiation was not long; Charles, fully fen-
lible of the importance of such an acquisition,
granted him whatever terms he required. Do-
ria sent back his commission, together with the
collar of St. Michael, to Francis, and hoising
the Imperial colours, failed with all his gallies
towards Naples, not to block up the harbour of
that uuhappy city, as he had formerly engaged,
but to bring them proteerion and deliverance.

His arrival opened the communication with

the sea, and restored plenty in Naples, which
was now reduced to the last extremity ; and the
French having loft their superiority at sea, were
soon reduced to great firaits for want of provi-
lions. 'The prince of Orange, who succeeded
the viceroy in the command of the Imperial
army, fhewed himself by his prudent conduat
worthy of that honour which his good fortune
and the death of his generals had twice acquired
him, Beloved by the troops, who remembering the

the prosperity which they had enjoyed under his
command, served him with the utmost alacrity,
he let flip no opportunity of harassing the enemy,
and by continual alarms or sallies fatigued and
weakened them r. As an addition to all these
misfortunes, the diseases common in that country
during the sultry months, began to break out
among the French troops. The prisoners com-
municated to them the pestilence which the Im-
perial army had brought to Naples from Rome,
and it raged with such violence, that few, either
officers or soldiers, escaped the infeaion. Of
the whole army, not four thousand men, a num-
ber hardly fuflicient to defend the camp, were
capable of doing duty'; and being now be-
fieged in their turn, they fuffered all the miseries
from which the Imperialists were delivered.
Lautrec, after fitruggling long with so many
difapppointments and calamities, which preyed
on his mind at the fame time that the pestilence
waited his body, died [August x1], lamenting
the negligence of his sovereign, and the infidelity
of his allies, to which so many brave men had
fallen viaims [. By his death, and the indifpo-
fition of the other generals, the command devolv-
ed on the marquis de Saluces, an officer altogether
unequal to such a truit. He, with troops no
less dispirited than reduced, retreated in disorder
to Averfa; which town being invefited by the
prince of Orange, Saluces was under the necef-
fity of consenting, that he himself ihould remain

r Jovii Hist. lib. xxxvi. p. 3r, &c. Sigonil Vita Doriae,

p. zz39. Bellay, 114, &c. S Bellay, s 7, &c.

S P. Heuter. Rernm Auftr. lib. x. c. 2. z3'.

a pri-

a prlfoner of war, that his troops mhould lay
down their arms and colours, give up their bag-
gage, and march under a guard to the frontiers
of France. By this ignominious capitulation,
the wretched remains of the French army were
saved; and the emperor, by his own perfever-
ance and the good condunt of his generals, ac-
quired once more the superiority in Italy U.

The loss of Genoa followed immediately upon

the ruin of the army in Naples. To deliver his
country from the dominion of foreigners was
Doria's higheRi ambition, and had been his prin-
cipal inducement to quit the service of France,
and enter into that of the emperor. A most fa-
vourable opportunity for executing this honour-
able enterprise now presented itself. The city
of Genoa, afflided by the pestilence, was almost
deserted by its inhabitants; the French garrison,
being neither regularly paid nor recruited, was
reduced to an inconsiderable number; Doria's
emissaries found that such of the citizens as re-
mained, being weary alike of the French and Im-
perial yoke, the rigour of which they had al-
ternately felt, were ready to welcome him as
their deliverer, and to second all his measures.
Things wearing this promising afped, he failed
towards the coast of Genoa; on his approach
the French gallies retired; a small body of men
which he landed surprised one of the gates of
Genoa in the night-time; Trivulci, the French
governor, with his feeble garrison, shut himself
up in the citadel, and Doria took poffefflion of
the town without bloodshed or resistance [Sep-

U Bellay, ''7, &c. Jovil Hist. lib, xxv, xxvi.

tember

tember Iz]. Want of provisions qnickly obliged
Trivulci to capitulate ; the people, eager to
aboliih such an odious monument of their fervi-
tude, ran together with a tumultuous violence,
and levelled the citadel with the ground.

It was now in Doria's power to have rendered

himself the sovereign of his country, which he
had so happily delivered from oppression. The
fame of his former adions, the success of his
present attempt, the attachment of his friends,
the gratitude of his countrymen, together with
the support of the emperor, all conspired to fa-
cilitate his attaining the supreme authority, and
invited him to lay hold of it. But with a mag-
nanimity of which there are few examples, he
sacrificed all thoughts of aggrandizing himself
to the virtuous fatisfadion of eftablifhiug liberty
in his country, the higheRt objea at which am-
bition can aim. Having assembled the whole
body of the people in the court before his pa-
lace, he assured them, that the happiness of fee.
ing them once more in poffeffion of freedom was
to him a full reward for all his services; that,
more delighted with the name of citizen than of
sovereign, he claimed no pre-eminence or power
above his equals; but remitted entirely to them
the right of fettling what form of government
they would now chufe to be efitablilhed among
them. The people listened to him with tears of
admiration and of joy. Twelve persons were
eleded to new-model the conititution of the re-
public. The influence of Doria's virtue and ex-
ample communicated itself to his countrymen;
the fadtions which had long torn and ruined the
alate seemed to be forgotten; prudent precau- tions

the form of government which has subsisted with
little variation since that time in Genoa was efta.
blifhed with universal applause. Doria lived to
a great age, beloved, refpeaed, and honoured
by his countrymen; and adhering uniformly to
his profefIions of moderation, without arrogating
any thing unbecoming a private citizen, he pre-
served a great ascendant over the councils of the
republic, which owed its being to his generosity.
The authority which he poffeffed was more flat-
tering, as well as more fatisfaAory, than that de-
rived from sovereignty; a dominion founded in
love and in gratitude; and upheld by veneration
for his virtues, not by the dread of his power.
His memory is frill reverenced by the Genoese,
and he is ditlinguifhed in their public monuments,
and celebrated in the works of their historians,
by the most honourable of all appellations, THE
FATHER OF HIS COUNTRY, AND
THE RESTORER OF ITS LIBERTY'.

1529.] Francis, in order to recover the repu-

tation of his arms, discredited by so many losses,
made new efforts in the Milanese. But the count
of St. Pol, a rash and unexperienced officer, to
whom he gave the command, was no match for
Antonio de Leyva, the ablest of the Imperial
generals. He, by his ffuperior skill in war,
checked, with a handful of men, the brisk, but ill-
concerted motions of the French; and though
so infirm himself that he was carried conafantly
in a litter, he surpassed them, when occasion re-

x Guic. L..xix. p. 498. Sigonii Vita Doria, p. 1z46.

Joviiliit. lib. xsri. p. 36, &r.

I quired,

quired, no less in a&ivity than in prudence.
By an unexpefted march he surprised, defeated,
and took prisoner the count of St. Pol, ruining
the French army in the Milanese as entirely as
the prince of Orange had ruined that which be-
fieged Naples Y.

Amidst these vigorous operations in the field,

each party discovered an impatient desire of
peace, and continual negotiations were carried
on for that purpose. The French king, difcou-
raged, and almost exhausted, by so many unfuc-
cefsful enterprises, was reduced now to think of
obtaining the release of his sons by concessions,
not by the terror of his arms. The pope hoped
to recover by a treaty whatever he had loft in the
war. The emperor, notwith{anding the advan-
tages which he had gained, had many reasons
to make him wish for an accommodation. Soly-
man, having over-run Hungary, was ready to
break in upon the Aufirian territories with the
whole force of the East. The reformation gain-
ing ground daily in Germany, the princes who
favoured it had entered into a confederacy which
Charles thought dangerous to the tranquillity
of the empire. The Spaniards murmured at a
war of fisch unusual length, the weight of which
refited chiefly on them. The variety and extent
of the emperor's operations far exceeded what his
revenues could support ; his success hitherto had
been owing chiefly to his own good fortune and
to the abilities of his generals, nor could he flatter
himself that they, with troops destitute of every

Y Guic. i. xix. 520. P. Heater. Rer. Auf1r. lib. x. c. 3.

p. 233. Mem. de Bellay, zzz.

thing

thing necessary, would always triumph over ene-
mies still in a condition to renew their attacks.
All parties, however, were at equal pains to con-
ceal or to dissemble their real sentiments. The
emperor, that his inability to carry on the war
might not be fufpeded, infifled oo high terms
in the tone of a conqueror. The pope, solicitous
not to lose his present allies before he came to
any agreement with Charles, continued to make
a thousand protefitations of fidelity to the former,
while he privately negotiated with the latter.
Francis, afraid that his confederates might pre-
vent him by treating for themselves with the em-
peror, had recourse to many difoonourable arti-
fices, in order to turn their attention from the
measures which he was taking to adjuof all dif-
ferences with his rival.

In this situation of affairs, when all the con-

tending powers withed for peace, but durst not
venture too hastily on the steps necessary for at-
taining it, two ladies undertook to procure this
blefling so much desired by all Europe [May].
These were Margaret ofAufdria, duchefs-dow-
ager of Savoy, the emperor's aunt, and Louise,
Francis's mother. They agreed on an inter-
view at Cambray, and being lodged in two ad-
joining houses, between which a communication
was opened, met together without ceremony or
observation, and held daily conferences, to which
no person whatever was admitted. As both
were profoundly skilled in bufincfs, thoroughly
acquainted with the secrets of their refpedive
courts, aud poffeffed with perfef confidence in
each other, they soon made great progress to-
wards a final accommodation; and the ambaffa-

vOL. mI. n dors

dors of all the confederates waited in anxious
suspense to know their fate, the determination
of which was entirely in the hands of those il-
lufirious negotiators Z.

But whatever diligence they used to hasten

forwards a general peace, the pope had the address
and induifry to get the flart of his allies, by con-
cluding at Barcelona a particular treaty for him-
self [June :o]. The emperor, impatient to visit
Italy in his way to Germany, and desirous of
re-establishing tranquillity in the one country,
before he attempted to compose the disorders
which abounded in the other, found it necessary
to secure at least one alliance among the Italian
states, on which he might depend. That with
Clement, who courted it with unwearied impor-
tunity, seemed more proper than any other.
Charles being extremely solicitous to make some
reparation for the insults which he had offered
to the sacred charaaer of the pope, and to re-
deem palt offences by new merit, granted Cle-
ment, notwithflanding all his misfortunes, terms
more favourable than he could have expeded
after a continued series of success. Among other
articles, he engaged to reflore all the territories
belonging to the ecclefiaflical ifate; to re-efla-
blifh the dominion of the Medici in Florence; to
give his natural daughter in marriage to Alexan-
der the-head of that family; and to put it in
the pbpe's power to decide concerning the fate
of Sforza, and the poffeffion of the Milanese.
In return for these ample concessions, Clement
gave the emperor the investiture of Naples with-

z P. Heuter. Rcr. Auftr. lib. x. c,3. 533. Mem. de

Bellay, p. zzz. out

of a white steed, in acknowledgment of his so-
vereignty; absolved all who had been concerned
in aflaulting and plundering Rome, and permitted
Charles and his brother Ferdinand to levy the
fourth of the ecclesiastical revenues throughout
their dominions a.

The account of this tranfaaion quickened the

negotiations at Cambray, and brought Margaret
and Louise to an immediate agreement [Aug. 51.
The treaty of Madrid served as the basis of that
which they concluded ; the latter being intended
to mitigate the rigour of the former. . The chief
articles were, That the emperor ihould not, for
the present, demand the reltitution of Burgundy,
reserving, however, in full force, his rights and
pretensions to that dutchy; That Francis ihould
pay two millions of crowns as the ransom of his
sons, and, before they were set at liberty, should
restore such towns as he fuill held in the Milanese;
That he should resign his pretensions to the fove-
reignty of Slanders and of Artois; That he
lhould renounce all his pretensions to Napies,
Milan, Genoa, and every other place beyond the
Alps; That he should immediately consummate
the marriage concluded between him and the
emperor's lifter Eleonora b.

Thus Francis, chiefly from his impatience to

procure liberty to his sons, sacrificed every thing
which had at firit prompted him to take arms,
or which had induced him, by continuing hof-
tilities during nine fucceflive campaigns, to pro-

a Guic. 1. xix. 522. 6 P. Heuter Rer. Aufir. jib. x.

c. 3. p. 234. Sandov. Hist. deli Emper. Car. V. ii. 28.

DZ tradft

tra& the war to a length hardly known in Eu.
rope before the eftablithment of flanding armies,
and the imposition of exorbitant taxes, became
universal. The emperor, by this treaty, was
rendered sole arbiter of the fate of Italy; he
delivered his territories in the Netherlands from
an unpleasant badge of fubjeaion; and after
having baffled his rival in the field, he preferibed
to him the conditions of peace. The. different
condua and spirit with which the two monarchs
carried on the operations of war, led naturally
to such an issue of it. Charles, inclined by tem-
per, as well as obliged by his situation, concertedf
all his schemes with caution, pursued them with
perseverance, and observing circumitances and
events with attention, let none efeape that could
be improved to advantage. Francis, more cn-
terpriling than Ready, undertook great designs
with warmth, but often executed them with re-
miffnefs; and diverted by his pleasures, or de-
ceived by his favourites, he loft on several occa-
fions the modt promising opportunities of success.
Nor had the charafter of the two rivals them-
selves greater influence on the operations of war,
than the opposite qualities of the generals whom
they employed. Among the Imperialifis, valour
tempered with prudence; fertility of invention
aided by experience; difeernment to penetrate
the designs of their enemies ; a provident saga-
city in conduaing their own measures; in a
word, all the talents, which form great com-
rnanders and ensure viaory, were conspicuous.
Among the French, these qualities were either
wanting, or the very reverse of them abounded;
nor could they boast of one man (unless we ex-

cept

cept Lautrec,.who was always unfortunate) that
equalled the merit of Pefeara, Leyva, Guafto,
the prince of Orange, and other leaders, whom
Charles had to set in opposition to them. Bour-
bon, Moronh, Doria, who by their abilities and
condud might have been capable of balancing
the superiority which the Imperialists had ac-
quired, were induced to abandon the service of
France, by the careleflhefs of the king, and the
malice or injustice of his counsellors; and the
most fatal blows given to France during the pro-
grefs of the war, proceeded from the despair and
resentment of these three persons.

The hard conditions to which Francis was

obliged to submit were not the most affliaing
circumstances to him in the treaty of Cambray.
He loft his reputation and the confidence of all
Europe, by abandoning his allies to his rival.
Unwilling to enter into the details necessary for
adjusting their interests, or afraid that whatever
he claimed for them must have been purchased
by farther concessions on his own part, he gave
them up in a body; and without the least pro-
vision in their behalf, left the Venetians, the
Florentines, the duke of Ferrara, together with
such of the Neapolitan barons as had joined his
army, to the mercy of the emperor. They ex-
claimed loudly against this base and perfidious
aaion, of which Francis himself was so much
ashamed, that, in order to avoid the pain of hear-
ing from their ambassadors the reproaches which
he jufily merited, it was some time before he
would consent to allow them an audience.
Charles, on the other hand, was attentive to the
interest of every person who had adhered to him;

> 3 the

had estates or pretensions in France, wire secured;
one article was inserted, obliging Francis to re-
ifore the blood and memory of the conitable
Bourbon; and to grant his heirs the poffeffion of
his lands which had been forfeited; another, by
which indemnification was stipulated for those
French gentlemen who had accompanied Bour-
bon in his exile c. This condua, laudable in it-
seif, and placed in the most fitriking light by a
comparison with that of Francis, gained Charles
as much esteem as the success of his arms had
acquired him glory.

Francis did not treat the king of England with

the fame neglea as his other allies. He com-
municated to him all the fieps of his negotiation
at Cambray, and luckily found that monarch in
a situation which left him no choice, but to ap-
prove implicitly of his measures, and to concur
with them. Henry had been soliciting the pope
for some time, in order to obtain a divorce from
Catharine of Aragon his queen. Several motives
combined in prompting the king to urge his
suit. As he was powerfully influenced at some
seasons by religious considerations, he entertained
many feruples concerning the legitimacy of his
marriage with his brother's widow; his affe&ions
had long been efdranged from the queen, who
was older than himself, and had loft all the
charms which she poffeffed at the earlier part
of her life; he was passionately desirous of having
male issue: Wolsey artfully fortified his feruples,

c Guic.1. xis. p. 535. P. Heuter. Rer. Auth. lib. x.

~ 4, p ~ nd

the breach between him and the emperor, Ca-
tharine's nephew, and, what was more forcible
perhaps in its operation than all these united, the
king had conceived a violent love for the cele-
brated Ann Boleyn, a young lady of great
beauty, and of greater accomplishments, whom,
as he found it impossible to gain her on other
terms, he determined to raise to the throne.
The papal authority had often been interposed
to grant divorces for reasons less specious than
those which Henry produced. When the matter
was fird proposed to Clement, during his im-
prifonment in the caftie of St. Angelo, as his
hopes of recovering liberty depended entirely
on the king of England, and his ally of France,
he expressed the warmeit inclination to gratify
him. But no sooner was he set free, than he
discovered other sentiments. Charles, who es
poufed the proteaion of his aunt with zeal in-
flamed by resentment, alarmed the pope on the
one hand with threats, which made a deep im-
preflion on his timid mind; and allured him on
the other with those promises in favour of his
family, which he afterwards accomplished. Upon
the profpea of these, Clement not only forgot
all his obligations to Henry, but ventured to
endanger the interest of the Romish religion in
England, and to run the rifque of alienating that
kingdom for ever from the obedience of the papal
fee. After amusing Henry during two years,
with all the subtleties and chicane which the
court of Rome can so dexterously employ to
protraa or defeat any cause; after displaying
the whole extent of his ambiguous and deceitful

policy,

policy, the intricacies of which the English his-
torians, to whom it properly belongs, have found
it no easy matter to trace and unravel; he, at
last, recalled the powers of the delegates, whom
he had appointed to judge in the point, avocated
the cause to Rome, leaving the king no other
hope of obtaining a divorce, but from the per-
fonal decision of the pope himself. As Clement
was now in fitria alliance with the emperor, who
had purchased his friendship by the exorbitant
concessions which have been mentioned, Henry
despaired of procuring any sentence from the
former but what was diAated by the latter.
His honour, however, and paflions concurred in
preventing him from relinquilhing his scheme of
a divorce, which he determined to accomplish
by other means, and at any rate; and the con-
tinuance of Francis's friendlhip being necessary
to counterbalance the emperor's power, he, in
order to secure that, not only offered no remon.
itrances againit the total negled of their allies,
in the treaty of Cambray, but made Francis
the present of a large fum, as a brotherly con-
tribution towards the payment of the ransom for
his fonsd.

Soon after the treaty of peace was concluded,

the emperor landed in Italy with a numerous
train of the Spanish nobility, and a considerable
body of troops [Aug. sz]. He left the go-
vernment of Spain, during his absence, to the
empress Isabella. By his long residence in that
country, he had acquired such thorough know-
ledge of the chara&er of the people, that he

d Herbert. Mem. de Bellay, p. szz.

could

government to their genius. He could even afTumne,
upon some occasions, such popular manners, as
gained wonderfully upon the Spaniards. A ftrik-
ing inflance of his disposition to gratify them had
occurred a few days before he embarked for Italy.:
he was to make his public entry into the city of
Barcelona; and some doubts having arisen among
the inhabitants, whether they should receive him
as emperor, or as count of Barcelona ; Charles
inflantly decided in favour of the latter, declar-
ing that he was more proud of that ancient title,
than of his Imperial crown. Soothed with this
flattering expreflion of his regard; the citizens
welcomed him with acclamations of joy, and the
slates of the province swore allegiance to his son
Philip, as heir of the county of Barcelona. A
similar oath had been taken in all the kingdoms
of Spain, with equal fatisfaAion e.

The emperor appeared in Italy with the pomp

and power of a conqueror. Ambassadors from
all the princes and dlates of that country attended
his court, waiting to receive his decision with
regard to their fate. At Genoa, where he first
landed, he was received with the acclamations
due to the proteaor of their liberties. Having
honoured Doria with many marks of diftinaion,
and bestowed on the republic several new privi-
leges, he proceeded to Bologna, the place fixed
upon for his interview with the pope [Nov. 51.
He affeAed to unite in his public entry into that
city the lRate and majesty that suited an emperor,
with the humility becoming an obedient son of

C Sandov. ii. p. 50. Ferrer. ix. i6.

the

thousand veteran soldiers, able to give law to all
Italy, he kneeled down to kiss the feet of that
very pope whom he had so lately detained a pri.
foner. The Italians, after fuffering so much
from the ferocity and licentiousness of his armies,
and after having been long accustomed to fornm
in their imagination a pidure of Charles, which
bore some resemblance to that of the barbarous
monarchs of the Goths or Huns, who had for-
merly afliaed their country with like calamities,
were surprised to fee a prince of a graceful ap-
pearance, affable and courteous in his deportment,
of regular manners, and of exemplary attention
to all the offices of religion f. They were still
more astonished when he fettled all the concerns
of the princes and states which now depended on
him, with a degree of moderation and equity much
beyond what they had expeeed.

Charles himself, when he set out from Spain,

far from intending to give any such extraordinary
proof of his felf-denial, seems to have been re-
solved to avail himself to the utmost of the fu-
periority which he had acquired in Italy. But
various circumifances concurred in pointing out
the necessity of pursuing a very different course.
The progress of the Turkilh sultan, who, after
over-running Hungary, had penetrated into
Austria [Sept. I3], and laid siege to Vienna
with an.army of an hundred and fifty thousand
men, loudly called upon him to collea his whole
force to oppose that torrent; and though the
valour of the Germans, the prudent condua of

I Sandov. Huft. del Emp. Cad. V. ii. jo. 53, &c.

Ferdinand,

Ferdinand, together with the treachery of the
vizier, soon obliged Solyman to abandon that
enterprise with disgrace and loss [OA. 16], the
religious disorders dill growing in Germany ren-
dered the presence of the emperor highly necef-
fary there 9: the Florentines, infdead of giving
their consent to the re-effablifhment of the Me-
dici, which, by the treaty of Barcelona, the
emperor had bound himself to procure, were
preparing to defend their liberty by force of
arms; the preparations for his journey had in-
volved him in unusual expences; and on this, as
well as many other occasions, the multiplicity of
his affairs, together with the narrowness of his
revenues, obliged him to contrac the schemes
which his boundless ambition was apt to form,
and to forego present and certain advantages, that
he might guard against more remote but unavoid-
able dangers. Charles, from all these confider-
ations, finding it necessary to assume an air of
moderation, aded his part with a good grace. He
admitted Sforza into his presence, and not only
gave him a full pardon of all padt offences, but
granted him the invedtiture of the dutchy, toge-
ther with his niece the king of Denmark's
daughter in marriage. He allowed the duke
of Ferrara to keep poffeffion of all his dominions,
adjuding the points in dispute between him and
the pope with an impartiality not very agreeable
to the latter. He came to a final accommodation
with theVenetians, upon the reasonable condition
of their refdoring whatever they had usurped
during the late war, either in the Neapolitan or

g Sleidan, sax. Guk. i. xx. 550. papal

papal territories. In return for so many con.
ctdlions, he exaded considerable sums from each
of the powers with whom he treated, which they
paid without relu&ance, and which afforded
him the means of proceeding on his journey to-
wards Germany with a magnificence suitable to
his dignity h

1530.] These treaties, which reffored tran.

quillity to Italy after a tedious war, the calami.
ties of which had chiefly affeaed that country,
were published at Bologna with great solemnity
on the first day of the year one thousand five
hundred and thirty, amidst the universal accla.
mations of the people, applauding the emperor,
to whose moderation and generosity they ascribed
the bleflings of peace which they had so long de-
fired. The Florentines alone did not partake of
this general joy. Animated with a zeal for
liberty more laudable than prudent, they deter.
mined to oppose the restoration of the Medici.
The Imperial army had already entered their
territories, and formed the siege of their capital.
But though deserted by all their allies, and left
without any hope of succour, they defended
themselves many months with an obifinate valour
worthy of better success; and even when they
fmirendered, they obtained a capitulation which
gave them hopes of securing some remains of
their liberty. But the emperor, from his desire
to gratify the pope, frufirated all their expeda-
tions, and abolished their ancient form of governm
mont, raised Alexander di Medici to the fame
absolute dominion over that Rate, which his

h Sandov, 1i, 55, &-c,

family

bert de Chalons, prince of Orange, the Imperial
general, was killed during this liege. His eitate
and titles descended to his filler Claude de Cha-
ions, who was married to Ren6, count of Nassau,
and the transmitted to her poflerity of the house
of Nassau the title of princes of Orange, which,
by their superior talents and valour, they have
rendered so illuftrious'.

After the publication of the peace at Bologna,

and the ceremony of his coronation as king of
Lombardy and emperor of the Romans [Feb.
22 and 24], which the pope performed with the
accustomed formalities, nothing detained Charles
in Italy k; and he began to prepare for his jour-
ney to Germany. His presence became every
day more necessary in that country, and was
solicited with equal importunity by the catholics
and by the favourers of the new do61rines.
During that long interval of tranquillity, which
the abtence of the emperor, the contells between
him and the pope, and his attention to the war
with France, afforded them, the latter had gained
much ground. Most of the princes who had
embraced Luther's opinions, had not only elta-
blifhed in their territories that form of worship
which he approved, but had entirely suppressed
the rites of the Romith church. Many of the
free cities had imitated their condud. Almost
one half the Germanic body had revolted from
the papal fee, and its authority, even in those

i Guic.1 . XXP. P4I, &c. P. Heuter. Rer.,Auftr. lib. ii.

c. 4. P. 236. k H. Cornel. Agtippa de duplici corona.
tione Car. V. ap. Scard. ii. 266.

VOL. III. I provinces

provinces which had not hitherto shaken off the
yoke, was considerably weakened, partly by the
example of revolt in the neighbouring fiates,
partly by the secret progress of the reformed
dotrine even in those countries where it was not
openly embraced. Whatever fatisfahion the em-
peror, while he was at open enmity with the fee
of Rome, might have felt in those events which
tended to mortify and embarrass the pope, he
could not help perceiving now, that the religious
divisions in Germany would, in the end, prove
extremely hurtful to the Imperialauthority. The
weakness of former emperors had fuffered the
great vassals of the empire to make such success.
ful encroachments upon their power and prero.
gative, that during the whole course of a war,
which had often required the exertion of his ut-
most strength, Charles hardly drew any effeAual
aid from Germany, and found that magnificent
titles or obsolete pretensions were almost the only
advantages which he had gained by swaying the
Imperial sceptre. He became fully sensible, that
if he did not recover in some degree the preroga.
tives which his predecessors had loft, and acquire
the authority, as well as possess the name, of head
of the empire, his high dignity would contribute
more to obitrud than to promote his ambitious
schemes. Nothing, he saw, was more eflential
towards attaining this, than to suppress opinions
which might form new bonds of confederacy
among the princes of the empire, and unite them
by ties fdronger and more sacred than any poli-
tical conneftion. Nothing seemed to lead more
certainly to the accomplishment of his design, than

which he was the natural protedor, as the in-
firument of extending his civil authority.

Accordingly, a profpea no sooner opened of

coming to an accommodation with the pope,
than, by the emperor's appointment, a diet of
the empire was held at Spires [March I5, 1529],
in order to take into consideration the fRate of re-
ligion. The decree of the diet assembled there
in the year one thousand five hundred and twenty.
fix, which was almost equivalent to a toleration
of Luther's opinions, had given great offence
to the reit of Christendom. The greateRt deli-
cacy of address, howevver, was requisite in pro-
ceeding to any decision more rigorous. The
minds of men, kept in perpetual agitation by a
controversy carried on, during twelve years,
without intermission of debate, or abatement of
zeal, were now inflamed to an high degree.
They were accustomed to innovations, and saw
the boldet of them fuccefsful. Having not only
abolished old rites, but fiubdtituted new forms in
their plape, they were influenced as much by
attachment to the system which they had em-
braced, as by aversion to that which they had
abandoned. Luther himself, of a spirit not to
be worn out by the length and obstinacy of the
combat, or to become remiss upon success, con-
tinued the attack with as much vigour as he had
begun it. His disciples, of whom many equalled
him in zeal, and fume fixrpaffed him in learning,
were no less capable than their master to con-
dua the controversy in the propereft manner.
Many of the laity, fume even of the princes,
trained up amiddt these incessant difputations, and

and in the habit ofliftening to the arguments of
the contending parties, who alternately appealed
to them as judges, came to be profoundly skilled
in all the questions which were agitated, and,
upon occasion, could shew themselves not inex-
pert in any of the arts with which these theolo-
gical encounters were managed. it was obvious
from all these circumstances, that any violent
deciion of the diet mud have immediately pre-
cipitated matters into confunion, and have
kindled in Germany the flames of a religious
war. All, therefore, that the archduke, and
the other commiflioners appointed by the empe-
ror, demanded of the diet, was, to enjoin those
frates of the empire which had hitherto obeyed
the decree issued againit Luther at Worms, in
the year one thousand five hundred and twenty.
four, to persevere in the observation of it, and
to prohibit the other slates from attempting any
farther innovation in religion, particularly from
abolithing the mass, before the meeting of a ge-
neral council. After much dispute, a decree to
that effeEt was approved of by a majority of
voices i.

The ele~ror of Saxony, the marquis of Branu

denburgh, the landgrave of Hesse, the dukes of
Lunenburgh, the prince of Anhalt, together
with the deputies of fourteen Imperial or free
cities m, entered a solemn protefd againit this de.
cree, as unjust and impious [April '9]. On

1 Sleid. Hist. I17.
m The four teen cities were StraFlorgh, Nuremburgh, Ulm,

Conflance, Reutlingen, Windiheim, Meinengen, Lindaw,
Kempten, Hailbron, Ifna, Weilfemburgh, Nordlingen,
and St. Gal.

that

that account they were distinguished by the name
of PROTESTANTS ", an appellation which
hath since become better known, and more
honourable, by its being applied indiscriminately
to all the seas, of whatever denomination, which
have revolted from the Roman fee. Not satisfied
with this declaration of their dissent from the
decree of the diet, the protestants sent ambaf-
fadors into Italy, to lay their grievances before
the emperor, from whom they met with the most
discouraging reception. Charles was at that
time in close union with the pope, and solicitous
to attach him inviolably to his interest. During
their long residence at Bologna, they held many
consultations concerning the most effeaual means
of extirpating the hereties which had sprung up
in Germany. Clement, whose cautious and
timid mind the proposal of a general council filled
with horror, even beyond what popes, the con-
dant enemies of such assemblies, usually feel,
employed every argument to dissuade the empe-
ror from consenting to that measure. He repre-
fented general councils as faAious, ungovern-
able, presumptuous, formidable to civil autho-
rity, and too flow in their operations to remedy
disorders which required an immediate cure.
Experience, he said, had now taught both the
emperor and himself, that forbearance and lenity,
initead of soothing the spirit of innovation, had
rendered it more enterprising and prefumptu'ous;
it was necessary, therefore, to have recourse to
the rigorous methods which such a desperate
cafe required; Leo's sentence of excommunica-
tion, together with the decree of the diet at
n Siid. -lift. ixg. F. Paul. Hlit. p. M. Seckend. i. Izzy

E 3 Worms,

it was incumbent on the emperor to employ
his whole power, in order to overawe those, on
whom the reverence due either to ecclefiaflical
or civil authority had no longer any influence.
Charles, whose views were very different from
the pope's, and who became daily more sensible
how obilinate and deep-rooted the evil was,
thought of reconciling the protefiants by means
less violent, and considered the convocation of a
council as no improper expedient for that pur-
pose; but promised, if gentler arts failed of
fuccefi, that then he would exert himself
with rigour to reduce to the obedience of the
holy fee those fiubborn enemies of the catholic
faith a.

Such were the fentimeuts with which the em-

peror set out for Germany, having already ap.
pointed a diet of the empire to be held at
Augsburg [March 22, 5530]. In his journey
towards that city, he had many opportuuities of
observing the diipoiltion of the Germans with
regard to the points in controversy, and found
their miuds every where so much irritated and
inflamed, as convinced him, that nothing tending
to severity os rigour ought to he attempted, until
all other measures proved ineffestual. He made his
public entry into Augsburg with extraordinary
pomp [June 55], and found there such a full as-
fembly of the members of the diet, as was suitable
both to the importance of the affairs which were to
come under their consideration, and to the honour

aS . Paul. xivvi. Seck. .I. 142. 4 Hit. de ConfefT.

d'Auxbourgh, par D. Chytreus, 4to. Antw, 5572. p. 6.

of

to them crowned with reputation and success.
His presence seems to have communicated to all
parties an unusual spirit of moderation and desire
of peace. The eleaor of Saxony would not
permit Luther to accompany him to the diet,
left he fhound offend the emperor by bringing
into his presence a person excommunicated by the
pope, and who had been the author of all those
diffenlions which it now appeared so difficult to
compose. At the emperor's desire, all the pro-
tefitant princes forbad the divines who accompa-
nied them to preach in public during their re-
fidence at Augsburg. For the fame reason they
employed Melanahon, the man of the greatefL
learning, as well as of the most pacific and gentle
spirit among the reformers, to draw up a con-
feff on of their faith, expressed in terms as little
offerfive to the Roman catholics, as a regard for
truth would permit. Melanahon, who seldom
fuffered the rancour of controversy to envenom
his Ityle, even in writings purely polemical, ex-
ecuted a taflk so agreeable to his natural difpo.
fition with great moderation and address. The
creed which he composed, known by the name
of the Confef/on of AogjZarg, from the place
where it was presented, was read publicly in the
diet. Some popish divines were appointed to
examine it; they brought in their animadver-
fions; a dispute ensued between them and
Melanethon, seconded by some of his brethren;
but though Melanalhon softened some articles,
made concessions with regard to others, and put
the leadt exceptionable sense upon all; though
the emperor himself laboured with great earnedt-

ness

ness to reconcile the contending parties; so many
marks of diRinaion were now eftablithed, and
such infisperable barriers placed between the two
churches, that all hopes of bringing about a
coalition seemed utterly desperate P.

From the divines, among whom his endea-

vours had been so unficcefsful, Charles turned
to the princes their patrons. Nor did he fmd
them, how desirous soever of accommodation, or
willing to oblige the emperor, more disposed
than the former to renounce their opinions. At
that time, zeal for religion took poffeflion of
the minds of men, to a degree which can scarcely
be conceived by those who live in an age when
the paflions excited by the first manifeitation of
truth, and the first recovery of liberty, have in a
great measure ceased to operate. This zeal
was then of such strength as to overcome at-
tachment to their political interest, which is
commonly the predominant motive among
princes. The eledor of Saxony, the landgrave
of Hesse, and other chiefs of the protestants,
though solicited separately by the emperor, and
allured by the promise or profpe& of those ad-
vantages which it was known they were most so-
licitous to attain, refused, with a fortitude highly
worthy of imitation, to abandon what they
deemed the cause of God, for the fake of any
earthly acquisition q.

Every scheme in order to gain or disunite the

protefitant party proving abortive, nothing now

P Seckend. lib. 11. 159, &c. Abr. Sculetti Annales

Evangelici ap. Herm. Von der Hard. Hill. Liter. Reform.
Lips. a7o7. fol. p. Iy9.

q Sicid. 13Z. Scultet. Annal, 055.

remained

remained for the emperor but to take some vi-
gorous measures towards asserting the doarines
and authority of the eftablijhed church. These,
Campeggio, the papal nuncio, had always re-
commended as the only proper and effeaual
course of dealing with such obilinate heretics.
In compliance with his opinions and remon-
firances, the diet ififued a decree [Nov. 59],
condemning molt of the peculiar tenets held by
the protestants ; forbidding any person to prote&
or tolerate such as taught them; enjoining a
fitria observance of the established rites; and
prohibiting any further innovation under severe
penalties. All orders of men were required to
aflill with their persons and fortunes in carrying
this decree into execution; and such as refused
to obey it were declared incapable of aaing as
judges, or of appearing as parties in the Impe.
rial chamber, the supreme court of judicature in
the empire. To all which was fubjoined a pro-
mile, that an application fnould be made to the
pope, requiring him to call a general council
within fix months, in order to terminate all con-
troverfies by its sovereign decisions r.

The severity of this decree, which was con-

fidered as a prelude to the molt violent perse-
cution, alarmed the protefiants, and convinced
them that the emperor was resolved on their de-
ftruaion. The dread of those calamities which
were ready to fall on the church, oppressed the
feeble spirit of MelanLhon; and, as if the cause
had already been desperate, he gave himself up
to melancholy and lamentation. But Luther,

r S!idd. 39.

who

voured to confirm and animate his party by feve.
ral treatises which he addressed to them, wua
not disconcerted or dismayed at the profpe& of
this new danger. He comforted Melanohon,
and his other defponding disciples, and exhorted
the princes not to abandon those truths which
they had lately asserted with such laudable bold.
ness . His exhortations made the deeper im.
pression upon them, as they were greatly alarmed
at that time by the account of a combination
among the popish princes of the empire for the
maintenance of the established religion, to which
Charles himself had acceded t. This convinced
them that it was necessary to itandl on their
guard; and that their own safety, as well as the
success of their cause, depended on union. Filled
with this dread of the adverse party, and with
these sentiments concerning the condu63 proper
for themselves, they affeinbled at Smalkalde.
There they concluded a league of mutual de-
fence againift all aggreffors" [Dec. 22], by
which they formed the protefdant slates of the
empire into one regular body; and beginning
already to confider themselves as such, they re.
solved to apply to the kings of France and
England, and to implore them to patronize and
aflift their new confederacy.

An affair not conneaed with religion furnished

themn with a pretence for courting the aid of
foreign princes. Charles, whole ambitious views
Colarged in proportion to the increase of his

s Seek. ii. 180. Sleid. 140. t Seck. ii. zoo.

ail. II, a Sleid. Hist. s4qz

power

power and grandeur, had formed a scheme of
continuing the Imperial crown in his family, by
procuring his brother Ferdinand to be eleaed
king of the Romans. The present junaure
was favourable for the execution of that design.
The emperor's arms had been every where viao-
rious; he had given law to all Europe at the
late peace; no rival now remained in a condition
to balance or to control him; and the eledors,
dazzled with the splendour of his success, or
overawed by the greatness of his power, durst
fearcely dispute the will of a prince, whose soli-
citations carried with them the authority of
commands. Nor did he want plausible reasons
to enforce the measure. The affairs of his other
kingdoms, he said, obliged him to be often ab-
sent from Germany; the growing disorders oc-
cafioned by the controversies about religion, as
well as the formidable neighbourhood of the
Turks, who continually threatened to break in
with their desolating armies into the heart of the
empire,. required the conifant presence of a
prince endowed with prudence capable of com-
posing the former, and with power as well as
valour fufficient to repel the latter. His brother
Ferdinand poffeffed these qualities in an emi-
nent degree; by residing long in Germany, he
had acquired a thorough knowledge of its
conititution and manners; having been present
almost from the firit rife of the religious dif-
fenfions, he knew what remedies were most
proper, what the Germans could bear, and how
to apply them; as his own dominions lay on
the Turkiik frontier, he was the natural defender

of

of Germany againit the invasions of the infidels,
being prompted by interest no less than he would
be bound in duty to oppose them.

These arguments made little impreflion on

the proteilants. Experience taught them, that
nothing had contributed more to the undisturbed
progress of their opinions, than the interregnum
after Maximilian's death, the long absence of
Charles, and the slackness of the reins of go.
vernment which these occaiioned. Conscious
of the advantages which their cause had derived
from this relaxation of government, they were
unwilling to render it more vigorous, by giving
themselves a new and a fixed master. They per-
ceived clearly the extent of Charles's ambition,
that he aimed at rendering the Imperial crown
hereditary in his family, and would of course es.
tablifh in the empire an absolute dominion, to
which eledive princes could not have aspired
with equal facility. They determined therefore
to oppose the eleaion of Ferdinand with the ut-
most vigour, and to rouse their countrymen, by
their example and exhortations, to withlfand this
encroachment on their liberties. The eleator
of Saxony, accordingly, not only refused to be
present at the elecoral college, which the enmpe-
ror summoned to meet at Cologne [January 5,
5531], but inftruAcd his eldest son to appear
there, and to protest against the eleaion as in-
formal, illegal, contrary to the articles of the
golden bull, and subversive of the liberties of
the empire. But the other eleftors; whom
Charles had been at great pains to gain, with.
out regarding either his absence or protest, chose

Ferdinand

after was crowned at Aix-la-Chapelle X.

When the protefiants, who were assembled a

second time at Smalkalde, received an account
of this tranfaAion, and heard, at the fame time,
that prosecutions were commenced, in the Im-
perial chamber, against some of their number, on
account of their religious principles, they thought
it necessary, not only to renew their former con-
federacy, but immediately to dispatch their am-
baffadors into France and England [Feb. 29].
Francis had observed, with all the jealousy of a
rival, the reputation which the emperor had ac-
quired by his seeming difintereitednefs and mo-
deration in fettling the affairs of Italy; and be-
held with great concern the fuccfsful itep which
he had taken towards perpetuating and extending
his authority in Germany by the ele&ion of a
king of the Romans. Nothing, however, would
have been more impolitic than to precipitate his
kingdom into a new war when exhaulted by ex-
traordinary efforts, and discouraged by ill fuc-
cess, before it had got time to recruit its fitrength,
or to forget pail misfortunes. As no provocation
had been given by the emperor, and hardly a
pretext for a rupture had been afforded him, he
could not violate a treaty of peace which he him-
seif had so lately solicited, without forfeiting the
eiteem of all Europe, and being detefited as a
prince void of probity and honour. He observed,
with great joy, powerful faaions beginning to
form in the empire; he lillened with the utmolt

x Sleid. 142. Seck. iii. i. P. Heuter. Rer. Auftr.

11b. x. c. 6. p. 240.

VOL. iI. & Cagernefs

eagerness to the complaints of the proteflant
princes; and without seeming to countenance
their religious opinions, determined secretly to
cherish those sparks of political discord which
might be afterwards kindled into a flame. For
this purpose, he sent William de Bellay, one of
the ablest negotiators in France, into Germany,
who visiting the courts of the malcontent princes,
and heightening their ill humour by various arts,
concluded an alliance between them and his maT..
terY, which, though concealed at that time, and
produaive of no immediate effeas, laid the
foundation of an union fatal on many occasions
to Charles's ambitious projeAs; and fhewed
the discontented princes of Germany, where,
for the future, they might find a proteAor no
less able than willing to undertake their de-
fence against the encroachments of the emperor.

The king of England, highly incensed againf8

Charles, in complaisance to whom the pope had
long retarded, and now openly opposed his di-
vorce, was no less disposed than Francis to
flrengthen a league which might be rendered so
formidable to the emperor. But his favourite
projea of the divorce led him into such a laby-
rinth of schemes and negotiations, and he was,
at the fame time, so intent on aboliihing the
papal jurifdiaion in England, that he had no
leisure for foreign affairs. This obliged him to
reft satisfied with giving general promises, to-
gether with a small supply in money, to the con-
federates of Smalkalde Z.

Y Bellay, z29, a. 130, b. Seck. iii. 14.
s Herbert, s5z. 154.

Meanwhile,

Meanwhile, many circumifances convinced

Charles that this was not a junaure when the
extirpation of heresy was to be attempted with
violence and rigour; that, in compliance with
the pope's inclinations, he had already proceed-
ed with imprudent precipitation; and that it was
more his interest to consolidate Germany into
one united and vigorous body, than to divide and
enfeeble it by a civil war. The protestants, who
were considerable as well by their numbers as by
their zeal, had acquired additional weight and
importance by their joining in that confederacy
into which the rash fleps taken at Augsburg
had forced them. Having now discovered their
own fitrength, they despised the decisions of the
Imperial chamber; and being secure of foreign
prote&ion, were ready to set the head of the em-
pire at defiance. At the fame time the peace
with France was precarious, the friendship of
an irresolute and interested pontiff was not to be
relied on; and Solyman, in order to repair the
discredit and loss which his arms had sustained
in the former campaign, was preparing to enter
*Austria with more numerous forces. On all

these accounts, especially the last, a speedy ac-
commodation with the malcontent princes became
aeceffary, not only for the accomplishment of
Lis future schemes, but for ensuring his present
safety. Negotiations were, accordingly, carried
an by his dire&ion with the ele~Eor of Saxony
and his associates; after many delays, occasioned
by their jealousy of the emperor, and of each
other, after innumerable difficulties, arising from
the inflexible nature of religious tenets, which
cannot admit of being altered, modified, or re-

F z linquifhed

linquifhed in the fame manner as points of poli.
tical interef, terms of pacification were agreed
upon at Nuremberg {July 23], and ratified so-
lemnly in the diet at Ratisbon [Aug. 3]. In
this treaty it was flipulated, That universal peace
be established in Germany, until the meeting
of a general council, the convocation of which
within iix months the emperor shall endeavour
to procure; That no person shall be molested
on account of religion; That a fop ihall be
put to all processes begun by the Imperial
chamber against protefitants, and the sentences
already passed to their detriment shall be declared
void. On their part, the protestants engaged to
assist the emperor with all their forces in resisting
the invasion of the Turks a. Thus, by their
firmness in adhering to their principles, by the
unanimity with which they urged all their claims,
and by their dexterity in availing themselves
of the emperor's situation, the proteitants obtain.
ed terms which amounted almost to a toleration
of their religion; all the concessions were made
by Charles, none by them; even the favourite
point of their approving his brother's eleaion
was not mentioned; and the protestants of Ger-
many, who had hitherto been viewed only as a
religious sea, came henceforth to be considered
as a political body of no small consequence b.

5532.] The intelligence which Charles received

of Solyman's having entered Hungary at the head
of three hundred thousand men, brought the de-
liberations of the diet of Ratisbon to a period;

a Du Afont Corps Dpplomatique, tom. iv. part ii. P7. P9.
b Sleid. 149, &c. Seck. iii. 19.

the

the contingent both of troops and money, which
each prince was to furnish towards the defence
of the empire, having been already fettled. The
protestants, as a tetimony of their gratitude to
tile emperor, exerted themselves with extraordi-
nary zeal, and brought into the field forces
which exceeded in number the quota imposed on
them; the catholics imitating their example,
one of the greatest and best appointed armies
that had ever been levied in Germany, assembled
near Vienna. Being joined by a body of Spanish
and Italian veterans under the marquis del
Guafto; by some heavy-armed cavalry from the
Low-Countries; and by the troops which Ser-
dinand had raised in Bohemia, Aufria, and his
other territories, it amounted in all to ninety
thousand disciplined foot, and thirty thousand
horse, besides a prodigious swarm of irregulars.
Of this vast army, worthy the first prince in
Christendom, the emperor took the command
its person; and mankind waited in suspense the
ifue of a decisive battle between the two greatelt
monarchs in the world. But each of them dread-
ing the other's power and good fortune, they
both conduaed their operations with such excef-
ive caution, that a campaign, for which such
immense preparations had been made, ended
without any memorable event [September and
Cmober]. Solyman, finding it impossible to
gain ground upon an enemy always attentive and
on his guard, marched back to Conflantinople
towards the end of autumn c. It is remarkable,

C Jovi HiSt. lib. xxx, p. 100, &c. Barre Hill. de fEm-

73ve,

i. 8. 347t

v 3 that

was a soldier, and every prince a general, this
was the firf' time that Charles, who had already
carried on such extensive wars, and gained so
many viaories, appeared at the head of his
troops. In this firit essay of his arms, to have
opposed such a leader as Solyman was no small
honour; to have obliged him to retreat, merited
very considerable praise.

About the beginning of this campaign, the

eledor of Saxony died [Aug. z6], and was fuc-
ceeded by his fonJohnFrederick. The reformation
rather gained than lot by that event; the new
eledor, no less attached than his predecessors to
the opinions of Luther, occupied the flation which
they had held at the head of the protestant party,
and defended, with the boldness and zeal of
youth, that cause which they had foilered and
reared with the caution of more advanced age.

Immediately after the retreat of the Turks,

Charles, impatient to revisit Spain, set out on his
way thither, for Italy. As he was extremely
desirous of an interview with the pope, they met
a second time at Bologna, with the fame external
demonitrations of refped and friendship, but
with little of that confidence which had fubfilied
between them during their late negotiations
there. Clement was much diffatisfied with the
emperor's proceedings at Augsburg; his con-
ceflions with regard to the speedy convocation
of a council, having more than cancelled all
the merit of the severe decree againd the doc-
trines of the reformers. The toleration granted
to the proteflants at Ratisbon, and the more
explicit promise concerning a council, with

which

farther. Charles, however, partly from convico
tion that the meeting of a council would be at-
tended with salutary effcts, and partly from his
desire to please the Germans, having solicited the
pope by his ambassadors to call that assembly
without delay, and now urging the fame thing
in person, Clement was greatly embarrassed what
reply he ,should make to a request which it was
indecent to refuse, and dangerous to grant. He
endeavoured at first to divert Charles from the
measure; but, finding him inflexible, he had re-
course to artifices, which he knew would delay,
if not entirely defeat, the calling of that affem.-
6ly. Under the plausible pretext of its being
previously necessary to fettle, with all parties
concerned, the place of the council's meeting;
the manner of its proceedings; the right of the
persons who ihould be admitted to vote; and
the authority of their decisions ; he dispatched a
nuncio, accompanied by an ambassador from the
emperor, to the eleAor of Saxony as head of
the protefants. With regard to each of these
articles, inextricable difflculties and contests arose.
The proterftants demanded a council to be held
in Germany ; the pope insisted that it should meet
in Italy : they contended, that ali points in dif-
pute should be determined by the words of holy
scripture alone; he considered not only the de-
crees of the church, but the opinions of fathers
and doEtors, as of equal authority; they required
a free council, in which the divines, commissioned
by different churches, should be allowed a voice;
he aimed at modelling the council in such a man-
ner as would render it entirely dependent on his

pleasure,

pleasure. Above all, the protefiants thought it
unreasonable that they should bind themselves to
submit to the decrees of a council, before they
knew on what principls these decrees were to
be founded, by what persons they were to be
pronounced, and what forms of proceeding they
would observe. The pope maintained it to be
altogether unnecessary to call a council, if those
who demanded it did not previously declare their
resolution to acquiesce in its decrees. In order
to adjust such a variety of points, many expedi.
ents were proposed, and the negotiations spun
out to such a length, as effedually answered
Clement's purpose of putting off the meeting
of a council, without drawing on himself the
whole infamy of obfitruaing a measure which all
Europe deemed so essential to the good of the
church C.

Together with this negotiation about calling

a council, the emperor carried on another, which
he had fill more at heart, for securing the peace
eftablihed in Italy. As Francis had renounced
his pretensions in that country with great reluc-
tance, Charles made no doubt but that he would
lay hold on the first pretext afforded him, or
embrace the first opportunity which presented
itfeif, of recovering what he had loft. It became
necessary on this account, to take measures for
assembling an army able to oppose him. As his
treasury, drarned by a long war, could not supply.
the sums requisite for keeping such a body con-
fhantly on foot, he attempted to throw that bur-
den on his allies, and to provide for the safety of

c F.Paul, Hil. 6z. Seekvnd. ii. 3 .

his own dominions at their expence, by propofmng
that the Italian ifates ihould enter into a league
of defence againit all invaders; that, on the lirit
appearance of danger, an army should be raised
and maintained at the common charge ; and that
Antonio de Leyva ihould be appointed the ge-
neraliffimo. Nor was the proposal unacceptable
to Clement, though for a reason very different
from that which induced the emperor to make it.
He hoped, by this expedient, to deliver Italy
from the German and Spanish veterans, which
had so long filled all the powers in that coun-
try with terror, and frill kept them in fubjec-
tion to the Imperial yoke. A league was ac-
cordingly concluded [Feb.24, a533]; all the
Italian frates, the Venetians excepted, acceded to
it; the fum, which each of the contraEting par-
ties thould fnrnifh towards maintaining the army
was fixed ; the emperor agreed to withdraw the
troops which gave so much umbrage to his allies,
and which he was unable any longer to support.
Having disbanded part of them, and removed the
reft to Sicily and Spain, he embarked on board
Doria's gallies, and arrived at Barcelona [April
22] d

Notwithflanding all his precautions for fecur-

ing the peace of Germany, and maintaining that
system which he had eflablifhed in Italy, the
emperor became every day more and more ap-
prehenfive that both would be soon disturbed by
the intrigues or arms of the French king. His
apprehensions were well founded, as nothing but
the desperate situation of his affairs could have

r1 Guic. .xx. 551. Ferreras, i r. o49* brought

brought Francis to give his consent to a treaty
so dishonourable and disadvantageous as that of
Cambray: he, at the very time of ratifying it,
had formed a resolution to observe it no longer
than necessity compelled him, and took a solemn
protest, though with the modt profound secrecy,
againit several articles in the treaty, particularly
that whereby he renounced all pretenlions to the
dutchy of Milan, as unjust, injurious to his heirs,
and invalid. One of the crown lawyers, by his
command, entered a protest to the fame purpose,
and with the like secrecy, when thle ratification
of the treaty was regifiered in the parliament of
Paris e. Francis seems to have thought that, by
employing an artifice unworthy of a king, de-
fitruetive of public faith, and of the mutual con.
fidence on which all tranfamions between nations
are founded, he was released from any obligation
to perform the mos solemn promises, or to ad-
here to the moss sacred engagements. From the
moment he concluded the peace of Cambray, he
wished and watched for an opportunity of vio-
lating it with safety. He endeavoured for that
reason to strengthen his alliance with the king
of England, whose friendship he cultivated with
the greatef assiduity. He put the military
force of his own kingdom on a better and more
refpeaable footing than ever. He artfully foi
mented the jealousy and discontent of the Ger-
man princes.

But above all, Francis laboured to break the

stria confederacy which fubfidted between Charles
and Clement; and he had soon the fatisfaaion

a Du Mont Corps Diplom. tom. iv. part z. p. 52.

to

arising in the mind of that suspicious and interest-
ed pontiff, which gave him hopes that their
union would not be lasting. As the emperor's
decision in favour of the duke of Ferrara had
greatly irritated the pope, Francis aggravated
the injustice of that proceeding, and flattered
Clement that the papal fee would find in him a
more impartial and no less powerful protedor.
As the importunity with which Charles demanded
a council was extremely offenlive to the pope,
Francis artfully created obilacles to prevent it,
and attempted to divert the German princes, his
allies, from insisting so obhtinately on that point f.
As the emperor had gained such an ascendant
over Clement by contributing to aggrandize his
family, Francis endeavoured to allure him by the
fame irrefifible bait, proposing a marriage be-
tween his second son Henry duke of Orleans, and
Catharine, the daughter of the pope's cousin
Laurence di Medici. On the firit overture of
this match, the emperor could not persuade him-
self that Francis really intended to debase the
rtyal blood of France, by an alliance with Ca.
tharine, whose ancestors had been so lately pri-
vate citizens and merchants in Florence, and
believed that he meant only to flatter or amuse
the ambitious pontiff. He thought it necessary,
however, to efface the impreflion which such a
dazzling offer might have made, by promising
to break off the marriage which had been agreed
on between his own niece the king of Denmark.'s
daughter, and the duke of Milan, and to sub-

f Jeilay, a4p, &c. Seek, iii. 48. F. Paul, 63.

flitute

Ititute Catharine in her place. But the French
ambaifador producing unexpeaedly full powers
to conclude the marriage treaty with the duke
of Orleans, this expedient had no effed. Cle-
ment was so highly pleased with an honour
which added fitch luoire and dignity to the house
of Medici, that he offered to grant Cathariiie the
investiture of considerable territories in Italy, by
way of portion; he seemed ready to fuppoit
Francis in prosecuting his antient claims in that
country, and consented to a personal interview
with that monarch Eg

Charles was at the utmost pains to prevent a

meeting, in which nothing was likely to pass
but what would be of detriment to him; nor
could he bear, after he had twice condefecnded
to visit the pope in his own territories, that
Clement should bestow such a mark of diftinfion
on his rival, as to venture on a voyage by sea, at
an unfavourable season, in oder to pay court to
Francis in tile French dominions. But the pope's
eagerness to accompiih the match overcame all
the scruples of pride, or fear, or jealousy, which
would probably have iniuenced him on any
other occfion. The interview, notwithianding
several artifices of the emperor to prevent it, took
place at Marseilles with extraordinary pomp, and
demonfrations ofconfisdnice on both Iides [Oto-
her] ; and the marriage, which the ambition and
abilities of Catharine rendered in the sequel as
pernicious to France, as it was then thought
dithonourable, was consummated. ]ut whatever
schemes may have been secretly concerted by the

K Guic. . xx. 551. 553. BelIay, i3S.

pope

pope aud Francis in favour of the duke of Or-
leans, to whom his father proposed to make over
all his rights in Italy; so careful were they to
avoid giving any cause of offence to the em-
peror, that no treaty was concluded between
them ; and even in the marriage-articles, Ca-
tharine renounced all claims and pretensions in
Italy, except to the dutchy of Urbino'.

But at tile very time when he was carrying on

these negotiations, and forming this conneaion
with Francis, which gave so great umbrage to
the emperor, such was the artifice and duplicity
of Clement's charadcr, that he fuiffered the latter
to dired all Isis proceedings with regard to the
king of England, and was no less attentive to
gratify him in that particular, than if the mout
cordial union had dill fubhifted between them.
Henry's suit for a divorce had now continued
near fix years; during all which period the pope
negotiated, promised, retradted, and concluded
nothing. After bearing repeated delays and dif-
appointments longer than could have been ex-
pefted from a prince of fucl a choleric and im-
prtuous temper, the patience of Henry was at
ladt so much exhsaufled, that he applied to an-
other tribunal for that decree which he had soli-.
cited in vain at Rome. Cranmer, archbishop of
Canterbury, by a sentence founded on the au-
thority of univerlities, docors, and rabbies, who
had been confhlted with refped to the point, an-
nulled the king's marriage with Catharine; her
daughter was declared illegitimate; and Anne

h Gukc. i. xx. 555.
i Du Mont. Corps Diplom.7 i. P. ii. ILex.

oL. il. 0 Boleyne

Boleyne acknowledged as queen of England.
At the fame time Henry began not only to ne-
glea and to threaten the pope, whom he had
hitherto courted, but to make innovations in the
church, of which he had formerly been such a
zealous defender. Clement, who had already
seen so many provinces and kingdoms revolt from
the holy fee, became apprehensive at last that
England might imitate their example, and partly
from his solicitude to prevent that fatal blow,
partly in compliance with the French king's soli-
citations, determined to give Henry such fatif-
faaion as might dlillretain him within the bosom
of the church. But the violence of the cardinals,
devoted to the emperor, did not allow the pope
leisure for executing this prudent resolution, and
hurried him, with a precipitation fatal to the Ro-
man fee, to issue a bull [March 23, i534] rescind-
ing Cranmer's sentence, confirming Henry's mar-
riage with Catharine, and declaring him excom-
municated, if, within a time specified, he did not
abandon the wife he had taken, and return to
her whom he had deserted. Enraged at this un-
expeaed decree, Henry kept no longer any mea-
fares with the court of Rome; his fubjeAs fe-
conded his resentment and indignation; an ae
of parliament was passed, aboliihing the papal
power and jurifdiAion in England; by another,
the king was declared supreme head of the
church, and all the authority of which the popes
were deprived was vefited in him. That vast
fabric of ecclesiastical dominion which had been
raised with such art, and of which the foundations
seemed to have been laid so deep, being no longer
fo-pported by the veneration of the people, was

overturned

the caprice peculiar to his charaaer, continued
to defend the doArines of the Romish church as
fiercely as he attacked its jurifdiAion. He alter-
nately persecuted the protefitants for rejeaing the
former, and the catholics for acknowledging tire
latter. But his fubjedts, being once permitted
to enter into new paths, did not choose to stop
ihort at the precise point preferibed by him.
Having been encouraged by his example to break
some of their fetters, they were so impatient to
lhake off what itill remainedk, that, in the fol-
lowing reign, with the applause of the greater
part of the nation, a total separation was made
from the church of Rome in articles of dodrine,
as well as in matters of difeipline and jurifdic-
tion.

A lhort delay might have saved the fee of

Rome from all the unhappy consequences of Cle-
ment's rashness. Soon after his sentence against
Henry, he fell into a languishing distemper,
which gradually wasting his conflitution, put an
end to his pontificate [Sept. 25], the molt un-
fortunate, both during its continuance, and by
its effeds, that the church had known for many
ages. The very day on which the cardinals en.
tered the conclave [Oft. e1], they raised to the
papal throne Alexander Farnese, dean of the
sacred college, and the oldest member of that
body, who assumed the name of Paul III. The
account of his promotion was received with ex-
traordinary acclamations of joy by the people of
Rome, highly pleased, after an interval of more

I( Herbert. Burn. Hist. of Reform.

GZ than

Peter placed on the head of a Roman citizen.
Persons more capable of judging, formed a fa-
vourable presage of his adminifcration, from the
experience which he had acquired under four pon-
tificates, as well as the charaaer of prudence and
moderation which he had uniformly maintained
in a flation of great eminence, and during an
aaive period that required both talents and ad.
dress '.

Europe, it is probable, owed the continuance

of its peace to the death of Clement ; for although
no traces remain in hiltory of any league con-
cluded between him and Francis, it is fearcely to
be doubted but that he would have seconded the
operations of the French arms in Italy, that he
might have gratified his ambition by feeing one
of his family poffeffed of the supreme power in
Florence, and another in Milan. But upon the
eledion of Paul III. who had hitherto adhered
uniformly to the Imperial intereRf, Francis found
it necessary to suspend his operations for some
time, and to put off the commencement of
hostilities against the emperor, on which, before
the death of Clement, he had been fully deter-
mined.

While Francis waited for an opportunity to

renew a war which had hitherto proved so fatal
to himself and his fubjeas, a tranfaaion of a very
singular nature w~as carried on in Germany.
Among many beneficial and falotary effeAs of
which the reformation was the immediate cause,
it was attended, as mud be the cafe in all adions

b Guic. 1. xx. 556. F. Paul, 64. and

consequences of an oppoiite nature. When the
human mind is rouoed by grand objeas, and
agitated by itrong paflions, its operations acquire
such force that they are apt to become irregular
and extravagant. Upon any great revolution in
religion, such irregularities abound most, at that
particular period, when men, having thrown off
the authority of their ancient principles, do not
yet fully comprehend the nature, or feel the
obligation of those new tenets which they have
embraced. The mind, in that situation, pushing
forward with the boldness which prompted it to
rejed established opinions, and not guided by a
clear knowledge' of the system fubitituted in their
place, disdains all restraint, and runs into wild
notions, which often lead to scandalous or immo-
ral condud. Thus, in the firdt ages of the Chris.
tian church, many of the new converts, having
renounced their ancient systems of religious faith,
and being but imperfe8l) acquainted with the
dodrines and precepts of Chriltianity, broached
the modt extravagant opinions, equally subversive
of piety and virtue; all which errors disappeared
or were exploded when the knowledge of religion
increased, and came to be more generally diflufed.
In like manner, soon after Luther's appearance,
the ralhnefs or ignorance of some of his disciples
led them to puhliih tenets nto less abfusd than
pernicious, which being proposed to men ex-
tremely illiterate, but fond of novelty, and at a
time when their minds were occupied chiefly with
religious speculations, gained too easy credit and
authority among them. To these causes must
be imputed the extravagances of Muncer, in the

o3 year

year one thousand five hundred and twenty-five,
as well as the rapid progress which his opinions
made among the pealants; but though the in.
furreaion excited by that fanatic was soon sup.
pressed, several of his followers lurked in different
places, and endeavoured privately to propagate
his opinions.

In those provinces of Upper Germany, which

had already been so cruelly wasted by their en-
thufiaftic rage, the magifirates watched their
motions with such severe attention, that many of
them found it necessary to retire into other
countries, some were punished, others driven into
exile, and their errors were entirely rooted out.
But in the Netherlands and Westphalia, where
the pernicious tendency of their opinions was
more unknown, and guarded againit with less
care, they got admittance into several towns, and
spread the infeaion of their principles. The
most remarkable of their religions tenets related
to the sacrament of baptifin, which, as they con-
tended, ought to be adminiRered only to per-
sons grown up to years of underflanding, and
lhould be performed, not by fpriukling them
with water, but by dipping them in it: for this
reason they condemned the baptism of infants,
and rebaptifing all whom they admitted into
their society, the fe& came to be distinguished
by the name of Anabaptists. To this peculiar
notion concerning baptism, which has the ap-
pearance of being founded on the praaice of the
church in the apostolic age, and contains nothing
inconsistent with the peace and order of human
society, they added other principles of a moid
enthusiastic as well as dangerous nature. They.

maintained

precepts of the gospel to direa, and the fpiit
of God to guide them, the office of magilcracy
was not only unnecessary, but an unlawful en-
croachment on their spiritual liberty; that the
diitiindions occasioned by birth, or rank, or
wealth, being contrary to the spirit of the vof-
pel, which considers all men as equal, ithould be
entirely abolished; that all Christians, throwing
their poffeffions into one common flock, should
live together in that Rlate of equality which be-
comes members of the fame family; that as
neither the laws of nature, nor the precepts of
the New Testament, had imposed any restraints
upon men with regard to the number of wives
which they might marry, they (hould use that
liberty which God hIimfclf had granted to the
patriarchs.

Such opinions,propngated and maintained with

enthusiastic zeal and boldness, were not long
without producing the violent effeas natural to
them. Two Anahaptiit prophets, John Matthias,
a baker of Haerlem, and John Boccoid, or Beii-
kels, a journeyman taylor of Leyden, poffeffed
with the rage of making profelytes, fixed their
residence at Munfier, an Imperial city in Well-
phalia, of the firit rank, under the sovereignty
of its bilbop, but governed by its own senate
and consuls. As neither of these fanatics wanted
the talents requisite in desperate enterprises,
great resolution, the appearance of fanaity, bold
pretensions to inspiration, and a confident and
plausible manner of discoursing, they soon gained
many converts. Among these were Rothman,
who bad first preached the protestant doarine in

M'iunftcr,

Munster, and Cnipperdoling, a citizen of good
birth and considerable eminence. Emboldened
by the countenance of such disciples, they
openly taught their opinions; and not satisfied
with that liberty, they made several attempts,
though without success, to become masters of the
town, in order to get their tenets established by
public authority. At last, having secretly called
in their associates from the neighbouring country,
they suddenly took poffeflion of the arsenal
and fenate-houfe in the night-time, and running
through the fireets with drawn swords, and
horrible howlings, cried out alternately, " Re-
pent and be baptifed," and " Depart, ye un.
godly." The senators, the canons, the nobility,
together with the more sober citizens, whether
papifds or protestants, terrified at their threats
and outcries, fled in confusion, and left the city
under the dominion of a frantic multitude,
consisting chiefly of itrangers [February]. No.
thing now remaining to overawe or control them,
they set about modelling the government accord-
ing to their own wild ideas: and though at first
they fhewed so much reverence for the ancient
conofitution, as to eleed senators of their own
fest, and to appoint Cnipperdoling and another
proselyte confiuls, this was nothing more than
form ; for all their proceedings were direaed by
Matthias, who, in the flyle, and with the autho-
rity of a prophet, uttered his commands, which
it was instant death to disobey. Having begun
with encouraging the multitude to pillage the
churches, and deface their ornaments; he enijoined
them to destroy all books except the bible, as
useless or impious; he ordered the eftatea of such

bitants of the adjacent country; he commanded
every man to bring forth his gold, silver, and
other precious effets, and to lay them at his
feet; the wealth amtaffied by these me tnss, he de-
potited in a public treafory, anti nasmei d~eaons
to difpeoe it for the common use of all. The
members of this commonwealth being thus
brought to a perfed equaity, be conmand d all
of them to eat at tables prepared in p ubl , a d
even preferibed the dithes which were to be rred
up each day. Having finilhed his olal of ret oim-
ation, his next care was to provrde for thi de-
fence of the city; and he took meafhres for that
porpofe with a prudence which farnoaed notrig
of fanaticifir. He colleaed lavre magzines of
every kind ; be repaired and extended the fortifi-
cations, obliging every person without diibn& on
to work in his tuns; he formed so h as x we
capable of bearing arms into regular bodies, and
endeavoured to add the ilahility of OiiciplinI to
the impetuosity of enthufadl. He Lent emissaries
to the Anabaptists in the Low-Countries, invitirn
them to assemble at Muuffer, which re dign' ed
with the name of Mount Sion, thsa fRrom twesce
they might set out to reduce all. toe rnatons of
the earth under their dominion. lie himlfwas
unwearied in attending to every thing necoEvary
for the security or increase of the feel,; amonating
his disciples by his own example to decmine no
labour, as well as to submit to every hardfiip;
and their enthusiastic paflions being kept from
subsiding by a perpetual fucceflion of cxhortation s,
revelations, and prophecies, they seemed ready

to

to undertake or to fuffer any thing in mainte.
nance of their opinions.

While they were thus employed, the bishop

of Munster having assembled a considerable army,
advanced to besiege the town. On his approach,
Matthias sallied out at the head of some chosen
troops, attacked one quarter of his camp, forced
it, and after great slaughter returned to the city
loaded with glory and spoil. Intoxicated with
this success, he appeared next day brandithing a
spear, and declared, that, in imitation of Gideon,
he would go forth with a handful of men and
finite the host of the ungodly. Thirty persons,
whom he named, foll'owed him without hesitation
in this wild enterprise [May], and, ruohing on
the enemy with a frantic courage, were cut off
to a man. The death of their prophet occasioned
at firif great conflernation among his disciples;
but Boccold, by the fame gifts and pretenflons
which had gained Matthias credit, soon revived
their spirits and hopes to such a degree, that he
succeeded the deceased prophet in the fame ab.
solute direaion of all their affairs. As he did
not possess that enterprising courage which dif-
tinguifhed his predecessor, he satisfied himself
with carrying on a defensive war; and, without
attempting to annoy the enemy by sallies, he
waited for the succours he expead from the
Low-Countries, the arrival of which was often
foretold and promised by their prophets. But
though less daring, in adtion than Matthias, he
was a wilder enthusiast, and of more unbounded
ambition. Soon after the death of his predecessor,
having, by obscure visions and prophecies, pre.

pared

pared the multitude for some extraordinary event,
he fitripped himself naked, and, marching through
the fireets, proclaimed with a loud voice, " That
the kingdom of Sion was at hand; that what-
ever was highest on earth should be brought low,
and whatever was loweit should be exalted." In
order to fulfil this, he commanded the churches,
as the most lofty buildings in the city, to be
levelled with the ground; he degraded the sena-
tors chosen by Matthias, and depriving Cnip-
perdoling of the consulship, the higheit office in
the commonwealth, appointed him to execute
the lowest and most infamous, that of common
hangman, to which firange transition the other
agreed, not only without murmuring, but with
the utmost joy; and such was the despotic rigour
of Boccold's adminifdration, that he was called
almost every day to perform some duty or other of
his wretched function. In place of the deposed
senators, he named twelve judges, according to
the number of tribes in Israel, to preside in all
affairs; retaining to himself the fame authority
which Moses anciently poffeffed as legislator of
that people.

Not satisfied, however, with power or titles,

which were not supreme, a prophet, whom he
had gained and tutored, having called the mul-
titude together, declared it to be the will of
God, that John Boccold should be king of Sion,
and fit on the throne of David. John kneeling
down, accepted of the heavenly call [June 24],
which he solemnly protefited had been revealed
likewise to himself, and was immediately ac-
knowledged as monarch by the deluded multi-
tude. From that moment he aifumed all the

state

Rate and pomp of royalty. He wore a crown
of gold, and was clad in the richeR and modt
sumptuous garments. A bible was carried on
his one hand, a naked fword'on the other. A
great body of guards accompanied him when he
appeared in public. He coined money flamped
with his own image, and appointed the great
or3cers of his houfkhold and kingdom, among
whom Cnipperdoling was nominated governor of
the city, as a reward for his former fubmifflion.

Having now attained the height of power,

Boccold began to discover pafflons, which he had
hitherto restrained, or indulged only in secret.
As the excesses of enthusiasm have been observed
in every age to lead to fentual gratifications,
the fame confittution that is susceptible of the
former, being remarkably prone to the latter, he
ifairuated the prophets and teachers to harangue
the people for several days concerning the law.
fulness, and even necessity, of taking more wives
than one, which they asserted to be one of the
privileges granted by God to the faints. When
their ears were once accudomeA to this licentious
doarine, and their paflions inflamed with the
profpea of such unbounded indulgence, he hi.n-
self irt them an example of using what he called
their Christian liberty, by marrying at once
three wives, among which the widow of Mat.
thias, a woman of singular beauty, was one. As
he was allured by beauty, or the love of variety,
he gradually added to the number of his wives,
until they amrounted to fourteen, ,though the
widow of Matthias was the only one dignified
with the title of Queen, or who ihared with him
the splendour and ornaments of royalty. After

the

themselves up to the moil licentious and uncon-
trolled gratification of their desires. No man
remained satisfied with a single wife. Not to
use their Chrifrian liberty was deemed a crime.
Persons were appointed to search the houses for
young women grown up to maturity, whom they
instantly compelled to marry. Together with
polygamy, freedom of divorce, its inseparable
attendant, was introduced, and became a new
source of corruption. Every excess was com-
mitted, of which the passions of men are capable,
when reifrained neither by the authority of laws
nor the sense of decency m; and by a monstrous
and almost incredible conjunCdion, voluptuous-
ness was engrafted on religion, and dissolute
riot accompanied the aufferities of fanatical de-
votion.

Meanwhile the German princes were highly

offended at the insult offered to their dignity by
Boccold's presumptuous usurpation of royal ho-
nours; and the profligate manners of his follow-

mi Prophetts & concionatorum autoritatejuxta et exemplo,

tots urbe ad rapiendas pulcherrimas quafque faminas difcur-
fum et. Nec intra paucor dies, in tanta hominum turbi fere
ulla reperta eit supra annum decimum quartum que flupruin
paffi non fuerit. Lamb. Hortenf. p. 303 Vulg viris quinas
effe uxores, pluribus Lenas, nonnuluis feptenas & oatonas. Pu-
ellas fupraduodecimumstatis annum ftatim amare. Id. 305*
Nemo una contentus suit, neque cuiquam extra effetas .e
viris immaturas continenti effe licuit. Id. 307. Tacebo hic,
ut fit fuus honor auribur, quanta barbarie et malitia uti funt
in puellis vitiandis nondum aptis matrimonio, id quad mihi
neque ex vano, neque ex vulgi fermonibus hauftum ei, fed
ex eB vetuli, cui cura sic vitiatarum demandata suit, audi-
tum. Joh. Corvinus, 3i6.

VOL. III. S Cisn

ers, which were a reproach to the Chriftion name,
filled men of all profefions with horror. Luther,
who had testified against this fanatical spirit on
its first appearance, now deeplylamented its pro-
grefs, and having exposed the delusion with great
itrength of argument, as well as acrimony of
ftylc, called loudly on all the fhates of Germany
to put a flop to a phrenzy no less pernicious to
society, than fatal to religion. The emperor,
occupied with other cares and projeds, had not
leisure to attend to such a difRant objed; hut
the princes of the empire affembied by the kiog
bs the Romans, voted a fuppiy of men and
moneyto the bifnop of Munfler,who being unable
to keep a fufficient army on foot, had converted
the siege of the tnwn into a blockade [5535].
The forces raised in consequence of this refolu-
tion, were put under the command of an officer
of experience, who approaching the town to-
wards the end of spring, in the year one thou-
sand five hundred and thirty-five, pressed it more
closely than formerly; but found the fortifica-
tions uo itrong, and Lo diligently guarded, that
he. durit not attempt an assault. It was now
about fifteen mouths since the anabaptifis had
efablihed their dominion in Munfier; they had
during that time undergone prodigious fatigue in
workmng on the fortifications, and performing
military.duty. Notwithilanding the prudent ati
tention of their king to, provide for their flhb
fiftence, and his frugal as well as regular 0econow
my in their pubiic meals, they began to feel the
approach of famine [May]. Several small bodies
of their brethren, wh o.were advancing to their
alffilance from the Low-Countircs, had been in;

terclepted

many was ready to combine againRi them, they
had no profped of succour. But such was the
ascendant which Boccold had acquired over the-
multitude, and so powerful the fascination of en-
thufiafm, that their hopes were as sanguine a4
ever, and they hearkened with implicit credulity
to the viflous and predidions of their prophets,
who assured them that the Almighty would
speedily interpose, in order to deliver the city.
The faith, however, of fame few, (haken by the
violence and length of their fufferings, began to
fail; but being fufpeAed of an inclination to
surrender to the enemy, they were punilhed with
immediate death, as guilty of impiety in diltruof-
ing the power of God. One of the king's wives,
having uttered certain words which implied some
doubt concerning his divine mission, he inflantly:
called the whole number together, and command-
ing the blasphemer, as he called her, to kneel
down, cut off her head with his own hands ; and
lo far were the reft from expressing any horror
at this cruel deed, that they joined him in dancing.
with a frantic joy around the bleeding body of
their companion.

By this time [June sl],the besieged endured the

utmost rigour of famine; but theychofe rather to
foffcrhardfhips, the recital of which is Ihocking to
humanity, than to listen to the terms ofcapitula-
tion offered them by the bifhup. At last, a de-~
ferter, whom they had taken into their service,
being either lefa intoxicated with the fumes of
enthosiafm, or unable any longer to bear such
distress, made his escape to the enemy. He in-
formed their general of a weak part in the for-

a a tifications

him that the besieged, exhausted with hunger and
fatigue, kept watch there with little care, he
offered to lead a party thither in the night. The
proposal was accepted, and a chosen body
of troops appointed for the service; who,
scaling the walls unperceived, seized one of
the gates, and admitted the reft of the army.
The anabaptifs, though surprised, defended
themselves in the market-place with valour,
heightened by despair; but being overpower.
Ed by numbers, and fnrrounded on every hand,
most of them were slain, and the remainder
taken prisoners EJune 24]. Among the last were
the king and Cnipperdoling. The king, loaded
with chains, was carried from city to city as a
fpeEacle to gratify the curiosity of the people,
and was exposed to all their insults. His spirit,
however, was not broken or humbled by this
fad reverse of his condition; and he adhered
with unshaken firmness to the distinguishing te-
nets of his se&t. After this, he was brought
back to Munfler, the scene of his royalty and
crimes, and put to death with the most exquisite
as well as lingering tortures, all which he bore
with astonishing fortitude. This extraordinary
man, who had been able to acquire such amaz-
ing dominion over the minds of his followers, and
to excite commotions so (dangerous to society,
was only twenty.iix years of age".

n Sleid. 190, &c. Tumultuiim anabaprtitarum Iber unus.

Ant. Lamberto Hortenifo auofore ap. Scardium, vol. ii.
p. 298, &c. De Miferabili MonakerienfiumObfidione, &c.
libellus Anronhi Corvini ap. Scar. 3'3. Annales Anabap.
tiilici a Joh. Henrico Ottio, 4to. Baiiem, 2672. Cor.
1ieerlbace1ius Hilt. Anab. edit. 1637, p. 140.

Together,

Together with its monarch, the kingdom of

the anabaptists came to an end. Their princi-
ples having taken deep root in the Low-Coun-
tries, the party dill subsists there, under the name
of Mennonites ; but by a very singular revolution,
this sea, so mutinous and sanguinary at its firit
origin, hath become altogether innocent and pa-
cifie. -iolding it unlawful to wage war, or to
accept of civil offices, they devote themselves
entirely to the duties of private citizens, and by
their indufhy and charity endeavour to make
reparation to human society for the violence
committed by their founders ". A small number
of this sea, which is fettled in England, retain its
peculiar tenets concerning baptism, but without
any dangerous mixture of enthufialm.

The mutiny of the anabaptists, though it drew

general attention, did not so entirely engross the
princes of Germany, as not to allow leisure for
other tranfaaions. The alliance between the
French king and the confederates at Smalkalde,
began about this time to produce great effeas.
Ulric, duke of Wurtembcrg, having been ex-'
pelled his dominions in the year one thousand
five hundred and nineteen, on account of his
violent and oppressive administration, the house
of Aufdria had got poffefionr of his dutchy.
That prince having now by a long exile atoned
for the errors in his condud, which were the es-
fe& rather of inexperience than of a tyrannical
disposition, was become the obje& of general
compassion. The landgrave of Hesse, in par.
ticular, his near relation, warmly efpoufed.hIi

c Bayle Dijion. prt. Anabapkes.

· 3 intereift,

interet, and used many efforts to recover for
him his antient inheritance. But the king of the
Romans obitinately refused to relinquish a valu-
able acquisition which his family had made with
so much ease. The landgrave, unable to compel
him, applied to the king of France, his new ally,
Francis, eager to embrace any opportunity of
difdrefling the house of Aufiria, and desirous of
wrefling from it a territory which gave it footing
and influence in a part of Germany at a difiance
from its other dominions, encouraged the land-
grave to take arms, and secretly supplied him
with a large fum of money. This he employed
to raise troops; and marching with great expe.
dition towards Wurtemberg, attacked, defeated,
and dispersed a conliderable body of Aufirians,
entrufled with the defence of the country. All
the duke's fubjeAs haflened, with emulation, ·to
receive their native prince, and re-invefited him
with that authority which is frill enjoyed by
his descendants. At the fame time the exercise
of the protestant religion was eitablifhed in his
dominions P.

Ferdinand, how sensible soever of this unex-

peAed blow, not daring to attack a prince wbom
all the protestant powers in Germany were ready
to support, judged it expedient to conclude a
treaty with him, by which, in the modt ample
form, he recognised his title to the dutchy.
The success of the landgrave's operations, in
behalf of the duke of Wurtemberg, having con-
vinced Ferdinand that a rupture with a league,
fa formidable as that of Smalkalde, was to be

P Skid. I7z: Belay, t59, &c. avoided

wife into a negotiation with the eledor of Sax-
ony, the head of that union, and by some con-
ceffions in favour of the protestant religion, and
others of advantage to the eleaor himself, he
prevailed on him, together with his confederates,
to acknowledge his title as king of the Romans,
At the fame time, in order to prevent any such
precipitate or irregular elerion in times to come,
it was agreed that no person should hereafter be
promoted to that dignity without the unanimous
consent of the eleaors; and the emperor soon
after confirmed this flipulation q.

These adEs of indulgence towards the protest-

ants, and the close union into which the king of
the Romans seemed to be entering with the
princes of that party, gave great offence at Rome.
Paul III., though he had departed from a refo-
lution of his predecessor, never to consent to the
calling of a general council, and had promised,
in tise firR consistory held after his elefion, that
he would convoke that assembly so much delired
by all Chrifrendom, was no less enraged than
Clement at the innovations in Germany, and no
less averse to any scheme for reforming either the
doarines of the church, or the abuses in the
court of Rome: but having been a witness of the
universal censure which Clement had incurred by
his obfitnacy with regard to these points, he
hoped to avoid the fame reproach by the seeming
alacrity with which he proposed a council;
flattering himself, however, that such difficulties
would arise concerning the time and place of

9 Sleid. 573. Corps Diplom. torn, iv. p. s. Ix9.

Ineeting,

meeting, the persons who had a right to be pre.
feut, and the order of their proceedings, as would
efFe6tnally defeat the intention of those who de-
manded that assembly, without exposing himself
to any imputation for refusing to call it. With
this view he dispatched nuncios to the several
courts, in order to make known his intention,
and that he had fixed on Mantua as a proper
place in which to hold the council. Such diffi-
culties as the pope had foreseen, immediately
presented themselves in great number. The
French king did not approve of the place which
Paul had chosen, as the papal and Imperial in-
fluence would necessarily be too great in a town
situated in that part ofItaly. The king of Eng-
land not only concurred with Francis in urging,
that objedion, but refused, besides, to acknow-
ledge any council called in the name and by the
authority of the pope. The German protefitants
having met together at Smalkalde [Dec. s2],
infifled on their original demand of a council to
be held in Germany, and pleading the emperor's
promise, as well as the agreement at Ratisbon to
that effea, declared that they would not confider
an assembly held at Mantua as a legal or free
representative of the church. By this diversity
of sentiments and views, such a field for intrigue
and negotiation opened, as made it easy for the
poSe to afifme the merit of being eager to affem-
ble a council, while at the fame time he could
put off its meeting at pleasure. The protestants,
on the other hand, fulpeaing his defigus, and
sensible of the importance which they derived
from their union, renewed for ten years the league
of Smaikaide, which now became fironger.and

more

members r,

During these tranfaftions in Germany, the

emperor undertook his famous enterprise againit
the piratical itates in Africa. That part of the
African continent lying along the coast of the
Mediterranean sea, which antiently formed the
kingdoms of Mauritania and Maffylia, together
with the republic of Carthage, and which is now
known by the general name of Barbary, had un,
dergone many revolutions. Subdued by the Ro-
mans, it became a province of their empire,
When it was conquered afterwards by the Van,
dais, they ereted a kingdom there. That being
overturned by Bellifarius, the country became
fubje61 to the Greek emperors, and continued to
be so until it was over-run, towards the end of
the seventh century, by the rapid and irresistible
arms of the Arabians. It remained for some
time a part of that vast empire which the Ca-
liphs governed with absolute authority. Its imo
mense distance, however, from the feat of govern-
mnent, encouraged the defcendaints of those leaders

r This league was concluded December, one thousand five

hundred and thirty-five, but not extended or signed in form
till September in the following year. The princes who ac-
ceded to it were, John eletor of Saxony, Ernell duke of
Brunswick, Philip landgrave of Hesse, Ulric duke of Wur,
temberg, Barnim and Philip dukes of Pomerania, John,
George, and Joachim, princes of Anhalt, Gehhard and AI,
bert counts of Mansfield, William count of Naffou. The
cities Strafaurg, Nuremberg, Conitance, Ulm, Megdeburg,
Bremen, Reurlingen, Hallbron, Memmengen, Lindaw, Cam.
pen, Ifna, Bibrac, Woisdlheim, Auglburg, Francfort, Efling,
Brunswick, Gollar, Hanover, Gottigen, Eimbeck, Ham.
burg, Mjnden. sho

who had subdued the country, or the chiefs of
the Moors, its ancient inhabitants, to throw off
the yoke, and to afert theirindependence. The
caliphs, who derived their authority from a spirit
of enthusiasm, more fitted for making conquefis
than for preserving them, were obliged to con-
nive at ads of rebellion which they could not
prevent; and Barbary was divided into several
kingdoms, of which Morocco, Algiers, and
Tunis were the mofi considerable. The inha-
bitants of these kingdoms were a mixed race,
Arabs, negroes from the southern provinces, and
Moors, either natives of Africa, or who had been
expelled out of Spain; all zealous profeffors of
the Mahometan religion, and inflamed against
Christianity with a bigoted hatred proportional
to their ignorance and barbarous manners.

Among these people, no less daring, incon-

slant, and treacherous, than the ancient inhabit-.
ants of the fame country deferibed by the Ro-
man hiflorians, frequent feditions broke out, and
many changes in government took place. These,
as they affeded only the internal Rate of a.
country extremely barbarous, are but little
known, and deserve to be so: but about the
beginning of the sixteenth century, a sudden re-
volution happened, which, by rendering the Rates
of Barbary formidable to the Europeans, hath
made their history worthy of more attention.
This revolution was brought about by persons
born in a rank of life which entitled them to
ad no such illufirious part. Homue and Hayra-
din, the sons of a potter in the Isle of Lesbos,
prompted by a reflefs and enterprising spirit,
forsook their father's trade, ran to sea, and joined

a crew

themselves by their valour and adivity, and be-
coming masters of a small brigantine, carried on
their infamous trade with such condu6{ and fuc-
cess, that they assembled a fleet of twelve galleys,
hefides many vessels of smaller force. Of this
fleet, Horuc, the elder brother, called Barba-
roffa, from the red colour of his beard,- was
admiral, and Hayradin second in command, but
with almoff equal authority. They called them-
selves the friends of the sea, and the enemies of
all who fail upon it; and their names soon be-
came terrible from the Straits of the Dardanels
to those of Gibraltar. Together with their fame
and power, their ambitious views extended, and
while aaing as corfairs, they adopted the ideas,
and acquired the talents of conquerors. They
often carried the prizes which they took on the
coaffs of Spain and Italy into the ports of Bar-
bary, and enriching the inhabitants by the sale
of their booty, and the thoughtless prodigality
of their crews, were welcome guefis in every
place at which they touched. The convenient
situation of these harbours, lying so near the
greateil commercial dates at that time in Chris-
tendom, made the brothers wish for an establish-
ment in that country. An opportunity of ac-
complifhing this quickly presented itself, which
they did not fuffer to pass unimproved. Eute-
.mi, king of Algiers, having attempted several
times, without fuccefe, to take a fort which the
Spanish governors of Oran had built not far from
his capital, was so ill-advifed as to apply for aid
to Barbarossa, whose valour the Africans con-
fidered as irrefifible. The aitive corsair gladly

3 accepted

accepted of the invitation, and leaving his bro.
ther Hayradin with the fleet [a5a 6], marched
at the head of five thousand men to Algiers,
where he was receivcd as their deliverer. Such a
force gave him the command of the town; and
as he perceived that the Moors neither fnfpected
him of any bad intentions, nor wvere capable with
their light-armed troops of opposing his difci-
plined veterans, he secretly murdered the monarch
whom he had come to aflift, and proclaimed him-
self king ofAlgiers in his stead. The authority
which he had thus boldly usurped, he endea-
voured to eitablifh by arts suited to the genius
of the people whom he had to govern; by libe-
rality without hounds to those who favoured his
promotion, and by cruelty no less unbounded
towards all whom he had any reason to diftruih.
Not satisfied with the throne which he had ac-
quired, he attacked the neighbouring king of
Tremecen, and having vanquilhed him in bat-
tie, added his dominions to those of Algiers.
At the fame time he continued to infest the coast
of Spain and Italy with fleets which resembled
the armaments of a great monarch, rather than
the light squadrons of a corsair. Their frequent
and cruel devastations obliged Charles, about the
beginning of his reign [SS18], to furnish the
marquis de Comares, governor of Oran, with
trocps fufficient to attack him. That officer,
affiited by the dethroned king of Tremecen,
executed the commiflion with such spirit, that
Barbaroffa's troops being beat in several encoun-
ters, he himself was shut up in Tremecen. After
defending it to the last extremity, he was over-

t taken

while he fought with an obifmnate valour, worthy
his former fame and exploits.

His brother Hayradin, kitown likewise by

the name of Barbarossa, aflumed the sceptre of
Algiers with the fame ambition and abilities, but
with better fortune. His reign being undisturbed
ly the arms of the Spaniards, which had full oc-
cupation in the wars among the European powers,.
he regulated with admirable prudence the inte-
rior police of his kingdom, carried on his naval
operations with great vigour, and extended his
conquefis on the continent of Africa. But per-
ceiving that the Moors and Arabs submitted to
his government with the utmost reluaance, ansd
being afraid that his continual depredations
would, one day, draw upon him the arms of the'
Christians, he put his dominions under the pro-
teaion of the Grand Seignior, and received
from him a body of Turkish soldiers fufficient
for his security against his domeffic as well as
his foreign enemies. At last, the fame of his
exploits daily increasing, Solyman offered hinm
the command of the Turkilh fleet, as the only
person whose valour and flkill in naval affairs en-
titled him to command against Andrew Doria*
the greatest fea-offcer of that age. Proud of
this diAinAion, Barbarossa repaired to Confdan-
tinople, and with a wonderful versatility of mind,.
mingling the arts of a courtier with the boldness
of a corsair, gained the entire confidence both of
the sultan and his vizier. To them he commu-
nicated a scheme which he had formed of making
himself maiter of Tunis, the most lourilhing
kingdom, at that time, on the coatt of Africa;

VOL. Ill. I and

and this being approved of by them, he obtained
whatever he demanded for carrying it into ex-
ccution.

His hopes of success in this undertaking

were founded on the intestine divisions in the
kingdom of Tunis. Mahmed, the last king of
that country, having thiity-four sons by differ-
ent wives, appointed Muley-Iakllen, one of the
youngest among tbem, to be his fiuccefor. That
weak prince, who owed this preference, not to
his own merit, but to the ascendant which his
mother had acquired over a monarch doating
with age, first poisoned Mahmed his father in
order to prevent him from altering his destination
with refpeEf to the succession; and then, with
the barbarous policy which prevails wherever
polygamy is permitted, and the right of fuccef-
lion is not precisely fixed, he put to death all his
brothers whom he could get into his power.
Alrafchid, one of the eldeit, was so fortunate
as to escape his rage; and finding a retreat
among the wandering Arabs, made several at-
tempts, by the alfiftance of fame of their chiefs,
to recover the throne, which of right belonged
to him. But these proving unfucceiesfl, and the
Arabs, from their natural levity, heing ready to
deliver him up to his merciless brother, he fled
to Algiers, the only place of refuge remaining,
and implored the prortcdion of Barbarossa, who,
dicerning at once all the advanta-es which
night be gained by supporting his title, re-
ceived him with every poi~ibie demondreation of
friendship and refpe6d. Being readx, at that
time, to set fail for Confiantinople, he efily
perfoaded Airafchid, whole eages oeds to obtain

a crown

any thing, to accompany him thither, promising
him effeaual affifraoce from Solyman, whom he
represented to be the moid generous, as well as
moit powerful monarch in the world. But no
sooner were they arrived at Constantinople, than
the treacherous corsair, regardless of all his pro.
mises to him, opened to the sultan a plan for
conquering Tunis, and annexing it to the
Turkish empire, by making use of the name of
this exiled prince, and co-operatiog with the
party in the kingdom which was ready to de-
clare in his favour. Solyman approved, with
too much facility, of this perfidious proposal,
extremely foitable to the charaAer of its author,
but altogether unworthy of a great prince. A
powerful fleet and numerous army were soon
assembled; at the fight of which the credulous
Airafchid flattered himself that he should soon
enter his capital in triumph.

But just as this unhappy prince was going to

embark, he was arreited by order of the Sultan,
flhut up in the seraglio, and was never heard of
more. Barbarossa failed with a fleet of two
hundred and fifty vessels towards Africa. After
ravaging the coafis of Italy, and spreading terror
through every part of that country, he appeared
before Tunis; and landing his men, gave out that
he came to assert the right of Alrafchid, whom he
he pretended to have cft sick aboard the admiral
galley. The fort of C oletta, which commands the
bay, soon fell into his hands, partly by his own ad-
dress, partly by the treachery of its commander;
and tile inhabitants of Tunis, weary of Muley-
Hafce's government, took arms, and declared

s2 for

for Airafchid with such zeal and unanimity, as
obliged the former to fly so precipitately, that
he left all his treasures behind him. The gates
were immediately set open to Barbarossa, as the
restorer of their lawful sovereign. But when
Alrafchid himself did not appear, and when
indead of his name, that of Solyman alone was
heard among the acclamations of the Turkish
soldiers marching into the town, the people of
Tunis began to fufpea the corfair's treachery.
Their suspicions being soon converted into cer-
'tainty, they ran to arms with the utmost fury,
and surrounded the citadel, into which Barba-
roffa had led his troops. But having foreseen
such a revolution, he was not unprepared for it:
he immediately turned againit them the artillery
on the ramparts, and by one briik discharge,
dispersed the numerous but undireaed assailants,
and forced them to acknowledge Solyman as
their sovereign, and to submit to himself as his
viceroy.

His first care was to put the kingdom, of

which he had thus got poffeflion, in a proper
posture of defence. He fitrengthened the citadel
which commands the town; and fortifying the
Goletta in a regular manner, at vail expence,
made it the principal fration for his fleet, and his
great arsenal for militady as well as naval stores,
Being now poffeffed of such extensive territories,
he carried on his depredations againit the Chris-
tian ilates to a greater extent, and with more
deftruaive violence than ever. Daily complaints
of the outrages committed by his cruisers were
brought to the emperor by his fubjedts, both in
Spain and Italy. All Christendom seemed to

cxpe~t

expe& from him, as its greatest and molt fostunate
prince, that he would put an end to this new
and odious species of oppression. At the fame
time Muley-Hafcen, the exiled king of Tunis,
finding none of the Mahometan princes in Africa
willing or able to assisi him in recovering his
throne, applied to Charles [April 21, 5535], as
the only person who could assert his rights in
opposition to such a formidable usurper. The
emperor, equally desirous of delivering his do-
minions from the dangerous neighbourhood of
Ilarbaroffa; of appearing as the proteaeor of an
unfortunate prince; and of acquiring the glory
annexed in that age to every expedition againit
the Mahometans, readily concluded a treaty with
Muley-HafEen, and began to prepare for invading
Tunis. Having made trial of his own abilities
for war in the late campaign in Hungary, he
was now become so fond of the military charac-
ter, that he determined to command on this oc-
cafion in person. The united strength of his do-
minions was called out upon an enterprize in
which the emperor was about to hazard his glory,
and which drew the attention of all Europe. A
Flemish fleet carried from the ports of the Low-
Country a body 0f German infantryS; the gallies.
of Naples and Sicily took on boad the veteran
bands of Italians and Spaniards, which had dif-
tinguifhed themfdeves by so many vitories over,
the French; the emperor himself embarked at
Barcelona with the flower of the Spanifn nobility,
and was joined by a considerable squadron from
Portugal, under the command of the Infant

5 H-erarie Annalei.Brabaat, i. 539.

'3 Dost

Doria conduaed his own gallies, the best apm
pointed at that time in Europe, and commanded
by the most fIkilful officers; the pope furni(hed
all the alli'Rance in his power towards such a
pious enterprize; and the order of Malta, the
perpetual enemies of the Infidels, equipped a
(quadron, which, though small, was formidable
by the valour of the knights who served on board
it. The port of Cagliari in Sardinia was the
general place of rendezvous. Doria wvas ap-
pointed high-admiral of the fleet; the command
of the land-forces under the emperor was given to
the marquis de Guafto.

On the sixteenth of July, the fleet, confifiing

of near five hundred vessels, having on board
above thirty thousand regular troops, set fail
from Cagliari, and after a prosperous navigation
landed within fight of Tunis. Barbarossa having
received early intelligence of the emperor's im-
mense armament, and fifpeaing its destination,
prepared with equal prudence and vigour for the
defence of his new conquest. He called in all
his corfairs from their different Rtations ; he drew
from Algiers what forces could be spared; he
dispatched messengers to all the African princes,
Moors as well as Arabs, and by representing
Muley-Hafeen as an infamous apostate, prompted
by ambition and revenge, not only to become the
vassal of a Christian prince, but to conspire with
him to extirpate the Mahomedan faith, he in-
flamed those ignorant and bigotted chiefs to such
a degree, that they took arms as in a common
cause. Twenty thousand horse, together with a
great body of foot, soon afekmbled at Tunis;

and

them from time to time, Barbarofla kept the
ardour which had brought them together from
fubflding. But as he was too well acquainted
with the enemy whom he had to oppose, to think
that these light troops could refifl the heavy-
armed cavalry and veteran infantry which com-
posed the Imperial army, his chief confidence
was in the strength of the Goletta, and in his
body of Turkith soldiers, who were armed and
disciplined after the European fashion. Six
thousand of these, under the command of Sinan,
a renegado Jew, the bravelt and mout experienced
of all his corfairs, he threw into that fort, which
the emperor immediately inveied. As Charles
had the command of the fca, his camp was so
plentifully supplied not only with the necessaries,
but with all the luxuries of life, that Muley-
Hafcen, who had not been accuffomed to fee
war carried on with such order and magnificence,
was filled with admiration of the emperor's
power. His troops, animated by his presence,
and considering it as meritorious to ihed their
blood in such a pious cause, contended with each
other for the poits of honour and danger. Three
separate attacks were concerted, and the Ger-
mans, Spaniards, and Italians, having one of
these committed to each of them, puihed them
forward with the eager courage which national
emulation inspires. Sinan displayed resolution
and skill becoming the confidence which his
mailer had put in him ; the garrison performed
the hard service on which they were ordered
with great fortitude. But though he interrupted
the besiegers by frequent sallies, though the

Moors

continual incursions; the breaches soon became
so considerable towards the land, while the fleet
battered those parts of the fortifications which
it could approach with no less fury and success,
that an aflault being given on all sides at once,
the place was taken by ilorm [July z2]. Sinan,
with the remains of his garrison, retired, after
an obstinate resistance, over a shallow part ofthe
bay towards trie city. By the reduaion of the
Goletta, the emperor became master of Barba-
roffa's fleet, confilling of eighty-feven gallies and
galliots, together with his arsenal, and three
hundred cannon, moitly brass, which were
planted on the ramparts; a prodigious number
in that age, and a remarkable proof of the
flrength of the fort, as well as of the greatness
of the corfair's power. The emperor marched
into the Goletta through the breach, and turning
to Muley-Hafen who attended him, " Here,"
says he, " is a gate open to you, by which.
you ihall return to take poffeffion of your do-
minions."

Barbarossa, though he felt the full weight of

the blow which he had received, did not, how-
ever, 1ofe courage, or abandon the defence of
Tunis. But as the walls were of great extent,
and extremely weak; as he could not depend on
the fidelity of the inhabitants, nor hope that the
Moors and Arabs would sustain the hardships of
a siege, he boldly determined to advance with
his army, which amounted to fifty thousand
men t, towards the Imperial camp, and to decide

t Epiflres des Princes, par Rufcelli, p. 119, &c.

-- the

This resolution he communicated to his principal
officers, and representing to them the fatal con-
sequences which might follow, if ten thousand
Chrifian slaves, whom he had shut up in the
citadel, {hould attempt to mutiny during the ab-
fence of the army, he proposed, as a necessary
precaution for the public security, to massacre
them without mercy before he began his march.
They all approved warmly of his intention to
fight ; but inured as they were, in their piratical
depredations, to scenes of bloodshed and cruelty,
the barbarity of his proposal concerning the slaves
filled them with horror; and Barbarossa, rather
from the dread of irritating them, than swayed
by motives of humanity, consented to spare the
lives of the slaves.

By this time the emperor had begun to ad.

vance towards Tunis; and though his troops
fuffered inconsiderable hardships in their march,
over burning sands, destitute of water, and ex-
posed to the intolerable heat of the fun, they
soon came up with the enemy. The Moors and
Arabs, emboldened by their vast superiority in
number, immediately rushed on to the attack
with loud ihouts, but their undisciplined courage
could not long Rand the shock of regular bat-
talions; and though Barbarossa, with admirable
presence of mind, and by exposing his own per-
fun to the greatest dangers, endeavoured to rally
them, the rout became so general, that he him-
self was hurried along with them in their flight
back to the city. There he found every thing
in the utmost confusion; fume of the inhabitants
flying with their families and effeas; others,

ready

ready to set open their gates to the conqueror;
the Turkiih soldiers preparing to retreat; and
the citadel, which in such ciscumfiances might
pave afforded him some refuge, already in the
pofleflion of the Christian captives. These un-
happy men, rendered desperate by their fitua-
tion, had laid hold on the opportunity which
Barbarossa dreaded. As soon as his army was
at some distance from the town, they gained
two of their keepers, by whose affiaance knock-
ing off their fetters, and buriting open their
prisons, they overpowered the Turkish garrison,
and turned the artillery of the fort againif their
former mailers. Barharoffa, disappointed and
enraged, exclaiming sometimes against the false
compaflion of his officers, and sometimes con-
demning his own imprudent compliance with
their opinion, fled precipitately to Bona.

Meanwhile Charles, satisfied with the easy

and almolt bloodless viaory which he had
gained, and advancing slowly with the precau-
tion necessary in an enemy's country, did not
yet know the whole extent of his own good for-
tune. But at lait, a messenger dispatched by
the slaves acquainted him with the success of
their noble effort for the recovery of their
liberty; and at the fame time deputies arrived
from the town, in order to present him the keys
of their gates, and to implore his protedlion
from military violence. While he was deliberat-
ing concerning the proper measures for this pur.-
pose, the soldiers, fearing that they ihould be
deprived of the booty which they had expeded,·
ruffed fiuddenly, and without orders, into the
town, and began to kill and plunder without

diftinetion.

>4*-

--4

I #. /

m~~adtsLt ----·sum /7~c~p

F~C-"~n 1~~, ,·r~l ~g .,55m~d

cruelty, their avarice, or licentiousness. All
the outrages of which soldiers are capable in the
fury of a form, all the excesses of which men
can be guilty when their paflions are heightened
by the contempt and hatred which difference in
manners and religion inspire, were committed.
Above thirty thousand of the innocent inhabitants
perished on that unhappy day, and ten thonfand
were carried away as slaves. Moley-Hafe n
took pofeffion of a throne surrounded with car-
nage, ahhorred by his fubjeAs on whom he had
brought stich calamities, and pitied even by
those whose rashness had been the occaflon of
them. The emperor lamented the fatal cc-
Cident which had flamned the lustre of this
viatory; and amidst such a feene of horror
there was but one fpe~acle that afforded him
any fatisfafion. Ten thousand Christian slaves,
among whom were several persons of diflinlion,
met him as he entered the town; and falling on
their knees, thanked and blelfed him as theirs
deliverer.

At the fame time that Charles accompliihcd

his promise to the Moorish king, of re-efiablifh-
ing him in his dominions, he did not negleed
what was necessary for bridling the power of
the African corfairs, for the security of his own
fubjefts, and for the interest of the Spanish
crown. In order to gain these ends, he con-
cluded a treaty with Muley-Hafeen dn the folb
loxving conditions: that he thould hold the
kingdom of Tunis in fee of the crown of Spain,
and do homage to the emperor as his liege lord;
that all the Christian hlaves now within his do-

minions,

liberty without ransom; that no fubje& of the
emperor's should for the future be detained in
servitude; that no Turkish corsair (hould be ad-
mitted into the ports of his dominions; that
free trade, together with the public exercise of
the Chriltian religion, ihould be allowed to all
the emperor's fubjeds; that the emperor should
not only retain the Goletta, but that all the
other sea-ports in the kingdom which were for-
tified ihould be put into his hands; that Muley.
Hafcen should pay annually twelve thousand
crowns for the fubliftence of the Spaniih garri-
son in the Goletta; that he ihould enter into no
alliance with any of the emperor's enemies, and
should present to him every year, as an acknow-
ledgment of his vassalage, fix Moorish horses,
and as many hawks'. Having thus fettled the
affairs of Africa; chastised the insolence of the
Eorfairs; secured a safe retreat for the Ihips of
his fubjeas, and a proper flation to his own fleets,
on that coast from which he was most infested
by piratical depredations; Charles embarked
again for Europe [Aug. 57], the tempefluous
weather, and Iicknefs among his troops, not per-
mitting him to pursue Barbarossa X.

By this expedition, the merit of which seems

to have been estimated in that age, rather by the

u Du Mont Corps Diplomat. ii. a23. Sumnonte Hilt.

di Napoli, iv. 89.

X Johl. Etropii Diarium Expedition. Tunetana, ap.

Scard. v. ii. p 320, &c. Jovii Hiflor. lib. xxxiv. 553,
&c. Sandov. ii. I54, &c. Vertat HiL. de Cheval de
Malthe. Epiltres des Princes, par Rufcelli, traduites par
Belieforefc, p. si9, sa0, &c. Anton. Ponthl Confentini
Hilt. Belli ady. Barbar. ap. Matthiei Analefta,

apparent

# BOOK VI.

apparent generosity of the undertaking, the mag-
nificence wherewith it was conduaed, and the
success which crowned it, than by the importance
of the consequences that attended it, the emperor
attained a greater height of glory, than at any
other period of his reign. Twenty thousand
slaves whom he freed from bondage, either by
his arms, or by his treaty with Muley-Hafeen Yt
each of whom he clothed and fnrnifhed with the
means of returning to their refpeaive countries,
spread over all Europe the fame of their bene-
faAor's munificence, extolling his power and
abilities with the exaggeration flowing from
gratitude and admiration. In comparison with
him, the other monarchs of Europe made an in-
considerable figure. They seemed to be solicit-
ous about nothing but their private and parti-
cular interests; while Charles, with an elevation
of sentiment which became the first prince in
Christendom, appeared to be concerned for the
honour of the Christian name, and attentive to
the public security and welfare.

B OO K VI.

NFORTUNATELY for the reputation of Francis
I. among his contemporaries, his condud, at

this jundure, appeared a perfef contrafa to that
of his rival, as he laid hold on the opportunity

' Summonte Hifl. de Nap. vol. iv. p. 103.

VOL. 11. R afforded

whole force againdt the common enemy of
Christendom, to revive his pretensions in Italy,
and to plunge Europe into a new war. The
treaty of Cambray, as has been observed, did
not remove the causes of enmity between the
two contending princes; it covered up, but did not
extingnifh the flames of discord. - Francis in par-
ticular, who waited with impatience for a proper
occasion of recovering the reputation as well
as the territories which he had lo0t, continued to
carry on his negotiations in different courts againil
the emperor, taking the utmost pains to heighten
the jealousy which many princes entertained of
his power or defsgns, and to inspire the reft with
the fame suspicion and fear: among others, he ap-
plied to Francis Sforza, who, though indebted to
Charles for the poffcflion of the dutchy of Milan,
had received it on such hard conditions, as ren-
6ered him not only a vassal of the empire, but a
tributary dependant upon the emperor. The
honour of having married the emperor's niece
did not reconcile him to this ignominious fhate of
fubjedion, which became so intolerable even to
Sforza, though a weak and poor-fpirited prince,
that he listened with eagerness to the firdt pro-
pofals Francis made of rescuing him from the
yoke. These proposals were conveyed to him
by Maraviglia, or Merveille, as he is called by the
French hiitorians, a Milanese gentleman residing
at Paris; and soon after, in order to carry on the
negotiation with greater advantage, Merveille was
sent to Milan, on pretence of visiting his rela-i
tions, but with secret credentials from Francis
as his envoy. In this chara~ter he was received

7hy

by Sforza. But notwithldanding his care to
keep that circumfiance concealed, Charles fiuf-
peding, or having received information of it, re-
monftrated and threatened with such an high
tone, that the duke and his miniffers, equally
intimidated, gave the world immediately a most
infamous proof of their servile fear of offending
the emperor. As Merveille had neither the pru-
dence nor the temper which the funAion wherein
he was employed required, they artfully decoyed
him into a quarrel, in which he happened to kill
his antagonist, one of the duke's domeftics, and
having initantly seized him, they ordered him to
be tried for that crime, and to be beheaded
[Dec. 1533.]. Francis, no less astonished at
this violation of a charater held sacred among
the most uncivilized nations, than enraged at the
insult offered to the dignity of his crown, threat·
ened Sforza with the effeas of his indignation,
and complained to the emperor, whom he con-
fidered as the real author of that unexampled
outrage. But receiving no fatisfaaion from
either, he appealed to all the princes of Europe,
and thought himself now entitled to take ven-
geance for an injury, which it would have
been indecent and pufdlianimous to let pass with
impunity.

Being thus furnished with a pretext for be-

ginning a war, on which he had already resolved,
he multiplied his efforts in order to draw in other
princes to take part in the quarrel. But all his
measures for this purpose were disconcerted by
unforeseen events. After having sacrificed the
honour of the royal family of France by the
marriage of his son with Catharine of Medici, in

K a order

order to gain Clement, the death of that pontiff
had deprived him of all the advantages which he
expeded to derive from his friendship. Paul,
his successor, though attached by inclination to
the Imperial interelt, seemed determined to main-
tain the neutrality suitable to his charader as the
common father of the contending princes. The
king of England, occupied with domestic cares
and projeas, declined, for once, engaging in the
affairs of the continent, and refused to affihl
Francis, unless he would imitate his example,
in throwing off the papal supremacy. These dif-
appointments led him to solicit, with greater
earnestness, the aid of the protefitant princes affo-
ciated by the league of Smalkalde. That he
might the more easily acquire their confidence,
he endeavoured to accommodate himself to their
predominant pailion, zeal for their religious te-
nets. He affeded a wonderful moderation with
regard to the points in dispute; he permitted
Bellay, his envoy in Germany, to explain his
sentiments concerning some of the modt impor-
tant articles, in terms not far different from those
used by the protestants a: he even condefcended
to invite MelanAhon, whose gentle manners and
pacific spirit distinguished him among the re-
formers, to visit Paris, that by his afaitance he
might concert the mofd proper measures for re-
conciling the contending feds which so unhap-
pily divided the church b. These concessions must
be connidered rather as arts of policy, than the

a Freheri Script. Rer. German. iii. 354, &c. Sleid.

Hist. 178. 133. Seckend. lib lii. 103.

b Camerari Vita Ph. Mvelanathonjs, tao. Hag. i655.

result

new opinions in religion had made on his filers,
the queen of Navarre and dutchess of Ferrara,
the gaiety of Francis's own temper, and his love
of pleasure, allowed him little leisure to examine
theological controversies.

But soon after he loft all the fruits of this dif-

ingenuous artiiice, by a step very inconsistent with
his declarations to the German princes. This
itep, however, the prejudices of the age, and the
religious sentiments of his own fobjedts, rendered
it neceflarv for him to take. His close union
with the king of England, an excommunicated
heretic; his frequent negotiations with the Ger-
man protestants ; but above all, his giving public
audience to an envoy from Sultan Solyman, had
excited violent finfpicions concerning the sincerity
of his attachment to religion. To have attacked
the emperor, who, on all occasions, made high
pretenflons to zeal in defence of the Catholic
faith, and at tire very junfaure when he was pre-
paring for his expedition againif Barbarossa,
which was then considered as a pious enterprise,
could not have failed to confirm such unfavourable
sentiments with regard to Francis, and called on
him to vindicate himself by some extraordinary
demonfiration of his reverence for the established
doftrines of the church. The indifereet zeal of
some of his fubjecAs, who had imbibed the Pro-
teftantopinicns, furnished him with such an oc-
cafion as he desired. They had affixed to the
gates of the Louvre, and other public places,
papers containing indecent refle&ions on the
dodrines and rites of the popilh church. Six of
the persons concerned in this rash arion were

K 3 discovered

discovered and seized. The king, in order to
avert the judgments which it was fruppofed their
blasphemies might draw down upon the nation,
appointed a solemn procelfion. The holy sacra-
ment was carried through the city in great pomp;
Francis walked uncovered before it, bearing a
torch in his hand; the princes of the blood
supported the canopy over it; the nobles marched
in order behind. In the presence of this nume-
rous assembly, the king, accuflomed to express
himself on every fubje& in strong and animated
language, declared, that if one of his hands were
infeaed with heresy, he would cut it off with
the other, and would not spare even his own
children, if found guilty of that crime. As a
dreadful proof of his being in earnest, the fix un-
happy persons were publicly burnt before the
procession was finished, with circumitarices of
the most (hocking barbarity attending their
execution C

The princes of the league of Smalkalde, filled

with resentment and indignation at the cruelty
with which their brethren were treated, could
not conceive Francis to be sincere, when he of-
fered to protea in Germany those very tenets,
which he persecuted with such rigour in his own
dominions; so that all Bellay's art and eloquence
is vindicating his maiter, or apologising for his
condua, made but little impression upon them
They considered likewise, that the emperor, who
hitherto had never employed violence againfi the
doarines of the reformers, nor even given them

c Belcari Comment, Rer, Gallic. 646. Sleid. Hilt.

Zu75, &Ch

bound by the agreement at Ratisbon, not to
disturb such as had embraced the new opinions;
and the protestants wifely regarded this as a more
certain and immediate security, than the preca.
rious and distant hopes with which Francis en-
deavoured to allure them. Besides, the manner
in which he had behaved to his allies at the
peace of Cambray, was too recent to be forgot.
ten, and did not encourage others to rely much
on his friendship or generosity. Upon all these
accounts, the protestant princes refused to assist
the French king in any hostile attempt against
the emperor. The eledor of Saxony, the most
zealous among them, in order to avoid giving
any umbrage to Charles, would not permit Me-
lanahon to visit the court of France, although
that reformer, flattered perhaps by the invitation
of so great a monarch, or hoping that his pre-
fence there might be of signal advantage to the
protefitant cause, discovered a firong inclination
to undertake the journey d*

But though none of the many princes who en-

vied or dreaded the power of Charles, would
second Francis's efforts in order to reduce and
circumscribe it, he, nevertheless, commanded his
army to advance towards the frontiers of Italy.
As his sole pretext for taking arms was that he
might chastise the duke of Milan for his insolent
and cruel breach of the law of nations, it might
have been expeded that the whole weight of his
vengeance was to have fallen on his territories.

d CamerariiVita Melan. 14.z, &c. 4r5. Seckend. lib.
ii. o7.But

But on a sudden, and at their very commence-
snent, the operations of war took another direc-
tion. Charles duke of Savoy, one of the leafl
;aive and able princes of the line from which he
descended, had married Beatrix of Portugal,
the sifter of the empress. By her great talents,
ihe soon acquired an absolute ascendant over her
husband; and proud of her affinity to the em,
peror, or allured by the magnificent promises
with which he flattered her ambition, (he formed
an union between the duke and the Imperial
court, extremely inconsistent with that neutrality,
which wife policy as well as the situation of his
dominions had hitherto induced him to observe
in all the quarrels between the contending mo-
narchs. Francis was abundantly sensible of the
diitrefs to which he might be exposed, if, when
he entered Italy, he (hould leave behind him the
territories of a prince, devoted so obsequiously to
the emperor, that he had sent his eldeR son to
be educated in the court of Spain, as a kind of
hostage for his fidelity. Clement the Seventh,
who had represented this danger in a strong
light during his interview with Francis at Mar-
feilles, suggested to him, at the fame time, the
proper method of guarding againfi it, having ad-
vised him to begin his operations against the Mi-
lanefe, by taking pofeflion of Savoy and Pied-
mont, as the only certain way offecuring a com-
nmunication with his own dominions. Francis,
highly irritated with the duke on many accounts,
particularly for having supplied the conflable
Bourbon with the money that enabled him to
levy the body of troops which ruined the French
army in the fatal battle of Pavia, was not un-

willing

resented, and how severely he could punish these
injuries. Nor did he want several pretexts which
gave some colour of equity to the violence that
he intended. The territories of France and Sa-
voy lying contiguous to each other, and inter-
mingled in many places, various disputes, un-
avoidable in such a situation, subsisted between
the two sovereigns concerning the limits of their
refpedive property; and besides, Francis, in right
of his mother Louise of Savoy, had large claims
upon the duke her brother, for her share in their
father's succession. Being unwilling, however,
to begin hostilities without some cause of quarrel
more specious than these pretensions, many of
which were obsolete, and others dubious, he de-
manded permission to march through Piedmont
in his way to the Milanese, hoping that the duke,
from an excess of attachment to the Imperial in-
terest, might refuse this request, and thus give a
greater appearance of j uftice to all his operations
againti him. But, if we may believe the hifto-
rians of Savoy, who appear to be better informed
with regard to this particular than those of
France, the duke readily, and with a good grace,
granted what it was not in his power to deny,
promising free passage to the French troops as
was desired ; so that Francis, as the only method
now left of justifying the measures which he de-
termined to take, was obliged to insist for full
fatisfaaion with regard to every thing that either
the crown of France or his mother Louise could
demand of the house of Savoy e. Such an evasive

e Hifloire Genealogique de Savoye, par Guichenon, i
tom. fol. Lyon. 166o. i. 639, &c.

answer,

answer, as might have been expeaed, being made
to this requisition, the French army under the
admiral Biron poured at once into the duke's
territories at different places. The countries of
Breffe and Bugey, united at that time to Savoy,
were over-run in a moment. Mod of the towns
in the dutchy of Savoy opened their gates at
the approach of the enemy; a few which attempt-
ed to make refidlance were easily taken; and
before the end of the campaign the duke saw
himself diripped of all his dominions, but the
province of Piedmont, in which there were not
many places in a condition to be defended.

To complete the duke's misfortunes, the city

of Geneva, the sovereignty of which he claimed,
and in some degree poffeffed, threw off his yoke,
and its revolt drew along with it the loss of the
adjacent territories. Geneva was, at that time,
an Imperial city, and though under the dired
dominion of its owrn bishops, and the remote fove-
reignty of the dukes of Savoy, the form of its
internal condcitution was purely republican, being
governed by syndics and a council chosen by the
citizens. From these didtina and often clashing
jurifdiaions, two opposite parties took their rife,
and had long fublifed in the fiate; the one,
composed of the advocates for the privileges of
the community, assumed the name of Eignetz,
or confederates in defence of liberty; and branded
the other, which supported the episcopal or ducal
prerogatives, with the name of Mlamme/ukes, or
slaves. At length [s532], the protedlant opinions
beginning to spread among the citizens, inspired
such as embraced them with that hold enterprif-
ing spirit which always accompanied or was na-

turally

turally produced by them in their first opera-,
tions. As both the duke and bishop were from
interest, from prejudice, and from political con-
fiderations, violent enemies of the reformation,
all the new converts joined with warmth the party
of the Eignotz ; and zeal for religion, mingling
with the love of liberty, added fitrength to that
generous passion. The rage and animosity of
two fadions, (hut up within the fame walls, oc-
cafioned frequent infurrearions, which terminat-
ing mofily to the advantage of the friends of
liberty, they daily became more powerful.

The duke and bishop, forgetting their ancient

contedts about jurifdidion, had united against
their common enemies, and each attacked them
with his proper weapons. The bishop excommu-
nicated the people of Geneva as guilty of a
double crime; of impiety, in apoitatifing from
the established religion; and of sacrilege, in in-
vading the rights of his fee. The duke attacked
them as rebels againit their lawful prince, and
attempted to render himself maiter of the city,
first by surprise, and then by open force [s534}*
The citizens, despising the thunder of the bi-
(hop's censures, boldly asserted their independence
againit the duke; and partly by their own va-
lour, partly by the powerful assistance which they
received from the canton of Berne, together with
fume small supplies both of men and money, fe-
cretly furnished by the king of France, they de-
seated all his attempts. Not satisfied with having
repulsed him, or with remaining always upon the
defensive themselves, they now took advantage
of the duke's inability to resist them, while over-
whelmed by the armies of France, and seized

several

several cailes and places of fdrength which he
poffeffed in the neighbourhood of Geneva; thus
delivering the city from those odious monuments
of its former fubjeAion, and rendering the public
liberty more secure for the future. At the fame
time tile canton of Berne invaded and conquered
the Pays de Vaud, to which it had some preten.
fions. The canton of Friburgh, though zealously
attached to the catholic religion, and having no
fubjedt of contest with the duke, laid hold on
part of the spoils of that unfortunate prince. A
great portion of these conquells or ufurpations
being itill retained by the two cantons, add con-
fiderably to their power, and have become the
mod valuable part of their territories. Geneva,
notwithianding many schemes and enterprises of
the dukes of Savoy to re-eflablifh their dominion
over it, dill keeps poffeffion of its independence;
and in consequence of that bieffing, has attained
a degree of consideration, wealth, and elegance,
which it could not otherwise have reachedr.

Amidd Luch a fuccefiion of difadrous events,

tile duke of Savoy had no other resource but the
emperor's protedtion, which, upon his returll
from Tunis, he demanded with the moR earnedt
importunity; and as his misfortunes were occa-
fioned chiefly by his attachment to the Imperial
interedt, he had a just title to immediate affiitance.
Charles, however, was not in a condition to sup-
port him with that vigour and dispatch which the
exigency of his affairs called for. Most of the

f I-flit. de laVille de Geneve, par Spon, Is/, Utrs 1685.

p. 99. HILl. de la Reformation de Suife, par Rouchat.
Gen. 1728. tom. iv. p. 294, &c. tomn. v p. 216, &c.
Mem. de Bellay, 581.

troops

troops employed in the African expedition,
having been raised for that service alone, were
difbandcd as soon as it was finished; the veteran
forces under Antonio de Leyva were hardly sus-
ficient for the defence of the Milanese ; and the
emperor's treasury was entirely drained by his
extraordinary efforts againd the Infidels.

But the death of Francis Sforza [O&. 24],

occasioned, according to some historians, by the
terror of a French invasion, which had twice been
fatal to his family, afforded the emperor full lei-
folre to prepare for aaion. By this unexpered
event, tile nature of the war, and the causes of
discord, were totally changed. Francis's firR
pretext for taking arms, in order to chastise
Sforza for the insult offered to the dignity of
his crown, was at once cut off; but as that
prince died without issue, all Francis's rights to
the dutchy of Milan, which he had yielded only
to Sforza and his posterity, returned back to
him in full force. As the recovery of the Milanese
was the favourite objeci of that monarch, he in-
flantly renewed his claim to it; and if he had
fnpportcd his pretensions by ordering the power-
ful army quartered in Savoy to advance without
losing a moment towards Milan, he could hardly
have failed to secure the important point of pof-
feflion. But Francis, who became less enterprif-
ing as he advanced in years, and who was over-
awed at fomt times into an excess of caution by
the remembrance of his padt misfortunes, endea-
voured to eifablifh his rights by negotiation, not
by arms; and from a timid moderation, fatal in
all great affairs, negleded to improve the favour-
able opportunity which presented itself. Charles

SOL. III. L Was

was more decisive in his operations, and in qua-
lity of sovereign, took poffeflion of the dutchy,
as a vacant fief of the empire. While Francis
endeavoured to explain and assert his title to it
by arguments and memorials, or employed various
arts in order to reconcile the Italian powers to
the thoughts of his regaining footing in Italy,
his rival was silently taking effeAual steps to pre-
vent it. The emperor, however, was very care-
ful not to discover too early an intention of this
kind; but seeming to admit the equity of Fran-
cis's claim, he appeared solicitous only about
giving him poffeffion in such a manner as might
not disturb the peace of Europe, or overturn
the balance of power in Italy, which the poli.
ticians of that country were so desirous of pre-
serving. By this artifice he deceived Francis,
and gained so much confidence with the reft of
Europe, that, almost without incurrig any sus-
picion, he involved the affair in new difflculties,
and protraded the negotiation at pleasure.
Sometimes he proposed to grant the investiture
of Milan to the duke of Orleans, Francis's second
son, fumetimes to the duke of Angouleme, his
third son ; as the views and inclinations of the
French court varied, he transferred his choice
alternately from the one to the other, with s-uch
profound and well-conduaed dissimulation, that
neither Francis nor his ministers seem to have
penetrated his real intention; and all military
operations were entirely fnfpended, as if nothing
had remained but to enter quietly into poffeflion of
what they demanded.

1536.] During the interval of leisure gained

in this manner, Charles, on his return from Tu-

ples, and, as they thought themselves greatly
honoured by the presence of their sovereign, and
were no less pleased with the apparent difinte.
reftednefs of his expedition into Africa, than
dazzled by the success which had attended his
arms, he prevailed on them to vote him such li-
beral subsidies as were seldom granted in that age.
This enabled him to recruit his veteran troops,
to levy a body of Germans, and to take every
other proper precaution for executing or sup-
porting the measures on which he had deter-
mined. Bellay, the French envoy in Germany,
having discovered the intention of railng troops
in that country, notwithlfanding all the pretexts
employed in order to conceal it, firif al rimed his
master with this evident proof of the emperor's
insincerity r. But Francis was so poffeffed at
that time with the rage of negotiation, in all the
artifices and refinements of which his rival far
surpassed him, that inifead of beginning his mi-
litary operations, and pushing them with vigour,
or seizing the Milanese before the Imperial army
was assembled, he satisfied himself with making
new offers to the emperor, in order to procure
the inveftituree by his voluntary deed. His of-
fers were, indeed, so liberal and advantageous,
that if ever Charles had intended to grant his
demand, he could not have reje6ted them with
decency. He dexterously eluded them by de-
claring that until he consulted the pope in per-
son, he could not take his final resolution with
regard to a point which so nearly concerned the

g Alem. de Bellay, s92.

L P peace

peace of Italy. By this evasion he gained some
farther time for ripening the schemes which he
had in view.

The emperor at last advanced towards Rome,

and made his public entry into that city with ex-
traordinary pomp [April 6]; but it being found
necessary to remove the ruins of an ancient temple
of Peace, in order to widen one of the itreets,
through which the cavalcade had to pass, all the
historians take notice of this trivial circumstance,
and they are fond to interpret it as an omen of
the bloody war that followed. Charles, it is
certain, had by this time banished all thoughts
of peace; and at last threw off the mask, with
which he had so long covered his designs from
the court of France, by a declaration of his fen.
timents no less singular than explicit. The
French ambassadors having in their maiter's name
demanded a definitive reply to his propositions
concerning the investiture of Milan, Charles pro-
snifed to give it next day in presence of the pope
and cardinals assembled in full consistory. These
being accordingly met, and all the foreign am-
baffadors invited to attend, the emperor ilood
up, and addressing himself to the pope, expatiated
for some time on the sincerity of his own withes
for the peace of Christendom, as well as his ab-
horrence of war, the miseries of which he enu-
merated at great length, with studied and ela-
borate oratory ; he complained that all his
endeavours to preserve the tranquillity of Europe
had hitherto been defeated by the reftiefs and
unjuit ambition of the French king; that even
during his minority he had proofs of the un-
friendly and hostile intentions of that monarch;

that,

that, afterwards, he had openly attempted to
wrest from him the Imperial crown which be.
longed to him by a title no less just than natu-
ral; that he had next invaded his kingdom of
Navarre; that not satisfied with this, he had at.
tacked his territories, as well as those of his allies,
both in Italy and the Low Countries; that when
the valour of the Imperial troops, rendered irre-
fiible by the protetion of the Almighty, had
checked his progress, ruined his armies, and
seized his person, he continued to pursue by
deceit what he had undertaken with injuitice;
that he had violated every article in the treaty
of Madrld to which he owed his liberty, and as
soon as he returned to his dominions took mea-
fures for rekindling the war which that pacifica.
tion had happily extinguished; that when new
misfortunes compelled him to sue again for peace
at Cambray, he concluded and observed it with
equal insincerity; that soon after he had formed
dangerous connexions with the heretical princes
in Germany, and incited them to diiturb the
tranquillity of the empire; that now he had
driven the duke of Savoy, a prince married to a
fiiter of the empress, and joined in close alliance
with Spain, out of the greater part of his terri-
tories; that after injuries so often repeated, and
amidit so many sources of discord, all hope of
amity or concord became desperate; and though
he himself was itill willing to grant the invelitture
of Milan to one of the princes of France, there
was little probability of that event taking place,
as Francis, on the one hand, would not consent to
what was neceirary for securing the tranquillity
of Europe; nor on the other, could he think it

L 3 reasonable

reasonable or safe to give a rival the unconditional
poffeffion of all that he demanded. " Let us
not, however," added he, " continue wantonly to
(hed the blood of our innocent fubjeAs; let us
decide the quarrel man to man, with what arms
he pleases to choose, in our (hirts, on an island,
a bridge, or aboard a galley moored in a river;
let the dutchy of Burgundy be put in deposit on
his part, and that of M\4ilan on mine; these (hall
be the prize of the conqueror; and after that,
let the united forces of Germany, Spain, and
France be employed to humble the power of the
Turk, and to extirpate heresy out of Chriflen-
dom. But if he, by declining this method of
terminating our differences, renders war inevitable,
nothing (hall divert me from prosecuting it to
ffuch extremity, as (hall reduce one of us to be
the poorest gentleman in his own dominions.
Nor do I fear that it will be on me this mif-
fortune (hall fall; I enter upon anion with the
fairest profped of success; the justness of my
cause, the union of my fubjeAs, the number and
valour of my troops, the experience and fidelity
of my generals, all combine to ensure it. Of all
these advantages, the king of France is deflitute;
and were my resources no more certain, and my
hopes of viaory no better founded than his, I
would instantly throw my[elf at his feet, and
with folded hands, and a rope about my neck,
implore his mercy b."

This long harangue the emperor delivered

with an elevated voice, a haughty tone, and the
greatefl vehemence of expression and gesture.

h Bellay, 199. Sandov. Hitor. del Emper. ii. zz6.

The

prehend his meaning, as he spake in the Spanish
tongue, were totally disconcerted, and at a loss
how they ihould answer such an unexpeAed in-
vehive; when one of them began to vindicate
his mailer's conduA, Charles interposed ab-
ruptly, and would not permit him to proceed.
The pope, without entering into any particu-
lar detail, satisfied himself with a ihort but pa-
thetic recommendation of peace, togethser with
an offer of employing his sincere endeavours in
order to procure that blessing to Chriffendom;
and the assembly broke up in the greatest ado-
nifhment at the extraordinary scene which had
been exhibited. In no part of his condua, in-
deed, did Charles ever deviate so widely from
hiis general claraaer. Initead of that prudent
recolledion, that composed and regular deport-
ment so firidly attentive to decorum, and so ad-
mirably adapted to conceal his own passions, for
which he was at all other times conspicuous, he
appears on this occasion before one of the modt
augunR assemblies in Europe, boafding of Isis own
power and exploits with insolence; inveighing
againd his enemy with indecency; and challeng-
ing him to combat with an ostentatious valour,
more becoming a champion in romance, than the
firdt monarch in Chridendom. But the well
known and powerful operation of continued pro-
fperity, as well as of exaggerated praise, even
upon the firmedt minds, fufficiently account for
this seeming inconsistency. After having com-
pelled Solvman to retreat, and having firipped
Barbaroffaof a kingdom,Charles began to confider

his

his arms as invincible. He had been entertained,
ever since his return from Africa, with repeated
scenes of triumphs and public rejoicings; the
orators and poets of Italy, the most elegant at
that time in Europe, had exhausted their genius
in panegyric on his condudt and merit, to which
the affrologers added magnificent promises ofa
more splendid fortune still in store. Intoxicated
with all these, he forgot his usual reserve and
moderation, and was unable to reflrain this ex-
travagant sally of vanity, which became the
more remarkable, by being both so uncommon
and so public.

He himself seems to have been immediately

sensible of the impropriety of his behaviour;
and when the French ambassadors demanded next
day a more clear explanation of what he had said
concerning the combat, he told them that they
were not to confider his proposal as a formal
challenge to their maiter, but as an expedient
for preventing bloodshed; he endeavoured to
soften several expressions in his discourse; and
spoke in terms full of refpeA towards Francis.
But though this flight apology was far from'
being fufficient to remove the offence which had
been given, Francis, by an unaccountable infatu-
ation, continued to negotiate, as if it had ilill
been poflible to bring their differences to a pe-
riod by an amicable composition. Charles, find-
ing him so eager to run into the snare, favoured
the deception, and, by seeming to listen to his
proposals, gained farthes time to prepare for the
execution of his own designs ',

I Mem. de Bellay, Eo5, &c.

At

frontiers of the Milanese, to the amount of forty
thousand foot and ten thousand horse, while that
of France encamped near Vercelli in Piedmont,
being greatly inferior in number, and weakened
by the departure of a body of Swiss, whom
Charles artfully persuaded the popish cantons to
recall, that they might not serve againdt the duke
of Savoy, their ancient ally. The French general
not daring to rifque a battle, retired as soon as
the Imperialists advanced. The emperor put
himself at the head of his forces [May 6], which
the marquis del Guafto, the duke of Alva, and
Ferdinand de Gonzaga commanded under him,
though the supreme direaion of the whole was
committed to Antonio de Leyva, whose abilities
and experience juflly entitled him to that diftinc-
tion. Charles soon discovered his intention not
to confine his operations to the recovery of Pied-
mont and Savoy, but to push forward and invade
the southern provinces of France. This scheme
he had long meditated, and had long been taking
measures for executing it with such vigour as
might ensure success. He had remitted large
sums to his filler, the governess of the Low-
Countries, and to his brother, the king of the
Romans, infiruding them to levy all the forces
in their power, in order to form two separate
bodies, the one to enter France on the fide of
Picardy, the other on the fide of Champagne;
while he, with the main army, fell upon the op-
polite frontier of the kingdom. Trusting to
these vast preparations, he thought it impossible
that Francis could i-elift so many unexpecled at-
tacks on such different quarters; and began his

enterprise

cnterprife with such confidence of its happy issue,
that he desired Jovius the historian, to make a
large provision of paper fufficient to record the
vidories which he was going to obtain.

His ministers and generals, infiead of enter-

taining the fame sanguine hopes, represented
to him in the firongeft terms the danger of
leading his troops so far from his own territories,
to such a distance from his magazines, and into
provinces which did not yield flfficient subsistence
for their own inhabitants. They entreated him
to confider the inexhauftibe resources of France
in maintaining a defensive war, and the adive
zeal with which a gallant nobility would serve a
prince whom they loved, in repelling the enemies
of their country; they recalled to his remem-
brance the fatalmifcarriage of Bourbon and Pes-
cara, when they ventured upon the fame enter-
prise under circumfiances which seemed as cer-
tainly to promise success; the marquis del Guafto
in particular fell on his knees, and conjured him
to abandon the undertaking as desperate. But
many circumitances combined in leading Charles
to disregard all their remonfirances. He could
seldom be brought, on any occasion, to depart
from a resolution which he had once taken; he
was too apt to under-rate and despise the talents
of his rival the king of France, because they
differed so widely from Ihis own; he was blinded
by the presumption which accompanies profpe-
rity; and relied, perhaps, in some degree, on the
prophecies which prediaed the increase of his
own grandeur. He not only adhered obitinately
to his own plan, but determined to advance
towards France without waiting for the reduc-

tion

as were absolutely necessary for preserving his
communication with the Milanese.

The marquis de Saluces, to whom Francis had

entruited the command of a small body of troops
left for the defence of Piedmont, rendered this
more easy than Charles had any reason to expeA.
That nobleman, educated in the court of France,
diftinguilhed by continual marks of the king's
favour, and honoured so lately with a charge of
such importance, suddenly, and without any pro-
vocation or pretext of difguit, revolted from his
benefaaor. His motives to this treacherous
aAion were as childish as the deed itself was base.
Being fitrongly poffeffed with a superstitious
faith in divination and astrology, he believed with
full assurance, that the fatal period of the French
nation was at hand; that on its ruins the empe-
ror would establish an universal monarchy; that
therefore he ought to follow the didates of pru-
dence, in attaching himself to his rising fortune,
and could incur no blame for deserting a prince
whom heaven had devoted to deftruAion k. His
treason became still more odious, by his employ.
ing that very authority, with which Francis had
invefited him, in order to open the kingdom to
his enemies. Whatever measures were proposed
or undertaken by the officers under his command
for the defence of their conquests, he rejeAed or
defeated. Whatever properly belonged to him-
self, as commander in chief, to provide or per-
form for that purpose, he totally negleded. In

Be;ay, 222, a. 146, b.

1 this

this manner, he rendered towns even of the
greatest consequence, untenable, by leaving them
destitute either of provisions, or ammunition, or
artillery, or a fufficient garrison; and the Im-
perialifts must have reduced Piedmont in as short
a time as was necessary to march through it, if
Montpezat, the governor of Foffano, bad not,
by an extraordinary effort of courage and military
condud, detained them alnoit a month before
that inconsiderable place.

By this meritorious and seasonable service, he

gained his matfer fuflicient time for assembling
his forces, and for concerting a system of defence
against a danger which he now saw to be inevit-
able. Francis fixed upon the only proper and
effee~ual plan for defeating the invasion of a
powerful enemy; and his prudence in choosing
this plan, as well as his perseverance in executing
it, deserve the greater praise, as it was equally
contrary to his own natural temper, and to the
genius of the French nation. He determined to
remain altogether upon the defensive; never to
hazard a battle, or even a great Ikirmiflh without
certainty of fnccefs; to fortify his camps in a
regular manner; to throw garrisons only into
towns of great itrength; to deprive the enemy
of fubiiftence, by laying wafde the country before
them ; and to save the whole kingdom, by facri-
ficing one of its provinces. The execution of
this plan he committed entirely to the marechal
Montmorency, who was the author of it ; a man
wonderfully fitted by nature for fich a truot.
Haughty, severe, confident in his own abilities,
and despising those of other men; incapable of

being

being diverted from any resolution by remon-
flrances or entreaties; and, in prosecuting any
scheme, regardless alike of love or of pity.

Montmorency made choice of a firong camp

under the walls of Avignon, at the confluence of
the Rhone and the Durance, one of which plen-
tifully supplied his troops with all necessaries
from the inland provinces, and the other covered
his camp on that fide where it was most probable
the enemy would approach. He laboured with
unwearied induifry to render the fortifications of
this camp impregnable, and assembled there a
considerable army, though greatly inferior to that
of the enemy; while the king with another body
of troops encamped at Valence higher up the
Rhone. Marseilles and Arles were the only
towns he thought it necessary to defend; the
former, in order to retain the command of the
sea; the latter, as the barrier of the province of
Languedoc; and each of these he furnished with
numerous garifons of his best troops, commanded
by officers on whose fidelity and valour he could
rely. The inhabitants of the other towns, as
well as of the open country, were compelled to
abandon their houses, and were conduted to
the mountains, to the camp at Avignon, or to
the inland provinces. The fortifications of such
places as might have afforded shelter or defence to
the enemy, were thrown down. Corn, forage, and
provision s of every kind, were carried away or
defiroved; all the mills and ovens were ruined,
and the wells filled up or rendered useless. The
devastation extended from the Alps to Marseilles,
an(d from the sea to the confines of Dauphind;
nor does hifiory afford any indance among civi-

i n. ill. RI lized

lized nations, in which this cruel expedient for
the public safety was employed with the fame
rigour.

At length, the emperor arrived with the van

of his army on the frontiers of Provence, and.
was still so poffeffed with confidence of success,
that, during a few days when he was obliged to
halt until the reft of his troops came up, he
began to divide his future conquelts among his
officers; and, as a new incitement to serve him
with zeal, gave them liberal promises of offices,
lands, and honours in France '. The face of
desolation, however, which presented itself to
him, when he entered the country, began to
damp his hopes, and convinced him that a mo-
narch, who, in order to difrefs an enemy, had
voluntarily ruined one of his richest provinces,
would defend the reft with desperate obstinacy.
Nor was it long before he became sensible that
Francis's plan of defence was as prudent as it
appeared to be extraordinary. His fleet, on
which Charles chiefly depended for fubliflence,
was prevented for some time by contrary winds,
and other accidents to which naval operations
are fubjeEt, from approaching the French coast;
even after his arrival, it afforded at best a preca-
rious and scanty supply to Luch a numerous body
of troops m; nothing was to be found in the
country itself for their support; nor could they
draw any considerable aid from the dominions of
the duke of Savoy, exhausted already by main-
taining two great armies. The emperor was no
less embarrassed how to employ, than how to

I Jellay, z66, a. m Sandsv. ii. i3rx fu'oiif

session of almost an entire province, he could not
be said to have the command of it, while he held
only defenceless towns; and while the French,
besides their camp, at Aviginon,continued mailers
of Marseilles and Aries. At firit he thought of
attacking the camp, and of terminating the war
by one decisive blow; but lkilful officers, who
were appointed to view it, declared the attempt
to be utterly impraaicable. He then gave orders
to invest Marseilles aud Arles, hoping that the
French would quit their advantageous post in
order to relieve them; but Montmorency ad-
hering firmly to his plan, remained immoveable
at Avignon, and the Imperialists met with such
a warm reception from the garrisons of both
towns, that they relinquilhed their enterprises
with loss and disgrace. As a last effort, the
emperor advanced once more towards Avignon,
though with an army harassed by the perpetual
incursions of small parties of the French light
troops, weakened by diseases, and dispirited by
diiafters, which seemed the more intolerable, be-
cause they were unexpe~ted.

During these operations, Montmorency found

himself exposed to greater danger from his own
troops than from the enemy; and their incon-
flderate valour went near to have precipitated the
kingdom into those calamities which he with such
induifry and caution had endeavoured to avoid.
Unaccustomed to behold an enemy ravaging their
country almoff without controul; impatient of
such long inadion; unacquainted with the flow
and remote, but certain effeas of Montmoren-
cy's fyfitem of defence; the French wished for a

a 2 battle

They considered the condu& of their general as
a disgrace to their country. His caution they
imputed to timidity ; his circumfpeaion to want
of spirit; and the conotancy with which he pur-
fied his plan, to obstinacy or pride. These re-
fleaions, whispered at first among the soldiers
and fubalterns, were adopted, by degrees, by
officers of higher rank; and as many of them
envied Montmorency's favour with the king, and
more were diffatisfied with his harsh difgufling
manner, the discontent soon became great in his
camp, which was filled with general murmurings,
and almost open complaints against his measures.
Montmorency, on whom the sentiments of his
own troops made as little impression as the infukts
of the enemy, adhered fleadily to his fyterm;
though, in order to reconcile the army to his
maxims, no less contrary to the genius of
the nation, than to the ideas of war among
undisciplined troops, he affiumed an unusual
affability in his deportment, and often explain-
ed, with great condescension, the motives of
his condua, the advantages which had already
resulted from it, and the certain success with
which it would be attended. At last, Francis
joined his army at Avignon, which, having re-
ceived several reinforcements, he now considered
as of itrength fufficient to face the enemy. As
he had put no small confiraint upon himself,
in consenting that his troops should remain so
long upon the defensive, it can hardly be doubted
but that his fondness for what was daring and
fpiendid, added to the impatience both of officers

and

morency's salutary caution ".

Happily the retreat of the enemy delivered the

kingdom from the danger which any rash refolu-
tion might have occasioned. The emperor, after
spending two inglorious months in Provence,
without having performed any thing suitable to
his vas preparations, or that could justify the con-
fidence with which he had boasted of his own
power, found that, besides Antonio de Leyva,
and other officers of diftinaion, he had loft one
half of his troops by diseases or by famine ; and
that the reft were in no condition to firuggle any
longer with calamities, by which so many of their
companions had perished. Neceility, therefore,
extorted from him orders to retire; and though
ie was some time in motion before the French
fufpeaed his intention, a body of light troops,
allifted by crowds of peasants, eager to be re-
venged on those who had brought such defola-
tion on their country, hung upon the rear of the
Imperialifs, and by seizing every favourable op-
portunity of attacking them, threw them often
into confusion. The road by which they fled,
for they pursued their march with such disorder
and precipitation that it scarcely deserves the
name of a retreat, was ftrewed with arms or bag-
gage, which in their hurry and trepidation they
had abandoned, and covered with the sick, the
wounded, and the dead; insomuch that Martin
Bellay, an eye-witness of their calamities, endea-
vours to give his readers some idea of them, by
comparing their miseries to those which the Jews

" Mem. de Bellay, 269, &c. 312, &c.

M 3 fuffered

fuffered from the vidorious and deRrudive arms
of the Romans o. If Montmorency, at this criti..
cal moment, had advanced with all his forces,
nothing could have saved the whole Imperial army
from utter ruin. But that general, by sanding
so long and so ohifinately on the defensive, had
become cautious to excess; his mind, tenacious
of any bent it had once taken, could not assume
a contrary one as suddenly as the change of cir-
cumitances required; and he htill continued to
repeat his favourite maxims, that it was more
prudent to allow the lion to escape, than to drive
him to despair, and that a bridge of gold should
be made for a retreating enemy.

The emperor having conduAed the shattered

remains of his troops to the frontiers of Milan,
and appointed the marquis del Guafto to fuc-
ceed Leyva in the government of that dutchy,
set out for Genoa. As he could not bear to
expose himself to the scorn of the Italians, after
such a fad reverse of fortune; and did not choose,
under his present circumstances, to revisit those
cities through which he had so lately passed in
triumph for one conquest, and in certain expec-
tation of another, he embarked diredly for
Spain P [November].

Nor was the progress of his arms on the op-

pofite frontier of France such as to alleviate, in
any degree, the losses which he had sustained iu
Provence. Bellay, by his address and intrigues,
had prevailed on so many of the German princes
to withdraw the contingent of troops which they

o Mem. de Bellay, 3e6. Sandov. Hihr. del Emper. ii. 232*
P Jovii Hiltor. lib. xxxv. p. 174, &c.

had

was obliged to lay aside all thoughts of his in-
tended irruption into Champagne. Though a
powerful army levied in the Low-Countries en-
tered Picardy, which they found but feebly
guarded, while the ffrength of the kingdom was
drawn towards the south; yet the nobility,
taking arms with their ufiual alacrity, supplied
by their spirit the defeas of the king's prepara.
tions, and defended Peronne, and other towns
which were attacked with such vigour, as obliged
the enemy to retire, without making any con-
quest of importance q.

Thus Francis, by the prudence of his own

measures, and by the union and valour of his
fubjeas, rendered abortive those valt efforts
in which his rival had almost exhausted his
whole force. As this humbled the emperor's
arrogance no less than it checked his power,
he was mortified more fcnflbly on this occa-
sion than on any other, during the course of
the long contests between him and the French
monarch.

One circum{tance alone embittered the joy

with which the success of the campaign inspired
Francis. That was the death of the Dauphin,
his eldest son, a prince of great hopes, and ex-
tremely beloved by the people on account of his
resemblance to his father. This happening fud-
denly, was imputed to poison, not only by the
- vulgar, fond of ascribing the death of illultrious
personages to extraordinary causes, but by the
king and his ministers. The count de Montecu-

q Mnet. de Bellay, asS, Po.

culi,

cull, an Italian nobleman, cupbearer to the Daui
phin, being seized on suspicion and put to the
torture, openly charged the Imperial generals,
Gonzaga and Leyva, with having infrigated him
to the commission of that crime; he even threw
out some indirea and obscure accusations against
the emperor himself. At a time when all France
was exasperated to the utmoll againh Charles,
this uncertain and extorted charge was considered
as an inconteffible proof of guilt; while the confi.
dence with which both he and his officers afTerted
their own innocence, together with the indigna-
tion, as well as horror, which they expressed on
their being supposed capable of such a detestable
aaion, were little attended to, and less regarded'.
It is evident, however, that the emperor could
have no inducement to perpetrate such a crime,
as Francis was still in the vigour of life himfeif,
and had two fous, besides the Dauphin, grown
up almost to the age of manhood. That lingle
,consideration, without mentioning the emperor's
general charaAer, uoblemimhed by the imputation
of any deed resembling this in atrocity, is more
than fufficient to counterbalance the weight of a
dubious teffimony uttered during the anguish of
tortures. Accordino to the moie unprejudiced
historians, the Dauphin's death was occasioned
by his having drunk too freely of cold water as..
ter over-heating himself at tennis; and this ac.
count, as it is the moid iimple, is likewise the modt
credible. But if his days were cut (hort by
poison, it is not improbable that the emperor

r Mem. de Bellay, 289.
4 SaudoY. Hit. del Emp. ii. 23I.

conjeaured

coujeaured rightly, when he affirmed that it had
been administered by the dire~iion of Catherine
of Medici, in order to secure the crown to the
duke of Orleans, her husband t. The advantages
resulting to her by the Dauphin's death were
obvious as well as great; nor did her boundless
and daring ambition ever recoil from any aAion
necessary towards attaining the objeas which she
had in view.

1537.] Next year opened with a tranfa&ion

very uncommon, but so incapable of producing
any effed, that it would not deserve to be men-
tioned, if it were not a firiking proof of the per-
fonal animosity which mingled itself in all the
hostilities between Charles and Francis, and
which often betrayed them into such indecencies
towards each other, as lessened the dignity of
both. Francis, accompanied by the peers and
princes of the blood, having taken his feat in
the parliament of Paris with the usual folemni-
ties, the advocate-general appeared; and after
accusing Charles of Aufiria (for so he affeded to
call the emperor) of having violated the treaty of
Cambray, by which he was absolved from the
homage due to the crown of France for the coun-
ties of Artois and Slanders; insisted that this
treaty being now void, he was dlill to be confi-
dered as a vassal of the crown, and by consequence
had been guilty of rebellion in taking arms againdt
his sovereign; and therefore he demanded that
Charles should be summoned to appear in person,
or by his counsel, before the parliament of Paris,
his legal judges, to answer for this crime. The

t Vera y Zuniga Vida de Carlo V. p. 75. request

request was granted; a herald repaired to the
frontiers of Picardy, and summoned him with
the accustomed formalities to appear against a day
prefixed. That term being expired, and no per-
son appearing in his name, the parliament gave
judgment, " That Charles of Austria had forfeited
by rebellion and contumacy those fiefs; declared
Slanders and Artois to be re-united to the crown
of France !" and ordered their decree for this
purpose to be published by found of trumpet on
the frontiers of these provinces U.

Soon after this vain display of his refeotment,

rather than of his power, Francis marched towards
the Low-Countries [March], as if he had intended
to execute the sentence which his parliament had
pronounced, and to seize those territories which
It had awarded to him. As thle queen of Hun-
gary, to whom her brother the emperor had
committed the government of that part of his
dominions, was not prepared for so early a
campaign, he at first made some progress, and
took several towns of importance. But being
obliged soon to leave his army, in order to super,
intend the other operations of war, the Flemings,
having assembled a numerous army, not only re-
covered most of the places which they had loss,
but began to make conquests in their turn. At
lait they invefied Terouenne, and the duke of
Orleans, now Dauphin, by the death of his
brother, and Montmorency, whom Francis had
honoured with the conftable's sword, as the re-
ward of his great services during the former camn-

u Lettres et Mlemoires d'Etat, par Ribier, a tom. Blois,

*666. tom. i. p. p.

paign,

paign, determined to hazard a battle in order to
relieve it. While they were advancing for this
purpose, and within a few miles of the enemy,
they were ftcpt short by the arrival of an herald
from the queen of Hungary, acquainting him
that a fufperiion of arms was now agreed upon.

This unexpe6led event was owing to the zeal-

ous endeavours of the two fillers, -the queens of
France and of Hungary, who had long laboured
to reconcile the contending monarchs. The war in
the Netherlands had laid waste the frontier pro-
vinces of both countries, without any real ad-
vantage to either. The French and Flemings
equally regretted the interruption of their com-
merce, which was beneficial to both. Charles
as well as Francis, who had each strained to the
utmost, in order to fipport the vast operations
of the former campaign, found that they could
not now keep armies on foot in this quarter,
without weakening their operations in Piedmont,
where both wished to pulh the wsar with the
greatest vigour. All these circumstances facili-
tated the negotiations of the two queens; a
truce was concluded [July 30], to continue in
force for ten months, but it extended no farther
than the Low-Countries x.

In Piedmont the war was Rihl prosecuted with

great animosity; and though neither Charles nor
rrancis could make the powerful efforts to which
this animosity prompted them, they continued
to exert themfelives like combatants, whose ran-
cour remains after their fitrength is exhausted.
Towns were alternately loft and retaken; Ikir-

x Memoires de Rilder, 56.

mifhes

mithes were fought every day; and much blood
was fled, without any adion that gave a decided
superiority to either fide. At last the two queens
determining not to leave unfinished the good
work which they had begun, prevailed, by their
importunate folicitations, the one on her brother,
the other on her hulband, to consent also to a
truce in Piedmont for three months. The con-
ditions of it were, that each should keep poffeflion
of what was in his hands, and after leaving gar-
rifons in the towns, ihould withdraw his army
out of the province; and that plenipotentiaries
should be appointed to adjust all matters in dif-
pute by a final treaty Y.

The powerful motives which inclined both

princes to this accommodation, have been often
mentioned. The expences of the war had far
exceeded the sums which their revenues were
capable of supplying; nor durdt they venture
upon any great addition to the impositions then
established, as fubjeas had not yet learnt to bear
with patience the immense burdens to which
they have become accustomed in modern times.
The emperor in particular, though he had con-
traded debts which in that age appeared pro-
digious z, had it not in his power to pay the
large arrears long due to his army. At the fame
time he had no profpe& of deriving any aid in
money or men either fiom the pope or Vene-
tians, though he had employed promises and
threats, alternately, in order to procure it. But
he found the former not only fixed in his refolu-
tion of adhering Rleadily to the neutrality which he

Y Memoires de Ribier, 6z. · Ribler, i. 294

ter, but passionately desirous of bringing about a
peace. He perceived that the latter were itill
intent on their ancient objea of holding the
balance even between the rivals, and solicitous
not to throw too great a weight into either
feale.

What made a deeper impreflion on Charles

than all these, was the dread of the Turkish
arms, which, by his league with Solyman, Francis
had drawn upon him. Though Francis, with-
out the assistance of a single ally, had a war to
maintain against an enemy greatly superior in
power to himself, yet so great was the horror of
Christians, in that age, at any union with Infi-
dels, which they considered not only as difho-
nourable but profane, that it was long before he
could be brought to avail himself of the obvious
advantages resulting from such a confederacy.
Necessity at last fuxrmounted his delicacy and
scruples. Towards the close of the preceding
year, La Forest, a secret agent at the Ottoman
Porte, had concluded a treaty with the sultan,
whereby Solyman engaged to invade the kingdom
of Naples, during the next campaign, and to at-
tack the king of the Romans in Hungary with a
powerful army, while Francis undertook to en.
ter the Milanese at the fame time with a proper
force. Solyman had punaually performed what
was incumbent on him. Barbarossa with a great
fleet appeared on the coast of Naples, filled that
kingdom, from which all the troops had been
drawn towards Piedmont, with consternation,
landed without reliflance near Taranto, obliged

'iUL. in. Call~-o,

plundered the adjacent country, and was taking
measures for securing and extending his con-
queffs, when the unexpeded arrival of Dori:,
together with the pope's gallies, and a squadron
of the Venetian fleet, made it prudent for him to
retire. In Hungary the progress of the Turks
was more formidable. Mahmet, their general,
after gaining several small advantages, defeated
the Germans in a great battle at Effek on the
Drave a. Happily for Christendom, it was not
in Francis's power to execute with equal exadt
ness what he had Riipulated; nor could he affem.
ble at this junaure an army- firong enough to
penetrate into the Milanese. By this he failed
in recovering poffeffion of that dutchy; and Italy
was not only saved from the calamities of a new
war, but from feeling the desolating rage of the
Turkish arms, as an addition to all that it had
fiffered b. As the emperor knew that he could
not long resist the efforts of two such powerful
confederates, nor could exped that the fame
fortunate accidents would concur a second time
to deliver Naples, and to preserve the Milanese;
as he foresaw that the Italian Rtates would not
only tax him loudly with insatiable ambition,
but might eved turn their arms againit him, if
he should be so regardless of their danger as ob-
flinately to protract the war, he thought it ne-
ceffary, both for his safety and reputation, to
give his consent to a truce. Nor was Francis

a IluanhefE H11. Hung. lib. xili. p. i39.
t' Jovi 1iift. lijb. xXV. P. IS3*

willing

willing to sustain all the blame ofobftruaing the
re-efitablifhment of tranquillity, or to expose him-
self on that account to the danger of being de-
ferted by the Swiss and other foreigners in his
service. He even began to apprehend that his
own fubjeds would serve him coldly, if by con-
tributing to aggrandize the power of the Infidels,
which it was his duty, and had been the ambi-
tion of his ancestors to depress, he continued to
ad in dired opposition to all the principles which
ought to influence a monarch distinguished by
the title of Most Christian King. He chose, for
all these reasons, rather to run the risk of dif-
obliging his new ally the sultan, than, by an
unseasonable adherence to the treaty with him,
to forfeit what was of greater confequence'

But though both parties consented to a truce,

the plenipotentiaries found insuperable difficulties
in fettling the articles of a definitive treaty.
Each of the monarchs, with the arrogance of a
conqueror, aimed at giving law to the other;
and neither would so far acknowledge his infe.
riority, as to sacrifice any point of honour, or to
relinquith any matter of right; so that the pleni-
potentiaries spent the time in long and fruitless
negotiations, and separated after agreeing to
prolong the truce for a few months.

1538.J The pope, however, did not despair

of accomplishing a point in which the plenipo-
tentiaries had failed, and took upon himself the
sole burden of negotiating a peace. To form a
confederacy capable of defending Christendom
from the formidable inroads of the Turkish arms,
and to concert effeaual measures for the extirpa-
tion of the Lutheran heresy, were two great ob-

hi a 4ets

jeds which Paul had much at heart, and he con.
fidered the union of the emperor with the king
of France as an essential preliminary to both.
To be the jnftrument of reconciling these con-
tending monarchs, whom his predecefiors by their
intereited and indecent intrigues had so often
embroiled, was a circumitance which could not
fail of throwing a distinguished lustre on his cha-
raaer and administration. Nor was he without
hopes that, while he pursued thiS laudable end,
he might secure advantages to his own family,
the aggrandizing of which he did not negledj,
though he aimed at it with a less audacious am-
bition than was common among the popes of that
century. Influenced by these considerations, he
proposed an interview between the two monarchs
at Nice, and offered to repair thither in person(
that he might at as mediator in composing all
their differences. When a pontiff of a venerable
charaaer, and of a very advanced age, was
willing, from his zeal for peace, to undergo
the fatigues of so long a journey, neither Charles
nor Francis could with decency decline the in-
terview. But though both came to the place of
rendezvous, so great was the difficulty of ad-
jufitng the ceremonial, or such the remains ofdif-
trust and rancour on each fsde, that they refused
to fee one another, and every thing was tranf-
aaed by the intervention of the pope, who visited
them alternately. With all his zeal and ingenuity
he could not find out a method of removing the
obstacles which prevented a final accommodation,
particularly those arising from the poffeffion of
the Milanese; nor was all the weight of his au-
thority fufficient to overcome the obstinate perse-

3 verance

claims. At lait, that he might not seem to
have laboured altogether without effe&, he pre-
vailed on them to Iign a truce for ten years
[June I8], upon the fame condition with the
former, that each should retain what was now in
his poffeflion, and in the mean time (hould fend
ambassadors to Rome, to discuss their pretensions
at leisure c.

Thus ended a war of no long continuance, but

very extensive in its operations, and in which
both parties exerted their utmost strength,
Though Francis failed in the objea which he
had principally in view, the recovery of the Mi-
lanefe, he acquired, nevertheless, great reputation
by the wisdom of his measures as well as the fuc-
cess of his arms in repelling a formidable invasion;
and by keeping poffeflion of one half of the duke
of Savoy's dominions, he added no inconsiderable
accefflon of fitrength to his kingdom. Whereas
Charles, repulsed and baffled, after having boasted
so arrogantly of vidory, purchased an inglorious
truce, by sacrificing an ally who had ralhly con,
sided too much in his friendihip and power. The
unfortunate duke murmured, complained, and
remondrated againit a treaty so much to his
disadvantage, but in vain; he had no means of
redress, and was obliged to submit. Of all his
dominions, Nice, with its dependencies, was the
only corner of which he himself kept poffeffion.
He saw the red divided between a powerful in-

c Recuell des Traitez, ii. aio. Relatione del Nicolo

Tiepolo de 1'Abocamento di Nizza, chez Dm Mont Corps
Dijiomat. par. ii. p. 174.

N vader

trusted, while he remained a fad monument of
the imprudence of weak princes, who -by
taking part in the quarrel of mighty neigh-
bours, between whom they happen to be
situated, are cruihed and overwhelmed in the
Ihock.

A few days after signing the treaty of truce,

the emperor set fail for Barcelona, but was driven
by contrary winds to the island of St. Margaret
on the coast of Provence. When Francis, who
happened to be not far distant, heard of this, he
considered it as an office of civility to invite him
to take shelter in his dominions, and proposed a
personal interview with him at Aigues-mortes.
The emperor, who would not be outdone by his
rival in complaisance, infrantly repaired thither.
As soon as he cast anchor in the road, Francis,
without waiting to fettle any point of ceremony,
but relying implicitly on the emperor's honour
for his security, visited him on board his galley,
and was received and entertained with the warm-
eit demonifrations of eiteem and affeaion. Next
day the emperor repaid the confidence which the
king had placed in him. He landed at Aigues-
mortes with as little precaution, and met with a
reception equally cordial. He remained on
ihore during the night, and in both vilits the two
monarchs vied with each other in expressions of
refpedt and friendship d. After twenty years of
open hostilities, or of secret enmity; after iTo

d Sandov. Hist. vol. 1i. 238. Relation de 1'Entrevue de

Charl. V. & Fran. I. par M. de la Rivoire. Hist. de Langued.
par D, D. De Vie. & Vailfete, tom. v. Preuves, p. 93.

nuany

many injuries reciprocally inflided or endured;
after having formally given the lie, and challenged
one another to single combat; after the emperor
had inveighed so publicly againif Francis as a
prince void of honour or integrity; and *after
Francis had accused him of being accessary to
the murder of his eldest son; such an interview
appears altogether singular and even unnatural.
But the history of these monarchs abounds with
such surprising transitions. From implacable'
hatred they appeared to pass, in a moment, to
the moss cordial reconcilement; from fufpi-
cion and diftruit, to perse& confidence; and
from pradifing all the dark arts of a deceitful
policy, they could assume, of a sudden, the
liberal and open manners of two gallant gentle-

men.

The pope, besides the glory of having reflored

peace to Europe, gained, according to his ex-
pedation, a point of great consequence to his
family, by prevailing on the emperor to betroth
Margaret of Auffria, his natural daughter, for-
merly the wife of Alexander di Medici, to his
grandson Odavio Farnese, and in consideration
of this marriage, to bestow several honours and
territories upon his future fon-in-law. A very
tragical event, which happened about the begin-
ning of the year one thousand five hundred and
thirty-feven, had deprived Margaret of her firit
husband. That young prince, whom the em-
peror's partiality had raised to the supreme power
in Florence, upon the ruins of the public liberty,
negleaed entirely the cares of government, and
abandoned himself to the most ditfolute de-
bauchery, Lorenzo di Medici his nearest kinf-

man was not only the companion but direnor
of his pleasures, and employing all the powers
of a cultivated and inventive genius in this dif.
honourable minifry, added such elegance as well
as variety to vice, as gained him an absolute as.
cendant over the mind of Alexander. But while
Lorenzo seemed to be funk in luxury, and as-
feaed such an appearance of indolence and es-
feminacy, that he would not wear a sword, and
trembled at the fight of blood, he concealed
under that disguise a dark, designing, audacious
spirit. Prompted either by the love of liberty,
or allured by the hope of attaining the supreme
power, he determined to affaffinate Alexander
his benefaaor and friend. Though he long re-
volved this design in his mind, his reserved and
suspicious temper prevented him from communi.
cating it to any person whatever; and continu.
ing to live with Alexander in their usual famili-
arity, he, one night, under pretence of having
secured him an assignation with a lady of high
rank whom he had often solicited, drew that un-
wary prince into a secret apartment of his house,
and there fiabbed him, while he lay carelessly on
a couch expeaing the arrival of the lady whose
company he had been promised. But no sooner
was the deed done, than flanding astonished,
and firuck with horror at its atrocity, he forgot,
inma moment, all the motives which had induced
him to commit it. Initead of rousing the people
to recover their liberty by publishing the death
of the tyrant, inflead of taking any itep towards
opening his own way to the dignity now vacant,
he locked the door of the apartment, and, like
a man bereaved of reason and presence of mind,

fled

Florentine territories. It was late next morning
before the fate of the unfortunate prince was
known, as his attendants, accnitomed to his ir-
regularities, never entered his apartment early.
Immediately the chief persons in the Ifate affem-
bled. Being induced partly by the zeal of car-
dinal Cibo for the house of Medici, to which lie
was nearly related, partly by the authority of
Francis Guicciardini, who recalled to their me-
mory, and represented in firiking colours, the
caprice as well as turbulence of their ancient po-
pular government, they agreed to place Cosmo
di Medici, a youth of eighteen, the only male
heir of that illuifrious house, at the head of the
government; though at the faiie time such was
their love of liberty, that they established fereral
regulations in order to circumferibe and mode-
rate his power.

Meanwhile, Lorenzo having reached a place

of safety, made known what he had doiie, to
Philip Strozzi and the other Florentines who
had been driven into exile, or who had voluntarily
retired, when the republican form of government
was abolished, in order to make way for the do.
minion of the Medici. By them, the deed was
extolled with extravagant praises, and the virtue
of Lorenno was compared to that of the elder
Brutns, who disregarded the ties of blood, or
with that of the younger, who forgot the friend-
ihip and favours of the tyrant, that they might
preserve or recover the liberty of their country e.
Nor did they reft satisfied with empty pane.

e Lettere di Principi, tom. iii. p. 6a.

gyries;

gyrics; they immediately quitted their different
places of retreat, assembled forces, animated
their vassals and partizans to take arms, and to
seize this opportunity of re-establishing the pub.
lic liberty on its ancient foundation. Being
openly affifled by the French ambassador at
Rome, and secretly encouraged by the pope,
who bore no good-will to the house of Medici,
they entered the Florentine dominions with a
considerable body of men. But the persons who
had eleded Cosmo poffeffed not only the means
of supporting his government, but abilities to
employ them in the most proper manner. They
levied, with the greatest expedition, a good
number of troops; they endeavoured by every
art to gain the citizens of greatest authority, and
to render the adminifiration of the young prince
agre.eable to the people. Above all, they courted
the emperor's protetion, as the only firm foundas
tion of Cofmo's dignity and power. Charles,
knowing the propensity of the Florentines to
the friendship of France, and how much all the
partizans of a republican government deteited
him as the oppressor of their liherties, saw it to
be greatly for his interest to prevent the re-
establishment of the ancient conflitution in
Florence. For this reason, he not only ac-
knowledged Cosmo as head of the Florentine
fiate, and conferred on him all the titles of
honour with which Alexander had been digni-
fled, but engaged to defend him to the utmost;
and as a pledge of this, ordered the commanders
of such of his troops as were flationed on the
frontiers of Tuscany, to support him againit all
aggressors. By their aid, Cosmo obtained an

easy

easy vidory over the exiles, whose troops he fur-
prifed in the night-time, and took most of the
chiefs prisoners: an event which broke all their
measures, and fully eitablifhed his own authority.
But though he was extremely desirous of the
additional honour of marrying the emperor's
daughter, the widow of his predecessor, Charles,
secure already of his attachment, chose rather
to gratify the pope, by beltowing her on his
nephew f.

During the war between the emperor and

Francis, an event had happened which abated in
some degree the warmth and cordiality of friend-
ship which had long subsisted between the latter
and the king of England. James the fifth of
Scotland, an enterprising young prince, having
heard of the emperor's intention to invade Pro-
vence, was so fond of fhewing that he did not
yield to any of his ancestors in the sincerity of
his attachment to the French crown, and so
eager to distinguish himself by fume military ex-
ploit, that he levied a body of troops with an
intention of leading them in person to the aiift-
ance of the king of France. Though some un-
fortunate accidents prevented his carrying any
troops into France, nothing could divert him
from going thither in person. Immediately
upon his landing, he hastened to Provence, but
had been detained so long in his voyage, that he
came too late to have any Ihare in the military
operations, and met the king on his return after

f Jvii Hi't. c. xcvili. p. MS, &c. Belcarii Comment.

1. xxii. p. 695 Ifioria de fai T'mxni di GLiov. Bac. Adri-
ani. Ven. 1jS7. p. so.

the

the retreat of the Imperialists. But Francis was
so greatly pleased with his zeal, and no less with
his manners and conversation, that he cotld not
refuse him his daughter Magdalcn, whom he
demanded in marriage. It mortified Henry ex-
tremely to fee a prince, of whom he was im-
moderately jealous, form an alliance [Jan. s,
4537]3, from which he derived such an acceflon
of reputation as well as security P. He could
not, however, with decency, oppose Francis's
beflowing his daughter upon a monarch descend-
ed from a race of princes, the most ancient and
faithful allies of the French crown. But when
James, upon the sudden death of Magdalen, de-
manded as his second wife Mary of Guise, he
waurmly solicited Francis to deny his suit, and in
order to disappoint him, asked that lady in mar-
aiage for himself. When Francis preferred the
Scottish king's sincere courtship to his artful and
malevolent proposal, he discovered much diffatif-
faition. The pacification agreed upon at Nice,
and the familiar interview of the two rivals at
Aigues-mortes, filled Henry's mind with new
suspicions, as if Francis had altogether renoun-
ced his friendship for the fake of new conneflions
with the emperor. Charles, thoroughly ac-
quainted with the temper of the English king,
and watchful to observe all the fhiftings and ca-
prices of his paflions, thoughst this a favourable
opportunity of renewing his negotiations with
him, which had been long broken off. By the
death of quseen Catharine, whose interest the em-
,peror could not with decency have abandoned, the

r fHi!tofScotland, vol. i. p. 77. chlief

that, without touching upon the delicate quef.
tion of her divorce, he might now take what
measures he thought mof' effeaual for regain-
ing Henry's good-will. For this purpose, he
began with proposing several marriage-treaties to
the king. He offered his niece, a daughter of
the king of Denmark, to Henry himself; he
dc-mandtd thc princess Mary for one of the
princes of Portugal, and was even willing to
receive her as the king's illegitimate daughter h
Though none of these projeded alliances ever
took place, or perhaps were ever seriously in-
tended, they occaiioned such frequent intercourse
between the courts, and so many reciprocal pro-
fcflions of civility and cfeem, as considerably
abated the edge of Henry's rancour againit the
emperor, and paved the way for that union be-
twcen them which afrcrwYards proved so difad-
vantageons to the French king.

The ambitious schemes in which the emperor

had been engaged, and the wars he had been
carrying on for fume years, proved, as usual,
extremely favourable to the progress of the re-
formation in Germany. While Charles was ab-
sent upon his African expedition, or intent on
his projeds against France, his chief- objea in
Germany was to prevent the diffenflions about
religion from diflurbing the public tranquillity,
by granting such indulgence to the protestant
princes as might induce them to concur with
his measures, or at least hinder them from taking
part with his rival. For this reason, he was

h Mem. de Ribier, t. i. 496.

voa. mII. o careful

careful to secure to the protestants the poffeffion
of all the advantages which they had gained by
the articles of pacification at Nuremberg, in the
year one thousand five hundred and thirty-two i;
and except some flight trouble from the pro.
ceedings of the Imperial chamber, they met with
nothing to disturb them in the exercise of their
religion, or to interrupt the fuccefsful zeal with
which they propagated their opinions. Mean-
while the pope continued his negotiations for
convoking a general council; and though the
protefants had expressed great diffatisfaftion with
his intention to fix upon Mantua as the place of
meeting, he adhered obstinately to his choice,
issued a bull on the second ofJune one thousand
five hundred and thirty-fix, appointing it to
aflemble in that city on the twenty-third of
MIav the year following he nominated three
cardinals to preside in his name; enjoined all
Christian princes to countenance it by their au-
thority, and invited the prelates of every nation
to attend in person. This fumons of a council,
an aifrmbly which from its nature and irtention
damanded quiet times, as well as pacific difpo-
tions, at the very jundture when the emperor
was on his march towards France, and ready to
involve a great part of Europe in the confutions
of war, appeared to every person extremely un-
seasonable. It was intimated, however, to all
the different courts by nuncios dispatched of pur-
pose k, W\Timh an intention to gratify the Ger-
mans, the emperor, during his residence in Rome,

i Du Mont Corps Diplom. tom. iv. part 2. p.1 n3S
k Ps!lavic. Hit. Cone. T'rid. 113. had

had warmly solicited the pope to call a council;
but being at the fame time willing to try every
art in order to persuade Paul to depart from the
neutrality which he preserved between him and
Francis, he sent Heldo his vice-chancellor into
Germany, along with a nuncio dispatched thither,
infitruaing him to second all the nuncio's repre-
fentations, and to enforce them with the whole
weight of the Imperial authority. The protest-
ants gave them audience at Smalkaide [Feb. 25,
s537], where they had assembled in a body in
order to receive them. But after weighing
all their arguments, they unanimously refused to
acknowledge a council fommoned in the name
and by the authority of the pope alone;
in which he aflumed the sole right of presiding;
which was to be held in a city not only far dif-
taut from Germany, but fubjeft to a prince, who
was a itranger to them, and closely conne~ted
with the court of Rome; and to which their
divines could not repair with safety, especially
after their doarines had been fligmatized in the
very bull of convocation with the name of heresy.
These and many other objetions against the
council, which appeared to them unanswerable,
they enumerated in a large nianifefto, which they
publilhed in vindication of their conduA .

Againif this the court of Rome exclaimed as

a flagrant proof of their obstinacy and prefump-
tion, and the pope frill persisted in his resolution
to hold the council at the time and in the place
appointed. But some unexpe~ted difficulties

i Sieldan.l. xii. 1z3, &c. Seckend. Com. lib. nii. p. 143,

o a being

being started by the duke of Mantua, both about
the right of jurifdiaion over the persons who
resorted to the council, and the security of his
capital amidit fich a concourse of strangers, the
pope [Od. 8, 1538], after fruitless endeavours
to adjufa these, first prorogued the council for
some months, and afterwards, transferring the
place of meeting to Vicenza in the Vene.
tian territories, appointed it to assemble on the
first of May in the following year. As neither
the emperor nor the French king, who had not
then come to any accommodation, would permit
their fubjeds to repair thither, not a single pre-
late appeared on the day prefixed, and the pope,
that his authority might not become altogether
contemptible by so many ineffeaual efforts to
convoke that assembly, put off the meeting by
an indefinite prorogation ".

But that he might not seem to have turned his

whole attention towards a reformation which he
was not able to accomplish, while he negleded
that which was in his own power, he deputed
a certain number of cardinals and bishops, with
full authority to inquire into the abuses and cor-
ruptions of the Roman court; and to propose
the most effeaual method of removing them.
This scrutiny, undertaken with reludance, was
carried on slowly and with remissness. All de-
seas were touched with a gentle hand, afraid
of probing too deep, or of discovering too much.
But even by this partial examination, many irre-
gularities were deteded, and many enormities
exposed to light, while the resmiedies which they

m F. Paps1, I57. Pallavic. 157. fuggefled

fuggeited as most proper were either inadequate,
or were never applied. The report and refolu-
tion of these deputies, though intended to be
kept secret, were transmitted by some accident
into Germany, and being immediately made pub-
lic, afforded ample matter for refieaion, and tri-
umph to the protestants n. On the one hand,
they demonfirated the neceflity of a reformation
in the head as well as the members of the church,
and even pointed out many of the corruptions
against which Luther and his followers had re-
monlirated with the greatest vehemence. They
fhewed, on the other hand, that it was vain to
exped this reformation from ecclefiaftics them-
selves, who, as Luther fitrongly expressed it,
piddled at curing warts, while they overlooked
or confirmed ulcers 0.

5539.] The earnefitnefs with which the em-

peror seemed, at firif, to press their acquiescing
in the pope's scheme of holding a council in
Italy, alarmed the protefitant princes so much,
that they thought it prudent to fitrengthen their
confederacy, by admitting several new members
who solicited that privilege, particularly the king
of Denmark. Heldo, who, during his residence
in Germany, had observed all the advantages
which they derived from that union, endeavoured
to counterbalance its effeas by an alliance among
the catholic powers of the empire. This league,
diflinguifhed by the name of Holy, was merely
defentive; and though concluded by Heldo in
the emperor's name, was afterwards disowned
by him, and subscribed by very few princes P.

" Sleidan, 233- O Seek. 1.jilk z64.
P Seck. i. iii. 175. Recueil des Traiter.

03 The

The protestants soon got intelligence of this

association, notvithihtanding all the endeavoursof
the contrating parties to conceal it; and their
zeal, always apt to fufpea and to dread, even
to excess, every thing that seemed to threaten
religion, infeantly took the alarm, as if the em.
peror had been juRe ready to enter upon the exe-
cution of some formidable plan for the extirpa.
tion of their opinions. In order to difappoiat
this, they held frequent consultations, they
courted the kings of France and England with
great allidufty, and even beg"m to think of raif-
ing the rcfpcsfrice contingents both in men and
money which they were obliged to furnish by the
treaty of Smalkalde. But it was not long be-
fore they were convinced that these aprehien-
fions were without foundation, and that the em-
peror, to whom reynoe was abahfelncy necessary,
after efforts so much beyond his firength is
the war with France, had no thoughts oif dif-
turbIng the tranuouli:y of Germany. As a proof
cf this, at an interview with the protel1ant princes
in Fr cfort [April a9], his ambahi"aors agreed
that 11 co cfllions ila thaeir favour, particolarly
thd. contained in the pacification of Nurembeeg,
11 osild contirue in force for sift en months; that
durino this period all proce dongs of the Imperial
chmtber against them Ehould be fuifpended; that
a cons rence should be held by a few divines of
each party, in order to discuss the points in con-
trnverly,andto propose articles ofaccommodation
whiclh (hould be laid before the neat diet. Though
toe emperor, that he might not irritate the pope,
who remonitrated against the firt part of this
agreement as impolitic, and againit the latter,

tive, never formally ratijied this convention, it
was obhirvcd with considerable eu±nens, * d
greatly fitrengliened the basis of that <c1!-
ijailical liberty for which the proteffants c 1-
tended 5.

A few days after the convention at Francfort,

Georcre duke of Saxony died £April 24], an I
lii d.eth tlwas an event of great advantage to
tlh' rL formation. That prince, the head of the
Albertine, or younger branch es the Saxon
femly, rnohhifed, as marquis us Mirnia and Tb 1
vinllia, extenilve territories, comprel ending Dreg-
d' n, Leipuic, and other cities row the muit con-
jidernlik in the eklctorare. From the firnd dawn
of tha reformation, he had been its enemy as
axowedly as the eledoral princes were its I ro-
tecrors, and had carried ( n Ins opp fitionii t
only w'th all the aeal floss-u g f 'i m elu't us
prejudices, hut with a virulknce ilfpired I y cr-
f< nal nrtipathv to LBther, and cml ittered bs t1.e
d 'neflic aniianoiity fnbfifng bKtwcen uim ai 1
the other branch of his family. By his diath
without ifhe, his fucceffon fell to his brotlher
IlJenm ', whoue atrachn

r eut to the proteilant rmli-

t'on furpafkfd, if pofible, that of his prmcdccuffr
to popely. Henry no sooner took pofirflion of
his new dominions, than, difr carding a clause
inGeorge's will, dictated by his bigotry, xxheresby
he bequeathsed all his territories to the emperor
and king of the Romans, if his broti cr (Isould
attempt to make any innovation in religion, he
invited some protestant divines, and aimong th In

9 F. Paul, Sz. Sleid. z. Seck. I. ii'. rc.

LBther

assistance, he overturned in a few weeks the whole
fyitem of ancient rites, established the full exer-
iffe of the reformed religion, with the universal
applause of his fubjeas, who had long wiflhed
for this change, which the authority of their
duke alone had hitherto preventedr. This revo-
lution delivered the protestants from the danger
to which they were exposed by having an in.
veterate enemy lituated in the middle of their
territories; and they had now the fatisfaiion of
fceiug that the poffemions of the princes and
cities attached to their cause, extended in one
great and almost unbroken line from the shore
of the Baltic to the banks of the Rhine.

Soon after the conclusion of the truce at Nice,

an event happened, which satisfied all Europe
that Charles had profecnted the war to the ut-
mout extremity that the fiate of his affairs would
permit. Vast arrears were due to his troops,
whom he had long amused with vain hopes and
promises. As they now foresaw what little at-
tention would be paid to their demands, when
by the re-eftabliihment of peace their services be-
came of less importance, they loft all patience,
broke out into an open mutiny, and declared
that they thought themselves entitled to seize
by violence what was detained from them con-
trary to all justice. Nor was this spirit of sedition
confined to one part of the emperor's dominions;
the mutiny was almost as general as the griev-
ance which gave rife to it. The soldiers in the
Milanese plundered the open country without

' Sleidan, z49.

controul,

iternation. Those in garrison at Goletta threat-
ened to give up that important fnrtrefs to Bar-
baroffa. In Sicily, the troops proceeded to 1111
greater exceffess; having driven away thdir ofli-
cers, they elerted others in their flead, defeated
a body of men whom the viceroy sent againlt
them, took and pillaged several cities, conduct-
ing themselves all the while in fiich a manner,
that their operations resembled rather the rgular
proceedings of a concerted rebellion, than the
rafhinefs and violence of a military mutiny. But
by the address and prudence of the generah,
who, partly by borrowing money in their own
name, or in that of their mailer, partly by ex-
torting large sums from the cities in their refpee-
tive provinces, raiferd what was fofficient to dif-
charge the arrears of the soldiers, these inforree-
tions vcre quelled. The greater pait of the
troops were dilhanded, fulch a number only beino-
kept in pay as was necessary for garrifnninj the
principal towns, and proteAing the sea-coast from
the infiilts of the Turks .

It was happy for the emperor that the abili-

ties of his generals extricated him out of thcfe
difficulties, which it exceeded his own power to
have removed. He had depended, as his chief
resource for discharging the arrears due to his
foldiars, upon the fublidics which lie expeted
from his Caflilian fubjeas. For this purpose,
he affembied the Cortes of Castile at Tolkdo,
and hiav ing represented to them the extraordinary
expenee of his military operations, together n itli

5 Jovii HiRl. i. xxxvii. 203. c. Sandov. Ferrerss, ix. 2c9.

the

the great debts in which these had necessarily in.
volved him, he proposed to levy such fiupplies as
the present exigency of his affairs demanded, by
a general excise on commodities. But the Spa.
niards already felt themselves oppressed with a
load of taxes unknown to their ancestors. They
had often complained that their country was
drained not only of its wealth but of its inhabit-
ants, in order to prosecute quarrels in which it
was not interefited, and to fight battles from
which it could reap no benefit; and they deter-
mined not to add voluntarily to their own bur.
dens, or to furnish the emperor with the means
of engaging in new enterprises no less ruinous to
the kingdonm than most of those which he had
hitherto carried on. The nobles, in particular,
inveighed with great vehemence against the im.
position proposed, as an encroachment upon the
valuable and diftinguiflhing privilege of their
order, that of being exempted from the pay.
ment of any tax. They demanded a conference
with the reprefeitatives of the cities concerning
the date of the nation. They contended that it
Charles would imitate the example of his pre-
deceffors, who had resided constantly in Spain,
and would avoid entangling himself in a multi-
plicity of tranfadions foreign to the concerns of
his Spanish dominions, the dated revenues of the
crown would be fully fufficient to defray the ne-
ceffary expences of government. They repre-
fented to him, that it would be unjuit to lay
new burdens upon the people, while this prudent
Ind effedual method of re-eifablifhing public
credit, and securing national opulence, was to-

tally

taillv ngieg ted E. Cliailes, aftcr rmj lox z

; a

nil nt , entreatics, and promtif , but wihe t
mcctis, in order to ovcrcome their obli ixlc , ( .1
wit i 1 the allnimbliy with grGat indig'i athiol.
Flolm that period I ith r the inoblcs nor thic p. -
lites have been called to thef ani inhlije , on jire-
tence that fioch as p-n- no part of the puolic taxcx,
Ilioull not chirm any vote in lax ii.; tl t n ou.
Nonii have kLcn adn littcd to the Coi tcs but the
pjooct.at irs or reprcfenltatirve of < i-litretc citics.
Phluc, to the nilmber of ti g-ilx, bi 1. two
from each ciimmi-xuinitx-, i rox an ai cmii' V. I'cli
bears ixoi ref in Ianie~ eith iir iin power or d~n it y
or iidcpC Idenicc to the ancielt Cortcp, and e e
ahfidutclv at the derotion of the coirt in ,'1 h -ir
<kterimit aii ou u. Thluii the improd lit Ic I xi ii
xiich tlie Calian nohes lad Iijp)t I t e
ruIe l prero ;atixe, in oppoul on to the c' i or

ith tuimmonslx 1 uii th li o. .lot ioi S tl t c -

one thoofanIt dx hnu dred ai d tx c ii ,

tx -out

at last fatal to their oxvuu b id -. B c a
Charles to d prIfs one o5 the it rs in ti e (LL ,
tlie\- dehirox cd that balance to which '

t c ii -

t ution ow ed its fCourits , ai d p it it ii i ii. i xxci-,
or iii tint of his fucceifo:e, to ii 'n 'i i the other,

I to itiip it gra~iualiy of its mnoi saluab 'e pri-

ottat tune, how cx I, the Spii ihi g; d ect

I :11 podcffed extraoi d.:ary 1)00 r a xvll di ri-
:lClc;, whLh they c':ercif d h.nd dcfci dcd xxith
a! 11 to 2htin pecul b to tainiifclvu. Cf this
the emperor ain 11£hd a mortityinig preof dui iig

1i. L. k .:i C, uxriiemcixt, par .!. de Rel',

thC

the meeting of the Cortes at Toledo. As he
was returning one day from a tournament accom-
panied by moid of the nobility, one of the ser-
jeants of the court, out of officious zeal to clear the
way for the emperor, firuck the duke of Infan-
tado's horse with his batton, which that haughty
grandee resenting, drew his sword, beat and
wounded the officer. Charles, provoked at such
an infolene deed in his presence, immediately
ordered Ronquilio the judge of the court to ar-
reit the duke; Ronquillo advanced to execute
his charge, when the condable of Cafdile inter-
poling, checked him, claimed the right ofjurif-
didion over a grandee as a privilege of his office,
and conduded Infantado to his own apartment.
All the nobles present were so pleased with the
boldness of the conflable in asserting the righnt
of their order, that, deserting the emperor, they
attended him to his house with infinite applaufs,
andCharles returned to the palace unaccornpanikd
by any person but the cardinal Tavera. The
emperor, how sensible soever of the affront, saw
the danger of irritating a jealous and highfpirited
order of men, whom the flightedl appearance of
offence might drive to the modt unwarrantabki
xetremities. For that reason, initead of itraining
at any ill-timed exertion of his prerogative, he
prudently connived at the arrogance of a body
too potent for him to controul, and sent next
morning to the duke of Infantado, offering to
inflia what punishment he pleased on the porson
who had affronted him. The duke contidering
this as a full reparation to his honour, inflantly
forgave the officer; bellowing on him, befldes,
a conhiderable present as a compensation for his

wound

wound. Thus the affair was entirJy forgot-
ten x; nor would it ho e diersed to be mention-
td, if it wete not a lriking exan pie of the high
and independent Qpirit of the Spanish noblks in
that age, as well as an inifance of the emperor's
dexterity in accommodating his conduct to the
cir-cumtiances in which he was placed.

Chatles was far from discovering the fame con-

dfeenlion or letitytowards the citizens of Gl·nt,
who not long after broke out into open rehellion
againRi his government. An oevnt whlich hap-
pened in the year one thousand five hundred and
tlirty-fix, gaxe occailon to this rafl infrrerction
so fatal to that flourithing city. At that time
the queen-dowager of Hungiry, govel ness of the
Nhthe rlan ds , Ihavin g received orders from lier
brother to i nade France n ith all the forces which
(he could raise, [lhe alfembkld the States of the
maite i Provinces, and ouitained fee um them a fob-
si fy of twelx e hIusndre si thou and ti r in -, to d firay
the expence oft ti s t 01 el rtiki'tr. Of thi fum,
the county of ] midert w as o' II d to pay a
third part as its proportic n. lBnt thi ciAi en of
Gheot, the mnlt conlijelable cit\ a t at c muntry,
averse to a war twith France, x' it wiMhiclh they
carried on an extentlie and gai li c.mml'-cc,
rfulfcd ti) pay their quota, and comendeJ, that
in coniequence of Itipueations bctxx ce I thi m and
the aticeclors of their prese St sovereign the em-
peror, no tax could be levied upon them, unless
they had gx en their cxprefs consent to tile im-
poltinn of i. The governelf, on the othmt
hand, m.Pnto u d, that ax the fobfidy of to elve

x Sardcr. L:v-q. E.rrers,'xz·. .Mhiniana, 513.
VOL. 111. P hundred

hundred thousand forins had been granted by the
States of Slanders, of which their reprefentatires
were members, they were bound, of course, to
conform to what was enaded by them, as it is
the firit principle in society, on which the tran-
quillity and qrder of government depcnd, that
the inclinations of the minority mult be over-
xuled by the judgment and deciflon of the fupe.
rior number.

The citizens of Ghent, however, were not

willing to relinquih a privilege of such high im-
portance as that they claimed. Having bees
accustomed, under the government of the houie
of Burgundy, to enjoy extensive immunities, an\
to be treated with much indulgence, they dif-
dained to sacrifice to the delegated power ofa
regent, those rights and liberties which they had
often and fuccefsfully asserted against their great-
elt princes. The queen, though the endeavoured
at firit to sooth them, and to reconcile them to
their duty by various conceilions, was at lait (o
much irritated by the ohitinacy with which they
adhered to their claim, that (he ordered all the
citizens of Ghent, on whom (he could lay hold
in any part of the Netherlands, to be arreited.
But this raih arion made an imprefrion very dif-
ferent from what (he expeded, on men, whose
minds wore agitated with all the violent passions
which indignation at opprelion and zeal for
libery inspire. Less affeaed with the danger of
their friends and companions, than irritated at
%he governess, they openly despised her authority,
and sent deputies to the other towns of Fianders,
conjuring them not to abandon their country at
fisch a jundture, but to concur with them in

vmanuicatiag

of a woman, who chhier did not know or did 1 < t
regard their immunita s. All but a fsw inc n-
tiderablie towns declincd entcLing into any- c n-
federacy againift the governdfs: thye join L,
however, in petitioning her to put off the tinm
for payment of the tax so long, that they niihit
have it in their power to fend some of their num-
bhr into Spain, in c dier to lay tihrir tit'e to cx-
cmptilin betore tbvii fouirvign. ThIL ti . grni ted
s ithi i me diaicilty. lBut Chailes rc&\tiJ. their
cominiwuomtnrrs w ith an haughltiinefs to xxhiAci they
w crc not accuifomcd from their ancient prinnc·,
and enjoininig them to yidld the fume rcifKelfA
o' ed'epce to his Giler, which thur ow id to hi oi
iii peiiin, remitted tie examiiiatmn of thiir
U 'n ti) ti coCn.icil of Malihes. Thias carii,

i

i -h is p-x peril a flanding committee of tl

p-s rinent or oiites of the coiuiiitr3 ,auu d w liih Ii -
£: .s the flijirer e ju ifdiction iii dld matte r's chi i
as well as criiniiwl , pronounced the clain ot
the citi/ens of Client to be ill-fooundd, an 1 -
painted them forthwith to pay their jproxust ii
of tie tax.

Enraged at this dccil'on, xxhich they coiF -

cd as notoriously uinjuft, and reiidered diolpeiae
oui feeing their rights bhtrayed by that xery court
whiich was hound to protect ti nm, the p o;L

Ci Ghent ran to arms in a tumultnarv mnuna. r;

drove fiuch of the nobility as resided air rug the 'a
oat of the city ; fcunred several of the ur-pe-
ror's Qflicers; put one of them to the tou uce,

Y Delcrittrone di tuti 1'aefT fafi di Lud. Gu'cciardini.

Ant. 15i1. tol. p. 53.

? ~ Zhl

whom they accused ofhaving flolen or destroyed
the record that contained a ratification of the
privileges of exemption from taxes which they
pleaded; chose a council to which they com-
mitted the direAion of their affairs; gave orders
for repairing and adding to their fortifications;
and openly eredted the i'andard of rebellion
against their sovereign Z. Senilble, however, of
their inability to support what their zeal had
prompted them to undertake, and ddirous of
securing a protedor against the formidable forces
by which they might exped soon to be attacked,
they sent fomne of their number to Francis, offer-
ing not only to acknowledge him as their fove-
reign, and to put him in immediate pofel~fion of
Cihent, but to aflift him with all their forces in
recovering those provinces in the Netherlands,
which had anciently belonged to the crown of
France, and had been so lately re-united to it by
the decree of the parliament of Paris. This un-
expeded proposition coming from persons who
had it in their power to have performed initantle
one part of what they undertook, and who could
contribute so effedually towards the execution
of the whole, opened great as well as alluring
profpeAs to Francis's ambition. The counties
of Slanders and Artois were of greater value
than the dutchy of Milan, which he had so long
laboured to acquire with passionate but fruitless
desire; their situation with refpe& to France
rendered it more easy to conquer or to defend
them; and they might be formed into a separate

Z Memoires fur Ja Revolte de Gantois en 5539, par Jean

d'Hollander, ecrit en 1547. A la Haye, 1747. P. Houter.
RCi. Aufer. Jib. xi. o. 26a. Sandov. Hist. tomu ii. p. zSZ.

principality

pr;ncip Jitv for the dU ke of Odleans, no les. fit-
:k to h i 'e nitth than that wnhih hi, t toer
.1 d o ctaning. T1o 1t<, the 1k. i ,

vb >oC( ancquai tc I '. h th. 1

rx ich 1

an x \troinmlet, vculd cot ive hern aS ic
aid lhis ou n fubj< -0, II I ty of thuir <t1

d thi i ce

(xp itions ;ito i: aih, wotkd hivt turned the ir
arvns towtiids thin q eer xx ith more good-sell,
a. d x ib rreatri r1'gour. S1 vcr-1' coojid itition·,
;iexi thtlec , pret c tod Fritcis fio c'nV i ho ld
of th' s (opportun it , the mu i ftivo irahl Ac 1 1p-
p aXanice xhiloch hlid Lvcr pr lkoted it fdhf, r r t-
tendiitg I' own doouinions, or di ! fi-M tile
ti p. r. I i m t xe time oi their i tcxvie ut
A' uicfnortr , Chi.rkls h ad c~ 'iiin iuii to coul
the Unr' <f I ia e xith xx ond fl attention;
ar I itit a icucd him with hioprs ulf gritifei 4
at k I11kf w i'h~ s coricero in g lie I. or fe, I y
grantwg i e i\ ihiture of it cither to h'li ( r to
one of ioi ,ous. Lit thiiou i thli f hopr aid
pron ifrs xxitinoon its thdr ot! iota t' n
than to <C tch liii frum hix conftli-i -ic', xi i
the gvox I C. >i'o r, or to uraiie fidpicii os in S Ax -
Inan's n irAl y- the o' pi arance ds a cordal >1 t
familiar ittercon C. hi Li hig bet cmn tl i cour s
of Paris nod 1; l id, Francix xx s w e 1k unough
to catch at the ihat.uw by xx ich I c l1 1

. 0 to

often anxrdfed, aod ftiom tagirncfx to f ir it, re-
liniuihed what WuIt

. Lave pi oed a rrore 4'l 1 .n-

tial acquilition. Bridtics this, the dui ' in, ,l-l
10us to exccfs of his brother, aid us x hlng that
a prince xxho fcemtd to be of a reiek ci d cotrr-
prifing nature, thould obtain an c ta liihimenit,
which from its situation mIght be condclred al-
nmoit as a domntiic one, made tide ofMEntmormncx ,

1 3 'xho,

who, by a singular piece of good fortune, was at
the fame time the favourite of the father and of
the son, to defeat the application of the Flemings,
and to divert the kino from espousing their cause.
MNontmorency, accordingly, represented, in itrong
terms, the reputation and power which Francis
would acquire by recovering that footing which
he had formerly in Italy, and that nothing could
be so efficacious to overcome the emperor's
averlion to this as a sacred adherence to the
truce, and refuifing, on an occasion so inviting,
to countenance the rebellious fubjeds of his rival.
Fra,:cis, apt of himself to over-rate the value of
the Milanese, because he estimated it from the
length of time as well as from the great efforts
which he had employed in order to reconquer it,
and fond of every adion which had the appearance
of gecnerofmtv, assented without dificulty to fen-
timents so agreeable to his own, rejeAed the pro·
politions of the citizens of Ghent, and dismissed
their deputies with an harsh answer a

Not satisfied with this, by a farther refinement

in generoity, he communicated to the emperor
his whole negotiation with the malecontents, and
all that he knew of their schemes and intentions b.
This convincing proof of Francis's difinterefied-
ness relieved Charles from the most disquieting
apprehensions, and opened a way to extricate
himself out of all his difficulties. He had al-
ready received full information of all the tranf-
adions in the Netherlands, and of the rage with
which the people of Ghent had taken arms

a Mem.deBellay, p. 263. P. Heuter. Rer. Auth lib.

xi., 63, b Sandov. Hiftor, tom. ii. 284. againfL

againit his government. He was tlhnioi oIily
aconainted with the genius and qualities of his
fabjecs in that couitr ; with tileir love of
lierty; their attachment to their ancient pri-
riIeges and cuitoms; as well as the mniuj iC
obitinacy with which their minds, flt w b it ft n
and perse-vering, adhered to any nm.esfure on w liche
they had deliberately resolved. He ealily fiarw v it
eiconragement and support they m'glit have de-
rived from the afilttance of France ; and thou h
now free from an-c danger on ti at quarter, I e
was fdill sensible that some imme liate as vell s
1' grous intirpotition ws' necedfary, in order t>
pr onnIt the spirit of d;fadfection fu m fpreadii.g
in ~ coutry 'where the numl cr of cities, the mnu
t:ti.de of people, together w it h the gieat saltth
difflQd among them by commerce, rl duied i'
pecundayh sot nidai lek and would ft lv it wit Ii
ie xihau~Iibsle resources. No expedi it, a(.e
long dilibeia:ieon, appeared to him f c eti 1 as
his goirg iin pe 00n to the INthelarLids a d 'le
go;ernefs his diter being of thee fa oe ir'i',
varmly solicited him to undortake the join ax.
There we re only two routts whlich lie e id t ke;
one by laud throtigh Italy and Ge many, ti e
ather entirely hy sea, from some port in S1 tin
to one in the Low-Countrks. But the formne r
was more tedioustann suited the prefeet exigency
of his affairs; nor could hse in colitdency xvith
his dignity, or even his safety, pass through
Germany without fitch a train both of attendants
and of troops, as would have added greatly to
the time he mutt have consumed in hi:s journey;
the latter was dangerous at this season, an i nhile
he remained uncertain with refpeA to the filicnd-

thip of the king of England, was not to be ven-
tured upon, unless under the convoy of a power.
ful fleet. This perplexing situation, in which he
was under the neceility of choosing, and did
not know what to choose, inspired him at lalt
with the singular and seemingly extravagant.
thought of palling through France, as the mod1
expeditious way of reaching the Netherlands.
He proposed in his council to demand Francis's
permiiion for that purpose. All his counsellors
joined with one voice in condemning the measure
as no less rash than unprecedented, and which
must infallibly expose him to disgrace or to
danger; to disgrace, if the demand were rejeded
in the manner that he had reason to exped ; to
danger, if he put his person in the power of an
enemy whom lie had often offended, who had an-
cient injuries to revenge, as well as fubjedts of
present contest itill remaining undecided. Eat
Charles, who had fiudied the charaAer of his
rival with greater care and more profound difeern-
ment than any of his miniffers, perlifted in his
plan, and flattered himself that it might be ac.
complifhed not only without danger to his own
person, but even without the expence of any
concemion detrimental to his crown.

With this view he communicated the matter

to the French ambassador at his court, and sent
Granvelle his chief miniffer to Paris, in order to
obtain from Francis permiflion to pass through
his dominions, and to promise that he would
soon fettle the affair of the Milanese to his fatif-
fadlion. But at the fame time he entreated that
Francis would not exad any new promise, or even
insist on f.ormer engagements, at this junaure,

left

circurrftances, night seem rather to be ex~t itcd
by necelity, than to flow from frienfifhsip or the
love ofjultice. Francis, initead of attending to
the snare which ftch a flight artifice fcarcei) coil-
cealed, was so dazzled with the fph odour ut
overcoming an enemy by aAs of generoisty, and
so pleased with the air of foperiio ity which tl c
rectitude and diihitercftedaiefs of his proceedings
gave him on this occasion, that he at once abiot-
ed to all that was demanded. Judgi I' ot th
emperor's heart by his own, he imagined that the
sentiments of gratitude, arising from the remun-
brance of good offices and liberAl truitment,
would determine him more forcibly to fulfil
what he had so often promised, than the mu1
precise flpulations that could be infcrted iin any
treaty.

Upon this, Charles, to whom every moment

was precious, set out, notwithilanding tie fears
rnd fiufpicions of his Spanish fobjects, with a
fniall but splendid tIdin of about an hlundre d c-
sons. At Bayonne, on the frontiers of FraIl cc,
he was receivtd by the D)auplii.i al d the duii'
of Orleans, attcnded by the connitab:i AL rr -
rency. The two princes o01ered to go into
Spain, and to remain there as hoitages for the
emperor's safety ; but this he rejeded, declaring,
that he relied with implicit confidence on thie
king's honour, and had never demanded, nor
would accept of any other pledge for his fe-
curity. In all the towns through which he
passed, the greatcit poffbile magniFcence n is
displayed; the magizirates p L~cented hin tie
keys of the gates; the primn doers were fct

open,

open ; and, by the royal honours paid to him,
be appeared more like the forereign of the country
than a foreign prince. [1540] The king ad-
vanced as far as Chatcihernuit to meet him;
their interview was diftinguithed by the warmest
expreflions of friendihip and regard. They pro-
ceeded together towards Paris, and presented to
toe inhabitants of that city, the extraordinary
fpe~acl of two rival monarche, whose enmity
had disturbed and laid waite Europe during
twcnty years, making their solemn entry togc-
thler with all the symptoms of a confidential
harmony, as if they had forgotten for ever
pail injuries, and would not revive hostilities for
the future a.

Charles remained fix days at Paris; but

amidit the perpetual car-eles of the French court,
and the various entertainments contrived to amnufe
or to do him honour, he difeovered an extreme
impatience to continue his journey, arising as
much from an appreheniion of danger which
conitantly hautnted him, as from the neceflity of
his presence in the Low-Countries. Conscious
of the dilingennity of his own intentions, he
trenhbled xvhen he refleded that some fatal acci-
dent might betray them to his rival, or lead him
to fufped them ; and though his artifices to con-
ceal them (hould be fuccefsful, he could not help
fearing that motives of interelt might at last tri-
umph over the scruples of honour, and tempt
Francis to avail himself of the advantage now in
his hands. Nor were there wanting persons
among the French ministers, who advised the

a Thuan. Hilt. lib. i. c. 14. Mem. de Bellay, 264.

Icing

king to turn his own arts againit the emperor,
and as the retribution due for so many initances
of fraud or falsehood, to feiie ard detain his
person until he granted him foil sati faciron with
regard to all the just claims of the French croon.
But no conoideration could iodnce Francis to
violate the faith which lie had pledge d, nor could
any argumcnt convince him that Charles, after
all the promises that lie had given, and ill tLe
favours which he had recebied, might ftll be
capable of deceiving him. Full of this false con-
fidence, he accompanied him to St. Quintin ;
and the two princes, who had met him oi the
borders of Spain, did not take leave of bins
until he entered his dominions in the Low-
Countries.

As soon as the emperor reached his own terri-

tories [Jan. 24], the French amnhaflhlbors de-
manded the accomplishment of xhiat lie had pro-
mifed concerning the inveiliture of Milan; blit
Charles, under the plaulible pretext thlit hlii
whole attention was then engroifed by the con-
fEltations necessary towards fippremling tle re-
bellion in Ghent, put off the matter for tome
time. But in order to prevent I rancis from fiil-
peding his sincerity, he dill continued to talk
of his resolutions with refpeA to thait uintter in
the fame itrain us when ihe entered France, and
even wrote to the king much to the fame pur-
pose, though in general terms, and with equivo-
cal expreflions, which he might afterwards ex-
plain away or interpret at pleasure k.

b Memoires de Rjbler, i. Sc4.

Ieano hile,

MVfeanwhile, the unfortunate citizens of Ghent,

destitute of leaders capable either of direaing
their councils, or conduaing their troops;
abandoned by the French king, and unsupported
by their countrymen ; were unable to refit their
offended sovereign, who was ready to advance
againit them with one body of troops which he
had raised in the Netherlands, with another
drawn out of Germany, and a third which had
arrived from Spain by fra. The near approach
of danger made them, at last, so sensible of their
own folly, that tisey sent ambassadors to the em-
peror, imploring his mercy, and offering to set
open their gates at his approach. Charles,
without voucifafing them any other answer, than
that he would appear among them as their fore.
reign, with the sceptre and the sword in his
hand, began his march at the head of his troops.
Though he cihofe to enter the city on the twenty.
fourth of February, his birth-day, he was touched
with nothing of that tenderness or indulgence
which was natural towards the place of his na-
tivity. Twenty-fix of tihe principal citizens were
put to death [April 20] ; a greater number were
sent into banilhment ; the city Was declared to
have forfeited all its privileges and immunities;
the revenues belonging to it were confifeated;
its ancient form of goverrnment was abolished;
the nomination of its magifrates was vefited for
the future in the emperor and his successors; a
new system of laws and political administration
was preferibed b; and in order to bridle the fedi-

h Le, Coutumes et Loix du Compti de Flandre, par Alex.

le Grande, 3 tom. fol. Cambray, 1719, tom. i. p 169.

tious

tious spirit of the citi',ens, orders were gfIen to
eredt a fitrong citadel, for defiray'\g the expeuce
of which a line of an hundred and fifty thousand
floaris was imposed on the innl/tbants, togetuhe
with an annual tax of si thounfund darius for the
support of the garriiol c. By Jiefe Igurons p 0-
ceedings, Charles not only punidhed the citi/eC!
of Ghent, but set an awful example of fes ity
before his other fubjeds in the Netherland:, whole
immunities and eri ileges, parth the c Sea, partly
thin cause of their extetiue camnhci. e, circam-
feribed the prerogatix e of their favertgri within
very narrow bounds, and oftnis flood i.i the way
of measures which he wiihed to nndertake, or
fettered and retarded him in s:s operations.

Chlarles having thsus virdicated and re-eila-

bliiihd his authority in the Lo.v-Coanatri s, aT.d
being now under no neceflity of con: i1. nin the
fame feene of fafehuod a:.d diufidlm!* with)
which se had long sna.ued Franc:, be ?sn ':ra-
duaiht to throw aside the veil uider s Ijich b i
had concealed his intentions wrid ref cdt to the
Milsnelc. At firit, he eluded tL den :ls of the
French ambassadors, whlen they agai r riminded
hiim of his promnifes; then he prope fd, by isay
of equivalent for the dutchsy of lan, to grant
the duke of Orleans the invefiture of Flaider',
clogging the offer, however, with impracticable
conditions, or such as he knew would be reici.
ed d. At lalt, being driven from all his evalions
and fubterfugcs by their infilting for a categori.
cal answer, he peremptorily refuled to give up a

c HarmS Annales Erabintim, vol. i. 6IG.
d Itlern. de Ribier, i. 509. 514.

VOL. IIu. territory

territory of such value, or voluntarily to make
such a liberal addition to the itrength of an ene-
my, by diminishing his own power e. He denied,
at the fame time, that he had ever made any pro.
mise which could bind him to an a6{ion so foolifl,
and so contrary to his own interest t.

Of all the tranfa~ions in the emperor's life,

this, xvithout doubt, refleAs the greatefR difho-
nouron his reputation . Though Charles was
not extremely scrupulous at other times about
the means which he employed for accomplifing
his ends, and was not always observant of the
itriE{ precepts of veracity and honour, he had
hitherto maintained some regard for the maxims of
that less precise and rigid morality by which mo-
narchs think themselves entitled to regulate their
condud. But, on this occasion, the fheme
that he formed of deceiving a generous and open-
hearted prince; the illiberal and mean artifices
by which he carried it on ; the insensibility with
which he received all the marks of his friendi
(hip, as well as the ingratitude with which he
requited them, are all equally unbecoming the
dignity of his charaaer, and inconjiftent x ith the
grandeur of his views.

This tranfafion exposed Francis to as much

feorn as it did the emperor to censure. After
the experience of a long reign, after so many
opportunities of discovering the duplicity and
artifices of his rival, the credulous simplicity with
which he trusted him at this junurce seemed to
merit no other return than what it aAually met

C Ribier,i. 519. f Bellay, 365-6.
F ovii Hiit. jib. xxxbx. p. zz8. a.

with.

with. Francis, however, rernonicrated and ex-
claimed, as if this had been the firlt inldane in
which the emperor had deceived him. Feeling,
as is usual, the insult which was offcred to his
understanding dill more sensibly than the in-
jury done to his interest, he discovered such
resentment, as made it obvious that he would lay
hold on the firit opportunity of being revenged,
and that a war, no less rancorous that that which
had so latily raged, would soon break out anew
in Europe.

But singular as the tranfacdion which hIas bcen

related may appcar, this year is rel derJd dill
more memorable by the edablilhment of the ordcr
of Jesuits ; a body whose influence on eccicliaffi-
cal as well as civil affairs hath been so conlicirahle,
that an account of the genius of its laws and go-
vernment jutly merits a place in hillorv. Wlun
men take a view of thse rapid progrdls of this
society towards wealth and power ; whcn they
contemplate the admirable prudence with which
it has been governed; whsen they attend to the
persevering and systematic spirit with \\hich its
schemes have been carrivd on ; they are apt to
afltibe fulch a singular inditution to the fiipeior
wildom of its founder, and to suppose that he
had formed and dige{ied his plan with profound
policy. But the Jesuits, as well as the other
monadtic orders, are indebted for the exift.nce
of their order not to the n ifdom of thir founder,
hut to his enthfiaifn. Ignatio Loycla, whom I
have already mentioned on occalion of the wound
which he received in defending Pampeluna N, was

II Vol. ii. Book ii. p. 155.

La a fsnatic

a fanatic difcinguifhed by extravagancies in senti.
ment and condud, no less incompatible with the
maxims of sober reason, than repugnant to the
spirit of true religion. The wild adventures,
and visionary schemes, in which his enthufiafsn
engaged him, equal any thing recorded in the
legends of the Romish faints; but are unworthy
of notice in history.

Prompted by this fanatical spirit, or incited by

the love of power and diftindlion, from which
ftch pretenders to superior fandity are not ex-
empt, Loyola was ambitious of becoming the
founder of a religions order. The plan, which
he formed of its conititution and laws, was fusg-
gefted, as he gave out, and as hiis followers flill
teach, by the immediate inspiration of heaveni.
But notwithflanding this high pretension, his
dclign met at fird with violent opposition. The
pope, to whom Loyola had applied for the fancs
tion of his authority to confirm the inflitution,
referred his petition to a committee of cardinals.
They represented the efxablifhment to be unne-
ceflary as well as dangerous, and Paul refused to
grant his approbation of it. At 14t, Loyola re-
moved all his scruples by an offer which it was
impoflible for any pope to refill. He proposed
that besides the three vows of poverty, of chaf-
tity, and of monafdic obedience, which are com-
mon to all the orders of regulars, the members
of his society should take a fourth vow of obe-
dience to the pope, binding themselves to go
whithersoever he Ihould command for the service

i Compte rendu des Con~itutioos des Jefuites au Pant-

rtent de Provence, par M. de Mionclar, p. 28z.

from the holy fee for their support. At a time
when the papal authority had received filch a
(hock by the revolt of so many nations from the
Romith church; at a time when every part of
the popith fyllem was attacked with so n uch
violence and firecefs, the acquisition of a body of
men, thus peculiarly devoted to the fee of Rome,
and whom it might set in opposition to all its
enemile, was an objeA of the highest confe-
quence. Paul, instantly perceiving this, con-
11rmed tile inflitution of the Jesuits lbv his bull
[Sept. 27] ; graited the most ample privikges
to tile membhrs of the society; and appointed
Loyola to be the fiiu general of the order.
Tlhe e\ent halt fully jufifiled Paol's difeeroment,
in expeaing firch beneficial codlequlellces to the
fee of Rome from this inflitution. In kiss tilhla
half a century, the society obtained efhahlilh-
melits in every country talilt adhered to tile Ro-
man catholic church; its power and wealth in.
creased amavingly; the nulnbcr of its men i eri
became great ; thur charader as vdll as accom.
phifhlmenlts were flill greater; alnd the Jfolits
were celtbrated by the fi;ends, and dreaded by
tile enemies, of the RomiTh faith, as the mud
able and enterprising order in tile church.

Tile contitultion and laws of the society were

perfeced by Layner and Aquaviva, the two ge-
clera si who focceeded Lovola, men far superior
to thsir mealler in abilities, and in the science of
g uernment. They framed that fyltem of pro-
jellnd and artfil policy which diffingitilhes tile
trekr. Tle large infuflon of fanaticifin, mingled
n 2 it "'ulations, flhould be irnputed to Lo! ola

ittS

its founder. Many circumitances concurred in
giving a peculiarity of chararer to the order of
Jesuits, and in forming the members of it not
only to take a greater part in the affairs of the
world than any other body of monks, but to
acquire superior influence in the condud of
them.

The primary ohjea of almofi all the monastic

orders is to separate men from the world, and
from any concern in its affairs. In the solitude
and silence of the cloister, the monk is called to
work out his own salvation by extraordinary ads
of mortification and piety. He is dead to the
world, and ought not to mingle in its tranfaEtions.
He can be of no benefit to mankind, but by his
example and by his prayers. On the contrary,
the Jesuits are taught to confider themselves as
formed for aAion. They are chosen soldiers,
bound to exert themselves continually in the
service of God, and of the pope, his vicar on
earth. Whatever tends to inlirua the ignorant;
whatever can be of use to reclaim or to oppose
the enemies of the holy fee, is their proper ob.
jed. That they may have full leisure for this
adive service, they are totally exempted from
those fundions, the performance of which is the
chief business of other monks. They appear in
no proceffions; they pradife no rigorous aufte-
rities; they do not consume one half of their
time in the repetition of tedious offices k But
they are required to attend to all the tranf.
adions of the world, on account of the influence

k Compte rendu par M. de Monclar, p. xili. 290. Sur

ia Deitrunt, des Jefuites, par M. d'ilembert, p. 42.

which

which these may have upon religion; they are
direded to ifudy the dispositions of persons in
high rank, and to cultivate their friendihip ;
and by the very conititution, as well as geIius
of the order, a spirit of aaion and intrigue is in-
fused into all its members.

As the oblje of the society of Jvfuits diffcrcd

from that of the other monadtic orders, the di-
verfiy was no Li:s in the form of its govern-
Inent. The other orders are to be coniidrred
as voluntary aiiociations, ia which whatever as-
feEts the whole body is regulated by the common
fuffrage of all its members. The executive
power is veRed in the persons placed at the hrd
of each convent, or of the whole foeiety the
legislative authority resides in the conmunity.
Affairs of moment, relating to particular con-
sents, are determined in conventnal chipters;
such as refpeci the whole order are co ridered in
general congregations. But Loynla, full of the
ideas of implicit obedience, which he had derived
from his military profehlion, appointed that the
government of his order fhulid be purely mo-
narchical. A general, chosen for life by de-
puties from the several provinces, poffeffed power
that was supreme and independent, extending
to every person, and to every cafe. He, by his
sole authority, nominated provincial;, redors,
and every other officer employed in the govern-
ment of the society, and could remove themn at
pleasure. In him was vefited the fovere'gn ad-
miniffration of the revenues and funds of the or-
der. Every member belonging to it was at lis

£ Compte par M. d: Monclar, p. zz.

dif-

disposal; and by his uncontrollable mandate, he
could impose on them any talk, or employ them
in what service soever he pleased. To his com-
manels they were required not only to yield out.
ward obedience, but to resign up to him the ia.
clinations of their own wills, and the featiments
of their own underfibndings. They were to
lifPen to his injundions, as if they had been ut.
tered by Chriit himself. Under his direhion,
they were to be mere paflive initruments, like
clay in the hands of the potter; or like dead
carcafes incapable of refillance m. Such a fin.
gular form of policy could not fail to impress
its charader on all the members of the order. and
to give a peculiar force to all its operations. There
is not in the annals of mankind any example of
such a pcrfe& despotism, exereifed not over
monks shut up in the cells of a convent, but over
men dispersed among all the nations of the earth.

As the confitiurions of the order veit in the

general such absolute dominion over all its mem-
bers, they carefully provide for his being per.
fedly informed with refpe& to the charafter and
abilities of his fubjeds. Every novice who
offers himfclf as a candidate for entering into the
order, is obliged to man fij his con/fcirnce to the
superior, or to a person appointed by him ; and
in doing this is required to confess not only his
fins or defeaes, but to discover the inclinations,
the paflosn, and the bent of his foul. This
manmfeftation must be renewed every lix months'.

'5 Comrpnu rendu au Parlem. de Bretagne, par M. de

Chaloruls, p. 4', &c. Compte par M. de MRIondar, S;.
185. 343,

a Comspte par M. de Monclar, p. sax, &c.

The

The foc'ety, not fatided with penetiotieg its
this manner into the innermoll reclks of the
heart, direds each member to obhfrve the words
and aaions of the novices; they are coiltjtuiete
spies upon their conodud; and are bound to dif-
close every thing of importance concerning them
to the superior. In order that this fcrntiny into
their charader may be as complete as poitble, a
long nos-iciate must expire, during which they
pala through the several gradations of ranks In
the society, and they muot have attai ted the full
age of tbhi ty-thrco years bessre they ca' I e Ld-
mitted to take the tinal vows, by which they be-
comne fraj;^d men bess o. By tlhfe vs ito a me-
thods, the fupt n ios, undr hol i m

ho

infpedfon the novices are phlced, acqp ire a th s-
rough knowledge of their di'pltii n a It U -
Itt order that the genesisal, hio i, ti e f aI t' at
animates and moves the whole fociekv, n sa I ase
under his eye every t~iing necciT {s to i. mn or
direi4 him, the provincials and I ads of the f'-
vel al houses are oblior d to ti a'on 'U to hi n re-
gular and frequent reports concerning the sen.
hers under their infpedion. In these th 'y de-
feend into minute details with refpe t to the chia-
racier of each person, his hbib ics n'tn 1 or cc-
quired, his temper, his experience in afsil i, and
the particular department fs r which lie is bhi
ittcd P. Thele reports, is hen digelted and ar-

rangr A,

e Comate ear M. de Mooncl. 2p. 241. Sur is Detr.

des Jef. par Mt. d'A emb. p. 39.

P At. se Clialoaris has mrna j cr'auiu;o rs tse numb r of

thafe reparss, wh is the generald the Jduits n.a.1 a t.u ly

re..ve

ranged, are entered into regifeers kept on purpose
that the general may, at one comprehensive view,
survey the fRate of the society in every corner of
the earth; observe the qualifications and talents
of its members; and thus choose, with perfed
information, the instruments, which his abfo-
lute power can employ in any service for which
he thinks meet to defline them s.

As it was the profeffed intention of the order

of Jefuics to labour with unwearied zeal in pro.
moting the salvation es men, this engaged them,
of course, in many a&ive funhions. From their
firfe infeitution, they considered the education of
youth as their peculiar province; they aimed at

receive according to the regulations of the fociecy. These
amount in all to 6584. If this ium be divided by 37, the
number of provinces in the order, it will appear that 177 re-
ports concerning the fiate of each province are tranimitted to
Rome annually. Compte, p. gz. Besides this, there may
be ext·aordinary letters, or luch as are Lent by the monitors
or ypies whom the g:neral and provincials entertain in each
houle. Compte par M. de Moncl P. 435 Hilt, des
Jefuites, Amit. 765. tom, iv* p. 56. 'The pravircials ard
heads of houses not only report concerning the members of
the Lociety, but are bound to give the general an account
of the civil affairs of the country wherein they are fetetid, as
far as their knowledge of these may be of benefit to religion.
This condition may ectend to every particular, Lu that she
general is Lurnifhed with full information concerning t'e
tranfations of every prince and slate in the world. Comnptc
par M. de Moncl. 443. Hilt. des Jesuit. ibid. p. 58. When
the affairs with refpeat to which the provincials or recTors
write are of impo lance, they are direted to ofe cyphers;
and each of them has a particular cypher from thie gereral.
Compte par Mi. Chalotais, p 54.

4 Compte par M. de MIoncl. p. asS. 439. Compie pat

lL. de Chalotua, p. 5. 52zz beiig

Leing spiritual guides and confeffrs ; they
preached freqnently in order to in:itrue tlie
people; they set out as miifionaries to convert
unbelieving nations. The nowhty of the indi-
tlotion, as xeli as the singularity of its objeEts,
procured the order many admirers and patrons.
Tie governors of the society had the address to
avail themselves of every circumntance in its fa-
sour, and in a fhsort time the number as well as
influence of its metmhers increased wonderfully.
Before the expiration of the fixtecnth century,
the Jesuits had obtained the chief diredion of
the education of youth in every catholic coun-
try in Europe. They had become the cofioffurs
of alnoit all its monarchs, a funfmion of no fmxll
importance in any reign, but under a weak pr inxe
frpuliar even to that of mninifier. They wet e
the spiritual guides of almost every person tini-
nent for rank or power. They poffeifed the
highest degree of confidence and interelt with
the papal court, an the moud zealous and ahle
champions for its authority. The advantages
which an asiive and enterpifing buoly of mncx
might derive from all thdef circunifances are oh-
viaIn. They flamed the minds o0fmien in their
youth. They retained an afcendint over them
in their advanced years. They poffeffed, at dif-
ferent periods, the direftion of the muff conti-
dereble courts in Europe. They mingled in all
affairs. They took part in exery intrigue and
revolution. The general, by means of the ex-
ten ive intelligence which he received, could re-
gulate the operations of the order with the most
perfec difceerment, and by meami of his al so-

lute

lute power could carry them on with the utmofit
vigour and effe '.

Together with the power of the order, its

wealth continued to increase. Various expedi.
ents were devised for eluding the obligation of the
vow of poverty. The order acquired ample pof-
fefifons in every catholic country ; and by the
number as well as magnificence of its public
buildings, together with the value of its pro-
perty, inoveable or real, it \ied with the mult
opulent of the morialtic fraternities. Befldes
the sources of wealth common to all the regular
clergy, the Jesuits poffeffed one which was pe-
culiar to themfehas. Under pretext of promot.
ing the success of their mimfons, and of facilitat-
ing the fiupport of their miffionaties, they ob-
tained a special licence from the court of Rome,
to trade with the nations wvhich they laboured to
convert. In consequence of this, they engaged
in an extensive and lucrative commerce, both in
the East and Weit Indies. They opened ware-
houses in different parts of Europe, in which
they vended their commodities. Not fatikdl
with trade alone, they imitated the example of
other commercial societies, and aimed at obtain-

r When Loyola, in the year I jo, petitioned the pope to

authorize the irltitution of the order, he had only ten ditciples.
But in the year i60S, f.xty-erght yeats after their firit indi-
tution, the number of Jeloits had increated to ten thousand
five hundred aed eirety-one. In the year e71o, the order
pofleffed twenty-four praf/Td heufes; fiftyenine houles of
probation; three hundred and forty refidencies; fix hundred
and twelve colleges; too hundred mflfions; one hundred and
fifty femrinarieS and boarding-fChools; and conified of
19,598 jetuits. [lift. des Jetiates, tom. i. p. 0o. isg

ing settlements. They acquired poffefflion ac-
cordingly of a large and fertile province in
the southern continent of America, and reigned
as fovereigna over some hundred thousand sub-
jeds S.

Unhappily for mankind, the vast influence

which the order of Jesuits acquired by all these
different means, has been often exerted with the
mou pernicious effea. Such was the tendency
of that discipline observed by the society in form-
ing its members, and such the fundamental max-
ims in its conflitution, that every Jesuit was
taught to regard the interest of the order as the
capital objed, to which every consideration was
to be sacrificed. This spirit of attachment to
their order, the modt ardent, perhaps, that
ever influenced any body of men ', is the
charaderiftic principle of the Jesuits, and serves
as a key to the genius of their policy, as well
as to the peculiarities in their sentiments and
conduEt.

As it was for the honour and advantage of

the society, that its members should possess an
afeendant over persons in high rank or of great
power, the desire of acquiring and preserving
such a diredion of their condud, with greater
facility, has led the Jesuits to propagate a system
of relaxed and pliant morality, which accommo-
dates itself to the paflions of men, which juiti-
fies their vices, which tolerates their imperfec-
tions, which authorizes almost every ation that

0 His. des Jef. iv. 168-196, &c.
t Compte par M. de Moncl. p.285*

YOL. III. R the

the mofd audacious or crafty politician would
with to perpetrate.

As the prosperity of the order was intimately

conneAed with the preservation of the papal
authority, the Jesuits, influenced by the fame
principle of attachment to the interests of their
society, have been the modt zealous patrons of
those dodrines which tend to exalt ecclkfiaiiical
rower on the ruins of civil government. They
have attributed to the court of Rome a jurifdic-
tion as extenlive and absolute as was claimed by
the modt presumptuous pontiffs in the dark ages.
They have contended for the entire independence
of eccleliaftics on the civil magiilrate. They
have published such tenets concerning the duty
of oppoling princes who were enemies of tlei
catholic faith, as countenanced the mod atro-
cious crimes, and tended to diilblve all the ties
which conned fubjeds with their rulers.

As the order derived both reputation and au-

thority from the zeal with which it flood forth in
defence of the Romith church againit the attacks
of the reformers, its members, proud of this dil-
tinclion, have coifidered it as their peculiar func-
tion to combat the opinions, and to check the
progress of the proteitants. They have made
uife of every art, and have employed every
weapon againd them. They have set tliemferles
in oppohition to every gentle or tolerating mea-
sure in their favour. They have incefanutly dlir-
red up againit them all the rage of ecciefiaflical
and civil persecution.

Monks of other denominations have, indeed,

ventured to teach the fame pernicious dodiincs,

and

and have held opinions equally inconGilent with
the order and happiness of civil society. But
they, from reasons which are obvious, haxe either
delivered frich opinions with greater reserve, or
have propagated them with kfs fucccfs. XX ho-
ever recollears the events which have happenid
in E urope during two centuries, will find that
the Jesuits may juofly be conlidered as refponiiblc
for miioit of the pernicious effeas ariling from
that corrupt and dangerous casuistry, from those
extravagant tenets concerning ecclfiaftical power,
and from that intolerant spirit, which hase been
the disgrace of the church of Rome throughout
that period, and which have brought so many ca.
lamities upon civil fcisety U,

But amnidit many bad consequences fowving

from the institution of this order, mankind, it
muot be ackuowledgsd, have derived from it
fume conliderable advantages. As the Jesuits
made the education of) outh one of their capital
objeds, and as their tirit attempts to eltablib
colleges for the reception of fiudents w-e vio-
lently opposed by the univerlitics in diikcrcnt
countries, it became necessary for them, as the
mout effcAual method of acquiring the puble
favour, to furpafa their rivals in science and in-
dufrry. This pronmptd tOem to cultivate the
ftildy of ancient literature xaich e:etraordinary ar
dour. This put themo upon various methosh tfor
facilitatieg the iniruoctiun of youth ; and by elhe
improvements which they made in it, they have
contributed so msuch towards the progrdfs of
polite laning, that on this account they hbae

u Encyclopedie, art. 7fjfist, tom. viii. 513.

R 2 merit d

Jesuits been fuccefsful only in teaching the ele-
ments of literature; it has produced likewise
eminent mafiers in many branches of science, and
can alone boast of a greater number of ingenious
authors than all the other religious fraternities
taken together x.

But it is in the new world that the Jcfuits have

exhibited the mofi wonderful display of their
abilities, and have contributed moil effeaually to
the benefit of the human species. The con-
querors of that unfortunate quarter of the globe
acied at firit as if they had nothing in view, but
to plunder, to enslave, and to exterminate its in-
habitants. The Jesuits alone made humanity the
objea of their fettling there. About the begin-

x M. d'Alembert has observed, that though the Jesuits

have made extraordinary progress in erudition of every species;
though they can reckon up many of their brethren who have
been eminent mathematicians, antiquaries, and critics, though
they have even formed fume orators of reputation; yet the
order has never produced one man, whole mind was so much
enlightened with found knowledge as to merit the name of a
philosopher. But it seems to be the unavoidable effea of
monalRic education to contra& and fetter the human mind.
The partial attachment of a monk to the interest of hisorder,
which is often inconmpatible with that of other citizens the
labit of implicit obedience to the will of a superior, together
with the fiequent return of the wearisome and frivolous duties
of the cloister, debase his faculties, and extinguilh that gene-
rolity of sentiment and spirit, which qualites men for think.
ing or feeling juily with relpe& to what is proper in lifeaind
condu&. Fother Paul of Venice is, perhaps, the only per-
Ton educated in a cloilter, that ever was altogether superior to
its prejudices, or who viewed the tranfastions of men, and
reatoned concerning the interests of society, with the enlarged
sentiments of a philolopher, with the dilcernment of a man
conversant in affairs, and with the liberality of a gentleman.

nitig

ning of the last century they obtained admilfion
into the fertile province of Paraguay, which
firetches across the southern continmnt of Ame-
rica, from the enit fide of the immense ridge of
the Ande s, to the confines of the Spanilh and
Portuguese fettlerments on the banks of the rixer
de Ia Pilata. They found the inhabitants in a
hate little different fiomn that which takes place
among men when they ftiit begin to unite toge-
ther; itrangers to the arts; fubfilnibg precari.
oufly by hunting or fiihiiig ; and hardly ac-
quaintcd with the first principles of fiubordination
and government. The J. suits set themnfeb es to

b lniut and to civilize these fdvages. They

taught them to cultivate the ground, to rear
tame animals, and to build houle . They brought
them to live together in villiges. They trained
them to arts and mnanufactunrs. They made them
tafee tlme sweets of focictv ; and accuflomed them
to the bifiogs of fecunrit and nrder. Thimfe
people became the fubjrtes of their bcnefaEors;
who have governed them with a tender attention,
resembling that with w hich a flaher directs his
children. Refpemted and beloved almost to
adoration, a few Jesuits presided over some hunm-
dred thousand Indians. They maintained a per-
feAt equality among all the members of the com-
munity. Each of them was obliged to labour,
not for himself alone, but for the public. The
produce of their fields, together with the fruits
of their induifry of every [pecies, were deposited
in common florehoufes, from which each indivi-
dual received every thing necessary for the fopply
of his wants. By this inititution, almost all the
patlions which disturb the peace of fuciety, and

t 3 render

render the members of it unhappy, were extin-
guifhed. A few magistrates, chosen from among
their countrymen by the Indians themselves,
watched over the public tranquillity, and secured
obedience to the laws. The sanguinary punish-
ments frequent under other governments were
unknown. An admonition from a Jesuit, a flight
mark of infamy, or, on some fngular occasion,
a few lashes with a whip, were fufficient to
maintain good order among these innocent and
happy people Y.

But even in this meritorious effort of the Je-

suits for the good of mankind, the genius and
spirit of their order have mingled and are dif.
cernible. They plainly aimed at eitablifhing in
Paraguay an independent empire, fubjea to the
focicty alone, and which, by the superior excel-
lence of its constitution and police, could fearcely
have failed to extend its dominion over all the
southern continent of America. With this view,
in order to prevent the Spaniards or Portuguese
in the ad acent settlements from acquiring any
dangerous influence over the people within the
limits of the pr vince fubjea to the society, the
Jesuits endoavcured to inspire the Indians with
hatred and contempt of these nations. They
cut off all intercourse between their fubjets and
the Spanish or Portuguese settlements. They
prohibited any private trader of either nation
from entering their territories. When they were
obliged to admit any person in a public charaAer
from the neighbouring governments, they did not

Y Hi1. du Paraguay par Pere de Charlevoix, tom. i. 42,

&c. V oyage au Perou par Don G. Juan & D. Ant. de Ul-
Jva, tom. i. 540, &c. Par, 4to. 37 em

permit

permit him to have any conversation with their
fubjeds, and no Indian was allowed even to enter
the house where these strangers resided, unless in
the presence of a Jesuit. In order to render any
communication between them as difficult as pofli-
ble, they industriously avoided giving the Indians
any knowledge of the Spanilh, or of any other
European language; but encouraged the differ-
ent tribes, which they had civilized, to acquire a
certain diale& of the Indian tongue, and laboured
to make that the universal language throughout
their dominions. As all these precautions, with-
out military force, would have been infufficient
to have rendered their empire secure and perma-
nent, they inftruAed their fobjeEas in the Euro-
pean arts of war. They formed them into bodies
of cavalry and infantry, completely armed and
regularly disciplined. They provided a great
train of artillery, as well as magazines stored
with all the implements of war. Thus they ella-
blifhed an army so numerous and well-appointed,
as to be formidable in a country, where a few
sickly and ill-difciplined battalions composed all
the military force kept on foot by the Spaniards
or Portuguese Z.

The Jesuits gained no confiderale degree of

power during the reign of Charles V., who, with
his usual sagacity, discerned the dangerous ten-
dency of the inititution, and checked its pro-
grefs a. But as the order was founded in the
period of which I write the hiflory, and as the

z Voyage de Juan & de Ulloa, tom. . 549 Recueil des

toutes les Pieces qui ont paru for les Affaires des Jefuites en
Portugal, tom. i. p. 7, &c.

a Compte par M. de Mond. p. 312.

age

age to which I address this work hath seen its
fall, the view which I have exhibited of the laws
and genius of this formidable body will not, I
hope, be unacceptable to my readers ; especially
as one circumitance has enabled me to enter
into this detail with particular advantage. Eu-
rope had observed, for two centuries, the ambi-
tion and power of the order. But while it felt
many fatal effeets of these, it could not fully
discern the caufcs to which they were to be im-
puted. It was unacquainted with many of the
singular regulations in the political conritiution
or government of the Jesuits, which formed the
enterpriJing spirit of intrigue that diffinguifhed
its members, and elevated the body itself to such
a height of power. It was a fundamental max-
im with the Jesuits, from their firit inititution,
not to publish the rules of their order. These
they kept concealed as an impenetrable myfiery.
They never communicated them to Ukrangers;
nor even to the greater part of their own mem-
bers. They refused to produce them when re-
quired by courts of justice b; and by a dtrange
solecism in policy, the civil power in different
countries authorised or connived at the eftabliih-
ment of an order of men, whose confritution and
laws were concealed with a solicitude which
alone was a good reason for excluding them.
During the prosecutions lately carried on againit
them in Portugal and France, the Jesuits have
been so inconsiderate as to produce the mysterious
volumes of their institute. By the aid of these

b Hit. des Jef, tomr. 1i. 236, &c. Compte par M. de

Chalot, pa 38a

authentic

authentic records, the principles of their govern.
ment may be delineated, and the fourccs of their
power investigated with a degree of certainty and
precision, which, previous to that event, it was
impossible to attain c. But as I have pointed out
the dangerous tendency of the conflitution and
spirit of the order with the freedom becoming an
historian, the candour and impartiality no kefs
requisite in that charaaer call on me to add one
observation, that no class of regular clergy in
the Romish church has been more eminent for
decency, and even purity of manners, than the
major part of the order ofJefuits d. The max-
ims of an intriguing, ambitious, intercletd po.
licy, might influence those who governed the
society, and might even corrupt the heart, and
pervert the condua of some individuals, while
the greater number, engaged in literary pursuits,
or employed in the funtions of religion, was
left to the guidance of those common principles
which restrain men from vice, and excite them
to what is becoming and laudable. The causes
which occasioned the ruin of this mighsty body,
as well as the circumstances and effcfts with

c The greater part of my information concerning the go.

versmmnt and laws of the order of Jesuits, I have derived
from the reports of M. de Chalotais and MI. de Monclor. I
red not my narrative, however, upon the authority even of
th fe reflpadble magiithates and elegant writers, but upon
innumerable palfsges which they have extraered from the con-
litutlons of the order depoaied in their hbnds. Hofpinian, a
pnotelIant divine of Zurich, in his Hilioria jefnurioa, printed
A. U. 1609, publihed a fmal part of the confllitutions of
the Jefuies, of which by some accdent he had got a copy £
p. I1-54.

d hark DEllIrA. des Jef. par M. d'Alembert, p.55.

which

countries of Europe, though objeAs extremely
worthy the attention of every intelligent ob-
server of human affairs, do not fall within the
period of this hiffory.

No sooner had Charles re-eftablithed order in

the Low-Countries, than he was obliged to turn
his attention to the affairs in Germany. The
proteffants pressed him earnestly to appoint that
conference between a feled number of the di-
vines of each party, which had been ifipulated
in the convention at Francfort. The pope con-
fidered such an attempt to examine into the
points in dispute, or to decide concerning them,
as derogatory to his right of being the supreme
judge in controversy; and being convinced that
such a conference would either be ineffeAual by
determining nothing, or prove dangerous by de-
termining too much, he employed every art to
prevent it. The emperor, hoxvever, finding it
more for his interest to sooth the Germans
than to gratify Paul, paid little regard to his
remonfirances. In a diet held at Flaguenaw
[June 25], matters were ripened for the con-
ference. In another diet assembled at Worms
[Dec. 26], the conference was begun, Melanc-
thon on the one dide and Eckius on the other
sustaining the principal part in the dispute; but
after they had made fume progress, though
without concluding any thing, it was suspended
by the emperor's command, that it might be
renewed with greater solemnity in his own pre-
fence in a diet summoned to meet at Ratifton.
[1541] This assembly was opened with great
pomp, and with a general expeftation that its

proceedings

proceedings would be vigorous and decisive.
By the consent of both parties, the emperor was
entrulted with the power of nominating the
persons who should manage the conference, which
it was agreed should be conduaed not in the
form of a public dilputation, but as a friendly
scrutiny or examination into the articles which
had given rife to the present controverlies. He
appointed Eckius, Gropper, and Pflug, on the
part of the catholics; Melanahon, Bucer, and
Piftorius, on that of the protestants; all mnn
of diltinguiihed reputation among their own ad-
herents, and, except Eckius, all eminent for
moderation, as well as desirous of peace. As they
were about to begin their conilultations, the em-
peror put into their hands a book, composed, as
he said, by a learned divine in the Low-Countries,
with fiuch extraordinary perfpkcuity and temper,
as, in his opinion, might go far to unite and
comprehend the two contending parties. Grop-
per, a canon of Cologne, whom he had named
among the managers of the conference, a man
of address as well as of erudition, was afterwards
fiufpeard to be the author of this thort treatise.
It contained positions with regard to twenty-tE o
of the chief articles in theology, which included
most of the questions then agitated in the contro-
verfy between the Lutherans and the church of
Rome. By ranging his sentiments in a natural
order, and expressing them with great simplicity;
by employing often the very words of scripture,
or of the primitive fathers; by softening the rigour
of some opinions, and explaining away what was
absurd in others; by concessions, sometimes on
one fide, and sometimes on the other; and efpe-

3 cially

phrases, those words and terms of art in contro-
verfy, which serve as badges of diltindion to dif-
ferent feds, and for which theologians often
contend more fiercely than for opinions them.
selves; he at last framed his work in such a man-
ner, as promised fairer than any thing that had
hitherto been attempted to compose and to ter-
minate religious diflentions C.

But the attention of the age was turned, with

fich acute oblervation, towards theological con-
troverfies, that it was not easy to impose on it by
any gloss, how artful or specious soever. The
length and eagerness of the dispute had separated
the contending parties Lo completely, and had
set their minds at such variance, that they were
not to be reconciled by partial conceifrons. All
the zealous catholics, particularly the ecclefiaflics
who had a feat in the diet, joined in condemning
Gropper's treatise as too favourable to the Lu-
theran opinion, the poison of which heresy it
conveyed, as they pretended, with greater danger,
because it was in some degree disguised. The
rigid protestants, especially Luther himself, and
his patron the eledor of Saxony, were for re-
jeding it as an impious compound of error and
truth, craftily prepared that it might impose on
the weak, the timid, and the unthinking. But
the divines, to whom the examination of it was
committed, entered upon . that business with
greater deliberation and temper. As it was
more easy in itself, as well as more confidtent
with the dignity of the church, to make con-

' GoldaR. Conitac, lnper, ii. p. i8a, ceffions,

calative opinions, the difcufion whereof is con-
ined chiefly to schools, and which present nothing
t> the people that either Qtrikes their imagination
a affeds their senses, they came to an accommo-
dotion about these without much labour, and even
dfined the great article concerning julfitication
tc their mutual fatisfaAion. But, when they
poceeded to points of jurifdiaion, where the
irtereft and authority of the Roman fee were
concerned, or to the rites and forms of external
iorffhip, where every change that could be made
must be public, and draw the obhkrvation of the
people, there the catholics were altogether un-
tra~table ; nor could the church either with safety
or with honour aholioh its ancient inlditutions.
All the articles relative to the power of the pope,
the authority of councils, the adnimiiitration of
the sacraments, the worihip of faints, and many
other particulars, did not, in their nature, a(dmit
of any temperament; so that astir lahonring
long to bring about an accommodetion with rc-
fpe& to these, the emperor found all his endea-
rours ineffedual. Being impatient, howevLr, to
*lose the diet, he at lait prevailed on a majority
,f the members to approve of the following
ecefs [July 28] : " That the articles concern-
iog which the divines had agreed in the con-
frence, Ihould be held as points decided, and
k observed inviolably by all; that the other
2'ticles, about which they had differed, should
h referred to the determination of a general
comcil, or if that could not be obtained, to a
na-ional synod cf Germany; and if it {hould
preve impraaicable, likewise, to alfemble a synod,

VOL. Il. S that

that a general diet of the empire should be called
a within eighteen months, in order to give fonie

final judgment upon the whole controversy ; thit
the emperor (hould use all his interest and autho-
rity with the pope, to procure the meetig
either of a general council or synod; that, im
the mean time, no innovations (hould be it-
tempted, no endeavours flhould be employed to
gain profelytes; and neither the revenues of the
church, nor the rights of monalteries, houldb e
invaded i.''

All the proceedings of this diet, as well as the

reccfs in vhich they terminated, gave great of-
fence to the pope. The power wvhich the Ger-
mans had assumed of appointing their own di-
vines to examine and determine matters of con-
troverfy, he considered as a very dangerous
invafilon of his iights ; the renewing of their an-
cient proposal concerning a national synod, which
had been so often rejedcd by him and his predecef-
fors, appeared extremely undutiful ; but the bare
mention of allowing a diet, composed chiefly of
laymen, to pass judgment with refpe& to articles
of faith, was deemed no less criminal and profane
than the worst of tlhofe herefies which they seemed
zealous to suppress. On the other hand, the
protefiants were no less diffatisfied with a recess
that considerably abridged the liberty which the'
enjoyed at that time. As they murmured loudir
againit it, Charles, unwilling to leave any fca
of discontent in the empire, granted them a pr-
vate declaration in the most ample terms, e.-

f Sleidan, 267, &c. Pallav; 1. ii. c. II. p. 136. F.

Paul, p. 86. Seekend. i. iii. 256.

empt.ng

cmpting them from whatever they thonhlit up.
pre~iive or iniurious in the receds, and a citaining
:o them the full poffeflion of all thr p:-rivl~grej
a'hich they had ever enjoyed .

Extraordinary as these concefflons may appear,

the situation of the emperor's affairs at this junc-
ture made it necessary for him to giant them.
He foresaw a rupture with France to be not only
unavoidable, but near at hand, and durit not
give any such cause of disgust or fear to the pro-
teftants, as might force them, in felf-defence, to
court the proteaion of the French king, fronm
whom, at present, they were much alienated. The
rapid progress of the Turks in Hungary was a
more powerful and urgent motive to that modera-
tion which Charles discovered. A great revolu-
tion had happened in that kingdom; John Za-
pol Scapus having chosen, as has been related,
rather to possess a tributary kingdom, than to
renounce the royal dignity to which he had been
accustomed, had, by the aflifiance of his mighty
protedor Solyman, wrested from Ferdinand a
great part of the country, and left him only the
precarious poffeifion of the reft. But being a
prince of pacific qualities, the frequent attempts
of Ferdinand, or of his paridfans among the KIn-
garians, to recover what thea had lolt, greatly
difquieted him ; aid the neccity on thef occa-
fions, of calling in the Turks, whom he conii-
dered and felt to be his maffeve rather thani aux-
iliaries, was hlvrdly less mortifying. II o.der,
therefore, to avoid these distresses, as well as to

gSteid. 283. Seckend. 366. Dum nt Corjs Diplom.

sy.

p.. p.fzuo.

s 2 focure

and enjoying amusements in which he delighted,
he secretly came to an agreement with his com-
petitor [A. D. 1535], on this condition; That
Ferdinand {hould acknowledge him as king of
Hungary, and leave him, during life, the unmo-
leited poffeffion of that part of the kingdom now
in his power; but that, upon his demise, the sole
right of the whole ihould devolve upon Ferdi-
nand h As John had never been married, and
was then far advanced in life, the terms of the
contra~r seemed very favourable to Ferdinand.
But, soon after, some of the Hungarian nobles,
solicitous to prevent a foreigner from ascending
their throne, prevailed on John to put an end to
a long celibacy, by marrying Isabella, the daugh.
ter of Sigifmond king of Poland. John had the
fatisfation, before his death, which happened
within less than a year after his marriage, to fee
a son born to inherit his kingdom. To him,
without regarding his treaty with Ferdinand,
which he considered, no doubt, as void, upon an
event not foreseen when it was concluded, he
bequeathed his crown; appointing the queen and
George Martinuzzi, bilhop of Waradin, guardians
of his fou, and regents of the kingdom. The
greater part of the Hungarians immediately ac-
knowledged the young prince as king, to whom,
in memory of the founder of their monarchy,
they gave the name of Stephen i.

Ferdinand, though extremely disconcerted by

this unexpeded event, resolved not to abandon

h Ifuanhaffi Hilt. Hung. lib. xii. p. n3S.
1 Jovii Hilt, lib. xxxix. p. 233, a. &ce

the

having acquired by his compad with Jul. Hie
sent ambaifadors to the queen to cum p n. ifii n,
and to offer the province of Tranfelvania as a
settlement for her son, preparing at the fame
time to assert his right by force of arms. But
John had committed the care of his son to per-
sons, who had too much fpiiit to give up the
crown tamely, and who poufifed abilities fflfi-
cient to defend it. The queen, to all the address
peculiar to her own sex, added a macnuline
courage, ambition, and magnanimity. Marti-
nuzzi, who had raised himself from the lowcif
rank in life to his present dignity, was one of
those extraordinary men, who, by the extent as
well as variety of their talents, are fitted to ad
a fiuperior part in buitling and factious times.
In discharging the fuanions of his ecclefialtical
office, he put on the semblance of an humble and
auffere fanaity. In civil tranfadions, he difeo-
vered indultry, dexterity, and buldnefs. D)rn-i'g
war, he laid alide the cassock, and appeared on
horseback with his feymetar and buckler, as
alive, as oftentatioos5 and as gallant as any of
his countrymen. Amidd all these diffxrent and
contradiaory forms which he could assume, an
infatiahle deilre of dominion and authority was
conspicuous. From such persons it was obvious
what answer Ferdinand had to exped. He soon
perceived that he muff depend on arms alone for
recovering Hungary. Having levied for this
purpose a considerable body of Germans, whom
his partisans among the Hungarians joined with
their vallids, he ordered them to march into that
part of the kingdom which adiser-eA to Stephen.

s 3 Alart:nuLz1,

powerful army in the field, satisfied himself with
holding out the towns, all of which, especially
Buda, the place of greateRt consequence, he
provided with every thing necessary for defence;
and in the mean time he sent ambassadors to Soly-
man, beseeching him to extend towards the son
the fame imperial proteaion which had so long
maintained the father on his throne. The ful-
tan, though Ferdinand used his utmost endea-,
vours to thwart this negotiation, and even offered
to accept of the Hungarian crown on the fame
ignominious condition, of paying tribute to the
Ottoman Porte, by which John had held it, saw
such profpeds of advantage from espousing the
intereff of the young king, that he initantly
pronmifed him his protedion; and commanding
one army to advance forthwith towards Hun-*
gary, he himself followed with another. Mean-
while the Germans, hoping to terminate the war
by the redudion of a city in which the king and
his mother were shut up, had formed the liege
of Buda. Martinuzzi, having drawn thither
the firength of the Hungarian nobility, defended
the town with such courage and skill, as allowed
the Turkilh forces time to come up to its
relief. They instantly attacked the Germans,
weakened by fatigue, diseases, and desertion, and
defeated them with great slaughter k

Solyman soon after joined his viaorious

troops, and being weary of so many expensive
expeditions undertaken in defence of dominions
which were not his own, or being unable to

k Ituanhasti Hist. Hung, jib. xiv. p. z50. refit

while poffeffed by an infant, under the guardian-
ship ofa woman and a priest, he allowed intereited
considerations to triumph with too much facility
over the principles of honour and thc sentiments
ofhumanity. What he planned ungenerously,
he executed by fraud. Having prevailed on the
queen to fend her son, whom he pretended to be
desirous of feeing, into his camp, and having, at
the fame time, invited the chief of the nobility
to an entertainment there, while thex-, fufplieing
no treachery, gave themselves up to the mirth
and jollity of the feast, a felea band of troops
by the fultan's orders seized one of the gates of
Buda. Being thus master of the capital, of the
king's person, and of the leading men among the
nobles, he gave orders to condud the queen, to-
gether with her son, to Transylvania, which pro-
vince he allotted to them, and appointing a
Bafha to preside in Buda with a large body of
soldiers, annexed Hungary to the Ottoman em-
pire. The tears and complaints of the unhappy
queen had no inluence to change his purpose,
nor could Martinuzzi either retft his ahfulnte
and uncontrollable command, or prevail on him
to recall it i.

Before the account of this violent usurpation

reached Ferdinand, he was so unlucky as to have
dispatched other ambalkadors to Solyman with a
fresh representation of his right to the crown of
Hungary, as well as a renewal of his former
overture to hold the kingdom of the Ottoman

I Imuanhaffi1 HtL. Hung. lib. xiv. p. 56. Jovil Hifor.

lib. xxxix. p. 2476, &c.

Forte,

Porte, and to pay for it an annual tribute.
This ill-timed proposal was rejeaed with scorn.
The sultan, elated with success, and thinking
that he might prescribe what terms he pleased to
a prince who voluntarily proffered conditions so
unbecoming his own dignity, declared that he
would not suspend the operations of war, unless
Ferdinand instantly evacuated all the towns which
he fill held in Hungary, and consented to the
imposition of a tribute upon Aufria, in order
to reimburse the sums which his presumptuous
invasion of Hungary had obliged the Ottoman
Porte to expend in defence of that kingdom "i.

In this fdate were the affairs ofHungary. As

the unfortunate events there had either happened
before the difiolutions of the diet at Ratisbon, or
were dreaded at that time, Charles saw the danger
of irritating and inflaming the minds of the Ger-
mans, while a formidable enemy was ready to
break into the empire; and perceived that he
could not expea any vigorous affiflance either
towards the recovery of Hungary, or the defence
of the Aufrian frontier, unless he courted and
satisfied the proteflants. By the conceflions
which have been mentioned, he gained this point,
and such liberal supplies both of men and money
were voted for carrying on the war against the
Turks, as left him under little anxiety about the
security of Germany during next campaign ".

Immediately upon the conclusion of the diet,

the emperor set out for Italy. As he passed
through Lucca, he had a ihort interview with

in Iftuanhaffil His. Hung. lib. xiv. p. iS.·
a Sleid. 283. the

the pope; but nothing could be concluded con-
cerning the proper method of composing the
religious disputes in Germany, betwern two
princes, whole views and iuttrelis w ithl regard
to that matter were at this juncture lo oppoilte.
The pope's eudeavours to rrmoxe the clsus of
discord between Charl's and Francis, aid to cx-
tinguifh those mutual animofities u lich tlhratcn-
ed to break out suddenly into open holtility,
were not more fuccefsful.

The emperor's thoughts were bent so entirely,

at that time, on the great enterprise which he
had concerted against Algiers, that be liftned
with little atrention to the pope's fchlcme3
or overtures, and hastened to join his army and
fleet o.

Algiers still continued in that slate of depend-

ence onthe Turkish empire to which Barbarossa
had fubjeced it. Ever since he, as Captain
Bafha, commanded the Ottoman fleet, Algiers
had been governed by Hafeen-Aga, a renegado
eunuch, who, by passing through every ilatioj
in the corfair's service, had acquired such expe-
rience in war, that he was well fitted for a itation
which required a man of tried and daring courage.
Ilafeen, in order to (hew how well he deserved
that dignity, carried on his piratical depredations
against the Christian dlates with amazing a6{ivity,
and outdid, if possible, Barbarossa himself in
boldness and cruelty. The commerce of the
Mediterranean was greatly interrupted by his
cruisers, and such frequent alarms given to the
coast of Spain, that there was a necefhity of

V Sandov. Hi~or. tom. ii. 298. eree~ingr

ereaing watch-towers at proper diitances, and
of keeping guards constantly on foot, in order to
descry the approach of his squadrons, and to
protea the inhabitants from their descents P.
Of this the emperor had received repeated arnd
clamorous complaints from his fuibjeds, who
represented it as an enterprise corresponding to
his power, and becoming his humanity, to re-
duce Algiers, which, since the conquefl of
Tunis, was the common receptacle of all the
free-booters; and to exterminate that lawless race,
the implacable enemies of the Christian name.
Moved partly by their entreaties, and partly
allured by the hope of adding to the glory
which he had acquired by his lait expedition Into
Africa, Charles, before he left Mviadrid in his
way to the Low-Countries, had issued orders
both in Spain and Italy, to prepare a fleet and
army for this purpose. No change in circum-
fdances, since that time, could divert him from
this resolution, or prevail on him to turn his
arms towards Hungary; though the success of
the Turks in that country seemed more imme-
diately to require his presence there; though
many of his mod faithful adherents in Germany
urged that the defence of the empire ought to
be his firdt and peculiar care; though such as
bhre him no good-will ridiculed his prepoilerous
condud in flying from an enemy almodt at hand,
that he might go in quest of a remote and more
ignoble foe. But to attack the sultan in Hun-
galy, how splendid soever that meaflure might
appear, was an undertaking which exceeded his

P Jovii Hilt. I. xL p. z66.

power,

power, and was not confillent with his intertit.
lo draw troops out of Spain or Italy, to march
them into a country so diitant as Hungary, to
provide the vast apparatus necehlary for trauf-
porting thither the artillery, ammunition, and
baggage of a regular army, and to pulh the war
in that quarter, where there was little profpeci
of bh inging it to an issue during several cam-
paigos, were undertakings so expenvre and un-
wieldy as did not ccrrefpond nith the low con-
d tion of the el'pesor's treafiury. While his
principal fsrce was thus emplo) ed, his dominiions
in Italy and tile Low-Countries muit hate kini
open to the French king, who would not have
allowed fucl a favourable oppertunity of atta L-
ing them to ge unIimpruxed. 'Whereas the
African expedition, the presparatlns fur which
were already sinilhsed, and ahlnot the whole cx-
pence of it defrayed, would depced upofn a
ingle effort; and bcfdes the fecnritv and fatif-
fa{iaon which thse fsecefs of it mult give lsl
fubjeas, would detain him during so Ihort a
space, that Fraincis could hardly take adxas-
te ge of Isis ablence, to insade his doissinions in
Europe.

On all thlee accounts, Charles adhered to Isis

firfd pla', and with fueh determined ubitinac,
that he paid no regaril to tile pope, who advised,
or to Andrew Doria, who conjured him not to
expoic his whole armament to ahinof unavoidable
dedruCtion, by venturing to approach the dan-
gerous coadi of Algiers at fuclh an advanced fra-
fun of the year, and when the autumnal wvinds
were so r iolent. Having embarked on boari
Duria's gallies at Forto-Venere in thle Uenocfe

terri-

sailor had not judged wrong concerning the ele-
ment with which he was so well acquainted; for
fulch a florm arose, that it was with the utmost
difficulty and danger he reached Sardinia, the
place of general rendezvous. But as his courage
was undaunted, and his temper often inflexible,
neither the renewed remonfirances of the pope
and Doria, nor the danger to which he had al-
ready been exposed by disregarding their advice,
had any other efled than to confirm him in his
fatal resolution. The force, indeed, which he
had colieaed, was filch as might have inspired a
prince less adventurous, and less confident in his
own schemes, with the most sanguine hopes of
success. It confilled of twenty thousand foot,
and two thousand horse, Spaniards, Italians,
and Germans, moffly veterans, together with
three thouiand volunteers, the flower of the
Spanish and Italian nobility, fond of paying
court to the emperor by attending him in his
favourite expedition, and eager to share in the
glory which they believed he was going to
reap; to these were added a thousand soldiers
sent from Malta by the order of St. John, led
by ans hundred of its most gallant knights.

The voyage, from Majorca to the African

coa{t, was not less tedious, or full of hazard,
than that which he had juit finished. When he
approached the land, the roll of the sea, and
vehemence of the winds, would not permit the
troops to diembnark. But at last, the emperor,
seizing a favourable opportunity, landed them
without oppolition, not far fiom Algiers, and
immediately advanced towards the town. To

oppose

oppose this mighty army, Hafcen had only eight
hundred Turks, and five thoufiind Moors, partly
natives of Africa, and partly refugees from
Granada. He returned, however, a fierce and
haughty answer, when summoned to furrcnder.
But with fubc a handfil of soldiers, neither his
desperate courage, nor coufommate skill in xvar,
could have long rciiked forces superior to tliofe
wjiich had defeated Barbarofia at the 'i ad of
Exty thoofand men, and which had rI.ducied
'i'unis, in spite of all his endeavours to fare it.

But how far soever the emperor might thiiik

hiinifelf beyond the reach of any danger from the
enemy, hle was fulddLnly expoftd to a more dread-
ful calamit\ , aiid one againl. which h1umnni pin-
deuce aiid humaii effii ts a\aicil nothiing. (O
the econ d day after Iis la u ding, aid efi re lie
had time for ano thi 1 biut to (hilpelfe some light-
armed Arahis o ho n.nkefttd his troops on their
march, the clouds hrgan to gather, and the
heaveiis to appear xith a fierce and tlireate.iiig
aspect. Towards evening, raiin began to fall,
accompanied with violent xwind ; and tihe rage of
the tempeit increasing, duriig the niiht, the
soldiers, xvho had brought nothing -ilhure bht
their arms, remained exposed to all its fury,
wvithout tents, or fhclter, or cover of any kimid.
Time ground xvas soon so wet that they could not
lie doxvn on it; their camp being in a low fito-
ation, was overflowed xviths water, and they fink
at every flep to the ankles in mud; xvhile the
wind blew xvith fucl impetuoofity, that, to pre-
vent their fallimig, they were obdiged to thirult
their spears jito the ground, amid to support
thiemfelves by taking hold of them. Hafen was

TOL. III. T 109

too vigilant an officer to allow an enemy in Luch
ditrefs to remain unmolefied. About the dawn
of morning, he sallied out with soldiers, who
having been screened from the iform under their
own roofs, were fresh and vigorous. A body of
Italians, who were Rtationed nearedt the city,
dispirited and benumbed with cold, fled at the
approach of the Turks. The troops at the
podt behind them discovered greater courage;
but as the rain had extinguofhed their matches,
and wetted their powder, their muskets were
ufeelefs, and having fearcely strength to handle
their other arms, they were soon thrown into
confuiion. Almost the whole army, with the
emperor himfeif in person, was obliged to ad-
vance, before the enemy could be repulsed, who,
after spreading Luch general condlernation, and
killing a considerable number of men, retired at
laid in good order.

But all feeling or remembrance of this los

and danger were quickly obliterated by a more
dreadful as well as affecing fpeaacle. It was
now broad day; the hurricane had abated no-
thing of its violence, and the sea appeared agi-
tated with all the rage of which that dedtrudive
clement is capable; all the (hips, on which alone
the whole army knew that their safety and fob-
htdence depended, were seen driven from their
anchors, some dashing againfd each other, some
beat to pieces on the rocks, many forced ashore,
and not a few linking in the waves. In less
than an hour, fifteen (hips of war, and an hun-
dred and forty transports with eight thousand
men, perished; and such of the unhappy crews
as efeaped the fury of the sea, were murdered

without

reached land. The emperor flood in filint
anguish and astonishment beholding this fatal
event, which at once blated all his hopes of sac-
cess, and buried in the depths the vast fiores
which he had provided, as well for annoying the
enemy, as for subsisting his own troops. He
had it not in his power to afford them any other
afliftance or relief than by sending fume troops to
drive away the Arabs, and thus dlixelerig a
few who were so fortunate as to get athore from
the cruel fate which their companions had met
with. At last the wind began to fall, and to giv e
some hopes that as many f hips might efeape as
would be fufficient to fare the army from perith-
ing by famine, and transport themn back to Eu-
rope. But these were only hopis ; the approach
of evening covered the sea with darkness; and it
being impossible for the officers aboard the Ihils
which had outlived the florm, to fend any intel-
ligence to their companions who were ashore,
they remained during the night in all the ang iftl
of fufpence and uncertainty. Next day, a boat
dispatched by Doria made shift to reacs lar d,
with information, that having weathered out the
storm, to which, during fifty years knon lekge
of the sea, he had never seen any equal in tierce-
ness and horror, he had found it neceffhrv to
bear away with his fhattrccd {hips to Cape
Metafuz. He advised the emperor, as tihe face
of the sky was itill lowering and tcmpefiuoua,
to march with all speed to that place, where
the troops could re-embark wihh greater cafe.

Whatever comfort this intcllhgence afforded

Charles, from being assured that part of his

T 2 fcet

fleet had escaped, was balanced by the new cares
and perplexity in which it involved him with re-
gard to his army. Metafuz was at leadt three
days march from his present camp; all the pro-
viians which he had brought ashore at his firit
landing were now consumed; his soldiers, worn
out with fatigue, were hardly able for fucl a
march, even in a friendly country; and being
dispirited by a fucceflion of hardihips, which
vi~tory itself would fearcely have rendered toler-
able, they were in no condition to undergo new
toils. But the fituatiun of the army was fulch
as allowed not one moment for deliberatiun, nor
left it in the leadt doubtful what to choose.
They were ordered initantly to march, the
wounded, the sick, and the feeble being placed
in the centre; such as seemed modt vigorous
were Rtationed in the front and rear. Then the
fad effefis of what they had fuffered began to
appear more manifedily than ever, and new ca-
lamities were added to all those which they had
already endured. Some could hardly bear the
weight of their arms; others, spent with the
toil of forcing their way through deep and
almodt impassable roads, funk down and died;
many perished by famine, as the whole army
fubired chiefly on roots and berries, or the flesh
of horses, killed by the emperor's order, and
didtributed among the several battalions; many
wvere drowned in brooks, which were fiivllen so
much by the exceflive rains, that in pafling them
they waded up to the chin ; not a fewv were killed
by the enemy, who, during the greateRt part of
their retreat, alarmed, harassed, and annoyed
them night and day. At lait they arrived at

Metafuz;

to restore their communication with the fleet,
they were supplied with plenty of proviflions, and
cheered with the profped of safety.

During this dreadful series of calamitics, the

emperor discovered great qrralirie', marry of
which a long continued flow of prufpciitv had
fearcely afforded him an opporturritv of dipiala-
ing. He appearled colfpicnous for firmness a d
constancy of fjpirit, for magnanimity, frrtiturdc,
humanity, and compaflion. He endured as grelt
hardships as the meanest soldier ; he expfofd iris
own person wherever danger threatLrred ; he on-
couraged tihe dcfporrdirrg, v;lrttd the lick and
wounded, and anirmated all by his nords arrd
example. Wihen tire armn) ermbarkred, he was
among the last vwho lkft the fihore, althbough
a body of Arabs hovered at no gr-eat dirlance,
ready to fall on the rear. By tirefe virtues,
Charles atoned, in some degree, for iis olrhtiirnacy
and presumption in undcrtakinrg an expurlrtiorn so
fatal to his fubjeds.

The calamities which attended this uinfortunate

enterprise did not end here; for no sooner were
the forces got on board, than a new itorm arif-
ing, though less furiorns than the former, scat-
tered the fleet, and obliged threm, separately, to
make towards such ports in Spain or Italy as
they could first reach; thus spreading the ac-
count of their disasters, with all the circumitances
of aggravation and horror, which their imagina-
tion, fitll under the influence of fear, suggested.
The emperor hnimfelf, after efeaping great dan-
gers, and being forced into the port of Bugia in
Africa [Dec. z], where he was obliged by con-

T 3 trary

# BOOK VII.

trary winds to remain several weeks, arrived at
last in Spain, in a condition very different from
that in which he had returned from his former
expedition against the infidelsz.

BOOK.VII.

H E calamities which the emperor fuffered in
his unfortunate enterprize againit Algiers

were great; and the account of these, which
augmented in proportion as it spread at a greater
diitance from the scene of his difalters, encou-
raged Francis to begin hostilities, on which he
had been for some time resolved. But he did
not think it prudent to produce, as the motives
of this resolution, eithser his aucient pretenflions
to the dutchy of Milan, or the emperor's dif-
ingenuity in violating his repeated promises with
regard to the restitution of that country. The
former might have been a good reason againit
concluding the truce of Nice, but was none for
breaking it ; the latter could not be urged with-
out exposing his own credulity as much as the
emperor's want of integrity. A violent and
unwarrantable adlion of one of the Imperial ge-
nerals furnished him with a reason to justify his

z Carol. V. Expeditio ad Argyriam, per Nicolaunt Vil.

lagnonem Equitem Rhodium, ap. Scardium, v. ii. 365*
Jovii Hist. 1. xl. p. 269, &c. Vera y Zuniga Vida de
Carlos V. p 83. Sandov. Hiitor. ii. 199, &c.

taking

taking arms, which was of greater weigiht than
either of these, and fich as would have roused
him, if he had been as desirous of peace as he
was eager for war. Francis, by signing the
treaty of truce at Nice, without consulting
Solyman, gave (as he foresaw) great offence to
that haughty monarch, xvho conjidered an alli-
ance with him as an honour of which a Chriffian
prince had cause to be proud. The friendly
interview of the French king with the emperor
in Provence, followed by Loch extraordinary ap-
pearances of union aud confidence which dillin-
guilhed the reception of Charles when he palfed
through the dominions of Francis to the Low-
Countries, induced the sultan to fufped that
the two rivals had at last forgotten their ancient
enmity, in order that they might form such a
general confederacy againit the Ottoman power,
as had been long withed for in Chrifiendom, and
often attempted in vain. Charles, with his
usual art, endeavoured to confirm and fireugthen
these suspicions, by initruaing his emifharies at
Conflautinople, as well as in those courts with
which Solyman hdld any intelligence, to rcpre-
Lent tile concord between him and Francis to be
Lo entire, that their fentimneuts, views, and pur-
foits, would be the fame for the future a. It
was not without diffculty that Francis effaced
these impressions; but the addrels of Rincon,
the French ambafiador at the Porte, together
with the manifelt advantage of carrying on hof-
tilities againfit the house of Anitria in conceit
wvith France, prevailed at length oi the sultan

* Mem, de Rtbler, tom. i. p. 53S.

uot

not only to banish his suspicions, but to enter
into a closer conjundion with Francis than ever.
Rincon returned into France, in order to com-
municate to his maiter a scheme of the fultan's
for gaining the concurrence of the Venetians in
their operations against the common enemy.
Solyman having lately concluded a peace with
that republic, to which the mediation of Francis
and the good offices of Rincon had greatly con-
tributed, thought it not impossible to allure the
senate by such advantages, as, together with the
example of the French monarch, might over-
balance any scruples arising either from decency
or caution, that could operate on the other dide.
Francis, warmly approving of this meafnre, dif-
patched Rincon back to Conitantinople, and di-
rcEting him to go by Venice along with Fregofo,
a Genoese exile, whom he appointed his am-
baffador to that republic, empowered them to
negotiate the matter with the senate, to whom
Solyman had sent an envoy for the fame pur-
pose h. The marquis del Guafto, governor of
the Milanele, an officer of great abilities, hut
capable of attempting and executing the molt
atrocious aftions, got intelligence of the motions
and deltination of these ambassadors. As he
knew how much his maiter wilhed to discover
the intentions of the French king, and of what
consequence it was to retard the execution of his
measures, he employed fume soldiers belonging
to the garrison of Pavia to lie in wait for Rincon
and Fregofo as they failed down the Po, who
murdered them and molt of their attendants,

b HiRl, deVenet. de Paruta, iv. iz. a

and

count of this barbarous outrage, committed,
during the subsistence of a truce, agaiolt persons
held sacred by the molI uncililiLed nations,
Francis's grief for the unhappy fate of two if r-
vants whom he loved and truited, his unoranfls
at the interruption of his fchmer by their death,
and every other pafnion, were La Ollowved up and
loft in the mndi nation whiich this in ulit on the
honour of his crown excited. H-c cxc IjIned
loudly agaia{t Guafto, who, having draon un li
himfeif all the infamy of afldaianatian Without
making any discovery of inportance, as the am-
baffadors had lkft their iinltriietioas and at icr
papers of consequence hb.ind thiin, n ie boldly
denied his being acceflry in any n ife to the
crime. He feat an amhliador to tie emperor,
to demand foitable reparation tlr an mdi0 'tc,
which no prinlce, how inconollraikc or pudla-
nimous soever, could tamely endure: and when
Charles, impatient at that time to set out on his
African expedition, endeavoured to put him off
with an evasive answer, he appealed to all the
courts in Europe, setting forth t' e hain suleif
of the injury, tue spirit of moderation with
which he had applied for rcdrels, and the
iniquity of the emperor in dilregaiding this
juit requelt.

Notwithifanding tile confidence with which

Guasto asserted his own innoeclice, the acenfa-
tions of the French gained greater credit than
all his protestations; and ldellay, the French
commander in Piedmont, procured, at length,
by his indluiry alnd address, fuclh a minmate detail
of the tranLfation, with the teitimony of so

many

many of the parties concerned, as amounted al-
most to a legal proof of the marquis's guilt.
In consequence of this opinion of the public,
confirmed by such firong evidence, Francis's
complaints were universally allowed to be well
founded, and the fleps which he took towards re-
newing hostilities, were ascribed not merely to
ambition or resentment, but to the unavoid-
able necessity of vindicating the honour of his
crown C.

However jufi Francis might esteem his own

cause, he did not trust so much to that, as to
negle& the proper precautions for gaining other
allies besides the sultan, by whose aid he might
counterbalance the emperor's superior power.
But his negotiations to this effe& were attended
with very little success. Henry VIII. eagerly
bent at that time upon schemes againfi Scotland,
which he knew would at once dissolve his union
with France, was inclinable rather to take part
with the emperor, than to contribute in any de-
gree towards favouring the operations againit
him. The pope adhered inviolably to his ancient
system of neutrality. The Venetians, notwith-
flanding Solyman's folicitations, imitated the
pope's example. The Germans, satisfied with
the religious liberty which they enjoyed, found
it more their interest to gratify than to irritate
the emperor; so that the kings of Denmark and
Sweden, who on this occasion were sirs drawn
in to intereit themselves in the quarrels of the
more potent monarchs of the south, and the
duke of Cleves, who had a dispute with

t Bellay, 367, &c. Jovii Hist. lib. xl. 268.

the

were the only confederates whom Francis fe-
cured. But the dominions of the two former
lay at fitch a distance, and the power of the
latter was so inconsiderable, that he gained little
by their alliance.

But Francis by vigorous efforts of his own

aairity flupplied every defcA. Being afflied
at this time with a diltemper, which was the es-
sea of his irregular plcafures, and wvhich pre-
vented his purfiuing them with the fame licen-
tious indulgence, he applied to business with
more than his uftual indultry. The fame cause
which occasioned this extraordinary attention to
his affairs, rendered him morose and diffhtistied
with the miniders whom he had hitherto em-
ployed. This accidental peevilhnefs being sharp-
ened by refleaing on the false lteps into which
he had lately been betrayed, as well as the insults
to which he had been exposed, some of those in
whom he had ufiually placed the greatest confi-
dence felt the effccs of this change in his tlm-
per, and were deprived of their oflices. At last
he disgraced Montmorency himself, who had
long direded affairs as well civil as military,
with all the authority of a minister no less be-
loved than trusted by his matter; and Francis
being fond of (hewing that the fall of such a
powerful favourite did not affed the vigour or
prudence of his administration, this was a new
motive to redouble his diligence in preparing to
open the war by some splendid and extraordinary
effort.

1542.] He accordingly brought into the field

Lve armies. One to at in Luxembourg under

the

the duke of Orleans, accompanied by the duke
of Lorraine as his inftruaor in the art of war.
Another, commanded by the Dauphin, marched
towards the frontiers of Spain. A third, led by
Van Roffem the marihal of Gucldres, and com-
posed chicfly of the troops of Cleves, had Bra-
bant allotted for the theatre of its operations.
A fourth, of which the duke of Vendofme was
general, hovered oil the borders of Slanders.
The ladl, confiuting of the forces cantoned in
Piedmont, was deftiined for the admiral Anne-
baut. The Dauphin and his brother were ap^
pointed to command where the chief exertions
were intended, and the greatest honour to be
reaped; the army of the formner amounted to
forty tyhoufand, that of the latter to thirty thou-
sand men. Nothing aippears more furpriling than
that ijaijcis did not pour with thPef numerous
and irrefiflille armies into the Milanese, which
had so long been the ohje& of his wilhes as well
as entetptifes; and that he thould choose rather,
to torn alnoit his whole itrength into another di-
iuetion, and towards new conquelts. But the
remnmlbranee of the disasters which he had met
with in his foimer expeditions into Italy, toge-
thier n ith the difhiculty offupporting a war carried
on at such a dilbince from his own dominions, had
gradually abated his violent inclination to ob-
tain footing in that country, and made him
willing to try the fortune of his arms in another
quarter. At the fame time he expeAed to make
foch a powcrftl irmpreffion on the frontier of
Spain, wlhere there were few towns of any
firengbh, and no army assembled to oppose him,
as might etnable him to recover poifflflon of the

contrt

the French crown, before Charles could bring
into the hicld any force able to obllruct his pro-
grefs. The necessity of supporting his ally the
duke of Cleves, and the hope of drawing a con-
fiderablk body of soldiers out of Germany by his
means, determined him to adt with vigour in the
Low-Countries.

The Dauphin and duke of Orleans opened the

campaign much about the fame time [June];
the former laying liege to Perpignan the capital
of Roussillon, and the latter entering Luxem-
bourg. The duke of Orleans pushed his opera-
tions with the greatest rapidity and success, one
town falling after another, until no place in that
iarge dutchiy remained in the emperor's hands
but Thiouville. Nor could he have failed of
over-runniug the adjacent provinces with the
fame cafe, if he had not voluntarily Rlopt short
in this career of vidory. But a report prevailing
that the emperor had detcrmninLd to hazard a
battle in order to save Perpignan, on a sudden
the duke, prompted by youthful ardour, or
moved, perhaps, by jealousy of his brother,
whom he both envied arid hated, abandoned his
owvn conquest, and haftencd towards Roussillon,
in order to divide with him the glory of the
viaory.

On his departure, some of his troops were

disbanded, others deserted their colours, and the
reft, cantoned in the towns which he had taken,
remained inadtive. By this conduA, which leaves
a dishonourable imputation either on his under-
fRanding or his heart, or on both, he not only
renounced whatever he could have hoped from

VOL. mIi. ucF

Loch a promising commencement of the campaign,
but gave the enemy an opportunity of recover-
ing, before the end of summer, all the conquefits
which he had gained. On the Spanish frontier,
the emperor was not so inconliderate as to ven-
ture on a hattle, the loss of which might have
endangered his kingdom. Perpignan, though
poorly furtided, and briflay attacked, having
been largely supplied with ammunition and pro-
vilions by the vigilance of Doria d, was defended
La long and Lo xigoroufly by the duke of Alva,
tile persevering obitinacy of whose temper ftted
him admirably for Loch a service, that at lait the
French, after a fege of three months, waited by
diseases, repulsed in Leveral assaults, and despair-
ing of success, relinquished the undertaking, and
retired into their own country e. Thus all
FIanlcis's mighty preparations, either from Lowre
dcefiEi in his own conduft, or from the superior
power aud prudence es his rivsl, produced no
d cli u lich bore any proportion to his expence
and efforts, or such as gratfi ed, in any degi-re,
his on hopee, or anwtiertd the expcAation of
Lurope. The only solid advantage ofthe caiv-
naicon was the acounfition of a few towns in Picd-
snout, which Bellay gashed rather by stratagem
and address, than by torce of arrms f

j..3.] Thie emperor and Imancis, though

h -th colflidllahly exhiaufted by fiuch glent but
ind cil\ be fforts, difcuvering no abatement of
51 V ll-rtutal animolit ', employed all their atten-

S' 5eCdTi Vita A. Doi~r, p. 1195. e Smndcv. HIlf.

to:0 .1 315. Ji Ib. 3 iC. IBelly, j 7, &c. b-ncr.

10.z-r

tlon, tried every eixpedint, and tournl tlhensfelxes
towards every quarter, in order to acquire new
allies, together with such a reinforcement of
flbength as would give them the fiuperiority in
the eiduiug campaign. Charles, taking advan-
tage of the ten or and relrtntment of the Spa-
jiards, upon the sudden iuivalion of their country,
prevailed on t'le Coites 0f the fe'veral kiutgrdonni
to grant hirm fublidies with a more liberal hand
than nLba1. At the iEme tune he horrowed a
large fum si om John king of Portugal, and, by
way of fcenrity so 1 his repi)y nent, put h1im1 in
potlelfion of the MIolucca ilbs in the Ea1t Indies,
with the gainful cominerce of precious spices,
which that fequcaelred corner of the globe
ykilde. Not fitiifld with this, he negotiated
a marnriage bctween Ph ilip his only fun, now in his
ii\tenithi year, and Mary daughter of that mo-
narchi, vi it whom her faithcr, thie moth opulent
prince ;n

il urope, give a lirge doxeer ; and having

likedx ei pci fondA the Cortes of Aragon and
Vakncia to recoginife Phdlip as the heir of these
croxx lIs, he obtained from them the donative us oal
on fuchi occailons z. ' lihce extraondinary supplies
enabled him to mrake fiuch additions to his forces
in Spain that lie could detach a gre-it body into
the Low-Coo tries, and yet reterve as many as
w ere oiflicient for the d(efence of the kiogd um.
Hlaxing thus provided for the tecrinty of Spain,
aol committed the government of it to hiL so.,
he failed for It.ly [May], in his way to Ger-
nmany. But hiow atrentixe soever to rife the
fu d' for carrying on the wiar, or cager to gra p

S Ferrersr, i. 23S. 24;. Jorli -Hit. Jib. xxi. 238. 6

vz a:

at any new expedient for that purpose, he was
not so inconsiderate as to accept of an overture
which Paul, knowing his necessities, artfully
threw out to him. That ambitious pontiff, no
less sagacious to discern, than watchful to seize
opportunities of aggrandizing his family, solicited
him to grant Oatavio his grandchild, whom the
emperor had admitted to the honour of being his
fon-in-law, the invefiture of the dutchy of Milan,
in return for which he promised such a fum of
money as would have gone far towards fiupply-
ing all his present exigencies. But Charle3, as
well from unwillingness to alienate a province of
so much value, as from disgust at the pope, who
had hitherto refused to join in the war against
Francis, rejeAed the proposal. His diffatisfac-
tion with Paul at that junaure was so great, that
he even refused to approve his alienatsng Parma
and Placentia from the patrimony of St. Peter,
and fettling them on his son and grandson as a
fief to be held of the holy fee. As no other ex-
pedient for raising money among the Italian
itates remained, he consented to withdraw the
garrisons whlich he had hitherto kept in the
citadels of Florence and Leghorn; in confider-
ation for which he received a large present from
Cofrno di Medici, who by this means secured
his own independence, and got poffeffion of two
forts, which were jufly called the fetters of
Tuscany h.

But Charles, while he seemed to have turned

his whole attention towards railing the sums ne-

' Adriani Iftoria, i.ac9. Sleid. ;Iz. Jovi Hiuf. lib.

xtii1. P. 30]. Vita di Coi. Medici di Baldini, P. 34.

ceffary

had not been negligent of obj~ecs more diftaat,
though no ltfs important, and had concluded a
hague ofllftive and defenlive with Henry VIII.
from which he derived, in the end, greater ad-
vantage than from all his other preparations.
Several flight circumfannces which hacr already
bcen mentioned, had behun to alienate the afice-
tions of that monarch from Francis, with whom
he had been for some time in close alliance;
and new incident s of greater moment had oc-
cnrred to illcret;e hIu difguit and animolity.
H-enry, dedr sus of el~ahli hi ug an uniformity irs
rclrh ~ion mboth the Britidh kingdoms, as well as
fond of making profelytes to his own opinions,
le.d formed a icheine of persuading his nephew
the ki.ig of Scots to renounce the popc's fu-
premac y, and to adopt tie fame lyifunm of rcc
formation, which he had iutroduced into Eng-
land. This meafire he pursued with his usual
cagerali and imnctuofiit), making fuchs advanra-
geous offers to J.nues, whom he confidcsed as
not over-fcrupuloully attached to any religious
tenets, that hc hardly doubted of foccefs. His
propolitions ere accordingly received in fulcs a
mnainer, that he flattered hinmelf with havL .g
gained his point. But the Scottith ecclcliinitie,
forefrcing how fatal the union of their fovrrcian
with England mult prove both to their own
power, and to the eflablifthed fyslei of relhgion;
end the partisans of France, no lcfs convinced that
it would put an end to the influence of that
crown poin the public councils of Scotlmsd;
combined together, and by their iuf ouations de-
seated Henry's fchcmm at the very momeut wuen

113 in.

he expeaed it to have taken effeAi. Too
haughty to brook fich a disappointment, which
he imputed as much to the arts of the French,
as to the levity of the Scottish monarch, he took
arms against Scotland, threatening to subdue the
kingdom, since he could not gain the fxiendfhip
of its king. At the fame time, his resentment
againat Francis quickened his negotiations with
the emperor, an alliance with whom he was now
as forward to accept as the other could be to
offer it. During this war with Scotland, and
before the conclusion of his negotiations with
Charles, James V. died,leaving his crown to Mary
his only daughter, an nfant a few days old.
Upon this event, Henry altered at once his whole
fyffem with regard to Scotland, and abandoning
all thoughts of conquering it, aimed at what
was more advantageous as well as more praai-
cable, an union with that kingdom by a mar-
liage between Edward his only son and the young
queen. But here, too, he apprehended a vigorous
oppoftion from the French faAion in Scotland,
which began to bestir itself in order to thwart
the measure. The necessity of crushing this
party among the Scots, and of preventing
Francis from furnishing them any effeaual aid,
confirmed Henry's resolution of hreakinq with
Fiance, and pushed him on to put a fioifhing
hand to the treaty of confederacy with the em-

peror. In this league [Feb. is] were contained first
of all, articles for securing their future amity and
mutual defence; then were enumerated the de.

1 Hiii, of Scotl. vol. i. p. 73, &c. gth edit. 'vr.

3 mands

mands which they were refpcftivrly to make upon
Francis; and the plan of their operations xx a-
fixed, if he (hould refife to grant them fatisfac-
tion. They agreed to require that Francis Ihould
not only renounce his alliance with Solyman,
which had been the source of infinite calamities
to Chrittendom, but also that he should make
reparation for the damages which that unnatural
union had occasioned; that he should reltore
Burgundy to the emperor, that he lhould
desist immediately from hofiiities, and leave
Charles at leisure to uppofe the common enemy
of the Christian faith ; ann that he thould im-
mediately pay the sums due to Henry, or put
some towns in his hands as focurity to that 0f-
fed. If, within forty days, he did not comply
with these demandz, they then engi:S d to imxade
France each with to enty thousand toot anld ht
thousand horse, and not to lay down tlhtir arms
until they had recovered Burgundy, tecgethler
with the tow ns on the Somme, for the emperor,
and Normandy and Guicnne, or even the whole
realm of France, for HIhry k, Their heealdR,
accordingly, fct out with these haughty requidi-
tions; and thunouh they were not permitted to
enter France, the two monarchs held themselves
filly entitled to execute whatever was flipulated
in their treaty.

Francis, on hia part, was not Iefs dilisgent in

preparing for the approaching campaign. Having
early observed symptoms of Henry's difgufl and
alienation, and finding all his endeavours to sooth
and reconcile him ineffedual, he knew his tem-
per too well not to exped that open holulities

k P-yin. xiv, 763. Herb. Z33.

wouldI

would quickly follow upon this cessation of
friendship. For this reason he redoubled his
endeavours to obtain from Solyman such aid as
might counterbalance the great accession of
itrength which the emperor would receive by
his alliance with England. In order to supply
the place of the two ambassadors who had been
murdered by Guailo, he sent as his envoy, firit
to Venice, and then to Conflantinople, Paulin,
who, though in no higher rank than a captain of
foot, was deemed worthy of being raised to this
important itation, to which he was recommended
by Jellay, who had trained him to the arts of
negotiation, and made trial of his talents and ad-
dress on several occations. Nor did he belie the
opinion conceived of his courage and abilities.
Haitening to Conittantinople, without regarding
the dangers to which he was exposed, he urged his
maierc's demands with such boldness, and availed
himself of every circumfitance with such dexte.
rity, that he soon removed all the fultan's difli-
culties. As some of the bafhaws, swayed either
by their own opinion, or influenced by the em.
peror's emissaries, who had made their way even
into this court, had declared in the divan againit
ading in concert with France, he found means
either to convince or hilence them k. At last he
obtained orders for larbaroffa to fail with a
powerful fleet, and to regulate all his operations
by the direaions of the French king. Francis was
not equally fuccefsful in his attempts to gain the
princes of the empire. The extraordinary rigour

k Sandov. Hiltor. tom. ii. 346. Jov~i HI-L1 lib. xiU.

1¶j, &c. 300, &c. Brantome.

wih

of his fubjedis as had embracid the proteflant
opinions, in order to give fume notable evidence
of his own zeal for thc catholic faith, and to
wipe off the imputations to which he was
liable from his confederacy with the Turks,
placed an insuperable barrier between him and
such of the Germans as interest or inclination
would have prompted moRt readily to join him i.
His chief advantage, however, over the emperor,
he derived on this, as on other occasions, from
the contiguity of his dominions, as well as from
the exent of the royal authority in France, which
exempted him from all the delays and difap-
pointments unavoidable wherever popular afllm-
blics provide for the expences of government by
occaiional and frugal subsidies. Hence his do-
meftic preparations were always carried on with
vigour and rapidity, while those of the emperor,
unlefa when quickened by some foreign supply,
or some temporary expedient, were extremely
flow and dilatory.

Long before any army was in resdinefs to

oppose him, Francis took the field in the Low-
Countries, against which he trurnd the whole
weight of the war. He made himself maller of
Landrecy, which he determined to keep as the
key to the uhole province of Hainault; and
ordered it to be fortified nith great care. Turn-
ing from thence to the right, he entered the
dutchy of Lurembourg, and found it in the fame
defencclefs itate as in the former year. While
he was thus employed, the t~mpuror, having

I Seck. lib. 11}* 403.

drawn

drawn together an army, composed of all the
different nations fubjed to his government, en-
tered the territories of the duke of Cleves, on
whom he had vowed to inflid exemplary ven.
geance. This prince, whose condud and fitua-
tion were jimilar to that of Robert de la Mark
in the fird war between Charles and Francis, re-
fembled him likewise in his fate. Unable, with his
feeble army, to face the emperor, who advanced
at the head of forty-four thousand men, he re-
tired at his approach ; and the Imperialilts, being
at liberty to ad as they pleased, immediately in-
veited Duren. That town, though gallantly
defended, was taken by assault; all the inhabit-
ants were put to the fxvord, and the place itself
reduced to ashes. This dreadful example of
severity firuck the people of the country with
such general terror, that all the other towns,
even such as were capable of refifRance, sent
their keys to the emperor [August 24] ; and be-
fore a body of French, detached to his afliftance,
could come up, the duke himself was obliged
to make his fubmilfion to Charles in the most
abjeA manner. Being admitted into the Im-
perinal presence, he kneeled, together with eight
of his principal fubjeAs, and implored mercy.
The emperor allowed him to remain in that ig-
nominious posture, and eyeing him with an
haughty and severe look, without deigning to
answer a single word, remitted him to his mi-
nifters. Tue conditions, however, which they
preferibed were not so rigorous as he had reason
to have expe~red after such a reception. He
was obliged [Sept. 7] to renounce his alliance
with France and Denmark ; to retign all his

pretensions

pretensions to the dutchy of Gurldres; to enter
into perpetual amity- with the emperor and king
of the Romans. In return for which, all his
hereditary domninions were refiored, except two
towns which the empiror kept as pledges of the
duke's fidtlity during the continuance of the

ar r; and he was reinliated in his privileges as

a p/nce of the empire. Not long after, Charlks,
as a proof of the lincerity of his reconcilement,
gave hin iin marinage one of the daughtcls of his
brother Ferdinand m.

Hasing thus clad i fed tihe prefumto p ion of the

duke of C(leves, detached out of hiis allits from
I'rancis, an d anun eed to his own domininions in
the Low.-ountrirs a coiflderable province which
la~ onlt i6ous to them, Cial ks advanced towards
Hainau~llt, and laid iikgec to Landrotcy. There, as
the first fruits of his alance with HIenroy, he
was joined by ix thodiand Engli h under ilr
Johs \ allop. The garir u, conltiding of vc-
teran ti oops commnud bA hr D la Lande and
l)ehll, two ofticls of rnputation, made a sigor-
ols rehlance. irancis approach A with r!l his
hu ccs to 1Icles t that place ; Charles coxered the
liige; buthi wler dctcrmeind to hazard an en-
gage; m cenu ; and adl Euro1 e c; aeded to sCC this
conte it, h ch had coninIced io long, d.akidi
at lait by a battle bctu rcc t. o grelt armincs kd
b) their rcfpectis e Imnolkn4r 0 i5 )erfo. But the
pronud ishicli 1 pi:tt thi ir two camps sas
le1], 11, lpt the dIea iar I Ollifiti on I
dde xx hciould entuC to a~tuck, aid neiler

t. .11

- 1.J .1 " :.R ce :T 'z

of them chose to run that rifque. Amidit a
variety of movements in order to draw the enemy
into the snare, or to avoid it themselves, Francis,
with admirable condu& and equal good fortune,
threw firit a supply of fresh troops, and then a
convoy of provisions, into the town, so that the
emperor, despairing of success, withdrew into
winter-quarters n, in order to preserve his army
from being entirely ruined by the rigour of the
season.

During this campaign, Solyman fulfilled his

engagements to the French king with great
punAuality. He himself marched into Hungary
with a numerous army [November] ; and as the
princes of the empire made no great effort to
save a country which Charles, by employing his
own force against Francis, seemed willing to
sacrifice, there was no appearance of any body
of troops to oppose his progress. He besieged,
one after another, Quinque Ecclefix, Alba, and
Gran, the three molt considerable towns in the
kingdom, of which Ferdinand had kept poffeffion.
The tirft was taken by dtorm; the other two
surrendered; and the whole kingdom, a small
corner excepted, was fubojeded to the Turkish
yoke 0. About the fame time, Barbarossa failed
with a fleet of an hundred and ten gallies, and
coasting along the shore of Calabria, made a
descent at Rheggio, which he plundered and
burnt; and advancing from thence to the mouth
of the Tiber, he dopt there to water. The citi-
zens of Rome, ignorant of his destination, and

n Bellay, 405, &c.
SIfliamhaff. Hiltor. Hung. i. xv, 167. filled

precipitation, trh.t the city w(,uld have been to-
tally defertee, if they i ea not refirmed courage
upon lktters from Paulin the Irench envou,
alolitinr them that no 1iolek ce or intury would
be oflered by the lurks to dny slate in niliance
with the king his wrfl' r P. Firom Oflia, Bar-
baroffa faikd to MIr ciik., and bring joined by
the Irench fleet with a body of land forces on
board, under the couiit d I rguier, a gallant
young prince of tl hot fT of Bourbon, they di-
reSied their course toward Nice, the (ole rtreat
of the unfortunate duke of Sa~voy FAugflt io].
There, to the ailonifl i ent and fcdndal of all
Chiriflendom, the lilies of France and crescent of
Mahiomet al pearced in conjundion egainit a for-
trels on w iiclh the cr fs of Savoy was difplaiycd.
Tfhe town, however, was bravely drfmnded againit
their conhbiiied force by Montfort a Si 'oynard
gentleman, w ho sI od a general a a~ult, and re-
poled the cncmx vwith vpeat loss bet, relic retii d
iyuo the cahflc. That flort, 1ituatea upon a roek ,
on whlich the artillery n .de no ir'pr fliou, ai d
which could not be underminid, he I eld out so
long, that Doria Iiaid time to appron.chi iw ith his
fleet, and the marquis dl Guaito to march I ith
a body of troops from Yilan. Lpon iitel genice
of this, the French and Turks railed tue iege
rSept. 8] q; and Francis had not eveii the con-
folation of fiuccefs, to render the irfan y which
he drew on Ilifelf, by calling in faehh an a:-
liaiy, more pardonable.

P vii Hil. 1. xlli. 304, &c. Pallavic. xno.
q (,uijchlzi n-i' obire de Savoye, t. i. p. (yi. fI'

42., &c.

voL. Iu. x

From the small progress of either party during

this campaign, it was obvious to what a length
the war might be drawn out between two princes,
whose power was so equally balanced, and who,
by their own talents or a~tivity, could so vary
and multiply their resources. The trial which
they had now made of each other's firength
might have taught them the imprudence of
perhiting in a war, wherein there was greater
appearance of their di{Irefling their own domi-
nions than of conquering those of their adver.
fury, and lhould hare disposed both to wiih for
peace. If Charles and Francis had been influ-
enced by considerations of interest or prudence
alone, this, without doubt, must have been the
manner in which they would have reasoned. But
the personal animosity, which mingled itfeilfin all
their quarrels, had grown to be so violent and
implacable, that, fur thle pleasure of gratifying
it, they disregarded every thing flfe; and were
infinitely more solicitous how to hurt each other,
than how to secure what would he of advantage
to tisemifelves. No sooner then did the featoni
force them to fulpend hostilities, than, without
paying any attention to thse pope's repeated en-
deavours or paternal exhortations to re-efitabiih
peace, they began to provide for the operations
of the next year with new vigour, and an attivity
increasing wviih their hatred. Charles turned his
chief attlnt:0ni towards gaining the princes of the
empire, and enjeavonred to ronfe the formidable
but unweidy fitrength of the Germanic body
againit Fssncis. In order to underf:mnd the pre-
pricty of the ileps which he took for that por-
pfUe, it ist ncceiy to rcicw the chid tranfac-

t1uLS

in the year one thoufaid iive htno.crd aui forty.
one.

M\uch about the time that aikrnbly broke up,

MIaurice lucceeded his father iI nry in the p >-
vernment of that part of Saxony wxhich be'onwed
to the Albertiue branch of the Saxon fmnily.
This young prince, then only in his twentieth
year, had, even at that ea-ly period, begun to
discover the great talents which qualified him for
acting fuceh a diftinguithcd part in the affiiirs of
Germnany . As soon as he entered upon the ad-
ninjitration, he ibutick out into fucli a new and
singular path, as ihewed that he aimed, from the
beginning, at something great and uncommon.
Though zealouly att-iched to tile proteliRant
opinion·, both f <m education and princillIc, he
refused to nccee> to tie league of Smalkahkk,
being deternined, ns he fuiid, to msinitain the
purity of reliifoi, wi 'ch ws tile 0c1ini0 ll ojlct
of that confede iucy, inut nt tot ct

> a ale himuklf

in ti e political inlta:is or counl ti l to ss ;ch
it had 0iven rife. At the fame time, for 1 cing
a rnpture between Charkls and t'i. coi clerate
of bmalkalde, aid perceiving which on tin

them

noR likely to pres ail in the cm tell, inifead of
that jealousy and diffruit whbicli the other p a-
tehtii ts expressed of all tile emipclur's dfigiio, lie
anected to place him in aln unboui eed coni-
! nce; anti couited hi, fasour with the utmnoff
aliiduit. When tie other purotci iLe in the

ear fiitten bun drcd an1 i itsr--two, c'elier de'-
<lined afsiting I erdin a ed in H-Iunc ar-, or a iforedel
hiim reluctant amad feeble a it, Mn urk e mo-inmci d
·hithcr in pci-fun, and rendered ldnelf cot., ic -

Xz l

motive, he had led to the emperor's assistance,
during the last campaign, a body of his own
troops; and the gracefulness of his person, his
dexterity in all military exercises, together with
his intrepidity, which courted and delighted in
danger, did not diitinguifh him more in the field,
than his great abilities and insinuating address
won upon the emperor's confidence and favour'.
While by this condu&, which appeared extraor-
dinary to those who held the fame opinions with
him concerning religion, Maurice endeavoured to
pay court to the emperor, he began to discover
some degree of jealousy of his counin the dleaor
of Saxony. This, which proved in the sequel so
fatal to the eledor, had almost occafloned an open
rupture between them ; and soon after Maurice's
accession to the government, they both took
arms with equal rage, upon account ofa dispute
about the right of jurifdiaion over a paltry town
situated on the Moldaw. They were prevented,
however, from proceeding to aaion by the
mediation of the landgrave of Hesse, whole
daughter Maurice had married, as well as by
the powerful and authoritative admonitions of
Luther

Amidit these tranfadions, the pope, though

extremely irritated at the emperor's concessions
to the proteitants at the diet of Ratisbon, was so
warmly solicited on all hands, by such as were
modt devoutly attached to the fee of Rome, no
lkfs than by those whose fidelity or designs he

r Sle;i. py. Seck.1.i11-377. 3S6.428.

*Wr ik. a:. Reck. I. iii. 403.

fufpe6aed,

finfpeted, to summon a general co ncil, that he
found it impoflibc to a oid any longer c;ing
that assembly. The imnpnticnce for its mnuting,
and the expefiations of great rffats from its de-
cifions, ftcmed to gron in proportion to the diii-
culty of obtaining it. HC fil1 adhtred, howecer,
to his original rfoulntion of holdino- it in fume
town of Italy, wher e, by the number of ecclcli.
afics, retainers to his court, aid dcpcndirig on
his favour, who could repair to it wit hut difli-
culty or expence, hle n ibht iiflincce an I tvC.i
d:rc6i all its prncetding . TIis propo~tion,
though often Ijcc ed by tie tGern anx, lie iu-
itructed his nulnicio to the dict hlod at Spires
[ March 3], in the ycar one tlhoufet.d live hun.
dred and forty-two, to renew once morCe; and if
he found it gave no greater satisfaction than fu:-
mcrlv, he empowertl him, as a ladt cuceili ,.,
to proj ofe for the place of meetin', Trent, a
city in the Tyrol, fnhbjet to the king of thle
Romans, and situated on the t u2tin s oatween
Geirnmany and Italy. The catholic p'ilces in the
diet, after giving it as their opiaion tiiat the
council might have beeni held with greater atl-
vantage in Ratisbon, Cologne, or fume of the
great cities of the empire, were at icngthl in-
duced to approve of the place which the pope
had named. Tie protcftants unanbniouflv cx-
priffed their dilatihfaction, and protcild that
they wdu!d pay no regard to a council held be-
)0 nd the precincts of the enmpire, called by the
pope's author'tv, and in which he alfnlied the
Sighit of predding t.

St'd. 291. Sack. I. iii z33.

" 3 The

The pope, without taking any notice of their

objections, publiihed the bull of intimation
[May 22, 1542], named three cardinals to pre-
Lde as hih kgates, and appointed them to repair
to Trent before the fisri of November, the day
he had fixed for opening the council. But if
Paul had desired the meeting of a council as
Jincerely as he pretended, he would not have
pitched on such an improper time for calling it.
Initead of that general union and tranquillity,
without which the deliberations of a council
could neither be conduaed with security, nor
attended with authority, such a fierce war was
just kindled between the emperor and Francis,
as rendered it impoffibie for the ecclefiaftics from
many parts of Europe to resort thither in safety.
The lcgates,accordingly, remained several months
at Trent ; but as no person appeared there, ex-
cept a few prelates from the ecclesiastical fdate,
the pope, in order to avoid the ridicule and con-
tempt which this drew upon him from the ene-
mies of the church, recalled them, and prorogued
the conncil .

Unhappily for the authority of the papal fee,

at the very time that the German protefiants
took every occasion of pouring contempt upon
it, the emperor and king of the Romans found
it necellary not only to connive at their condua,
but to court their favour by repeated ads of in-
diligence. In the fame diet of Spires, in which
they had protefied in the most difrefpeafnl
terms againit assembling a council at Trent, Ser..
dinand, who depended on their aid for the de-

u r. Paul, P* 97. Sleid. 296. fence

tefitation to he inrfrtrd in the records of the diet,
but renewed in their favour all the emperor's con-
ceflions at Ratifbon,adding to them whatever they
demanded for their farther security. Among
other particulars, he granted a funpenflon of a
d-cree of the Imperial chamber againit the city
of Goflar (on of those which had entered into
tre lkagiue of So.s'k-lde), on account of its
ha'I g fciced the ecktlelfiical revenues within
Its domains, ard enjoined HIlenry duke of Brunf-
wick to delist from his attempts to crnry that de-
cree into execution. But Henry, a furious bigot,
and no hfs obilinate than rash in all his under-
takings, continuing to disquiet the people of
Goflar by his incursions, the eleaor of Saxony
and Jar dgrave of Hesse, that they might not
fuffer any member of the Smalkaldic body to be
opprcffi, aiTembled their forces, declared war in
form again4i Henry, ard in the space of a few
weeks, dtripping him entirely of his dominions,
drove him as a wretched exile to take refuge iu
the court of Bavaria. By this aat of veng ance,
no Icfs severe than furdden, they tilled all Ger-
mansy with dread of their power, and the con-
federates of Smnalkalde appeared, by this iirtl
effort of their arms, to be as ready as they were
able to prote& those who had joined their affo-
ciation X

Emboldened by so many conceflions in their

favour, as well as by the progress which their
opinions daily rmade, the princes of the league of

x Steid. 2a6. Commemuratio fuccinas Caularum Belli,

S.c. a Smalkaldicis contra Henr, Biuaiaf. ab iiIdem edita:
ap. scardiurn, tom, ii. 3C.S e

Sma~lkld~e

perial chamber, and declined its jurifdidtion for
the future, because that court had not been visited
or reformed according to the decree of Ratisbon,
and continued to discover a modt indecent par.
tiality in all its proceedings. Not long after
this, they ventured a fdep farther; and proteding
againit the recess of a diet held at Nuremberg
[April23, '543], which provided for the defence
of Hungary, refused to furnish their contingent
for that purpose, unless the Imperial chamber
were reformed, and full security were granted
them in every point with regard to religion F.

1544.] Such were the lengths to which the

psoteitants had proceeded, and flch their confi-
dence in their own power, when the emperor
returned from the Low-Countries, to hold a
diet which lie had summoned to meet at Spires.
The rcfpef due to the emperor, as well as the
importance of the affairs which were to be
laid before it, rendercd this assembly extremely
full. All the eleaors, a great number of princes
ecclesiastical and secular, with the deputies of
modt of the cities, were present. Charles soon
perceived that this was not a time to offend the
jealous spirit of the protestants, by afTerting in
any high tone the authority and doarines of the
church, or by abridging, in the fmailedt article,
the liberty which they now enjoyed; but that,
on the contrary, if he expeaed any support from
them, or wiihed to preserve Germany from in-
tedine disorders while he was engaged in a foreign
war, he mudt sooth them by new concessions,
and a more ample extenlion of their religious

Y Slcid. 304. 307. Seck. 1. ii. 404. 4r6.

privileges.

prvi~ kges. Fie bei-un accordinvly, with court.
ing the eltor of Saxonv, aid landgrave of
Hleife, the heads of the protefiant party', and by

mgivin up some things in their fatvour, and grant-

nlg liberal promifts with rema d to others, he
fescired himiclf from any din'grr of oppoiition
on their part. Having gained this capital point,
he then ventured to address the diet with greater
freedom. He began by repreienting his own
7eal, and unwearid efforts with regard to two
thiegs rroft efentihl to Christendom, the procur-
ing of a genaral council in oider to compose the

ri'ious difentions hich had unhappily arisen

in Germany, and the providing some proper
means for chechir" the foi midable progress of the
Turki'h arms. 1E ut he ohlerved, with deep re-
gret, thit his pious endeavours had been entirely
defeated by the unjufli lable amhiton of the
French k:ng, ss ho having n intonly kindled the
flame of war in F urope, which had been so lately
extinuidiied bv the truce of Nie e, rendered it
impo.hble for the fathers of the chur-h to affem-
ble in council, or to deblberate with security;
and obliged him to employ those forces in hh
own defence, which, with greater fatisfaclion to
hVmnflf, as well as more honour to Chrillendom,
he would have turned against the infidels: that
F-ancl, not thinking it enough to hase called
h m off from oppofimg the Mahometans, had,
with unexamplkd impicty, invited them into the
heart of Christendom, and joining his arms to
theirs, had openly attacked the duke of Sasoy a
mctrber of the empire: that Barhbroila's fleet
w-m' now in one of the ports of France, waiting
oi ly the return of fpriug to carry terror and de-

folatiot'

folation to the coast of fume Christian fiate:
that in such a situation it was folly to think of
distant expeditions against the Turk, or of
marching to oppose his armies in Hungary,
while such a powerful ally received him into the
centre of Europe, and gave him footing there.
It was a didate of prudence, he added, to oppose
the nearedt and modt imminent danger, firit of
all, and by humbling the power of France, to
deprive Solyman of the advantages, which he
derived from the unnatural confederacy formed
between him and a monarch, who dtill arrogated
the name of Mod Chriidian: that, in truth, a
war againdt the French king and the sultan ought
to be conlidered as the fame thing; and that
every advantage gained over the former was a
severe and feniible blow to the latter : on all these
accounts, he concluded with demanding their
aid againL Francis, not merely as an enemy of
the Germanic body, or of him who was its head,
but as an avowed ally of the infidels, and a pub.
lie enemy to the Chridtian name.

In order to give greater weight to this violent

inveaive of the emperor, the king of the Ro-
mans stood up, and related the rapid conquerls
of the filtan in Hungary, occasioned, as he said,
by the fatal necelity imposed on his brother, of
employing his arms apaindt France. When he
had fi.uifhed, the ambatiador of Savoy gave a de-
tail of Eahbaroffa's operations at Nice, and of the
ravages which he had committed on that coald.
All these, added to the general indignation
which Francis's unprecedented union with the
Turks excited in Europe, made fulch an inm-
preflion on the diet as the emperor wished, and

dlfpof d

disposed most of the members to grant him such
effeaual aid as he had demanded. The am.
baffadors whom Francis had sent to explain the
motives of his condu&, were not permitted to
enter the bounds of the empire; and the apology
which they publilbed for their master, vindicating
his alliance with Solyman, by examples drawn
from Scripture, and the pradice of Christian
princes, was little regarded by men who were
irritated already, or prejudiced against him to
fiich a degree, as to be incapable of allowing
their proper weight to any arguments in his
behalf.

Such being the favourable disposition of the

Germans, Charles perceived that nothing could
now abitru& his gaining all that he aimed at,
but the fears and jealousies of the protestants,
which he determined to quiet by granting every
thing that the utmost solicitude of these pa ions
could dcfire for the security of their religion.
With this view, he oonfented to a recess, where-
by all the rigorous ediAs hitherto ilfued against
the protefiants weee suspended; a council either
general or national to be assembled in Germany
was declared necessary, in order to re-eitablifh
peace in the church; until one of these should
be held (which the emperor undertook to bring
about as ihon as possible), the free and public
exercise of the protestant religion was authorized;
the Imperial chamber was enjoined to give no
mokitation to the protefitants; and when the
ttrm, for v Ihich the present judges in that court
were ekaed, thould expire, persons duly quali-
fled w eE tlhen to be admitted as members, without
arn d Iitictio t. ii accour t of rdliion. In re-

tu'n

turn for these extraordinary aas of indulgence,
the protefitants concurred with the other mem-
bers of the diet, in declaring war againit Francis
in name of the empire; in voting the emperor a
body of twenty-four thousand foot and four
thousand horse, to be maintained at the public
expence for fix months, to be employed againit
France; and at the fame time the diet imposed
a poll-tax to be levied throughout all Germany
on every person without exception, for the sup.
port of the war against the Turks.

Charles, while he gave the greatest attention

to the minute and intricate detail of particulars
neccifary towards condutting the deliberations of
a numerous and divided assembly to such a foc.
cefsful period, negotiated a separate peace with
the king of Denmark; who, though he had
hitherto performed nothing considerable in confe-
quence of his alliance with Francis, had it in his
power, however, to make a troublesome diversion
in favour of that monarch 2. At the fame time,
he did not negled proper applications to the king
of England, in order to rouse him to more vi-
gorous eflorts against their common enemy.
Little, indeed, was wanting to accomplish this;
for such events had happened in Scotland as in-
flamed Henry to the mo{t violent pitch of re-
fcntment againfi Francis. Having concluded
with the parliament of Scotland a treaty of mar-
riage between his son and their young queen,
by which he reckoned himself secure of effeciing
the union of the two kingdoms, which had been
long desired, and often attempted without fuc-

a Dumont Corps Diplomn t. iv. p -y

cess

ccfs by his predecefluls, Mary of Guise the
queen-mother, cardinal iLeatoun, and other par-
tizans of France, for nd nmans not only to break
off the match, but to alienate the Scottish na-
tion entirely from the friendffhip of England, and
to Ithenqtlhen its ancient attachment to France.
Henry, hlo'we;er, did not abandon an objcd of
In much in ii artance; and as the humbling of
Francis, beindes the plkafore of taking revcnge
upon ~n cn onemy who had disappointed a favourite
mealure, apprared the most effeaual method of
bring;ng thc Scots to accept once more of the
ti caty nw ich ty hey d relieioquhlhed, he was so

i*r t0 a cop'iulh thi, that he was ready to
SImd mx intever the emperor could propose to

he 'olempted o ;sit t he French kirg. The
5ilam, accordi gly, which they concerted, meas
lnch, if it h d been punanally executed, as mufd
haxe ruinedl hr mnce in the lirnt place, and would
have ammmemtrd so prodigioullv the emperor's
power and ternitorics, as might in the end have
proved fatal to the liberties of Europe. They
;mgreed to invade France each with an army of
twcnty-five thousand men, and, without lolin=
time in belieging the frontier towns, to admaoce
direCdl towards the interior provinces, and to
join their forces near Paris.

Francis flood alone in opposition to all the

encmies x hom Charles was muficning against
him. Solyman had been the only ally who dd
not desert him; but the affiltance which lie re-
ceived from him had rendered him so odious to
~..I Chritfeudom, that he resolved rather to forego
all the advantages of his friendship, than to b.-

a Herbert, 245. Bellay, 449

OL. Ill. Y coCe,

come, on that account, the obje& of general de-
teilation. For this reason, he dismissed Barba-
roffa as soon as winter was over, who, after ra-
vaging the coast of Naples and Tuscany, return.
ed to Conitantinople. As Francis could not
hope to equal the forces of so many powers com-
bined againil him, he endeavoured to supply that
defeEt by dispatch, which was more in his
power, and to get the start of them in taking
the field. Early in the spring the count d'En-
guien invefited Carignan, a town in Piedmont,
which the marquis del Guafto the Imperial gene-
ral having surprised the former year, considered
as of so much importance, that he had fortified
it at great expence. The count pushed the
iiegr with stich vigour, that Guafto, fond of his
own conquest, andfeeing no other way of saving
it from falling into the hands of the French, re.
solved to hazard a battle in order to relieve it.
He begun his march from Milan for this pur.
pole, and as he was at no pains to conceal his
intention, it was soon known in the French
camp. Enguien, a gallant and enterprising
young man, wished palionately to try the for-
tune of a battle; his troops desired it with no
less ardour; but the peremptory injunEtion of
the king not to venture a general engagement,
flowing from a prudent attention to the present
tituation of affsirs, as well as from the remem-
brance of former difalters, reflrained him from
venturing upon it. Unwilling, however, to
abandon Carignan, when it was just ready to
yicld, and eager to dillinguifh his command by
ifme memorable a~iicn, lie difpatehed Moniuc
to court, in order to lay before the king the ad-

vanta'. s

which he had of victory. The king referied the
matter to his privy council; all the ministers de-
clared, one after another, againit fighting, and
supported their sentiments by reasons extremely
plausible. While they were delivering their
opinions, Monluc, nho was permitted to be
present, discovered such visible and extravagant
symptoms of impatience to speak, as well as
fuchi diflatisfaction with what he heard, that
Francis, dixerted with his appearance, called on
him to declare what he could offer in reply to
sentiments which seemed to be as just as they
were general. Upon this, Monluc, a plain but
spirited soldier, and of known courage, repre-
fented the good condition of the troops, their
eagerness to meet the enemy in the field, their
confidence in their officers, together with the
everlasting infamy which the declining of a bat-
tie would bring on the French arms; and he
urged his arguments with fulch lively impetuoiity,
and such a flow of military eloquence, as gairnd
over to his opinion, not only the king, naturally
fond of daring actions, but several of the council.
Francis, catching the fame enthuiafin which had
animated his troops, suddenly darted up, and
having lifted his hands to Heaven, and inmplored
the Divine protecdion, he then addieffed him-
self to Monluc, " Go," says he, "I return to
Piedmont, and fight in the name of God b*"

No sooner was it known that thse king had

given Enguien lease to fight the Inperialftfs,
than fucls was the martial ardour of the gallant

b Memoires de Monluc.

v z and

the court was quite deserted, every person de-
lirous of reputation, or capable of ferivice, hur-
rying to Piedmont, in order to (hare, as volun.
teers, in the danger and glory of the a~tion.
Encouraged by the arrival of so many brave
officers, Enguien immediately prepared for battle,
nor did Guafto decline the combat. The num-
ber of cavalry was almost equal, but the Impe-
rial infantry exceeded the French by at leaid
ten thousand men. They met near Cerifoies
[April II], in an open plain, which afforded to
neither any advantage of ground, and both had
full time to form their army in proper order.
The (hock was such as might have been expeded
between veteran troops, violent and obitinate.
The French cavalry rushing forward to the
charge with their usual vivacity, bore down
every thing that opposed them; but, on the
other hand, the ifeady and disciplined valour of
the Spanish infantry having forced the body
which they encountered to give way, viaory re-
mained in suspense, ready to declare for which-
ever general could make the best use of that cri-
tical moment. Guafto, engaged in that part of
his army which was thrown into disorder, and
afiaid of falling into the hands of the French,
whose vengeance he dreaded on account of the
murder of Rincon and Fregofo, loft his presence
of mind, and forgot to order a large body of
reserve to advance; whereas Enguien, with ad-
mirable courage and equal condud, supported,
at the head of his gens d'armes, such ol his b.t-
talions as began to yield; and at the fame time
he ordered the Swiss in his service, who had been

vielori-

the Spaniards. This motion proved deciiive.
All that followed was confusion and fhughter.
The marquis del Guasto, wounded in the thigh,
efaped only by the fwiftnefs of his horse. The
vidory of the French was complete, ten thou-
sand of the Imperialilts being slain, and a con-
fiderable number, with all their tents, baggage,
and artillery, taken. On the part of the con-
querors, their joy was without allay, a few
only being killed, and among these no oflicer
ofdiflindion C

This splendid naion, beside the reputation

with which it was attended, delivered France
from an imminent danger, as it ruined the army
with wbich Guaffo had intended to invade the
country between the Rhone and Saone, where
there were neither fortified towns nor regular
forces to oppoue his progress. But it was not in
Francis's power to iunriue the viAory with such
vitqour as to reap .ill the adx antages which it
nighlt have yielded; for though the Milanele re-
n ained now almost dcfencelefs; though the in-
habitants, who had long murmured under the
rigour of the Imperial government, were ready
to throw off the ) oke; though Enguien, flush-
ed with success, urged the king to seize this
happy opportunity of recovering a country, the
acquiition of which had been long his favourite
objec{; yet, as the emperor and king of England
wLre preparing to break in spon the opposite
frontier of France with numerous armies, it be.

c Belay, 429, &c. Memoires de Monlut. Jovii Hiss.

i, xii'. p. 327. 6.

Y3 came

came necefi'ary to sacrifice all thoughts of con-
queRt to the public safety; and to recal twelve
thousand of Enguien's bei troops to be em-
ployed in defence of the kingdom. Enguien's
subsequent operations were, of consequence, so
languid and inconsiderable, that the redudion
of Carignan and some other towns in Piedmont,
was all that he gained by his great vikory at
Cerifoles d.

The emperor, as ufoal, was late in taking

the field, but he appeared, towards the begin-
ning of June, at the head of an army more nu-
merous and better appointed than any which he
had hitherto led againit France. It amounted
ahnoft to fifty thousand men, and part of it hav-
ing reduced Luxembourg and some other towns
in the Netherlands, before he himself joined it,
he now marched with the whole towards the
frontiers of Champagne [June]. Charles, ac-
cording to his agreement with the king of
England, ought to have advanced diredly to-
wards Paris; and the Dauphin, who commanded
the only army to which Francis truited for the
security of his dominions in that quarter, was
in no condition to oppose him. But the success
with which the French had defended Provence
in the year one thousand five hundred and thirty-
lix, had taught them the moit effeAlal method
of dilirefling an invading enemy. Champagne,
a country abounding more in vines than corn,
was incapable of maintaining a great army; and
before the emperor's approach, whatever could
be of any use to his troops had been can ied cff

d Bellay, 4j5 6.

&

him to be maller of some placts of fitrength in
order to ftcwce the consoys, on which alone he
now perceived that he mutt depend for flhblit-
ence ; and he found the frontier towns so ill pro-
vided for defence, that he hoped it would not
be a work either of much time or difliculty
to reduce them. Accordingly Ligny and Com-
mercy, which he first attacked, surrendered after
a Ihort telitiance. He then invefited St. Diiler
[July 8], which, though it commanded an im-
portant pasS on the Maroe, was dcftitute of every
thing necessary for fuftainingafiege. But the count
de Sancerre and M.de la Lande, who had acquired
such reputation by the defence of Landrecy, ge-
neroufly threw themselves into the town, and
undertook to hold it out to the last extremity.
The emperor soon found how capable they were
of making good their promise, and that he could
I.ot expedt to take the town without besieging it
in form. This accordingly he unndrtook; and as
it was his nature never to abandon any enterprie
in which he had once engaged, he perliited in it
v.ith an inconliderate obstinacy.

The king of England's preparations for the

campaign were complete long before the empe-
ror's; but as he did not choose, on the one hand,
to encounter alone the whole power of France,
az1d was unwilling, on the other, that his troops
should remain inactive, he took that opportunity
of challiling the Scots, by sending his fleet,
tog-ether with a considerable part of his infantry,
under the earl of Hertford, to invade their
countrs-. IHeitfoid executed his commiflion
S.:>h si our, pl'ndescd and burnt Edinburgh and

and Leith, laid waste the adjacent country, and
reimbarked his men with foch dispatch that they
joined their sovereign soon after his landing in
France # [July 1]. When Henry arrived in
that kingdom, he found the emperor engaged in
the siege of St. Difier; an ambassador, however,
whom he sent to congratulate the English
monarch on his safe arrival on the continent,
solicited him to march, in terms of the treaty,
direaly to Paris. But Charles had set his ally
firch an ill example of fulfilling the conditions of
their confederacy with exaAnefs, that Henry,
obierving him employ his time and forces in
taking towns for his own behoof, saw no reason
why he Fhonld not attempt the redurion of some
places that lay conveniently for himself. With-
out paying any regard to the emperor's renmon.
lIrnnces, he immediately invefied Boulogne, and
commanded the duke of Norfolk to press the
1hge of I\Iontreuil, which had been begun be-
FTre his arrival, by a body of Flemings, in con-
vmndion with some English troops. While
C(Iales and Henry fhewed such attention each
to his own intereit, they both negleAed the com-
moo n use. Inlead ofthe union and confidence
requiike towards conduding the great plan that
then- had formed, they early discovered a mutual

uoaloufy of each other, which, by degrees, begot
dirnruR, and ended in open hatred e,

Iy thfs time, Francis had, with unwearied in-
,il'rv, drawn together an army, capable, as
wefl from the number as from the valour of the
troc'p, of making head againit the enemy. But

# Hifl. Scotland, i. I i. C fierbcrt.

the

dently dcclining a battle, the loss of which
would have endangercd the kingdom, fatieii~d
himself with hairaffi ig the emperor wkh his light
troop-s, cutting off hii coniuo , and laying wade
the country a:0uo I hin. Thou gh extremrly
diltreffed bM thde onerations, Charles fRillprefied
the i,~: of St. Diikr, which Saincerre detend d
ith altonithing for itude nod cond it. He
ifood repeated aifloult , repuhling the enemy in
them all; and undifimayed even by the death of
his brave associate D)e la Lande, who was killed
by a cannon-ball, lie continued to Ihew the fame
bold countenance and obitinate rjfolution. At
the end of tbe five weeks, he was frill in a con-
dition to hold out fume time longer, when an
artitice of Grauvelle's induced him to fiurrender.
That crafty politician, havi ig intercepted the
key to the cypher which the duke of Guise
used in communicatnig intelligence to Sancerre,
forged a letter in his name, authorizing Sincerre
to capitulate, as the king, though highly faisfied
with his behaviour, thought it imprudent to
hazard a battle for his relkf. This lktter he
convered into the town in a m'snner which could
raile no suspicion, and the governor fell into the
fuare. Even then, he obtained Luch honourabie
conditions as his gsllant defence merited, and
amnolg others, a celfistion of hlo1ii;ties for cihlit
d ra, at the expiration of xshich he bound hjn-
seif to open ths. gates, if Frencio, during that
time, did not ittack the Inper:l a my, an I
throw fr..h tsoup: into the town . Thus San-

f Brantome, tom. vi 459. Cerr`e,

cerre, by detaining the emperor so long before
an inconsiderable place, afforded his sovereign full
time to assemble all his forces, and, what rarely
falls to the lot of an officer in such an inferior
command, acquired the glory of having saved
his country.

As soon as St. Difier surrendered, the empe-

ror advanced into the heart of Champagne
[August 17], but Sancerre's obstinate refiitance
had damped his sanguine hopes of penetrating to
Paris, and led him seriously to reflea on what
he might exped before towns of greater strength,
a!nd defended by more numerous garrisons. At
the fame time, the procuring fubisftence for his
army was attended with great difficulty, which
increased in proportion as he withdrew farther
from his own frontier. He had loft a great num-
ber of his best troops in the siege of St. Difier,
and many fell daily in skirmishes, which it was
not in his power to avoid, though they waited
his army insensibly, without leading to any de-
cifive ation. The season advanced apace, and
he had not yet the command either of a fufficient
extent of territory, or of any such considerable
town as rendered it safe to winter in the enemy's
country. Great arrears too were now due to his
soldiers, who were upon the point of mutinying
for their pay, while he knew not from what funds
to satisfy them. All these conliderations induced
him to listen to the overtures of peace, which
a Spanish Dominican, the confeffor of his sifter
the queen of France, had secretly made to his
confeffor, amonk of the fame order. In consequence
of this, plenipotentiaries were named on both
fdee, and began their conferences in Chaufse, a

small

small village near Chalons. At the fame time,
Charles, either from a desire of making one great
final effort againit France, or merely to gain a
pretext for deserting his ally, and concluding a
separate peace, Lent an ambassador formally to
require Henry, according to the stipulation in
their treaty, to advance towards Paris. While
he expeaed a return from him, and waited the
issue of the conferences at Chaufsh, he continued
to march forward, though in the utmolt distress
from Learcity of provisions. But at last, by a
fortunate motion on his part, or through Lome
negle& or treachery on that of the French,
he Lurprifed firit Efperney and then Chateau
Thierry, in both which were considerable
magazines. No Looner was it known that these
towns, the latter of which is not two days march
from Paris, were in the hands of the enemy, than
that great capital, defenceless, and susceptible
of any violent alarm in proportion to its great-
ness, was filled with consternation. The in-
habitants, as if the emperor had been already at
their gates, fled in the wildest confusion and
despair, many sending their wives and children
down the Seine to Roiien, others to Orleans,
and the towns upon the Loire. Francis himself,
more afflided with this than with any other
event during his reign, and sensible as well of
the triumph that his rival would enjoy in insult-
ing his capital, as of the danger to which the
kingdom was exposed, could not refrain from
crying out in the flrft emotion of his surprise and
sorrow, " How dear, O my God, do I pay for
this crown, which I thought thou hadst granted
me frcelyP!" But recovering in a moment

g Brantome, tom. vi. 3 i.

from

from this fludden sally of peevishness and impa.
tience, he devoutly added, " Thy wiil, however,
be done;" and proceeded to iflue the necessary
orders for oppoling the enemy with his ufial ac-
tiity and presence of mind. The Dauphin de.
tached eight thousand men to Paris, which re-
vived the courage of the ariighted citizens; he
threw a firong garrison into Meauz, and by a
forced march got into Ferte, between the Im-
perialhts and the capital.

Upon this, the emperor, who began again to

feel the want of provisions, perceiving that the
Danphii fdill prudently declined a hattle, and
not dnring to attack his camp with forces lo
imu h shattered and reduced by hard service,
turned fuiddenlv to the right, and began to fall
back towards Soissons. Having about this time
received Henry's answer, whereby he refused to
dbandon the iognes of elogne and Montreuil,
of both which Ihe expected every moment to get
poffemfon, he thought himfeilf absolved from all
oblinations of adhering to the treaty with him,
and at full liberty to consult his oxvn interest in
wshat manner foevcr he pleased. He conented,
ther fore, to renew tue couference, xshich the
surprise of Efperney had broken ofl. To con-
clude a peace between two princes, ooe of whom
greatly desired, and the other greatly needed it,
dIi not require a long negociation. It wvas ligord
at Crefpy, a finall town near Meaux, on the
eighteenth of Septcmber. The chief articles of it
were, That all the conquefis which either party
had made lince the truce of Nice fhalll be re-
itored; That the emperor fihll give in marrisge
to the duke of Orleans, either his own cideft

siaughti r,

daughter, or the second daughter of his brother
Ferdinand ; that if he chose to bellow on him his
own daughter, he (hall fettle on her all the pro-
vinces of the Low-Countries, to be ereded into
an independent (late, which (hall descend to the
male issue of the marriage ; that if he determined
to give him his niece, he shall, with her, grant
him the investiture of Milan and its dependencies;
that he (hall within four months declare which
of these two princesses he had pitched upon, and
fulfil the refpcEive conditions upon the confum-
mation of the marriage, which (hall take place
within a year from the date of the treaty;
that as soon as the duke of Orleans is put
in poffeffion either of the Low-Countries or
ofMilan, Francis (hall redfore to the duke of
Savoy all that he now poffeffes of his territories,
except Pignerol and Montmillian; that Francis
shall renounce all pretenlions to the kingdom of
Naples, or to the sovereignty of Slanders and
Artois, and Charles (hall give up his claim to the
dutchy of Burgundy and county of Charolois;
that Francis (hall give no aid to the exiled king
of Navarre; that both monarchs (hall join in
making war upon the Turk, towards which the
king (hall furnish, when required by the emperor
and empire, fix hundred men at arms, and ten
thousand foot h

Besides the immediate motives to this peace,

arising from the diltrefs of his army through
want of provilions; from the difficulty of re-
treating out of France, and the impossibility of

h RecueUl des Traites. t.I.227. Belius de Caufss Pacis

Crepiac. in A~tis Erudit. LipL. 1763.

voL. 5z1. Z securing

securing winter-quarters there ; the emperor was
iofluenced by other considerations, more dhitant
indeed, but ·not less weighty. The pope was
ofhjnded to a great degree, as well at his con-
cellions to the proteiants in the late diet, as at
his codientiog to call a council, and to admit of
phtblic difputations in Germany with a view of
uctermining the dodtrines in controversy. Paul
coilidiring both these steps as sacrilegious en-
croachmcut(I on the jurifdidtion as well as privi.
leges of the holy fee, had addressed to the em-
peror a remonifrance rather than a letter on this
fub'ect, written with such acrimony of language,
and in a ftyic of such high authority, as disco-
vered mowr of an intention to draw on a quarrel
than of a delre to reclaim him. Tlis ill lmunour
was nut a Ltalc inflamed by the emperor's ieataue
with Hrnrv of England, which being contraceed
witnl an hera tic, excomlntlicated by the apofiolic

pre, up eared to the pope a profane alliance, and

was . t less dreaded by him than that of Francis
wILh Solyman. Paul's fan and grandfun, highly
incensed at the emperor fur havinlg reftled to
gratify tlhm with regard to the alienation of
Farina and Placent i, contributed by their iug-
zefiuns to four and difgnlk him Itill more. T'o
all svhich was added the powerful operation of
the Iittteryand promises which Francis incessantly
employed to gain him. rjTh1ough from his desire
of maintaining a neutrality, the pope had hitherto
suppressed his own rfentment, had eluded the
artifices of his own family, and refifed the soli.
citations of the Trench king, it was not safe to
rely mucis on the iteadinets of a man whom his
paflions, his fsiends, and his inltereft combined to

shake,

Charles wvell knew, would ioibntly expose his
dominions in Italy to be attacked. 1 he VWoe-
tians, he foresaw, would probably follow the
examplk of a pontiff, who was considered as a
model of political wisdom among the Itali.ns;
and thus, at a junCture when he felt hiimfelf
hardly equal to the burden of the prdent war,
he would be overwhelmed wvith the weilht of a
new confederacy againd hins i. At the fame
time, tile Tur ks, almost unrellijid, made fulcs
progress in Hungary, reducin'g te wn after toxx n,
that they approached near to tile confines of the
Auitrian provincesk. Abhoe all theLe, the cx-
tr lordinar) progress of the proteliant doutrines in
Germany, and tile dangerous co;mbination into
which the princes of that profffon had entered,
called for his immediate attention. Almolt one
half of German)y had revolted from the cilabliihed
church ; the fidelity of the reit was much Ihaken;
the nobility of Auth-ia had de md. d <f Ferdi-
nand the free exercise of reli on ; tile I ihe-
mians, among whtom fume feed of the doctrines
of Huss ltill remained, openly sav lured the new
opinions; the archubitnop of Cologne, with a
zeal which is seldom found among ecekaiifics,
had begun the reformation of I is diocfe ; nor
waS it pofflble, unimlfs some ti'ely and efIfctual
check were given to the fuirit of innovation, to
foresee whele it would end. He himafelf had
been a witncfs, in the late diet, to the peremop-
tory and deciive tone which the proteitants had

i F. Paul. leo. PhllAic. if . k If uanhaii H-ilt.

IHung. 177. 1 Seid. 285.

Z 2 5OW

in their number and union, they had forgotten
the humble ityle of their first petitions, and had
grown to such boldness as openly to despise the
pope, and to shew no great reverence for the Im-
perial dignity itself. If, therefore, he wished to
maintain either the ancient religion or his own
authority, and would not choose to dwindle into
a mere nominal head of the empire, some vigorous
and speedy effort was requisite on his part, which
could not be made during a war that required
the greateit exertion of his fitrength against a so-
reign and powerful enemy.

Such being the emperor's inducements to

peace, he had the address to frame the treaty
of Crefpy so as to promote all the ends which
he had in view. By coming to an agreement
with Francis, he took from the pope all pro-
fpeA of advantage in courting the friendship of
that monarch in preference to his. By the pro-
vifo with regard to a war with the Turks, he
not only deprived Solyman of a powerful ally,
but turned the arms of that ally againit him.
By a private article, not inserted in the treaty,
that it might not raise any unseasonable alarm,
he agreed with Francis that both (hould exert all
their influence and power in order to procure a
general council, to assert its authority, and to
exterminate the proteitant heresy out of their do-
minions. This cut off all chance of afliftance
which the confederates of Smalkalde might ex-
ped from the French king m; and left their so.
licitations, or his jealousy of an ancient rival,

m Serk. 1. iii. 496.

lhould

gagement, he left him embarrassed with a war
againif England, which would put it out of his
power to take any coniidrrable part in the afairs
of Germany.

Henry, poffeffed at all times with an high idea

of his own power and importance, felt, in the
most sensible manner, the neglecd with which the
emperor had treated him in concluding a separate
peace. But the situation of his affairs was fiuch
as fomerwhat alleviated the mortification which
this occalioned. For though he was obliged to
recall the duke of Norfolk from the siege of
Montreuil [Sept. 14], because the Flemiih
troops received ordtes to retire, Boulogne had
surrendered before the negotiations at Crdfpy
were brought to an issue. While elared with
vanity on account of this conqurit, and intlamed
with indignation agamnit the emperor, the am-
baffadors who n Francis feut to make overtures
of peace, found him too amr r an, to grant what
was moderate or equitihle. I H tiemands wc'-e
indeed extras agant, and mad. in the tone of a
conqueror; that Francis lhonId renounce his alli-
ance with Scotland, and not only pay up the
arrear3 of furn ct debts, hut reimburfc the money
which Henmy Ih id e'pendcd in the preelnt war.
Francis, thou rh fin.crely desirous of peace, and
willing to yield a great deal in order to obtaiji
It, h ing now fr-ee from the plnlfire of the Im-
paial arms, rejcftcd these i nominious plra)1)( 1.
tionS with dilfiaiu ; and 11 try d uni til tig
England, hoftiitics contiiluJ bewedo the two

n II 'A' 'a P.iberC: t ;. p. 57. I~E.:*i~, 241.

to the people of France, whom it delivered from
the dread of an enemy who had penetrated into
the heart of the kingdom, was loudly complain.
ed of by the Dauphin. He considered it as a
xnanifea proof of the king his father's extraor-
dinary partiality towards his younger brother,
now duke of Orleans, and complained that, from
his eagerness to gain an eilablifhment for a
favourite son, he Ihad sacrificed the honour of the
kingdom, and renounced the molt ancient as well
as valuable rights of the crown. But as he durit
not venture to offend the king by refusing to
ratify it, though extremely desirous at the fame
time of securing to himself the privilege of re-
claiming what was now alienated so much to his
detriment, he secretly protefited, in presence of
some of his adherents, against the whole tranf-
a6{ion; and declared whatever he ihould be
obliged to do in order to confirm it, null in it-
self, and void of all obligation. The parliament
of Thoulouife, probably by the infligation of his
partisans, did the fameo. But Francis, highly
pleased as well with having delivered his fubjeas
from the miseries of an invasion, as with the
propTcatof acquiringan independent fettlementfor
his son at no greater price than that of renoun-
cing conquefis to which he had no just claim;
titles which had brought so much expence and
so many disasters upon the nation; and rights
grown obsolete and of no value ; ratified the
treaty with great joy. Charles, within the time
prefazibed by the treaty, declared his intention

0 Recueil des Traitez, t. 1. z35. ±;3.

of giving Ferdinand's daughter in marriage to
the duke of Orleans, together with the dutchy
of Milan as her dowry P. Every circumfiance
seemed to promise the continuance of peace.
The emperor, cruelly afiWted with the gout,
appeared to be in no condition to undertake any
enterprise where great alivity was requisite, or
much fatigue to be endured. He himself felt
this, or wished at least that it should be believed;
and being so much disabled by this excruciating
diitemper, when a French ambassador followed
him to Brussels, in order to be present at his
ratification of the treaty of peace, that it was
with the utmost difficulty that he signed his
name, he observed, that there was no great dan-
ger of his violating these articles, as a hand
that could hardly hold a pen, was little able to
brandish a lance.

The violence of his disease confined the em-

peror several months in Brussels, and was the ap-
parent cause of putting off the execution of the
great scheme which he had formed in order to
humble the protestant party in Germany. But
there were other reasons for this delay. For,
however prevalent the motives were which de-
termined him to undertake this enterprise, the
nature of that great body which he was about
to attack, as well as the situation of his own
affairs, made it necessary to deliberate long, to
proceed with caucion, and not too suddenly to
throw aside the veil under which he had hitherto
concealed his real sentiments and schemes. He
was sensible that the protestants, conscious of

q Recueil des Traitcz, t. ii. 238. their

their own fitrength, but under continual appre-
henfions of his designs, had all the boldness of a
powerful confederacy joined to the jealousy of a
feeble faation; and were no less quick-fighted
to discern the firit appearance of danger, than
ready to take arms in order to repel it. At the fame
time, he frill continued involved in a Turkish
war; and though, in order to deliver himself from
this incumbrance, he had determined to fend an
envoy to the Porte with most advantageous and
even submissive overtures ofpeace, the resolutions
of that haughty court were so uncertain, that
before these were known, it would have been
highly imprudent to have kindled the flames of
civil war in his own dominions.

Upon this account, he appeared diffatisfied

with a bull issued by the pope immediately after
the place of Crefpy [Nov. 19], summoning the
council to assemble at Trent early next spring,
and exhorting all Chritian princes to embrace
the opportunity that the present happy interval
of tranquillity afforded them, of fupprefling those
heredfes which threatened to subvert whatever
was sacred or venerable among Christians. But
after such a flight expreflion of dillike, as was
necessary in order to cover his designs, he de-
termined to countenance tile council, which might
become no inconsiderable infirument towards
accomplishing his projefts, and therefore not
only appointed ambassadors to appear there in his
name, but ordered the ecclefiaitics in his domi-
nions to attend at the time prefixed q.

1545.] Such were the emperor's views when

the Imperial diet, after several prorogations, was

'sF. Post, aod: -pi'ned

opened at Worms [March 24]. The protest-
ants, who enjoyed the free exercise of their reli-
gion by a very precarious tenore, having rno other
security for it than the recess of the lait diet,
which was to continue in force only until the
meeting of a council, w\ithed earnetly to eflablifh
that important privilege upon some firmer balis,
and to hold it by a perpetual not a temporary
title. But inflead of ofeicring them any additional
security, Ferdinand opened the dict with obferv-
ing, that there were two points, which chiefly
required consideration, the prosecution of the
war againfi the Tm ks, and the itete of religion;
that the former was the mofi urgent, as Soly-
man, after conquering the greateR part of Hun-
gary, was now ready to fall upon the Auhiriozn
provinces; that the emperor, who, from the be-
ginning of his reign, had ncleAcd no oppor-
tunity of annoying this formidable enemy, and
with the hazard of hlii own person had resifted
his attacks, being animated itill with the fame
zeal, had now confeoted to flop (hort in the
career of his fucccfs againRi France, that, in con.
jundion with his ancient rival, he might turn
his arms with greater vigour against the common
adversary of the Chrifian faith; that it became
all the members of the empire to second those
pious endeavours of its head; that, therefore, they
ought, without delay, to vote him such effecitual
aid as not only their duty but their interest called
upon them to furnish; that the controversies about
religion were so intricate, and of such difficult
difruiflon, as to give no hope of its being pof-
fible to bring them at present to any final iflue;
that by perseverance and repeated folicitations

the

the emperor had at length prevailed on the pope
to call a council, for which they had so often
wished and petitioned; that the time appointed
for its meeting was now come, and both par.
ties ought to wait for its decrees, and submit to
them as the decilions of the universal church.

The popish members of the diet received this

declaration with great applause, and signified
their entire acquiescence in every particular which
it contained. The protefitants expressed great
surprise at propositions, which were so manifehily
repugnant to the recess of the former diet ; they
inifited that the quctions with regard to religion,
as firdt in dignity and importance, ought to come
siret under deliberation; that, alarming as the
progress of the Turks was to all Germany, the
securing the free exercise of their religion touch-
ed them flill more nearly, nor could they pro-
fecute a foreign war with spirit, while solicitous
and uncertain about their domefdic tranquillity;
that if the latter were once rendered firm and
permanent, they would concur with their country-
men in pushing the former, and yield to none of
them in aaivity or zeal. But if the dangerfrom
the Turkish arms was indeed so imminent, as not
to admit of such a delay as would be occasioned
by an immediate examination of the controverted
points in religion, they required that a diet should
be indantly appointed, to which the final fettle-
ment of their religious disputes should be re-
ferred; and that in the mean time the decree of
the former diet concerning religion thould be
explained in a point which they deemed essential.
By ?t$e recess of Spires it was provided, that they
thould enjoy unmolested the public exercise of

their

cil; but as the pope had now called a council, to
which Ferdinand had required them to submit,
they began to fufpea that their adversaries might
take advantage of an ambiguity in the terms of
the recess, and pretending that the event therein
mentioned had now taken place, might pronounce
them to be no longer entitled to the fame indul-
gence. In order to guard against this interprr-
tation, they renewed their former remonittances
againit a council called to meet without the
bounds of the empire, summoned by the pope's
authority, and in which he assumed the right of
presiding; and declared that, notwithflanding
the convocatien of any such illegal affembl',
they still held the recess of the late diet to be in
full force.

At other junalures, when the emperor thought

it of advantage to sooth and gain the protefitants,
he had dcvifed expedients for giving them fatif.
faaion with regard to demands seemingly more
extravagant; but his views at present being very
different, Ferdinand, by his command, adhered
inflexiblyto his first propositions, and would make
no conceflions which had the most remote tend-
encyto throw discredit on the council, or to weak.
en its authority. The proteiants, on their part,
were no less inflexible; and after much time
spent in fruitless endeavours to convince each
other, they came to no agreement. Nor did
the presence of the emperor, who upon his re-
covery arrived at Worms LMay 15], contribute
in any degree to render the protellants more
compliant. Fully convinced that they were
maintaining the cause of God and of truth, they

Ihewed

(hewed themselves superior to the allurements of
interest, or the fuggeRions of fear; and in pro-
portion as the emperor redoubled his folicita.
tions, or discovered his designs, their boldness
seems to have increased. At last they openly
declared, that they would not even deign to vin.
dicate their tenets in presence of a council, as-
fembled not to examine, but to condemn them;
and that they would pay no regard to an assembly
held under the influence of a pope, who had
already precluded himrflf from all title to a& as
a judge, by his having fligmatized their opi-
nions with the name of heresy, and denounced
againit them the heavieRt censures, which, in
the plenitude of his usurped power, he could
inflidt r.

While the protefitants, with such union as well

as firmnelfs, reje~ted all intercourse with the
council, and refused their assent to the Imperial
demands in refped to the Turkimh war, Maurice
of Saxony alone (hewed an inclination to gratify
the emperor with regard to both. Though he
profeffed an inviolable regard to the protestant
religion, he afluned an appearance of moderation
peculiar to himself, by which he confirmed the
favourable sentiments which the emperor already
entertained of him, and gradually paved the way
fur executing the ambitious designs which always
occupied his aaive and enterprising mind '. His
example, however, had little influence upon such
as agreed with him in their religious opinions;
and Charles perceived that he could not hope

rSleid. 343, &c. Seck. i. 543, &c. Thuan. H1ior.

l2L. Al. p. 56. * Seek.1 ii. 57. h

cather

ants againit the Turks, or to quiet their fears and
jealousies on account of their religion. But as his
flhemnes were not yet lipe for execution, nor his
preparations so far advanced that he could force
the compliance of the proteitants, or punith their
obl-inacy, he artfully concealed Ihis own inten-
tiosis. That he might augment their security,
he [Aogufi 43 appointed a dict to be held at
Ratiibon early next year, in order to adjust what
was now left undetermined ; and previous to it,
lie agreced that a certain uumbhr of divines of
each party ihoold meet, in oder to confer upon
the points in dispute t.

But, how far fuever this appearance of a de-

fire to maintain sle present tranquillity might
have imposed upon the protestants, the emperor
was incapable of ftsch uniform and thorough dif-
finuilation, as to hide altogether from their view
the danbil ous del;ins which he iwas meditating
againit them. Herman count de 11'eid, arch-
biiihop and eklaor of Cologne, a prelate con-
fpicuous for his ;irtuc and piimiti e liniplicity of
Inaunnrs, though not more distinguithtd for Earn-
ing than the other defcendamts of noble families,
who in that age poulffnd moit of the grcat bent-
fices in Germany, having become a proselyte to
the doitrines of the reformers, had begun in the
ymar one thousand five hundred and forty-three,
nith the alihtance of Mclancthon and Bucer, to
ababishs the ancient fopcriiition in his diocese, and
to introduce in its place the rites eitablifhed
among the protellants. But the canons of hiB

£ 4leid. 351.

ion,. is. A A cathedral,

cathedral, who were not poffeffed with the fame
spirit of innovation, and who foresaw how fatal
the levelling genius of the new fef would prove
to their dignity and wealth, opposed, from the
beginning, this unprecedented enterprise of their
archbishop, with all the zeal flowing from reve-
relice for old infritutions, heightened by conccrn
for their own interest. This oppoikion, which
the archbishop considered only as a new argument
to demonitrate the neceflity of a reformation,
neither shook his resolution, nor slackened his
ardour in profecnting his plan. The canons,
perceiving all their endeavours to check his ca-
reer to be ineffeaual, solemnly protefited againit
his proceedings, and appealed fLr redress to the
pope and emperor, the former as ecclesiastical,
the latter as his civil superior. This appeal being
laid before the emperor, during his residence in
Worms, he took the canons of Cologne under
his immediate proteAion ; enjoined them to pro-
ceed with rigour againit all who revolted from
the established church; prohibited the archbi-
shop to make any innovation in his diocese;
and summoned him to appear at Brussels within
thirty days, to aniver the accusations which
lhould be preferred against him U.

To this clear evidence of his hoflile intentions

againit the protestant party, Charles added other
proofs still more explicit. In his heredktery do-
minions of the Low-Countries, he persecuted all
who were fupeated of Lutheranifm with un-
relenting rigour. As soon as he arrived at
WSTorms, he lilenced the protestant preachers in

SSlelid, 31o. 340. 351. Seckend.iii, 443. 553.

that

reigh against the Lutherans from the pulpit of
his chapel, and to call upon him, as he regarded
the favour of God, to exterminate that pefilent
herely. He dispatched the embassy, which has
been already mentioned, to Constantinople, with
overtures of peace, that he might be free from
any apprehensions of danger or interruption from
that quarter. Nor did any of thele fleps, or
their dangerous tendency, escape the jealous
observation of the proteltants, or fail to alarm
their fears, and to excite their solicitude for the
safety of their secEt.

Meanwhile, Charles's good fortune, which

predominated on all occasions over that of his
rival Francis, extricated him out of a dificulty,
from which, with all his sagacity and address,
he would have found it no easy matter to have
disentangled himself. Jull about the time when
the duke of Orleans should have received Ferdi,.
rand's daughter i0 marriage, and together with
her the poffeflion of the Milanese, he died of a
malignant fever [Sept. 8]. By this event, the
emperor was freed from the necefility of giving
up a valuable province into the hands of an
enemy, or from the indecency of violating a recent
and solemn engagement, which must have occa-
fioned an immediate rupture with France. He
affeaed, however, to exprefa great sorrow for
the untimely death of a young prince, who was
to have been so nearly allied to him; but he
carefully avoided entering into any frelh discus-
fions concerning the Milanese; and would not
listen to a proposal which came from Francis
of new-modelling the treaty of Crefpy, so as to

LaS make

make him some reparation for the advantages
which he had loft by the demise of his son. In
the more aAive and vigorous part of Francis's
reign, a declaration of war would have been the
certain and inidantaneous consequence of such a
flat refusal to comply with a demand seemingly
so equitable; but the declining state of his own
health, the exhausted condition of his kingdom,
together with the burden of the war againlt
England, obliged him, at present, to dissemble
his resentment, and to put off thoughts of re-
venge to some other junaure. In consequence
of this event, the unfortunate duke of Savoy
loft all hope of obtaining the restitution of his
territories; and the rights or claims relinquished
by the treaty of Crefpy returned in full force to
the crown of France, to serve as pretexts for fu-
ture wars X.

Upon the first intelligence of the duke of

Orleans's death, the confederates of Smalkalde
flattered themselves that the essential alterations
which appeared to be unavoidable consequences
of it could hardly fail of producing a rupture,
which would prove the means of their safety.
But they were not more disappointed with re-
gard to this, than in their expe&ations from an
event which seemed to be the certain prelude of
a quarrel between the emperor and the pope.
When Paul, whose passion for aggrandizing his
family increased as he advanced in years, and as
he saw the dignity and power which they derived
immediately from him becoming more precarious,

z Belcasli Comment. 769. Paruta, Hist. Venet. iv.

P. 577* found

found that he could not bring Charles to approve
of his ambitious schemes, he ventured to grant
his son Peter Lewis the investiture of Parma and
Placentia, though at the rilk of incurring the dif-
plealure of the emperor. At a time when a
great part of Europe inveighed openly against
the corrupt manners and exorbitant power of
ceclefiatics, and when a council was summoned
to reform the disorders of the church, this inde-
cent grant of such a principality, to a son of
whose illegitimate birth the pope ought to have
been alhamed, and whose licentious morals all
good men detefed, gave general offence. Some
cardinals in the Imperial interest remonitrated
againR such an unbecoming alienation of the pa-
trimony of the church; the Spanish ambassador
would not be present at the solemnity of his in-
feofment; and upon pretext that these cities
were part of the Milanese ifate, the emperor
peremptorily refused to confirm the deed of in-
veftiture. But both the emperor and pope being
intent upon one common obje& in Germany,
they sacrificed their particular pallions to that
public cause, and suppressed the emotions of
jealouly or refntment which were rising on this
occalion, that they might jointly pursue what
each deemed to be of greater importance r,

About this time the peace of Germany was

disturbed by a violent but lhort eruption of
IHenry duke of Brunswick. This prince, though
fill fiript of bie dominions, which the emperor
held 5n fequeflration, until his differences with
the confederates of Smalkalde should be adjusted,

I Pruta, .Hist. Vener. iv, i73S PIllvic. 180.

SA3 poffelled

poffeffed however so much credit in Germany,
that he undertook to raise for the French king
a considerable body of troops to be employed in
the war against England. The money flipulated
for this purpose was duly advanced by Francis:
the troops were levied; but Henry, initead of
leading them towards France, suddenly entered
his own dominions at their head, in hopes of
recovering poffeffion of them before any army
could be assembled to oppose him. The confe-
derates were not more surprised at this unexped.
ed attack, than the king of France was astonished
at a mean thievilh fraud, so unbecoming the
charaaer of a prince. But the landgrave of
Hesse, with incredible expedition, colle&ed as
many men as put a flop to the progress of Hen.
ry's undisciplined forces, and being joined by his
fon-in-law, Maurice, and by some troops belong-
ing to the elefor of Saxony, he gained such ad-
vantages over Henry, who was rash and bold in
forming his schemes, but feeble and undetermined
in executing them, as obliged him to disband
his army, and to surrender himself, together with
his eldest son, prisoners at discretion. He was
kept in close confinement, until a new reverse
of affairs procured him liberty Z.

As this defeat of Henry's wild enterprise ad-

ded new reputation to the arms of the protest-
ants, the establishment of the protefitant religion
in the palatinate brought a great accession of
itrength to their party. Frederick, who fioc.
ceeded his brother Lewis in that eledorate, had
long been fufpeaed of a secret propensity to the

a Sleid. 35z. Seck. iii. 567. doEtrines

doArines of the reformers, which, upon his accef-
sion to the principality, he openly maniferled.
But as he expected that something effedual to-
wards a general and legal edablifhment of reli-
gion, would be the fruit of so many diets, con-
ferences, and negotiations, he did not, at firif,
attempt any public innovation in his dominions.
Finding all thdef ilTue in nothiug, he thought him-
seif called, at length [Jan. 10, I146], to counte-
nance by his authority the lytimn which he ap.
proved of, and to gratify. the jibhes of his fob-
jeas, who, hy their intercourse with the protestant
Rlates, had almolt universally imbibed their opi-
nions. As the warmth and impetuonity, which
accompanied the spirit of rnformation in its firnt
efforts, had somewhat abatld, this change was
made with grnat order and regularity; the an-
cient rites were nboliihed, and new forms intro-
duced, without any acts of riolence, or fymptorn
of discontent. Though Fredetick adopted the
religious f) dem of the prottilants, he imitated
the examj le of Maurice, and did not accede to
the league of Smalkalde

t .

A few v neeks before this revolution in the

palalnate, the geunal council was opened with
the accullotued foleiities at Trent. The eyes
of the catholic fiates were turned with much cx-
pedation towards an assembly, which all had con-
lidered as caphle of apphling an effeaual remedy
for the difoidcj-s of the church when they firit
broke out, though many scre afraid that it was
now too late to hope for great benefit fiom it,
when the malady, by bein t fufLred to incrneae

a Skid. 3;6. Seek, i. 111. 6r6,

during

and grown to fueh extreme violence. The pope,
by his lait bull of convocation, had appointed
the firR meeting to be held in March. But his
views, and those of the emperor, were so differ-
ent, that aimoft the whole year was spent in
negotiations. Charles, who foresaw that the
rigorous decrees of the council againd the pro.
teitants would soon drive them, in self defence
as well as from refeotment, to some desperate
extreme, laboured to put off its meeting until his
warlike preparations were so far advanced, that
he might be in a condition to fecood its decitions
by the force of his arms. The pope, who had
early sent to Trent the legates who were to pre.
fide in his name, knowing to what contempt it
would expose his authority, and what suspicions
it would beget of his intentions, if the fathers
of the council should remain in a fdate of inac-
tivity, when the church was in such danger as
to require their immediate and vigorous interpo-
fition, insisted either upon translating the council
to fume city in Italy, or upon suspending alto-
gether its proceedings at that junturc, or
upon authorizing it to begin its deliberations im.
mediately. The emperor rejeded the two for.
mer expedients as equally offenfive to the Ger-
mans of every denomination; but finding it
impossible to elude the latter, he proposed thai
the council should begin with reforming the
disorders in the church, before it proceeded to
examine or define articles of faith. This was
the very thing which the court of Rome dreaded
most, and which had prompted it to employ lb
many artifices in order to prevent the meeting of

such

such a dangerous judicatory. Paul, though
snore compliant than some of his predecessors
swith regard to calling a council, was no less
jealous than they had been of its jurifdi&ion, and
saw what matter of triumph such a method of
proceeding would afford the heretics. He appre.
hended consequences not only humbling but fatal
to the papal fee, if the council came to confider
an inquest into abuses as their only business; or
if inferior prelates were allowed to gratify their
own envy and peerilhnefs, by prescribing rules
to those who were exalted above them in dignity
and power. Without listening, therefore, to this
insidious proposal of the emperor, he inftruded
his legates to open the council.

Jan. s8] The first felion was spent in matters

of form. In a subsequent one, it was agreed
that the framing a confefimon of faith, wherein
ihould be tontamned all the articles which the
church required its members to believe, ought
to be the firA and principal business of the coun.
cil; but that, at the fame time, due attention
Ihould be given to what was necessary towards
the reformation of manners and discipline. From
this first symptom of the spirit with which the
council was animated, from the high tone of au-
thority which the legates who presided in it
affuined, and from the implicit deference with
which mofl of the members followed their direc-
tions, the protefiants conjeaured with ease what
decisions they might expe&. It allonifhed them,
however, to fee forty prelates (for no greater
Dumber were yet assembled) afiume authority as
representatives of the universal church, and pro-
ceed to determine the most important points of

doarine

dodrine in its name. Sensible of this indecency,
as well as of the ridicule with which it might be
attended, the council advanced slowly in its deli.
berations, and all its proceedings were for some
time languithing and feeble b. As soon as the
confederates of Smalkalde received information of
the opening of the council, they published a long
manifeflo, containing a renewal of their proteat
against its meeting, together with the reafoses
which induced them to decline its jurifdic ioos C.
The pope and emperor, on their part, were so
little solicitous to quicken or add vigour to its
operations, as plainly discovered that some ob.
jed of greater importance occupied and interest.
ed them.

The protefiants were not inattentive or uncon-

cerned fpe&ators of the motions of the sovereign
pontiff nnd of Charles, and they entertained every
day more violent suspicions of their intentions,
in consequence of intelligence received from dif-
ferent quarters of the machinations carrying on
against them. The king of England iaformed
them, that the emperor, having long resolved to
exterminate their opinions, would not fail to em-
ploy this interval of tranquillity which he now
enjoyed, as the moit favourable junaure for car-
rying his delign into execution. The merchants
ofAugfburg, which was at that time a city of exc
tensive trade, received advice, by means of their
correspondents in Italy, among whom were some
who secretly favoured the protefrant caue s ,
that a dangerous confederacy againit it was

b F. Paul, nc, &c. Pallaric. p. 180, &c. cSeck.

and, I Uii. 6cz, &c. d Seck. i. iii. 579.

forming

forming between the pope and emperor.
In confirmation of this they heard from the
Low-Countries, that Charles had iffixed or-
ders, though with every precaution which could
keep the meafrre concealed, for raising troops
both there and in other parts of his dominions.
Such a variety of information corroborating all
that their own jealousy or observation led them
to apprehend, left the protedfants )ittle reason to
doubt of the emperor's boilile intentions. Under
this imprefilon, the deputies of the confederates
of Smalkalde assembled at Francfort, and by
communicating their intelligence and sentiments
to each other, reciprocally heightened their sense
of the impending danger. But their union was
not fiuch as their situation required, or the pre-
parations of their enemies rendered necessary.
Their league had now subsisted ten years. Among
so many members, whose territories were inter-
mingled with each other, and who, according to
the cuilom of Germany, had created an infinite
varity of mutual rights and claims by intermar.
riages, alliances, and conltraas of different kinds,
fubjeas of jealousy and discord had unavoidably
arisen. Some of the confederates, being conne&-
ed with the duke of Brunswick, were highly
disgusted with the landgrave, on account of the
rigour with which he had treated that rash and
unfortunate prince. Others taxed the eleftor of
Saxonyandlandgrave,the heads ofthe league,with
having involved the members in unnece{fary and
exorbitant expences by their profufenefs or want
of meconomy. The views, likewise, and temper
of those two princes, who, by their superior
power and authority, influenced and direaed

the

the whole body, being extremely different, ren-
dered all its motions languid, at a time when the
utmost vigour and dispatch were requisite. The
landgrave, of a violent and enterprising temper,
but not forgetful, amidit his zeal for religion, of
the usual maxims of human policy, insisted that,
as the danger which threatened them was manifest
and unavoidable, they ihould have recourse to the
most effedual expedient for securing their own
safety, by courting the protedion of the kings
of France and England, or by joining in alliance
with the protestant cantons of Swifferland, from
whom they might exped such powerfid and pre-
sent afliftance as their situation demanded. The
eleaor, on the other hand, with the mofi up-
right intentions of any prince in that age, and
with talents which might have qualified him
abundantly for the adminifiration of government
in any tranquil period, was poffeffed with such
fiuperdtitious veneration for all the parts of the
Lutheran system, and such bigoted attachment
to all its tenets, as made him averse to an union
with those who differed from him in any article
of faith, and rendered him very incapable of un-
dertaking its defence in times of difficulty and
danger. He seemed to think, that the concerns
of religion were to be regulated by principles and
maxims totally different from those which apply
to the common affairs of life; and being swayed
too much by the opinions of Luther, who was
not only a itranger to the rules of political con-
duA, but despised them; he often discovered an
uncomplying spirit, that proved of the greatest
detriment to the cause which he wished to sup-
port. Influenced, on this occasion, by the severe

and

and rigid notions of that reformer, he refused to
enter sisto any confederacy with Francis, because
he was a persecutor of the truth; or to solicit
the friendship of Henry, because he was no less
impious and profane than the pope himself; or
even to join in alliance with the Swiss, because
they differed from the Germans in several elfen-
tial articles of faith. This dissension, about a
point of fuels consequence, produced its natural
effeds. Each secretly censured and reproached the
other. The laudgrave considered the eledor as set-
tered by narrow prejudices, unworthy of a prince
called to ad a chief part in a scene of such import-
ance. T'hie elkdor fufpeded the landgrave of loose
principles and ambitious views, which correspond-
ed ill with the sacred cause wherein they were en-
gaged. But though the eldor's scruples prevented
their timely application for foreign aid; and the
jealousy or discontent of the other princes de-
seated a proposal for renev. ing their original con-
federacy, the term during which it was to con-
tinue in force being on the point of expiring;
yet the sense of their common danger induced
them to agree with regard co other points, par-
ticularly that they would never acknowledge the
assembly of Trent as a lawful council, nor fuffer
the archbishop of Cologne to be oppressed on
account of the fitcps which he had taken towards
the reformation of his diocese e

The landgrave, about this time, desirous of

penctlating to the bottom of the emperor's in-
tenutous, wr rote to Granvelle, whom he knew to
be thuriugdly acquainted with all his mailer's
fchcnms, informing him of the several particulars

c SeJk. 1. ii. 566. 576. 653. Sleid. 355.

VOL,. 11 a a which

which raised the suspicions of the protefiants, and
Legging an explicit declaration of what they had
to fear or to hope. Granvelle, in return, as-
sured them, that the intelligence which they
had received of tile emperor's military prepara-
tions was exaggerated, and all their suspicions
ddilitute of foundation; that though, in order
to guasd his frontiers againif any ijfult of the
F:cnch or English, he had commanded a small
body of men to be raised in the Low-Countries,
he was as solicitous as ever to maintain tranquil.
lity in Germany F.

But the emperor's aaions did not correspond

w:th these profeffions of his minister. For in-
itead of appoiutiug men of known moderation
and a pacitic temper to appear in defence of the
catholic doatriues at the conference which had
been agreed on, he made choice of fierce bigots,
attached to their own fiylem with a blind obfti.
nacu , that rendered all hope of a reconcile-
ment desperate. Malvanda, a Spanish divine,
who took upon him the conduct of the de-
bate on the part of the catholics, managed it
with all the flbtle dexterity of a fcholaltic meta-
phyheian, more ifudious to perplex his adver-
larins than to convince them, and more intent
on yahliating error than on difcoveriug truth.
The protvitants, filled with indignation, as
well at his sophistry as at some regulations
which the emperor endeavoured to impose on
tile difputants, broke off the conference abrupt-
ly, being now fully convinced that, in all his
late meafiures, the emperor could have no other
view than to amuse them, and to gain time for
lipening his own schemes .

f Sleid* 356. O Ibid. 358* Seek, 1, ill. Czo.

# BOOK VIII.

BO O K VIII.

-HILE appearances of danger daily increafedl
an4 the tempelR which had been so long a

gathering was ready to break forth in all its vio-
lence againdt the protdltant church, Luther was
saved, by a seasonable death, from feeling or
beholding its dedirnftive rage. Having gone,
though in a declining date of health, and doring
a rigorous season, to his native city of Eyfieben,
in olldr to compose, by his authority, a diffen-
tion among the counts of Mansfield, he was
seized with a violent inflammation in his dtomach,
which in a few days put an end to his life, in the
fixty-third year of his age [Feb. so]. As he
was raised up by Providence to be the author of
one of the greateRt and moil intereiting revolu-
tions recorded in hildory, there is not ally person
perhaps whole character has been drawn u-ith
foch opposite colours. In his own age, otie
pal ty, itruck wi Is horror and inflamed with rage,
when they saw with u-hat a daring hand he over-
turned every tlhing nx hich they lheld to be sacred,
or ;aloed as beneficial, imputed to him not only
all the defeas and vices of a man, but the qua-
lities of a delaon. The other, warmed with
the admiration and gratitude wihich they thought
he merited as tile rcdtorer of light and liberty
to the Chridian church, aferibed to him perfec-
t'ons above the condition of lllmanity, and viewed
all his aztions with a veneration bordering on
that which ihould be paid only to those who are
guided by the immediate inspiration of Heaven.

BB2 It

It is his own condu&t, not the undiflinguifhing
censure or the exaggerated praise of his contem-
poraries, that ought to regulate the opinions of
the present age concerning him. Zeal for what
he regarded as truth, undaunted intrepidity to
maintain his own fyitem, abilities, both natural
and acquired, to defend his principles, and un-
wearied indudry in propagating them, are vir-
tues which ihine so conspicuously in every part
of his behaviour, that even his enemies mull
allow him to have poffeffed them in an eminent
degree. To these may be added, with equal
juitice, such purity and even aufierity of man-
ners, as became one who assumed the charaaer
of a Reformer; such fanAity of life as suited the
doarine which he delivered; and such perfed
difinterefitednefs as affords no flight presumption
of his sincerity. Superior to all felfifh confider-
ations, a llranger to the elegancies of life, and
despising its pleasures, he left the honours and
emoluments of the church to his disciples, re-
maining satisfied himself in his original state of
profeffor in the university, and paflor of the town
of Wittemberg, with the moderate appointments
annexed to these offices. His extraordinary
qualities were allayed with no inconsiderable
mixture of human frailty and human passions.
These, however, were of such a nature, that
they cannot be imputed to malevolence or cor-
ruption of heart, but seem to have taken their
rife from the fame source with many of his vir.
tues. His mind, forcible and vehement in all
its operations, roused by great objeas, or agi.
tated by violent passions, broke out, on many
occalions, with an impetuosity which aflonithes

wets

men of feebler spirits, or such as are placed in a
more tranquil situation. By carrying some
praie-nworthy dispositions to exccfs, he bordered
sometimes on what was culpable, and was often
betrayed into adions which exposed him to cen-
sure. His confidence that his own opinions
were well founded, approached to arrogance;
his courage in asserting them, to rafhnels; his
firmness in adhering to them, to obitinacy; and
his zeal in confuting his adversaries, to rage and
scurrility. Accuitomed himfeilf to confider
every thing as subordinate to truth, he expeAed
the fame deference for it from other men; and
without making any allowances for their timidity
or prejudices, he poured forth againfit such as
disappointed him in this particular, a torrent of
invective mingled with contempt. Regardless
of any diitinciion of iank or charader when
his doearines were attacked, he clhaffifed all his
ad&erfaries indiscriminately, with the fame
rough hand; anether the royal dignity of
Henry VIII. nor the eminent learning and
abilities of Erasmus, screened them from the
fame gross abuse w!ith which he treated Tetzel
or Eccius.

But these indecencies of which Luther was

guilty, must not be imputed wholly to the vio-
knce of his temper. They ought to be charged
in part on the manners of the age. Among a
rude people, unacquainted with those maxims,
which, by putting continual redtraint on the pas-
fione of individuals, have polished society, and
rendered it agreeable, disputes of every kind
were managed with heat, and firong emotions

cre uttered in their natural language without

ia3 reserve

reserve or delicacy. At the fame time, the
works of learned men were all composed in Latin,
and they were not only authorized, by the ex-
ample of eminent writers in that language, to
use their antagonists with the most illiberal fcur-
rility; but, in a dead tongue, indecencies of
every kind appear less shocking than in a living
language, whose idioms and phrases seem gross,
becaule they are familiar.

In passing judgment upon the charaaers of

men, we ought to try them by the principles
and maxims of their own age, not by those of
another. For, although virtue and vice are at
all times the fame, manners and customs vary
continually. Some parts of Luther's behaviour,
which to us appear most culpable, gave no dif-
gust to his contemporaries. It was even by some
of those qualities, which we are now apt to
blame, that he was fitted for accomplishing the
great work which he undertook. To rouse man-
kind, when funk in ignorance or superstition, and
to encounter the rage of bigotry armed with
power, required the utmost vehemence of zeal,
as well as a temper daring to excess. A gentle
call would neither have reached, nor have excited
those to whom it was addressed. A spirit more
amiable, but less vigorous than Luther's, would
have ihrunk back from the dangers which he
braved and surmounted. Towards the close of
Luther's life, though without any perceptible
diminution of his zeal or abilities, the infirmi-
ties of hjs temper increased upon him, so that
he grew daily more peevish, more iralcible, and
more impatient of contradiAion. Having lived
to be a witness of his own amazing success ; to

icc

and to ihake the foundation of the papal throne,
before which the mightiest monarchs had trem.
bled, he discovered, on some occasions, fymp-
toms of vanity and felf-applaufe. He muff
have been, indeed, more than man, if, upon
contemplating all that he aaually accomplished,
he had never felt any sentiment of this kind rising
in his breasts*.

Some time before his death he felt his fitrength

declining, his constitution being worn out by
a prodigious multiplicity of business, added to
the labour of discharging his minilterial funaion
with unremitting diligence, to the fatigue of
conitant Qrudy, besides the composition of works
as voluminous as if he had enjoyed uninterrupted
leisure and retirement. His natural intrepidity
did not forsake him at the approach of death;
his lait conversation with his friends was concern.
ing the happiness reserved for good men in a fu.

* A remarkable inltance of this, as well as of a certain

singularity ansd elevation of sentiment, is found in his Lalt
Wjll. Thousgh the effeas which he had to bequea:h were
vwry inconsiderable, he thought it ntcerfry to make a Telfa-
menr, but icorned to frame it with the urual legal formaiisies.
Notus (um, Lays he, in cw1l, in terra, & inferno, & aujto-
ritatem ad hoc uislicientem habeo, ut mihi foil cred'.tur,
cum Drus mihi, homini licet damnabili, et miferabili pecca-
tori, ex paterna mifrticordia Evanneliusm fiiii fui credid'-rir,
dederitque ut in eo verax & fidelis fucrim, ita ut multi in
munud ilHud per me acceperint, & me pro Doatore veritatis
agnoverinr, fpreto banno papwe, Catfaris, regumn, priscipum
& Lacerdotum, immso omnium diemonum odio. Qgidni,
igisur, ad dispofitior.em hanc, in re exigos, fufficit, Si ad.
lit manus mea teftimonium, & dicd podit, he fcripfit D.
iWiarripus Luther, Notarius Dei, & tellis ty5ran\lii ejua.
Sec, i, ini, p 657.

ture life, of wxhich lie spoke with the fervor
and delight natural to one who expeaed and
wished to enter soon upon the enjoyment of it a.
The account of his death filled the Roman ca-
tholic party x ith excessive as well as indecent
joyr, and damped the spirits of all his followers;
neither party fufficiently considering that his
doarines were now so firmly rooted, as to be in
a condition to flourilh independent of the hand
which had firit planted them. His funeral
was celebrated by order of the eleaor of
Saxony with extraordinary pomp. He left
several children by his wife Catherine a Boria,
V hio survived him. Towards the end of the
lai ccntury, there were in Saxony some of
b s dcfcendants in decent and honourable hta.
teLns .

The emperor, meanwhile, pursued the plan

of diflimulation with which he had set out, em-
ploying every art to amuse the protestants, and
to quiet their fears and jealousies. For this pur-
pose he contrived to have an interview with the
laadgrave of Hesse, the most aEtive of all the
collftdcrates, and the most suspicious of his de-
signs. To him he made futch warm profeflions
of his concern for the happiness of Germany,
and of his averhon to all violent meafires;
Le denied in fitch express terms, his having
entered into any league, or having begun aty
military preparations which should give any
jurt cause of alarm to the protefiants, as seem
to have dispelled all the landgrave's doubts and

a Sleid. 36z. Seck. lib.iii. 6pz, &c.
S 5ck.b lit. jtj. 651.

appre-

apprehenfxons, and sent him away fully satisfied
of his pacific intentions. This artifice was of
great advantage, and effedually answered the
purpose for which it was employed. The land-
grave, upon his leaving Spires, where he had
been admitted to this interview, went to Worm;,
where the Smalkaldic confederates were ai-
fcmbled, and gave them fuclh a flattering repre-
fentation of the emperor's favourable disposition
towards them, that they, who were too apt, as
well from the temper of the German nation,
as from the genius of all great affbcictions or
bodies of men, to be flow, a'd dilatorv, and
undecifive in their deliberations, thought there
was no neceflity of taking any immediate measures
againit danger, which appeared to be distant or
Imaginary c

Such events, however, soon occurred, as Ifag-

gered the credit which the protefants had given
to the emperor's declarations. The council of
Trent, though fitll composed of a small number
of Italian and Spanish prelates, nithout a single
deputy from many of the kingdoms, which it
assumed a right of binding by its decrees, being
ashamed of Its long inadivity, proceeded now
to fettle articles of the greatest importance.
Having begun with examining the firit and
chief point in controversy between the church of
Rome and the reformers, concerning the rule
which thould be held as supreme and decisive in
matters of faith, the council, by its infallible
authority, determined [Apr. 5], " That the
books to which the designation of /lpocrJphal

c Skid. Hilt. 3h7. 3'3

hath

hath been given, are of equal authority with
those which were received by the Jews and pri-
mitive Chriflians into the sacred canon ; that the
traditions handed down from the apostolic age,
and preserved in the church, are entitled to as
much regard as the do~trines and precepts which
the inspired authors have committed to writing;
that the Latin translation of the Scriptures, made
or revised by St. Jerome, and known by the
name of the Yu!gate translation, Ihould be read in
churches, and appealed to in the schools as authen-
tic and canonical." Againit all who disclaimed the
truth of these tenets, anathemas were denounced
in the name and by the authority of the Holy
Ghost. The decision of these points, which
undermined the main foundation of the Lu-
theran system, was a plain warning to the pro-
tefitants what judgment they might expe& when
the council should have leisure to take into con.
fideration the particular and subordinate articles
of their creed d

This discovery of the council's readiness to

condemn the opinions of the protestants, was
soon followed by a firiking infrance of the pope's
resolution to punish such as embraced them. The
appeal of the canons of Cologne against their
archbifhcp having been carried to Rome, Paul
eagerly seized on that opportunity, both of dif-
playing the extent of his own authority, and of
teaching the German ecclefiaftics the danger of
revolting from the established church. As no
person appeared in behalf of the archbishop, he
v as hild to be conviatd of the crime of heresy,

d F. Peul, 541. Pallay. zo6.

and

and a papal bull was if'ued [Apr. 16], depriving
r'm of his ecclejiaftical dignity, inflicding on
him the sentence of excommunication, and ab-
solving his fubjedts from the oath of allegiance
which they had taken to him as their civil fu-
perior. The countenance which he had given to
the Lutheran heresy was the only crime imputed
to him, as well as the only reason afigned to
iju'ify the extraordinary severity of this decree.
The protellants could hardly believe that Paul,
how zealous soever he might be to defend the
dhblifhed fyilem, or to humble those who in-
vaded it, would have ventured to proceed to fucl
extremities againlt a prince and eledor of the
empire, without having previously secured fiuch
powerful protedion as would render his censure
something more than an impotent and despicable
sally of resentment. They were of course deeply
alarmed at this sentence againit the archbishop,
considering it as a fore indication of the malevo-
lent intentions not only of the pope, but of the
emperor, against the whole party d.

Upon this frcfh revival of their fears, with

such violence as is natural to men roofed from a
false security, and conscious of their having been
deceived, Charles saw that now it became oecef-
farv to throw aside the mask, and to declaie
openly what part he determined to ad. By a
long fcries of artifice and fallacy, he had gained
so much time, that his measures, though not al-
together ripe for execution, were in great for'
wardnefs. The pope, by his proceedings againlt
the eledor of Colonge, as well as by the de-

d Skid. 34, F. Pauh 15;. Pa::ayiC, 224.

3 creCs

crees of the council, had precipitated matters
into fucli a situation, as rendered a breach be-
tween the emperor and the protestants almost
unavoidable. Charles had therefore no choice
left him, but either to take part with them in
overturning what the fee of Rome had deter-
mined, or to support the authority of the church
openly by force of arms. Nor did the pope
think it enough to have brought the emperor
under a necessity of aaing; he pressed him to
begin his operations immediately, and to carry
them on with such vigour as could not fail of
fkcuring success. Transported by his zeal
againit heresy, Paul forgot all the prudent and
cautious maxims of the papal fee, with regard
to the danger of extending the Imperial autho-
rity beyond due bounds; and in order to crush
the Lutherans, he was willing to contribute to-
wards raising up a master that might one day
prove formidable to himself as well as to the reft
of Italy.

But, besides the certain expe~ation of assistance

from the pope, Charles was now secure from
any danger of interruption to his designs by the
TuIrkilih arms. His negotiations at the Porte,
whliich lie had carried on with great assiduity
since the peace of Crefpy,'were on the point of
being terminated in such a manner as he defirle.
Solyman, partly in compliance with the French
king, who, in order to avoid the disagreeable
obligation of joining the empesor against his an-
Cit t ally, laboured with great zeal to bring about
an accoinmodation between them, and partly
from its LbLing neceffiry to turn his arms towards
the eaRt, where the Persians threatened to in-

vade

vade his dominions, consented without difficulty
to a truce for five years. The chief article of
it was, That each Ihould retain poffeflion of
what he now held in Hungary; and Ferdi-
nand, as a sacrifice to the pride of the sultan,
submitted to pay an annual tribute of fifty thou.
sand crowns e.

But it was upon the aid and concurrence of

the Germans themselves that the emperor re-
lied with the greateR confidence. The Germanic
body, he knew, was of such vaR fitrength, as to
be invincible if it were united, and that it was
only by employing its own force that he could
hope to subdue it. Happily for him, the union
of the several members in this great fyfitem was
so feeble, the whole frame was so loosely com-
pated, and its different parts tended so violently
towards separation from each other, that it was
almost impoflible for it, on any important emer-
gence, to join in a general or vigorous effort.
In the present jundure, the sources of discord
were as many, and as various, as had been known
on any occasion. The Roman catholics, animated
with zeal in defence of their religion proportional
to the fierceness with which it had been attacked,
were eager to second any attempt to humble
those innovators, who had overturned it in many
provinces, and endangered it in more. John
and Albert of Brandenburg, as well as several
other princes, incensed at the haughtiness and
rigour with which the duke of Brunswick had
been treated by the confederates of Smalkalde,

e Ifuanhaflhi Hilt. Hun. iSo. Mem. de Ribier,

tom i. 552.

yOL. zU. c c were

were impatient to rescue him, and to be reveng.
ed on them. Charles observed, with fatisfadion,
the working of those passions in their minds, and
counting on them as sure auxiliaries whenever he
ihould think it proper to at, he found it, in
the mean time, more necessary to moderate than
to inflame their rage.

Such was the situation of affairs, such the

discernment with which the emperor foresaw and
provided for every event, when the diet of the
empire met at Ratisbon. Many of the Roman
catholic members appeared there in person, but
pnoit of the confederates of Smalkalde, under
pretence of being unable to bear the expence oc-
cafioned by the late unnecessary frequency of
such assemblies, sent only deputies. Their jea.
louly of the emperor, together with an ap.
prehenlion that violence might, perhaps, be em-
ployed, in order to force their approbation of
what he ihould propose in the diet, was the true
cause of their absence. The speech with which
the emperor opened the diet was extremely art.
ful. After profeffing, in common form, his re.
gard for the prosperity of the Germanic body,
and declaring, that, in order to bellow his whole
attention upon the re-efitablifhment of its order
and tranquillity, he had at present abandoned all
other cares, rejeded the mod pressing folicita.
tions of his other fubjefas to reside among them,
and postponed affairs of the greatest importance;
he took notice, with fume disapprobation, that
his difintereited example had not been imitated;
many members of chief consideration having
aeglefed to attend an assembly to which he
had repaired with luch manifest inconvenience

diffenflions about religion; lamented the ill fuoe
ctfs of his pait endeavours to compose them;
complained of the abrupt dissolution of the late
conlerence, and craved their advice with regard
to the beit and most effectual method of re-
Iloring union to the churches of Germany, to-
gether with that happy agreement in articles of
faith, which their anceffors had found to be of
no less advantage to their civil interest, than be-
coming their Christian profefion.

By this gracious and popular method of con-

fulting the membeis of the diet, rather than of
obtruding upon them ally opinion of his own,
belides the appearance of great moderation, and
the merit of paying much relped to their judg.
ment, the emperor dexteroully avoided disco-
vering his own sentiments, and refvrxed to him-
fclf, as his only part, that of carrying into ex-
ecution what they (hould recommend. Nor was
he less secure of such a decision as he wilhed to
obtain, by refurring it wholly to themselves.
The Roman catholic members, prompted by
their own zeal, or prepared by his intrigues,
joined immediately in reprefentin: that the au-
thority of the council now met at Trent ought
to be lifneme in all matters of controversy; that
all Chritians Ihould fobmit to its decrees as the
infallible role of their faith; and therefore they
befoughit him to exert the power, with which
lie was inveiled b) the Almighty, in protcling
that afrembly, and ill compellillg the protellalts
to acquife in its determinations. The protelt-
allts, on the other hand, presented a memorial,
in which, after repeating their objertions to the

c c 2 council

council of Trent, they proposed, as the only
effeaual method of deciding the points in dif.
pute, that either a free general council should be
assembled in Germany, or a national council of
the empire Ihould be called, or a feled number
of divines should be appointed out of each party
to examine and define articles of faith. They
mentioned the recesses of several diets favourable
to this proposition, and which had afforded them
the profpe& of terminating all their differences in
this amicable manner; they now conjured the
emperor not to depart from his former plan, and
by offering violence to their consciences, to
bring calamities upon Germany, the very thought
of which must fill every lover of his country with
horror. The emperor receiving this paper with
a contemptuous smile, paid no farther regard to
it. Having already taken his final resolution,
and perceiving that nothing but force could com-
pel them to acquiesce in it, he dispatched the
cardinal of Trent to Rome [June 9], in order
to conclude an alliance with the pope, the terms
of which were already agreed on; he commanded
a body of troops, levied on purpose in the Low.
Countries, to advance towards Germany; he
gave commissions to several officers for raising
men in different parts of the empire; he warned
John and Albert of Brandenburg, that now was
the proper time of exerting themselves, in order
to rescue their ally, Henry of Brunswick, from
captivity '.

All these things could not be tranfaded with-

out the observation and knowledge of the pro-

f Sleid. 374. Seck. iii. 6jS. teftants.

teallants. The secret was now in many hands;
under whatever veil the emperor flill affeded to
conceal his designs, his officers kept no such
mvlcrious reserve; and his allies and fubjeds
spoke out his intentions plainly. Alarmed with
reports of this kind from every quarter, as well
as with the preparations for war which they
could not but observe, the deputies of the con-
federates demanded audience of the emperor,
and, in the name of their masters, required to
know whether these military preparations were
carried on by his command, and for what end,
and againift what enemy ? To a queflion put in
such a tone, and at a time when faas were be-
come too notorious to be denied, it was necessary
to give an explicit answer. Charles owned the
orders which lie had issued, and profeffing his
purpole not to moloft on account of religion
thole xwhso should ad as dutiful fubjeas; de-
clared, that he had nothing in view but to main-
tain tise rights and prerogatives of the Imperial
dignity, and by punithing some fadious members,
to preserve the ancient conititution of the
empire from being impaired or dissolved by
thseir irregular and licentious condud. Though
the emperor did not name the persons whom he
charged with fiuch high crimes, and destined to
be the objeAs of his vengeance, it was obvious
that he had the eleAor of Saxony and Land.
grave of Hesse in view. Their deputies confi.
dering what he had said, as a plain declaration
of his hostile intentions, immediately retired
fronm Ratisbon 9.

E Sicid. 376.

cc3 The

matter to treat with the pope, who having at
length brought the emperor to adopt that plan
which he had long recommended, assented with
eagerness to every article that he proposed. The
league was signed [July 26] a few days after the
cardinal's arrival at Rome. The pernicious he-
refaes which abounded in Germany, the obstinacy
of the protestants in rejeding the holy council
assembled at Trent, and the necessity of main'
taming found doarine, together with good order
in the church, are mentioned as the motives of
this union between the contradaing parties. In
order to check the growth of these evils, and to
punilh such as had impiously contributed to
spread them, the emperor, having long and with-
out success made trial of gentler remedies, en-
gaged inflantly to take the field with a fuffiicint
army, that he might compel all who disowned
the council, or had apoffatized from the religion
of their forefathers, to return into the bosom of
the church, and submit with due obedience to
the holy fee. He likewise bound himself not
to conclude a peace with them during jix months
without the pope's coufent, nor without aflign-
ing him his Ihare in any conquests which (hould
be made upon them; and that even after this
period he should not agree to any accommodation
which might be detrimental to the church, or to
the intereci of religion. On his part, the pope
flipulated to deposit a large fum in the bank of
Venice towards defraying the expence of the
nwar; to maintain, at his own charge, during
the space of fix months, twelve thousand
foot, and five hundred horse; to grant the em-

peror,

peror, for one year, half of the ecclefiaitical re.
venues throughout Spain; to authorize him, by
a bull, to alienate as much of the lands, belong-
ing to religious houses in that country, as would
amount to the fim of five hundred thousand
crowns; and to employ not only spiritual cen-
fures, but military force, against any prince who
ihould attempt to .nterrupt or defeat the execu-
tion of this treaty h.

Notwithifanding the explicit terms in which

the extirpation of heresy wvas declared to be the
objecd of the war which was to follow upon thiS
treaty, Charles flill endeavoured to persuade the
Germans that he had no design to abridge their
religious liberty, but that he aimed only at vin-
dicating his own authority, and reprefling the
infoleuce of such as had encroached upon it.
With this xiew, he wrote circular letters in the
fame itrain with his answer to the deputies at
Ratilahn, to mout of the free cities, and to feve.
ral of the princes who had embraced the pro-
teitant dodrines. In these he complained loudly,
but in general terms, of the contempt into which
the Impeiial dignity had fallen, and of the pre-
sumptuous as well as disorderly behaviour of some
members of the empire. He declared that he
now took arms, not in a religious, but in a civil
quarrel; not to oppress any who continued to
behave as quiet and dutiful fubjeas, but to
humble the arrogance of such as had thrown off
all sense of that subordination in which they
were placed under him as head of the Germanic
body. Grols as this deception was, and mani.

h Sleid. 38s. Pally. 255. Dumont CorpsDiplom. xi.

3 felt

fest as it might have appeared to all who con-
fidered the emperor's conduA with attention, it
became necessary for him to make trial of its es.
seA; and such was the confidence and dexterity
with which he employed it, that he derived the
modt solid advantages from this artifice. If he
had avowed at once an intention of overturning
the protedtant church, and of reducing all Ger-
many under its former slate of fubjeiion to the
papal fee, none of the cities of princes who had
embraced the new opinions could have remained
neutral after such a declaration, far less could
they have ventured to affflt the emperor in such
an enterprize. Whereas by concealing, and even
disclaiming any intention of that kind, he not
only saved himself from the danger of being
overwhelmed by a general confederacy of allthe
protestant slates, but he furniihed the timid with
an excuse for continuing inaative, and the de-
signing or interedied with a pretext for joining
him, without exposing themselves to the infamy
of abandoning their own principles, or taking
part openly in fiuppreffing them. At the fame
time the emperor well knew, that if, by their
affiitance, he were enabled to break the power
of the eleaor of Saxony and the Landgrave, he
might afterwards prescribe what terms he pleased
to the feeble remains of a party without union,
and destitute of leaders, who would then re-
gret, too late, their mistaken confidence in
him, and their inconsiderate desertion of their
associates.

The pope, by a sudden and unforeseen display

of his zeal, had well nigh disconcerted this plan
which the emperor had formed with so much

care

care and art. Proud of having been the author
of such a formidable league against the Lutheran
heresy, and happy in thinking that the glory of
extirpating it was reserved for his pontificate, he
publilhed the articles of his treaty with the em-
peror, in order to demonirate the pious inten-
tion of their confederacy, as well as to display
his own zeal, which prompted him to make such
extraordinary efforts for maintaining the faith in
its purity. Not fatistied with this, he soon after
iflfed a bull, containing most liberal promises of
indulgence to all who thould engage in this holy
enterprize, together with warm exhortations to
such as could not bear a part in it themselves,
to increase the firvour of their prayers, and the
severity of their mortifications, that they might
draw down the blefling of Heaven upon those
who undertook it '. Nor was it zealalone which
pushed the pope to make declarations so incon-
firtent with the account which the emperor him-
self gave of his motives for taking arms. He
was much scandalized at Charles's difilmulation
in such a cause ; at his seeming to be alhamed
of owning his zeal for the church, and at his en-
deavours to make that pass for a political contest,
which he ought to have gloried in as a war that
had no other objc& than the defence of religion.
With as much solicitude, therefore, as the em-
peror laboured to disguise the purpose of the con-
federacy, did the pope endeavour to publish their
real plan, in order that they might come at once
to an open rupture with the protestants, that all
hope of reconcilement might be cut off, and that

i Du Mont Corps Diplom.

Charles

Charles might be under fewer temptations, and
have it less in his power than at present, to be-
tray the interests of the church by any accom.
modation beneficial to himself k

The emperor, though not a little offended at

the pope's indiscretion or malice in making this
discovery, continued boldly to pursue his own
plan, and to assert his intentions to be no other
than what he had originally avowed. Several
of the protestant slates, whom he had previ.
oufly gained, thought themfelvesjuiified, in some
measure, by his declarations, for abandoning
their associates, and even for giving assistance to
him.

But these artifices did not impose on the

greater and founder part of the protefitant con-
federates. They clearly perceived it to be against
the reformed religion that the emperor had taken
arms, and that not only the fuppreflion of it,
but the extinaion of the German liberties, would
be the certain consequence of his obtaining such
an entire fiuperiority as would enable him to exe-
cute his schemes in their full extent. They de-
termined, therefore, to prepare for their own
defence, and neither to renounce those religious
truths, to the knowledge of which they had at-
tained by means so wonderful, nor to abandon
those civil rights which had been transmitted to
them by their ancestors. In order to give the
necessary direrions for this purpose, their depu-
ties met at Ulm, soon after their abrupt depar.
ture from Ratisbon. Their deliberations wrre
now conduAed with such vigour and unanimity,

k F. Paul, 188. Thuan. Hit. i. 6i.

required. The contingent of troops, which each
of the confederates was to furnith, having been
fixed by the original treaty of union, orders were
given for bringing them immediately into the
tield. Being fentibie, at ladt, that through the
narrow prejudices of some of their members, and
the imprudent security of others, they had ne-
glecled too long to tirengthen themselves by
foreign alliances, they now applied with great
earnmeinefs to the Venetians and Swiis.

To the Venetians they represented the em-

peror's intention of overturning the present fyfitem
of Germany, and of raising himself to absolute
power in that country by means of foreign force
furiiihrd by the pope; they warned them how
fatal this event would prove to the liberties of
Italy, and that by fintffring Charles to acquire un-
limited authority in the one country, they would
soon feel his dominion to be no less despotic in
the other; they besought them, therefore, not
to grant a paflage through their territories to
thote troop3, which ought to be treatcd as com-
mon enemies, because by fiubduing Germany they
prepared chains for the red of Europe. These
reflections had not efcapcd the sagacity of those
wife repulihicans. They had communicated their
sentiments to the pope, and had endeavoured to
divert him from an alliance, which tended to
render iirefidtible the power of a potentate, whose
ambition he already knew to be boundless. But
they had found Paul so eager in the prosecution
of his own plan, that he disregarded all their re-
monhtrances . This attempt to alarm the pope

1 Adriani Ilforia di fiuoi Tempi, Lv. v. p. 332.

hiving

having proved unfuccefsful, they declined doing
any thing more towards preventing the dangen
which they foresaw; and in return to the appli.
cation from the confederates of Smalkalde, they
informed them, that they could not obftru& the
march of the pope's troops through an open
country, but by levying an army strong enough
to face them in the field; and that this would
draw upon themselves the whole weight of his as
well as of the emperor's indignation. For the
fame reason they declined lending a fium of mo-
ney, which the eletor of Saxony and landgrave
proposed to borrow of them, towards carrying
on the war mi

The demands of the confederates upon the

Swiss were not confined to the obitruaing of the
entrance of foreigners into Germany; they re-
quired of them, as the nearest neighbours and
closest allies of the empire, to interpose with their
wonted vigour for the preservation of its liberties,
and not to itand as inacrive fpeAators, while their
brethren were oppressed and enslaved. But
with whatever zeal fume of the cantons might
have been disposed to a& when the cause of the
recormation was in danger, the Helvetic body
was so divided with regard to religion, as to
render it unsafe for the proteltants to take any
step without consulting their catholic associates;
and among them the emissaries of the pope and
emperor had such influence, that a resolution of
maintaining an exad neutrality between the con.
tending parties, was the utmost which could be
procured ".

mn Sleid. 3r8 . Parutalfbr. Venet. torn. iv. iSo. Lam.

bertus Holienfius de Belo Germanico, apud Sear.ium,wol. ii.
P. i47. a Sleid. 392.

Being disappointed in both these applications,

the proteltants, not long after, had recourse to
the kings of France and England; the approach of
danger either overcoming the eleator of Saxony's
scruples, or obliging him to yield to the importu-
sites of his associates. The situation of the two
monarchs flattered them with hopes of success.
Though hoffilities between them had continued
for fume time after the peace of Crefpy, they
became weary at last of a wa-, attended with no
glory or advantage to either, and had lately ter-
minated all their difference3 by a peace concluded
at Campe near Ardres. Francis having with
great difficulty procured his allies, the Scots, to
be includtd in the treaty, in return for that
concession he engaged to pay a great fum, which
Henry demanded as due to him on several ac-
counts, and he left Boulogne in the hands of the
Engliih as a pledge for his faithful performance
of that article. 1But though the re-eilablifhment
of peace seemed to leave the two monarchs at
liberty to turn their attention towards Germany,
so unfortunate were the proteltants, that they
derived no immediate advantage from this circum-
fiance. Henry appeared unwilling to enter into
any alliance nith them, but on such conditions
as would render him not only the head, but the
sup? emne director of their league ; a pre-eminence
which, as the bonds of union or interedt between
them were but feeble, and as he differed from
them so widely in his religious fcntiments, they
had no inclination to admit o. Francis, more
powerfully inclined by political considerations to

o Rymer, xv. 93. Herbert, 25 -

TOL. 111, ) n afford

afford them assistance, found his kingdom so
much exhauited by a long war, and was so much
afraid of irritating the pope, by entering into
close union with excommunicated heretics, that
he durit not undertake the proteAion of the
Smalkaldic league. By this ill-timed caution,
or by a superstitious deference to fruples, to
which at other times he was not much addided,
he loit the most promising opportunity of mor-
tifying and diffreffing his rival, which presented
itself during his whole reign.

But, notwithfitanding their ill success in their

negotiations with foreign courts, the confederates
found no difficulty at home, in bringing a foffi.
cient force into the field. Germany abounded
at that time in inhabitants; the feudal inifitu-
tions, which subsisted in full force, enabled the
nobles to call out their numerous vassals, and to
put them in motion on the (horteft warning;
the martial spirit of the Germans, not broken or
enervated by the introduacion of commerce and
arts, had acquired additional vigour during the
continual wars in which they had been employed,
for half a century, either in the pay of the em-
perors or the kings of France. Upon every oppor-
tunity of entering into service, they were accuf-
tomed to run eagerly to arms; and to every
itandard that was ereAed, volunteers flocked from
all quarters P. Zeal seconded, on this occasion,
their native ardour. Men on whom the doadines
of the reformation had made that deep impref.
sion which accompanies truth when firid discover-
ed, prepared to maintain it with proportional

p Seck1. Lil. s6z.

vigour;

vigour; and among a warlike people it appear-ed
infamous to remain inaaive, when the defence
of religion was the motive for taking arms. Ac-
cident combined with all these circumitanees in
facilitating the Ivy of soldiers among the con-
federates. A considerable number of Germans
in the pay of France, being difiniffed by the
king on the profpea of peace with England,
joined in a body the fandard of the protefiants 4.
By such a concurrence of causes, they were en-
abled to assemble in a few weeks an army com-
posed of seventy thousand foot and fifteen thou-
sand horse, provided with a train of an hundred
and twenty cannon, eight hundred ammunition
waggons, eight thouiand beadts of burden, and fiu
thousand pioneers r. This army, one of the modt
numerous, and undoubtrdly the bedl appointed,
of any which had been levkd in Europe during
that century, did not require the united effort of
the whole protedtant body to raise it. The elec-
tor of Saxony, the landgrave of Hesse, the duke
of \Vurtemberg, the princes of Anhalt, and the
Imperial cities of Augsburg, Ulmn, and Straf-
burg, were the only powers which contributed
towards this great armament: the cleaors of
Cologne, of Brandenburg, and the count Pala-
tine, overawed by the emperor's threats, or de-
ceived by hii pr-ofeflions, remained neuter. John
marquis of Brandenburg Bareith, and Albert of
Brandenburg Anfpach, though both early con-
verts to Lutheranifmn, entered opcnly into the
emperor's service, under pretext of having ob-

q Thiuan. 1. i. 68. r lb. 1. i. 60<. Lulorici ab

Avia & Zuiigl Commentariorum de. Bel. Geim. iib. duo,
Aniw. 1550. xzmo. p. 13, a.

D D 2 taskeid

ant religion; and Maurice of Saxony soon fol.
lo0ed their example.

The number of their troops, as well as the

amazing rapidity wherewith they had assembled
them, aikonifhed the emperor, and killed him with
the most disquieting apprehensions. He was, in.
deed, in no condition to refiff fiuch a mighty
force. Shut up in Ratisbon, a town of no great
strength, whole inhabitants, being mostly Lu.
therans, would have been more ready to betray
than to assist him, with only three thousand Spa-
nifh foot, who had served in Hungary, and about
five thousand Germans who had joined him from
different parts of the empire, he must have been
overwhelmed by the approach of such a formida-
ble army, which he could not fight, nor could
he even hope to retreat from it in safety. The
pope's troops, though in full march to his relief,
had hardly reached the frontiers of Germany;
the forces which he expeAed from the Low-
Countries had not yet begun to move, and were
even far from being complete S. His situation,
however, called for more immediate succour, nor
did it seem praaicable for him to wait for such dif-
tant auxiliaries, with whom his junaion was so
precarious.

But it happened fortunately for Charles, that

the confederates did not avail themselves of the
advantage which lay so full in their view. In
civil wars, the firlt fleps are commonly taken
with much timidity and hesitation. Men are
solicitous, at that time, to put on the semblance

$ S!eld. 39. Avila, e, a.

of

of moderation and equity; they fitrive to gain
partisans by seeming to adhere firiily to known
forms; nor can they be brought, at once, to
violate those eitahlifhed inflitutions, which in
times of tranquillity they have been accustomed
to reverence; hence their proceedings are often
feeble or dilatory, when they ought to be molt
vigorous and decisive. Influenced by those con-
fiderations, which, happily for tlhe peace of so-
ciety, operate powerfully on the human mind,
the confederates could not think of throwing off
that allegiance which they owed to the head of
the empire, or of turning their arms against him
without one solemn appeal more to his candour,
and to the impartial judgment of their fellow-
fubjefts. For this purpole, they addrelfed a
letter to the emperor [July 15], and a manifilo
to all the inhabitants of Gersnany. The tenour
of both was the famne. They reprentred their
own condu&t with regard to civil nfbiirs as dutiful
and submissive; they mentioned the inviolable
union in whieh they had lived with the emperor,
as well as the many and recent marks of bis
good-will and gratitude wherewithal they had
been honoured; they asserted religion to he the
sole cause of the violence which the emperor now
meditated against them; and in proof of this
produced many arguments to convince those who
were so weak as to be deceived by the artifices
with which he endeavoured to cover his real in-
tentions; they declared their own resolution to
rIh every thing in maintenance of their religious
rights, and foretold the dissolution of the German
conflitution, if the emperor liould finally prevail
againit them '.

t Sleid. 384.

D D Charles,

Charles, though in such a perilous situation

as might have inspired him with moderate senti-
ments, appeared as inflexible and haughty as if
his affairs had been in the mofe prosperous state.
His only reply to the address and manifeflo of
the proteilants, was to publish the ban of the
empire [July 20], against the eleaor of Saxony
and landgrave of Hesse, their leaders, and againit
all who Ihould dare to affiff them. By this sea-
tence, the ultimate and mot rigorous one which
the German jurisprudence has provided for the
punilhmentof traitors, or enemies to their country,
they were declared rebels and outlaws, .and de-
prived of every privilege which they enjoyed as
members of the Germanic body; their goods
were coniicatcd; their fubjeas absolved from
their oath of allegiance ; and it became not only
lawful but meritorious to invade their territories.
The nobles, and free cities, who framed or per.
feaed the constitution of the German govern.
ment, had not been so negligent of their own
safety and privileges as to trust the emperor with
this formidable jurifdiaion. The authority of
a diet of the empire ought to have been inter-
posed before any of its members could be put
under the ban. But Charles overlooked that
formality, well knowing that, if his arms were
crowned with success, there would remain none
who would have either power or courage to call
in question what he had done u. The emperor
however did not found his sentence againit the
eleaor and landgrave on their revolt from the

u Sleid. 386. Du Mont Corps Diplom iv. p. ix· S'4*

Pfeffel Hilt. Abrege du Droit P'ubl. x68. 736. i53.

citablilicd

to religion ; he affeded to assign for it reasons
parely civil, and those too expressed in such ge-
neral and ambiguous terms, without specifying
the nature or circuimitances of their guilt, as
rendered it more like an ad of dcfpotic power
than of a legal and limited jurifdiciion. Nor
was it altogether from choice, or to conceal his
intentions, that Charles had recourse to the am-
biguity of general expreflions; but he durit not
mention too particularly the causes of his fein-
tence, as every adion which he could have charged
upon the cleftor and landgrave as a crime, might
have been employed with equal juflice to con-
demn many of the proteflants whom he Itfll pre-
tended to confider as faithful fubjeds, and whom
it would have been extremely imprudent to alarm
or difgufr.

The confederates, now perceiving all hopes of

accommodation to be at an end, had only to
choose whether they would submit withsout re-
serve to the emperor's will, or proceed to open
hoflilities. They were not deflitute either of
pubiic spirit, or of refoludion to make the pro-
per choice. A few days after the ban of the
empire was published, they, accordling to the
callum of that age, sent a herald to the Imperial
Camnp, with a foelinn declaration of war againit
Charles, to whsom they no longer gave any other
title than that of pretended emperor, and re-
nounced all allegiance, homage, or duty whsich
he might claim, or which they had hitherto
yielded to him. But previous to this formality,
pait of their troops had begain to ad.. The
cemmand ofa considerable body of men raifedby

the

baftian Schertel, a soldier of fortune, who, by the
booty that he got when the Imperialifis plun.
dered Rome, together with the merit of long
service, had acquired wealth and authority which
placed him on a level with the chief of the Ger-
man nobles : that gallant veteran resolved, before
he joined the main body of the confederates, to
attempt something suitable to his former fame,
and to the expeaation of his countrymen. As
the pope's forces were hastening towards Tyrol,
in order to penetrate into Germany by the nar-
row passes through the mountains which run
across that country, he advanced thither with the
urtmoft rapidity, and fcized Ehrenberg and Cuff.
flein, two firong cafiles which commanded the
principal defiles. Without flopping a moment,
he continued his march towards Infpruck, by
getting poflfeion of which he would have oblig.
ed the Italians to flop ihort, and with a small
body of men could have refifled all the efforts of
the greatest armies. Cafilealto, the governor
of Trent, knowing what a fatal blow this would
be to the emperor, all whose designs must have
proved abortive if his Italian auxiliaries had
been intercepted, raised a few troops with the
utmost dispatch, and threw himself into the
town. Schertel, however, did not abandon the
enterprize, and was preparing to attack the
place, when the intelligence of the approach of
the Italians, and an order from the eledior and
landgrave, obliged him to desist By his re-
treat the passes were left open, and the Italians
entered Germany without any opposition, but
from the garrisons which Schertel had placed in

Ehrenberg

Eirrenberg and Cuffftein, and thelc, having no
hopes of being relieved, surrendered, after a Ihort
reliance X e.

Nor was the recalling of Schertel the only er-

ror of which tire confederates were guilty. As
the supreme command of their army n as com.
mitted, in terms of the league of Smalkalde, to
the eledtor of Saxony and landgrave of Hesse
with equal power, all the inconveniencies ariiing
from a divided and co-ordinate authority, which
is always of fatal consequence in the opes ations
of war, were immediately felt. The elecor,
though intrepid in his own person to excess,
gnd mouf ardently zealous in the cause, was flow
in deliberating, uncertain as well as irresolute in
his determinations, and conitantly preferred mea-
fures which were cautious and safe, to such as
were bold or decisive. The landgrave, of a more
adive and enterprising nature, formed all his re-
solutions with promptitude, wished to execute

x Seckend. lib. i1. 70. Adriani Illoria di fusi Tempi,

lib. 33 j*

* seckendorf, the indulirlous author of the Commentarius

Apologericus de Lutheranifmo, whom I have To long and
fafeiv followed as my guide in German affairs, was a descend-
ant from Scheit-l. With the care and folicitudeof a Ger-
mm, wvho was himself of noble birth, Seckendorf has pub.
flfned a long digreiron concerning his ancetor, calculated
chiefly to Ihew how Scherrel was ennobled, and his polterity
allikd to many of the most ancient families in the empire.
Among other curious particulars, he gives us an account
of his wealth, the chief (ource of which was the p100.
der he got at Rome. H-is landed cihate alone was fold by
h s greadfons for fix hundred thouland forins. By this se
may form some i:ea of the riches amassed by the Condseeieri,
or commaudeta of mercenary bands in that age. At the taking
of Rome Schertel waSonly a coptain. Seckend. lib. iL.7 .

them

them with spirit, and uniformly preferred such
measures as tended to bring the conteit to a
speedy iflue. Thus their maxims, with regard
to the condna of the war, differed as widely as
those by which they were influenced in preparing
for it. Such perpetual contrariety in their senti-
ments gave rife, imperceptibly, to jealousy and
the spirit of contention. These multiplied the
dissensions flowing from the incompatibility of
their natural tempers, and rendered them more
violent. The other members of the league con.
fidering themselves as independent, and fubje&
to the eledor and landgrave, only in cosfe.
quence of the articles of a voluntary confederacy,
did not long retain a proper veneration for com-
manders who proceeded with so little concord;
and the numerous army of the proteiants, like a
vas machine whose parts are ill compa~ed, and
which is destitute of any power fufficient to move
and regulate the whole, aaed with no confiltency,
vigour, or effea.

The emperor, who was afraid that, by re-

maining at Ratisbon, he might render it impof.
fible for the pope's forces to join him, having
boldly advanced to Landshut on the Ifer, the
confederates loft some days in deliberating
whether it was pioper to follow him into the
territories of the duke of Bavaria, a neutral
prince. When at last they surmounted that
feruple, and began to move towards his camp,
they suddenly abandoned the deiign, and hastened
to attack Ratisbon, in which town Charles could
leave only a small garrison. By this time the
papal troops, amounting fully to that number
which Paul had flipulated to furnish, had reached

Landihut,

Spaniards of the veteran hand iatiened in Naples.
The confederates, after Schertel's fpiritrd bht
fruitless expedition, seen to have permitted these
forces to advance unmoleffed to the place of ren-
dezvous, without any attempt to attack either
them or the emperor separately, or to prevent
their juntion X. The Imperial army amounted
now to thlity-fix thousand men, and was fitll
more formidable by the discipline and valour of
the troops, than by their num'oer. Avila, com-
mendador of Aicantars-, who had been present in
all the wars carried on by Charles, and had fers rd
in the armies which gained the mesmorable viflory
at Pavia, which conquered Tunis, and invaded
France, gives this the preference to any military
force he had ever seen affembledY. Oaaxio
Farnese, the pope's grandfou, aflified by the abhlft
officers formed in the long wars between Charles
and Francis, commanded the Italian auxiliaries.
His brodher, the cardinal Farnele, accompanied
him as papal legate; and in order to give the
war the appearance of a religious enterprize, he
proposed to march at the head of the army, with
a cross carried before him, and to pullith i ndul-
gences wherever he caine, to all who fhochl girt
them any aflifance, as bad anciently been the
praftice in the crusades againit the infidels. But
this tihe emperor firikly probibited, as incon-
filtent with all the declarations which he had
made to the Germans of his own party; and the
legate perceiving, to his aftonifiment, that the

x Adriani Iftoria de fuon Tcmpi, lib. v; 40.
Y Aiia, IS. exercile

exercise of the proteiant religion, the extirpation
of whlich lie conlidered as the sole objea of the
war, wvas publicly permitted in the Imperial camp,
soon returned in disgust to Italy Z.

The arrival of these troops enabled the emperor

to fend such a reinforcement to the garrison at
Ratisbon, that the confederates, relinquilhing
all hopes of reducing that town, marched towards
Irrgolddadt on the Danube, near to which
Charles was now encamped. They exclaimed
loudly against the emperor's notorious violation
of tile laws and conititution of the empire, in
having called in foreigners to lay waste Germany
and to oppose its liberties. As, in that age, the
dominion of the Roman fee was so odious to the
protestants, that the name of the pope alone was
fifficient to inspire them with horror at any en-
terprize which he countenanced, and to raise in
their minds the blackeRt suspicions, it came to be
unirerfally believed among them, that Paul, not
satisfied with attacking them openly by force of
arms, had dispersed his emissaries all over Ger-
many, to set on fire their towns and magazines, and
to poison the wells and fountains of water. Nor did
this rumour, which was extravagant and fright.
fol enough to make a deep impreflion on the
credulity of the vulgar, fjpread among them only;
even the leaders of the party, blinded by their
prejudices, published a declaration, in which they
accused the pope of having cmpioyed such Anti-
christian arid diabolical arts agaifit them a. These
sentiments of the confederates were confirmed, in

z FPaul, run. a Sie;d. 399.

some

some mexfure, by the behaviour of the papal
troops, who, thiinking nothing too rigorous to-
wards heretics anathematized by the chorch,
were guilty of great excesses in the territories of
the Lutheran fRates, and aggravated the calami-
ties of war, by mingling with it all the cruelty
of bigoted zeal.

T'ihe firie operations in the field, however, did

not correspond with the violence of those passions
which animated individuals. The emperor had
prudently taken the resolution of avoiding an
action with an enemy so far superior in number b,
especially as he foresaw that nothing could keep
a body composed of so many and such dissimilar
members from falling to pieces, but the prefling
to attack it with an inconsiderate precipitancy.
The confederates, though it was no Iefs evident
that to them every moment's delay was perni-
cious, were dill prevented by the xveaknefs or
divition of their leaders firom exerting that
x gour, with which their lituation, as wJi as
thi aidour of their soldiers, oughlt to haxc in-
spired them. On their arrival at Ingulditadt
[Aug. 29],thelr found tche emperor in a camp not
icmnarkable for strength, and surrounded only by
a flhght entrenchment. Before the camp lay a
plain of such extent, as afforded fufficient space
for drawing out their whole army, and bringing
it to act at once. Every consideration 1hould
have determined them to have seized this oppor-
tuuiey of attacking the emperor; and their
great superiority in numbers, the eagerness of
tucir troops, together with the fiability of the

b Avia, 78, a,

V.*L. III. E German

them the most probable expedation of vidory
The landgrave urged this with great warmth,
declaring that if the sole command were veiled
in him, he would terminate the war on that oc-
cafion, and decide by one general aAion the fate
of the two parties. But the eleaor, refleding
on the valour and discipline of the enemy's
forces, animated by the presence of the emperor,
and conduded by the best officers of the age,
would not venture upon an adion, which he
thought to be so doubtful, as the attacking such
a body of veterans on ground which they them.
selves had chosen, and while covered by forti·
fications which, though imperfea, would afford
them no finall advantage in the combat. Not-
withstanding his heitation and remonitrances, it
was agreed to advance towards the enemy's camp
in battle array, in order to make a trial whether
by that insult, and by a furious cannonade which
they began, they could draw the Imperialifs
out of their works. But the emperor had too
much sagacity to fall into this snare. He adhered
to his own fyfitem with inflexible conflancy; and
drawing up his soldiers behind their trenches,
that they might be ready to receive the confe-
derates if they should venture upon an assault,
calmly waited their approach, and carefully re-
firained his own men from any excursions or
Ikirmifhes which might bring on a general en.
gagement. He rode along the lines, and ad.
dressing the troops of the different nations in their
own language, encouraged them not only by his
words, but by the cheerfulness of his voice and
countenance; he exposed himself in places of

greatelt

greatest danger, and amidit the warmest fire of
the enemy's artillery, the molt numerous that
had hitherto been brooght into the field by any
army. Roused by his example, not a man
quitted his ranks; it was thought infamous to
discover any symptom of fear when the emperor
appeared so intrepid; and the meanest soldier
plainly perceived, that their declining the com.
bat at present was not the effe& of timidity in
their general, but the result of a well-grounded
caution. The confederates, after firing several
hours on the Imperialilts, with more noise and
terror than execution, feeing no profpedt of al-
luring them to fight on equal terms, retired to
their own camp. The emperor employed the
night with such diligence in firengthening his
works, that the confederates, returning to the
cannonade next day, found that, though they
had now been willing to venture upon such a
bold experiment, the opportunity of making an
attack with advantage was loftC.

After such a discovery of the feebleness or ir.

resolution of their leaders, and the prudence as
well as firmness of the emperor's condud, the
confederates turned their whole attention to-
wards preventing the arrival of a powerful rein-
forcement of ten thousand foot, and four thou-
sand horse, which the count de Buren was bring-
ing to the emperor from the Low-Countries.
But though that general had to traverse such an
extent of country; though his route lay through
the territories of several Rtates warmly disposed to

c SIeId, 395. 397. Avila, 17, a. Lamb. Hortenl. ap.

Scard. ii.

E E favour

prized of his approach, and by their superiority
in numbers might easily have detached a force
fufficient to overpower him, he advanced with
such rapidity, and by such well-concerted more-
ments, while they opposed him with fich remiss.
ness, and so little military skill, that he condued
ed this body to the Imperial camp without any
lofsd [Sept. no].

Upon the arrival of the Flemings, in whom lie

placed great confidence, the emperor altered, in
some degree, his plan of operations, and began
to adt more upon the offenfive, though he iHill
avoided a battle with the utmost induitry. Hle
made himself master of Neuburg, Dillingen, and
Donawert on the Danube; of Nordlingen, and
several other towns, situated on the moit con-
fiderable fireams which fall into that mighty
river. By this he got the command of a great
extent of country, though not without being
obliged to engage in several sharp encounters, of
which the success was various, nor without be-
ing exposed, oftener than once, to the danger of
being drawn into a battle. In this manner the
whole autumn was spent; neither party gained
any remarkable superiority over the other, and
ncthing was yet done towards bringing the war
to a period. The emperor had often foretold,
with confidence, that discord and the want of
money would compel the confederates to disperse
that unwieldy body, which they had neither
abilities to guide, nor funds to support .

dI Sleid. 403. e Bdlii Smaltaldici Commeniarius

Graco fermone fcriptus a Joach. Camerario, ap. Fieherum,
vol. 11. pT 479T Though

Though he waited with impatience for the ac-
complifhment of his prediaion, there was no
profpeEt of that event being at hand. But he
himself began to fuffer from the want of forage
and provisions; even the catholic provinces being
so much incensed at the introdudion of foreigners
into the empire, that they furnimhed them with
reludance, while the camp of the confederates
abounded with a profusion of all necessaries,
which the zeal of their friends in the adjacent
countries poured in with the utmost liberality
and good-will. Great numbers of the Italians
and Spaniards, unaccenfomed to the climate or
food of Germany, were become unfit for service
through iicknefs '. Considerable arrears were
now due to the troops, who had scarcely re-
ceived any money from the beginning of the camin
pailgo; the emperor, experiencing on this, as
well as on former occasions, that his jurifdidion
was more extenlive than his revenues, and that
the fortner enabled him to assemble a greater
number of soldiers, than the latter were fufhicient
to fiupport. Upon all these accounts, he found
it difficult to keep his army in the field; some of
his ablest generals, and even the duke of AIva
himself, persevering and obhtinate as he uifually
was in the profcutiou of every meafore, advising
him to disperse his troops into winter-quarters.
But as the arguments urged against any plan
whichl he had adopted, rarely made much impref-
sion upon the emperor, he paid no regard to their
opinion, and determined to continue his efforts
in order to weary out the confederates; being

f Camerar. ap. Frenr. 483*

zia3 i'vll

separate, there was little probability of their
uniting again in a body E. Still, however, it re-
mained a doubtful point, whether his fleadinefs
was modt likely to fail, or their zeal to be ex-
haufted. It was itill uncertain which party, by
firit dividing its forces, would give the superiority
to the other; when an unexpeaed event decided
the contedt, and occasioned a fatal reverse in the
affairs of the confederates.

Maurice of Saxony having insinuated himself

into the emperor's confidence, by the arts which
have already been described, no sooner saw hofli.
lities ready to break out between the confederates
of Smalkalde and that monarch, than valt
profpeAs of ambition began to open upon himn.
That portion of Saxony, which descended to
him from his ancedfors, was far from satisfying
his aspiring mind; and he perceived with plea.
sure the approach of civil war, as, amidd the re.
volutions and convulions occasioned by it, oppor.
tunities of acquiring additional power or dignity,
which at other times are fought in vain, present
themselves to an enterprising spirit. As he was
thoroughly acquainted with the dtate of the two
contending parties, and the qualities of their
leaders, he did not hesitate long in determining
on which fide the greatest acdvantnges were to be
expedCd. Having revolved all these things in
his own breadt, and having taken his final refolu.
tion ofjoining the emperor, he prudently deter-
mined to declare early in his favour; that by the
merit of this, he might acquire a title to a pro-

g Thuan 83. portional

portional recompence. With this view, he had
repaired to Ratisbon in the month of May, under
pretext of attending the diet; and after many
conferences with Charles or his ministers, he,
with the most myfiterious secrecy, concluded a
treaty, in which he engaged to concur in afifting
the emperor, as a faithful fiobjeci.; and Charles,
in return, flipulated to bestow on him all the
spoils of the eledor of Saxony, his dignities as
wcl1 as territories h. History hardly records any
treaty that can be considered as a more manifest
violation of the mout powerfil principles which
ought to influence human adions. Maurice, a
profeffed protestant, at a time when the belief of
religion, as well as zeal for its interests, took
irong poffefflion of every mind, binds himself to
contribute his affifance towards carrying on a
war which had manifefily no other ohjeA than the
extirpation of the protestant dodrines. He en-
gtges to take arms againit his father-in-law, and
to Ibip his nearetd relation of his honours and
dominions. He joins a dubious fi-iend against a
known benefador, to whom his obligations were
both great and recent. Nor was the prince s-who
ventured upon all this, one of tlofe audacious
politicians, who, provided they can accompliiih
their ends, and secure their intrcit, avowedly
disregard the molt sacred obligations, and glory
in contemning whatever is honourable or decent.
Maurice's condua, if the whole mulf be aferihed
to policy, was more artful and matterly; he exe-
cuted his plan in all its parts, and yet endra-

h t-Tarai Ar.cl Brabsnt vet. i. 63·. Sruvi; Corp. io04.

Thien 8vocd

voured to preserve, in every itep which he took,
the appearance of what was fair, and virtuous,
and laudable. It is probable, from his subsequent
behaviour, that, with regard to the proteliant
religion at leait, his intentions were upright,
that he fondly trusted to the emperor's promises
for its security, but that, according to the fate
of all who refine too much in policy, and who
tread in dark and crooked paths in attempting to
deceive others, he himself was, in some degree,
deceived.

His first care, however, was to keep the en.

gagements into which he had entered with the
emperor closely concealed: and so perse8 a
mater was he in the art of dissimulation, that
the confederates, notwithfitanding his declining
all conncions with them, and his remarkable
assiduity in paying court to the emperor, seemed
to have entertained no suspicion of his deligns.
Even the eleaor of Saxony, when he marched
at the beginning of the campaign to join his afl
fociates, committed his dominions to Maurice's
proteaion, which he, with an insidious appear.
ance of friendship, readily undertooki. But
fearcely had the ele61or taken the field, when
Maurice began to consult privately with the
king of the Romans how to invade those very
territories, with the defence of which he was en-
trusted. Soon after, the emperor sent him a
copy of the Imperial ban denounced againit the
eledor and landgrave. As he was next heir to
the former, and particularly interefited in prevent.
ing strangers from getting his dominions into

1 Struvil Corp. 1046.

their

hIs own ike, but upon the allegiance and duty
which ihe owed to the head of the empire, in-
Itantly to seize and detain in his hands the for.
ftited eftares of the elefror; warning him, at the
fame time, that if he nigleaed to obey there
commands, he (hould be held as accessary to the
crimes of his kinsman, and be liable to the fame
pminilhment k

This artifice, which it is probable Maurice

hlimfelf fuggeited, was employed by him in order
that his condu& towards the eledor might seem
a matter of necessity but not of choice, an ad
of obedience to his superior, rather than a volun-
tary invasion of the rights of his kinsman and
ally. But in order to give some more specious
appearance to this thin veil with which he en-
deavoured to cover his ambition, he, soon after
his return from Rarifbon; had called together
the fiates of his country ; and representing to
them that a civil war between the emperor and
confederates of Smalkalde was now become una-
voidable, desired their advice with regard to the
part which he (hsould as in that event. They
having been prepared, no doubt, and tutored be-
forchand, and being defli-ous of gratify·ing their
prince, whom they citeemed as wvell as loved, gave
[mmch counsel as they knew wvould be molt agree-
able; adviling him to offer his mediation to-
wards reconciling the contending parties; but if
that were rtjeAed, and he could obtain proper
frcurity for the proteitanit religion. they delivered
it as their opinion, that, in all other points, he

k Skeid 391. Thua,. S4.

ought

ought to yield obedience to the emperor. Upon
receiving the Imperialrefript, together with the
ban against the eledor and landgrave, Maurice
summoned the fRates of his country a second
time; he laid before them the orders which he
had received, and mentioned the punishment with
which he was threatened in cafe of disobedience;
he acquainted them, that the confederates had
refused to admit of his mediation, and that the
emperor had given him the most fatisfadory de.
clarations with regard to religion; he pointed
out his own interest in securing poffeffion of the
eledcoral dominions, as well as the danger of
allowing firangers to obtain an establishment in
Saxony; and upon the whole, as the point under
deliberation refpeAed his fubjeas no less than
himself, he desired to know their sentiments, how
he should fleer in that difficult and arduous con-
junaure. The fRates, no less obfequions and
complaisant than formerly, profeffing their own
reliance on the emperor's promises as a perfeci
security for their religion, proposed that, before
he had recourse to more violent methods, they
would write to the eledor, exhorting him, as the
belt means, not only of appeasing the emperor,
but of preventing his dominions from being seized
by foreign or hostile powers, to give his consent
that Maurice lhould take poffe~ion of them
quietly and without opposition. Maurice him-
self seconded their arguments in a letter to the
landgrave, his father-in-law. Such an extrava-
gant proposition was rejeded with the scorn and
Indignation which it deserved. The landgrave,
in return to Maurice, taxed him with his trea-
chery and ingratitude towards a kinsman to

whom

with contempt his affeaation of executing the
Imperial ban, which he could not but know to
be altogether void by the unconititutional and
arbitrary manner in which it had been ififued;
he besought him, not to fuffer himself to be so
far blinded by ambition, as to forget the obliga-
tions of honour and friendship, or to betray the
proteriant religion, the extirpation of which out
of Germany, even by the acknowledgment of
the pope himself, was the great objea of the pre.
sent war1.

But Maurice had proceeded too far to be di-

verted from pursuing his plan by reproaches or
arguments. Nothing now remained but to exe-
cute with vigour, what he had hitherto carried
on by artifice and diflimulation. Nor was his
boldness in amion inferior to his subtlety in con-
trivance. Having assembled about twelve thou-
[and men, he suddenly invaded one part of the
electoral provinces, while Ferdinand, with an army
composed of Bohemians and Hungarians, over-
ran the other. Maurice, in two sharp encounters,
defeated the troops which the eleAor had left
to guard his country; and improving these ad-
vantages to the utmost, made himlelf maler of
all the eledorate, exceptWittemberg, Gotha, and
Eisenach, which being places of considerable
itrength, and defended by fuflicient garrisons,
refufid to open their gates. The news of these
rapid conquests soon reached the Imperial and
confederate camps. In the former, fatisfadion
with an event, which it was foreseen would be

1 Sleid. 4c5, &-c, Thuan. 5. Camerar. 434.

produAive

produAive of the most important consequences,
was expressed by every poflible denioutration of
joy. The latter was filled with astonishment and
terror. The name of Maurice was mentioned
with execration, as an apostate from religion, a
betrayer of the German liberty, and a contemaer
of the most sacred and natural ties. Every thing
that the rage or invention of the party could
suggest, in order to blacken and render him
odious, inveaives, satires, and lampoons, the
fulrious declamations of their preachers, together
with the rude wit of their authors, were all em.
ployed against him. While hle, confiding in the
arts which he had so long pradifed, as if his
adions could have admitted of any serious jufblh
cation, publifbed a manifesto, containing the
fame frivolous reasons for his conduEt, which he
had formerly alleged in the meeting of his Htates,
and in his letter to the landgrave im.

The eledeor, upon the first intelligence of Mau-

rice's motions, proposed to return home with his
troops for the defence of Saxony. But the de.
putits of the league, assembled at Ulm, prevailed
on him, at that time, to remain with the army,
and to prefer the success of the common cause
before the security of his own dominions. At
length the fiuiferings and complaints of his sub.
jedts increased so much, that he discovered the
utmost impatience to set out, in order to rescue
them from the oppression of Mauice, and from
the cruelty of the Hungarians, who, having been
ncculbomed to that licentious and merciless species
of war which was thought lawful againit the

an Stid. 4c9, 41o.

Turks,

wildeit acs of rapine and violence. This desire
of the eleaor was so natural and so warmly urged,
that the deputies at Ulm, though fully fenlible
of the unhappy consequences of dividing their
army, durit not refufc their consent, how un-
willing soever to grant it. In this perplexity
they repaired to the camp of the confederates at
Gilengen, on the Brenz, in order to consult their
conitituents. Nor were they less at a loss what
to determine in this pressing emergence. But,
after having considered seriously the open defer-
tion of some of their allies ; the feandalous luke-
warmness of others, who had hitherto contributed
nothing towards the war; the intolerahle load
which had fillen of consequence upon such mem-
bers as were molt zealous for the cause, or most
faithful to their engagements; the ill fucccfs of
all their endeavours to obtain foreign aid; the
unusual length of the campaign; the rigour of
the season; together with the great number of
soldiers, and even oflicers, who had quitted the
service on that account; they concluded that
nothing could save them, but cither the bringing
the contelt to the immediate decilion of a battle,
by attacking the Imperialarmy, or an accommo-
dation of all their differences with Charles by a
treaty. Such was the despondency and dejection
which now oppressed the party, that of these
two they chose what was molt feeble and un-
manly, empowering a minister of the eleCaor of
Brandenburg to propound overtures of peace in
their name to the emperor.

No sooner did Charles perceive this haughty

cunfederacy, which had so lately threatened to

VOL. II. F F drive

drive him out of Germany, condescending to
make the firdt advances towards an agreement,
than ccncluding their spirit to be gone, or their
union to be broken, he immediately affiumed the
tone of a conqueror; and, as if they had bVrn
already at his mercy, would not hear of a nego-
tiation, but upon condition that the eletor of
Saxony {hould previously give up himself and hi,
dominions absolutely to his difyofal n. As no-
thing more intolerable or ignominious could have
been prescribed, even in the word situation of
their affahs, it is no wonder that this proposition
should be rrjeaed by a party, which was rathcr
humbled and disconcerted than subdued. But
though they refused to submit tamely to the em-
peror's will, they wanted spirit to pursue the
only plan which could have preserved their inde-
pcndcnce ; and forgetting that it was the union
of thnir troops in one body which had hitherto
rendered the confederacy formidable, and had
more than once obliged the Imperialilts to think
of quitting the field, they inconsiderately abaun
doned this advantage, which, in spite of the di-
verion in Saxony, would fdill have kept the em.
peror in awe; and yielding to the eleaor's en-
treaties, confroted to his proposal of dividieg
the army. Nine thousand men were left in the
dutchy of Wiurtemberg, in order to protest that
province, as well as the free cities of Upper
Germany ; a conhiderable body marched with the
dledor towards Saxony; but the greater pnat
returned xx ith their rcfpedeive leaders into their

own cOuntries, and were diifperfed there o.

a' idaen f r S c2d. i0 45. 0, Sleid. 4!'.

The

confederacy ceased to be the objei of terror;
and the members of it, who, while they composed
part of a great body, had felt but Ietel anxiety
about their own fencrity, began to tremble when
they refleaed that they now iood exposed fing!y
to the whole wei0ht of the emperor's vengeance.
Charles did not allow them leillre to recover
from their conifernation, or to form any new
fehemes of union. As soon as the confederates
began to retire, he put his army in motin, and
though it wa· now the depth of winter, he -
solved to keep the field, in order to mke the
moth of that favourable juncdure for which he
had svaited so long. Some fmnall towns in which
the proteitants had left garrisons, immediately
opened their gates. Norlingen, Rotembherg, and
Hall, Imperial cities, submitted soon after.
Though Charles could not preveat the ekldeor
from levying, as he retreated, large contribt-
tions upon the archbilhop of Menta, the abbot
of Fulda, and other ecclJiatics P, t1s wa r mme
than balanced by the fubmilion es Vim, om e of
the chief cities of Suabia, hio-hly d'ftin C.hd
by its zeal for the Smalkaldic lennue. As soon
as an example was set of dsfertm g the c mnn'
cause, the rest of the members became i lnitly
impatient to follow it, and seemed an lid lkAh
others, by getting the itart oft scm ima rvtn-ning
to their duty, fl(ould, on that account, obtain
more favourable terms. The Ianor Palatine, a
weak prince, who, notwithitanding his proct-
Iions of neutrality, had, very perepoftroullf, ftnt

P Thuan. 88.

SFI2 to

to the confederates four hundred horse, a body
so inconsiderable as to be fearcely any addition to
their firength, but great enough to render him
guilty in the eyes of the emperor, made his ac-
knowledgments in the most abjeA manner. The
inhabitants of Augsburg, ihaken by so many in.
itances of apoitacy, expelled the brave Schertel
out of their city, and accepted fiuch conditions as
the emperor was pleased to grant them.

'547.] The duke of Wurtemburg, though

among the fin-ft who had offered to submit, was
obliged to fie for pardon on his knees; and even
after this mortifyinghumiliation, ohtained it with
difficulty q. Memmingen, and other free citiesin
the circle of Suabia, being now abandoned by all
their former associates, found it necessary to pro.
vide for their own safety, by throwing them-
feives on the emperor's mercy. Stlaaburg and
Frankfort on the Maine, cities far remote from
the feat of danger, discovered no greater fleadi.
ness than those which lay more exposed. Thus
a confederacy, lately so powerful as to Ihake the
Imperial throne, fell to pieces, and was dissolved
in the space of a few weeks; hardly any mnmber
of that formidable combination now remaining
in arms, but the elecXor and landgrave, to
whom the emperor, having from the beginning
marked them out as vi~tims of his vengeance, was
at no pains to offer terms of reconciliation. Nor
did he grant those who submitted to him a ge-
nerous and unconditional pardon. Conscious of
his own fiuperiority, he treated them both with
haughtiness and rigour. All the princes in

q Mem. de Rnbier, tom. i. 589 f

perfonl,

person, and the cities by their deputies, were
compelled to implore mercy in the humble pol-
ture of fopplicants. As the emperor laboured
under great difficulties from the want of money,
he imposed heavy fines upon them, which he
levied with molt rapacious exastnefs. The
duke of Wurtembhrg paid three hundred thou-
Land crowns; the city of Augsburg an hundred
and fifty thousand; hlm an hundred thousand;
Frankfort eighty thousand; Memmingen fifty
thousand; and the redt in proportion to their
abilities, or their different degrees of guilt.
They were obliged, besides, to renounce ti e
league of Smalkalde ; to furnith afliftance, if re-
quired, towards executing the Imperial ban
againit the eledtor and landgrave; to give up
their artillery and warlike itores to the emperor;
to admit garrisons into their principal cities and
places of fitrength; and, in this disarmed and
dependent htuation, to exped the final award
which the <emperor should think proper to prn-
nounce when tihe war came to an issue '. But,
amidit the great variety of articles dictated by
Charles on this occasion, he, in conformity to his
original plan, took care that nothing rela:ing to
religion {hould be inserted; and to such a degrce
were the confederates humbled or overawed, that,
forgetting the zeal which had so long animated
them, they were solicitous only about their own
safety, without venturing to isdit on a point,
the mnetion of which they saw the emperor ax oij.
ing with so much indudry. The inhabitants of

Sleid. 4r, &c. Tbuan. lib. iv. j. i. . em. de

eFier, tgm. i. 606.

r r3 1\Iemmringen

procure a promise of proteAion in the exercise
of their religion, but were checked so severely
by the Imperial ministers, that they inilantly fell
from their demand.

The eleaor of Cologne, whom, notwithfland.

ing the sentence of excommunication ifficd
againit him by the pope, Charles had hitherto
allowed to remain in poffeffion of the archiepif.
copal fee, being now required by the emperor
to submit to the censures of the church, this
virtuous and difinterefied prelate, unwilling to
expose his fubj'es to the miseries of war on his
own account, voluntarily resigned that high dig.
nity [Jan. 25]. With a moderation becoming
his age and charaaer, he chose to enjoy truth,
together with the exercise of his religion, in
the retirement of a private life, rather than to
disturb society by engaging in a doubtful and
violent firuggle in order to retain his office S.

During these tranfaaions, the eleAor of

Saxony reached the frontiers of his country
unmolefied. As Maurice could assemble no force
equal to the army which accompanied him, he,
in a ihort time, not only recovered poffeflion of
his own territories, but over-ran Miinia, and
firipped his rival of all that belonged to him, ex-
cept Dresden and Leipfic, which, being towns
of some strength, could not be suddenly reduced.
Maurice, obliged to quit the field, and to shut
himself up in his capital, difpatchied courier after
courier to the emperor, representing his danger-
pus situation, and soliciting him with the most

SSicid. pS. Thllan, lib. iv, UeS.

earneit

reliaf. But Charles, busy at that time in pre-
feribing terms to such members of the hague as
were daily retunrnng to their allegiance,thought it
fufficient to detach Albert narujis of Branden-
burg-Anlpach with three thousand men to lUs
alijihance. Albert, though an enterprilihg at
adive officer, was unexpet edly furpsifed by the
ekctor, who killed many of his troops, G:Aj~erf-
ed the remainder, and took him prliuocr t
Maurice continued as much exposed as formerly;
and if his enemy had known how to improve ti a
oppoutunity which presented itself, his ruin ,r.uit
have been immediate and unavoidable. Bnt the
eieAor, no less flow and dilatory when inveiled
sith the sole command, than he had been for-
merly when joined in authourity with a partnrr,
never gave any proof of military adtivity hut in
this cuterprife againfi Albert. Inlitead of march-
ing dirertiy towards Maurice, whom the defeat
of his ally had greatly alarmed, he inconfikikately
iiiiened to overtures of accommcdation, which
his artful antagonist proposed with no other in-
tention than to amuse him, and to slacken the
vignur of his operations.

Such, indeed, wvas the poiture of the empe-

ror's affairs, that he could not march infltantly
to the relief of his ally. Soon after the fc1 ara-
tion of the confederate army, he, iu order to
cafe himself of the burden of maintaining a fiuper-
fluous number of troops, had dismissed the count
of Euren with his Flemings u, imagining that the

t Avils, 99. 6. Mem. de Rbiber, tom. 1. 620.
u Avila, h3. 6. Mem. de Ribier, toml. i. 592*

Spaniaids

Spaniards and Germans, together with the papal
forces, would be fully fufficient to crush any
degree of vigour that yet remained among the
members of the league. But Paul, growing
wife too late, began now to difeern the impru.
dence of that measure from which the more
sagacious Venetians had endeavoured in vain to
dilfuade him. The rapid progrefa of the Im-
perial arms, and the ease with which they had
broken a combination that appeared no less firm
than powerful, opened his eyes at length, and
made him not only forget all the advantages
which he had expeaed from such a complete
triumph over heresy, but placed, in the firongda
light, his own impolitic condu&, in having coo.
tributed towards acquiring forCharles such an imn
mense increase of power,as would enable him,after
opprefling the liberties of Germany, to give law
with abhflute authority to all the fhates of Italy.
The moment that he perceived his error, he en.
deavoured to corred it. Without giving the
emperor any warning of his intention, he ordered
Farnese, his grandson, to return initantly to Italy
with all the troops under his command, and at
the fame time recalled the licence which he had
granted Charles, of appropriating to his own
use a large share of the church lands in Spain.
He was not deihitute of pretences to juitify this
abrupt desertion of his ally. The term of fix
months, during which the flipulations in ther
treaty were to continue in force, was now e::-
pired; the league, in opposition to which their
allience had been framed, seemed to be entirely
difipated; Charles, in all his negotiations with
the princes and cities which had submitted to his

wills

will, had neither consulted the pope, nor had
allotted him any part of the conqueits which he
had made, nor had allowed him any share in the
vaff contributions which he had railed. He had
not even made any provision for the fupprefion
of heresy, or the re-efitablifhment of the catholic
religion, which were Paul's chief inducements to
beltow the treasures of the church so liberally in
carrying on the war. These colours, however fpe-
cious, did not conceal from the emperor that secret
jealousy which was the true motive of the pope's
condua. But as Paul's orders with regard to
the march of his troops were no less peremp.
tory than unexpeAed, it was impossible to pre.
vent their retreat. Charles exclaimed loudly
againif his treachery, in abandoning him so uni-
seasonably, while he was prosecuting a war un-
dertaken in obedience to the papal injunAions,
and from which, if faccefsful, so much honour
and advantage would redound to the church. To
complaints he added threats and expoftulations.
But Paul remained inflexible; his troops conti-
nued their march ton ards the ecclesiastical ifate ;
and in an elaborate memorial, intended as an
apology for his conduct, he discovered new and
more manifest symptoms of alienation frumn the
emperor, together with a deep-rooted dread of
his powerx. Charles, weakened by the with-
drawing of so great a body from his army, which
was already much diminiihed by the number of
garrisons that he had been obliged to throw into
the towns which had capitulated, found it ne-
ceffary to recruit his forces by new levies, be-

K F. Paul. zoS. Pallavic. par. ii. p. 5. Thuan. s26.

sure

Saxony.

The fame and splendour of his success could

not have failed of attrading such multitudes of
soldiers into his service from all the extenlie
territories now fubjed to his authority, as muff
have soon put him in a condition of taking the
field against the eledor; but the sudden and
violent eruption of a conspiracy at Genoa, as
well as the great revolutions which that event,
extremely myfierious in its firit appearances,
seemed to portend, obliged him to avoid en.
tangling himself in new operations in Germany,
until he had fully discovered its source and ten-
dency. The form of government which had
been effablifhed in Genoa, at the time when
Andrew Doria reffored liberty to his country,
though calculated to obliterate the memory of
former diffentions, and received at firit with eager
approbation, did not, after a trial of near twenty
years, give universal fatisfadion to those turbu.
lent and fadious republicans. As the entire
adminiliration of affairs was now lodged in a cer-
tain number of noble families, many, envying
them that pre-eminence, wished for the refeitu-
tion of a popular government, to which they
had been accuffomed; and though all reverenced
the dilinterefited virtue of Doria, and admired
his talents, not a few were jealous of that as-
cendant which he had acquired in the councils
of the commonwealth. His age, however, his
moderation, and his love of liberty, afforded
ample security to his countrymen that he would
not abuse his power, nor fIain the close of his
days by attempting to overturn that fabric,

which

life to ereEt. But the authority and influence
which in his hands were innocent, they eailly fiaw
would prove deitructive, if usurped by any citi-
zen of greater ambition, or less virtue. A citi-
zen of this dangerous charader had aCiuahly
formed fuchi pretenlions, and with fume profipxt
of fuccels. Giannetino Doria, whom his grand
uncle Andrew deitined to be the hbir of his pri-
vate fortune, aimed likewise at being his fuccef-
for in power. His temper, haughty, insolent,
and overbearing to such a degree as would hardly
have been tolerated in one born to reign, was
altogether insupportable in the citizen of a free
itate. The more sagacious among the Gencefe
already feared and hated him as the enemy of
those liberties for which they were indebted to
his uncle. While Andrew himfeilf, blinded by
that violent and undifeerning affedion which
perfous in advanced age often contraA for the
younger members of their family, set no bounds
to the indulgence with which be treated him
seeming less solicitous to secure and perpetuate
the fi-redom of the commonwealth, than to ag-
grandize that undeferving kinsman.

But whatever fuifpicion of Doria's designs, or

whatever didhtisfamion with the ylytem of admi-
nidtration in the commonwealth, these circum-
itances might have occahioned, they would have
ended, it is probable, in nothing more than
murmurings and complaints, if John Le\\ is
IFidceo count of Lavagna, observing this grow ing
difguit, had not been encouraged by it to attempt
one of the boldest a~tions recorded in hiltory.
That young nobleman, the richeeR and molt il-

luftriou;

eminent degree, all the qualities which win upon
the human heart, which command refped, or fe.
cure attachment. He was graceful and majeflic
in his person; magnificent even to profulion;
of a generosity that anticipated the wishes of
his friends, and exceeded the expedations of
firangers; of an insinuating address, gentle man-
ners, and a flowing affability. But under the
appearance of these virtues, which seemed to
form him for enjoying and adorning social life,
lhe concealed all the dispositions which mark men
out for taking the lead in the most dangerous and
dark conspiracies; an insatiable and resilefs am-
bition, a courage unacquainted with fear, and a
mind that difdained subordination. Such a temper
could ill brook that flation of inferiority, where-
in he was placed in the republic ; and as he envied
the power which the elder Doria had acqsired,
he was filled with indignation at the thoughts of
its dcfcendiaag, like an hereditary polieffion, to
Ghsnnetino. These various paflions, preying
wieh violence on his turbulent and aipiring
mind, determined him to attempt overturnir.g
that domination to which he could not sub-
mit.

As the most effedual method of accomplishing

tlhia, he thought at firit of forming a connexion
with Francis, and even proposed it to the French
ambafiador at Rome; and after expelling Doria,
together with the Imperial fadion, by his afflit-
ance, he offered to put the republic once more
under the protedion of that monarch, hoping in
return for that service to be entrusted with the
principal (hare in the adminiflration of govern-

a ment.

a few chosen contidents, from whom he kept
nothing secret, Verrina, the chief of them, a
mIan of desperate fortune, capable alike of ad.
viling and executing the mott audscious deeds,
reonitufrated w ith earnefitnefs agnioft the filly of
exposing himself to the mci imnminenit dan ei,
wvoile bhe allowed another to reap all the fruits of
his focefs; and eahorted him '.,srmlv to aim
hin:(elf at that pre-eminence in his country, to
which lie was destined by his illustrious birth, ivas
called by the voice of his feliow-c:tizrns, aod
Sonild be railed by the zeal of his friends. This
difeourfe opened such great profpeds to Tidefo,
and so fuiiable to his genius, that abannonih
his own plan, he eagerly adopted tuat of Verriiin. .
The other perlons present, though fiiffle of
the hazardous narore of the uideretaking, did
not choose to condemn what their pitron nadl so
warmly approved. It was inflantly rifohlxed, in
this daik cabal, to affaffinate the two Dorias, as
well as the principal persons of their paity, to
overturn the efiablithed fyitem <f tgovernmienlt,
anid to place Fiefco on the ducal tlioie of
Genoa. Time, however, and preipartnioin 1eve
requisite to ripen such a deidgn for execution;
aiid while he was employed in carrying on these,
Fiefco made it his chief care to gnuird againit
every thing that might betray his secret, or create
fiufpicion. The diiguife he afirfncd, was of all
others the mofi impenetrable. He seemed to be
abandoned entirely to pleasure and dissipation.
A perpetual gaiety, diveriffied by the puifuit of
all the amusements in which pei sons of his age
and taik are apt to delight, eubiofkd, in ap-

L. i. 0C pGzan

pcarance, the whole of his time and thoughts.
But amidif this hurry of dissipation, he prosecuted
his plan with the mo{t cool attention, neither
retarding the design by a timid heitation, nor
precipitating the execution by an excess of im-
patience. He continued his correspondence
with the French ambassador at Rome, though
without communicating to him his real inten.
tions, that by his means he might secure the
proteAion of the French arms, if hereafter he
ihould find it necessary to call them in to his aid.
He entered into a close confederacy with Farneic
duke of Parma, who being difgsifed with the
emperor for refofing to grant him the investiture
of that dustchy, was eager to promote any mea-
fore that tended to diminish his influence in Italy,
or to ruin a family so implicitly devoted to him
as that of Doria. Being sensible that, in a mar-
ritime slate, the acquisition of naval power was
what he ought chiefly to aim at, he purchased
four gallies from the pope, who probably was
not unacquainted with the delign which he had
formed, and did not disapprove of it. Under
colour of fitting out one of these gallies to fail
on a cruise against the Turks, he not only
assembled a good number of his own vassals, but
essoaged in his service many bold adventurers,
whom the truce between the emperor and Soly.
man had deprived of their usual occupation and
fubliftence.

While Fiefco was taking these important fleps,

he preserved so admirably his usual appearance of
being devoted entirely to pleasure and amuse.
ment, and paid court with such artfil address
to the two Dorias, as imposed not only on the

generous

generous and unfufpicious mind of Andrew, but
deceived Giannetino, who, conscious of his oxn
criminal intentmons, w'as more apt to dcb{ruft the
ddiigns of others. So many inftrumnnts Leing
now prepared, nothing remained but to strike
the blow. X arious consultations were held by
Fiefco with hiL co fidents, in order to fettle the
manner of d/ 1 g it with the greatest certainty
and efrfc. At trit, they propoled to murder
the Dorias a' d their chief adherents, during the
celebration of high mass in the principal church;
hut, as Andrew was often absent from religious
fulemnities on Sccount of his great age, that de.
sign was laid alide. It was then concerted that
liefo Ihould invite the uncle and nephew, with
all their friends n hom he had marked out as
victems, to his house; where it would be easy
to cut them off at once without danger or refilt-
ance; but as Giannetino was obliged to leave
the town on the day which they had chosen, it
became neceifary likewise to alter this plan,
They at last determined to attempt by open force,
what they found difficult to ieled by stratagem,
and fixed on the night between the Lecond and
third of January, for the execution of their en-
terprize. The time was chosen with great pro-
priety; for as the doge of the former year was to
quit his office, according to custom, on the first
of the month, and his successor could not be
elekted sooner than the fourth, the republic re-
rained during that interval in a fort of anarchy,
and Fiefco might with less violence take poilei-
sion of the vacant dignity.

The morning of that day Fiefco employed in

visiting his friends, pafling some hours among

C C 2 them

other times. Towards evening, he paid court to
the Dorims with his usual marks of refpe&, and
surveying their countenance and behaviour with
the attention natural in his fitnation, was happy
to obfcrve the perfed security in which they re-
mained, without the Ilall foresight or dread of
that storm which had been so long a gathering,
and was now ready to burif over their heads.
From their palace he hastened to his own, which
hood by itfeif in the middle of a large court, fur-
rounded by a high wall. The gates had been kt
open in the morising, and all persons, without
diftinAion, were allowed to enter, but frong
guards poited within the court fufTered no one to
return. Versina, meanwhile, and a few persons
trusted with the secret of the conspiracy, after
cunduding Fiefco's vassals, as well as the crews
of his gallies, into the palace in small bodies, with
as little noise as possible, dispersed themselves
through the city, and, in the name of their
patron, invited to an entertainment the principal
citizesis whom they knew to be difguited with
the adminisiration of the Dorias, and to have
inclination as well as courage to attempt a
change in the government. Of the vast num.
ber of persons who now filled the palace, a few
only knew for what purpose they were as-
fe:nblcd; the redt, aftonithed at finding, infkad
of the preparations for a feast, a court crowded
with armed men, and apartments filled with
the inidruments of war, gazed on each other
uith a mixture of curiosity, impatience, and
terror.

While

penfe and agitation, Fiefco appeared. With a
lcok fell of alacrity and confidence, he addrcffed
himufelf to the persons of chief diiinofion, tclling
them, that they were not now called to partake
of the pleasure of an entertainment, but to join
in a deed of valour, which would lead them to
liberty and immortal renown. He set before
their eyes the exorbitant as well as intolerable au-
thority of the elder Doria, which the ambition of
Giannetino, and the partiality of the emperor to a
fmnily more devoted to him than to their country,
was about to enlarge and to render perpetual.
This unrighteous dominion, continued he, you
have it now in your power to subvert, and to efla-
blifh the freedom of your country on a firm basis.
The tyrants muf be cut off. I have taken the
noit effedlual measures for this purpofc. My
affociatcs are numerous. I can depend on allies
and proteeors if necessary. Happily, the tyraits
are as secure as I have been provident. Thrir
isfolent contempt of -their countrymen has
banished the suspicion and timidity w&iici
usually render the guilty quiekfighted to discern,
as well as sagacious to guar d against the ven-
geance which thy deserve. They will now fedl
the blow, before they fufpe& any hollie hand
to be nigh. Let us then dally forth, that we
may deliver our country by one generous effort,
almoit unaccompanied with danger, and certain
of success. These words, uttered with that ir-
reflfible fervour which animates the mind when
roused by great objeas, made the drfired im-
preflion on the aedience. Fiefco's vafihis, ready
to execute xihatever their mailer should com-

G G 3 malhs

applause. To many whose fortunes were defpc.
rate, the license and confusion of an infnrreEtion
afforded an agreeable profpea. Those of higher
jank and more virtuous sentiments, durst not
difcovcr the surprise or horror with which they
were fitruck at the proposal of an enterprize no
less unexpeted than atrocious; as each of them
imaginc(d the other to be in the secret of the con-
fpiracy, and saw himself surrounded by persons
who waited only a signal from their leader to per-
petrate the greateR crime. With one voice
then all applauded, or feigned to applaud, the
undertaking,

Fiefco having thus fixed and encouraged his

associates, before he gave them his last orders, he
hallened for a moment to the apartment of his
wife, a lady of the noble house of Cibo, whom
he loved with tender affeaion, and whole beauty
and virtue rendered her worthy of his love. Tae
noise of the armed men who crowded the couirt
and palace, having long before this reached her
ears, she concluded some hazardous enterprize to
be in hand, and she trembled for her husband.
He found her in all the anguish of uncertainty
and fear; and, as it was now impossible to keep
his design concealed, he informed her of what
he had undertaken. The profpea of a scene so
full of horror as well as danger, completed her
agony; and foreboding immediately in her mind
the fatal issue of it, she endeavoured, by her tears,
her entreaties, and her despair, to divert hini
from his purpose. Fiefco, after trying in vain
to sooth and to inspire her with hope, broke
from a situation into which an excess of tender.

uefs

ness had unwarily seduced him, thoutih it could
not (hake his refoloution. " Farevell,'' he cried,
as he quitted the apartment, " you (hall either
never fee me more, or you (hall behold to-
morrow every thring in Genoa fubjeal to your
power."

As soon as he rejoined his companions, he a!-

lotted each his proper station: fume were ap-
pointed to assault and seize the different gates
of the city; some to make themfeives maei s of
the principal itreets or places of itrength: Ficfco
reserved for himfel the attack of the harhour
where Doria's gallies were laid up, as the po{t of
chief importance, and of greatest danger. It was
now midnight, and the citizens slept in the fe-
curity of peace, wvhen this band of conspirators,
numerous, defperatc, and well armed, ruahed
out to execute their plan. They firprifed fume
of the gates, without meeting with any refifrance.
They got pofifeffon of others after a (harp con-
fict with the soldiers on guard. Verrina, with
the galley which had been fitted out againit the
Turks, blocked up the mouth of the Darfena
or little harbour where Doria's fleet lay. All
polilbility of efeape bcng cut off by this pre-
caution, when Fiefco attempted to enter the
gallies from the (hore, to which they were made
fad, they were in no condition to make refiff-
ance, as they were not only unrigged and dif-
anned, but had no crew on board, except the
flares chained to the oar. Every quarter of tie
city was now filled with noise and tumult, all
the fireets refounded with the cry of Fic/fo and
Liberty. At that name, so popular and beloved,
rnany of the lower rank took arms and joined

the

the arillocracy, astonished or affrighted, shut the
gates of their houles, and thought of nothing
but of securing them from pillage. At last the
noise excited by this scene of violence and con-
fulion, reached the palace of Doria; Giannetino
started immediately from his bed, and imagining
that it was occafloned by some mutiny among
the sailors, rushed out with a few attendants,
and hurried towards the harbour. The gate of
St. Thomas, through which he had to pals,
was already in the poffeffion of the conspirators,
who, the moment he appeared, fell upon him
with the utmost fury, and murdered him on the
spot. The fame must have been the fate of the
elder Doria, if Jerome de Fiefco had executed
his brother's plan, and had proceeded immedi-
ately to attack him in his palace ; but he, from
the sordid consideration of preventing its being
plundered amidst the confulion, having forbid
his followers to advance, Andrew got intelligence
of his nephew's death, as well as of his own dan-
ger; and mounting on horseback, saved himfeif
by flight. Amidst this general conifernation, a
few fcnators had the courage to assemble in the
palace of the republic v. At firlt, some of the
mout daring among them attempted to rally the
scattered soldiers, and to attack a body of the
conspirators; but being repulled with loss, all
agreed that nothing now remained, but to treat
with the parry which feeined to be irresistible.
Deputies were accordingly sent to learn of Fiefco
what were the conceclions with which he would

Y II palazza delia Signotia.

he

terms he should plkafe to prefcsibe.

But by this time Fiefco, with whom thtv were

errpowered to negotiate, was no more. Juot as
he was about to leave the harbour, where every
thing had succeeded to his wijh, that he might
join his viAorious companions, he heard some
extraordinary uproar on board the admiral gal-
ley. Alarmed at the noise, and fearing that the
slaves might break their chains, and ovcrpovcr
his a.Tociates, he ran thither ; but the Ilank
which reached from the shore to the vehel hlap-
pening to overturn, he fell into the sea, whlilni
he hurried forward too precipitately. Being
loaded with heavy armour, he lunk to the bot-
tom, and perlihed in the very moment when lhe
mriu have taken full poffeflion of every thing
that his ambitious heart could dfiire. Vereina
was the firit who discovered this fatal accident,
and forefecing, at once, all its consequences,
concealed it with the utmost industry from esery
one but a few laders of the conspiracy. Nor
was it difficult, amidit the darkness and confnlfion
of the night, to have kept it secret, until a
treaty with the senators ihould have put the city
in tile power of the collfpirators. All their mopes
of this were disconcerted by the imprudence of
Jerome Fiefco, who, when tile deputies of the
senate inquired for his brother, thie count of
Lavagna, that they might make their proposal
to him, replied with, a childith vanity, " I am
now thle only person to whom that title belongs,
and with me you must treat." These words dif-
covered as well to his friends as to his enemies

what

which might have been expeeted upon both. The
deputics, encouraged by chi, event, the only one
which could occasion such a fudd,-n revolinion as
might turn to their advantage, airuned indantly,
with admirable presence of mind, a new tone,
suitable to the change in their circumilances, and
made high demands. While they endeavoured
to gain time by protrafting the negotiation, the
reR of the senators were busy in assembling their
partisans, and in forming a body capable of de-
sending the palace of the republic. On the other
hand, the conspirators, aRoi!bhed at the death
of a man whom they adored and trusted, and
placing no confidence in Jerome, a giddy youth,
felt their courage die away, and their arms fall
from their hands. That profound and amazing
tecrecy with which the conspiracy had been con-
certed, and which had contributed hitherto so
much to its success, proved now the chief cause
of its milcarriage. The leader was gone; the
greater part of those who adted under him, knew
not his confidants, and were trangers to the obh
jedt at which he aimed. There was no person
among them whose authority or abilities entitled
him to assume Fielco's place, or to siniih his plan;
after having loft the spirit which animated it,life
and aativity deserted the whole body. Many of
the conspirators withdrew to their houses, hoping
that amidit the darkness of the night they had
passed unobfeiv ed, and might remain unknown.
Others fought for safety by a timely retreat ; and
before break of day, most of them fled with
precipitation from a city, which, but a few

hour.

hours before, was ready to acknowledge them
as masters.

Next morning every thing was quiet in
Genoa; not an enemy was to be seen; few
marks of the violence of the former night ap-
peared, the conspirators having condured their
enaerprize with mere noise than bloodihed, and
gained all theit advantages bh surprise, rathler
than by force of anms. Towards evensing, An-
drew Doria returned to the city, being met b:
all the inhabipanuts, who received him with accla-
mations of joy. Thiougis the disgrace as well as
danger of the preceding night were frefhs in h5is
mied, and the mangled body of iis kinfinan itill
before his eyes, focis was his moderation as well
as magnanimity, that the decree iffuxed by the
lsnate againit the conspirators, did not exceed
that juk measure of severity which was requisite
for the support of government, and was dictated
ilcer by thle violence of rdefetment, nor the
rasncour of revenge z O

After taking the nec efilrvy precautions for pre-

venting the fl .ne, wisicl nas now so happily ex-
tiaguilhbod, from breaking oat anew, the firit
cere of the senate was to fend an ansbaffador to

1 Thuan. 93. Ssrir \ii a Asdta 1otiv, siC La

C njuration au Comle de

5 Pit on, isr Cn: Jn 'it Rets.

Adtiani Ihtli, lib. vi. 3t9. FOlictu Conjutahto Jo. Lud.
kieter, ap. Grsy. Thdhs. Ital. i. 8d3*

It is renatrkEb', that cardinal de Rer r. at tie ace of

riCs meen, compolad a hb(rwryv f this c 5gir'cv, onstaiinog
tacn a difcovrry of hit atttsiratinlt of Fierfe sod his sn:er-
Si[ze, as sender it not forpr ing that a nain 5itr, io jealous
and difeening as Richl!l:u, Ihould be lad, by the perufat of
it, to p tdil tshe turbulent and s ntert us 5pir t ou 503t young
tccleiuific. Mema. de Reaz, tt Ir. i. p. rs.

the

had happened, and to beg his afliftance towaids
the reduAion of Montobhio, a firong fort on the
hereditary eff ate of the Fiefci, in which Jerome
had Ihut himself up. Charles was no less alarmed
than aitoisilhed at an eent so strange and unex.
peAed. He could not believe that Fiefco, how
hold or adventurous soever, durt have attemptcd
such an enterprize, but on foreign fuggeshin,
and from thls hope of foreign aid. Being in-
formed that the duke of Parma was well ac-
quainted with the plan of the conspirators, he
iamnediately supposed that the pope could not be
ignoranst of a meaflre, which Isis son had counte.
Ilnanced. Pioceeding from this to a farther con-
jedure, which Paul's cautious maxims of policy
in othcr initances rendered extremely probahle,
he conclndcd, that the French kingo muff have
known and approved of the design; and he be.
gan to ap-prelicnd that this spark might again
kindle the dame of war which had raged so lobr
in Italy. As he had drained his Italian terni-
torics of troops on account of the German wer,
he was altogether unprovided for reiifting any
hoaile attack in that country; and on the flrit
appearance of danger, he muR have detachrd
tiuidier the greateit part of his forces for its do-
fence. In this situation of affairs, it would have
been altogether imprudent in the emperor to
have advancedin person against the eleaor, until
he flhould learn with foime degree of certainty
whether such a feene were not about to open is
Italy, as might put it out of his power to kecp
the field with an army futicient to oppose him.

# BOOK IX.

BOO K IX.

'HE emneror's dread of the hofile intentions

of the pope and French king did not procdiA

from any imaginary or ill-grounded funpicinn.
Paul had already given the ftrongeit proofs both
of his jealousy and enmity. Charles conld not
hope, that Francis, after a rivalifhip of so long
contin nance, would behold the great advantagis
which he had gained over the confederate pru-
telants, without feeling his ancient emnuletion
revive. He was not deceived in this conjecture.
Francis had observed the rapid progress of his
arms with deep concern, and though hitherto
preventedl, by circumitances xwhich have been
mentioned, from interpoling in order to check
them, he was now convinced that, if he did not
make fomse extraordinnry and timely effort,
Chailes inul acquire fulch a degree of power as
would enable him to give law to tihe mict of
Europe. This apprehenlion, which did not take
its rife from the jealousy of rivalfimip alone, but
was entertained by the wifelt politicians of the
age, fuggefied various expedients which might
serve to retard the course of the emperor's vic-
tories, and to form by degrees such a combina-
tion against him as might put a flop to his dan-
gerous career.

With this view, Francis infirueted his emisTa-

ries in Germany to employ all their address in
order to revive the courage of the confederates,
and to prevent them from fabmitting to the em-
peror. He made liberal offers of his assistance to

VOL. III. IH H the

the modt zealous as well as the mole powerful of
the whole body; he used every argument and
proposed every advantage which could either
confirm their dread of the emperor's designs, or
determine them not to imitate the inconliderate
credulity of their associates, in giving up their
religion and liberties to his disposal. While he
took this itep towards continuing the civil war
which raged in Germany, he endeavoured like-
wife to itir up foreign enemies againit the em-
peror. He solicited Solyman to seize this fa-
vourable opportunityof invading Hungary,which
had been drained of all the troops necessary for
its defeirce, in order to form the army against
the confederates of Smalkalde. He exhorted
the pope to repair, by a vigorous and seasonable
effort, the error of which he had been guilty in
contributing to raise the emperor to such a for-
midable height of power. Finding Paul, both
from the confcioufncfs of his own miitake, and
his dread of its consequences, abundantly disposed
to liden to what he fuggedied, he availed himself
of this favourable disposition which the pontiff
began to discover, as an argument to gain the
Venetians. He endeavoured to convince them
that nouthig could save Italy, and even Europe,
from oppreflion and fervitode, hut thtir joining
with the pope and him, in giving the flre begin-
ning to a generalconfederacy, in order to humble
that ambitious potentate, whom they had al
equal reason to dread.

Having set on foot these negotiations in the

southern courts, he turned his attention next
towards those in the north of Europe. As the

king

king of Denmark had particular reasons to be
offended with the erperor, Francis imagined
that the objea of the league which he had pro.
jeaed would be highly acceptable to him: and
left considerations of caution or prudence Ihould
reltrain him from joining in it, he attempted to
overcome these, by offering him the young queen
of Scots in marriage to his son ". As the mi-
nifters who governed Englard in the name of
Edward VI. had openly declared thenmfelves con-
verts to the opinions of the reformers, as soon as
it became safe upon Henry's death to lay aside
that disguise which his intolerant bigotry had
forced them to afiume, Francis flattered himself
that their zeal would not allow them to remain
inadtive fpedators of the overthrow and deftruc-
tion of those who profeffed the fame faith with
themselves. He hoped, that notwithstanding
the itruggles of fadion incident to a minority,
and the profped of an approaching rupture with
the Scots, he might prevail on them likewise to
take part in the common cause b*

While Francis employed luch a variety of ex-

pedients, and exerted himself with such extraor-
dinary aaivity, to rouse the different states of
Europe againit his rival, he did not negledf what
depended on himnfeif alone. He levied troops in
all parts of his dominions; he colleded military
stores; he contraded with the Swiss cantons for
a considerable body of men; he put his finances
in admirable order; he remitted considerable
sums to the cledcor and landgrave; and took all

a Mem. de Ribier, i. 6cc. 606.
b lbid. 635.

fs152 the

the other leps necessary towards commencing
hostilities, on the Ihorteft warning, and with the
greatest vigour F.

Operations so complicatcd, and which rer

quired the putting so many initruments in motion,
did not escape the emperor's observation. He was
early informed of Francis's intrigues in the feve-
ral courts of Europe, as well as of his domneitic
preparations ; and sensible how fatal an interrup.
tion a foreign war would prove to his designs in
Germany,he trembled attheprofpecdof that event.
The danger,however,appeared to him as unavoid-
able as it was great. He knew the insatiable and
well-direAed ambition of Solyman, and that he
always chose the season for beginning his mili-
tary enterprises with prudence equal to the valour
with which he conduaed them. The pope, as
he had good reason to believe, wanted not pie.
texts to justify a rupture, nor irclination to be-
gin hostilities. He had already made fume dif-
covery of his sentiments, by exprefling a joy alto-
gether unbecoming the head of the church, upon
receiving an account of the advantage which the
eledor of Saxony had gained over Albert of
Brandenburg; and as he was now secure of find-
ing, in the French king, an ally of fulicient
rower to lupport hjim, he was at no pains to
conced the violence and extent of his enmity d.
'T he Vene ians, Charles was wellaffured,had long
ohferred the growth of his power with jealousy,
which, added to the folicitations and - promises
of France, might at lait quicken their flow
counsels, and overcome their natural caution.

c Mcm. de Ribier, i. 635. d Ibid. 637.

The

both peculiar reason to be difguited, as well as
fitrong motives to a& againit him. But above
all, he dreaded the adive emulation of Francis
himself, whom he considered as the foul and
mover of any confederacy that could be formed
against him; and as that monarch had afforded
proteAion to Verrina, who failed diredly to
Marseilles upon the miscarriage of Fiefco's con-
fpiracy, Charles expeaed every moment to fee
the commencement of those hoilile operations in
Italy, of which he conceived the infurreaion in
Genoa to have been only the prelude.

But while he remained in this fRate of suspense

and solicitude, there was one circumstance which
afforded him some profped of escaping the danger.
The French king's health began to decline. A
disease, which was the effe6d of his incouliderate
pursuit of pleafire, preyed gradually on his
constitution. The preparations for war, as
well as the negotiations in the different courts,
began to languish, together with the monarch
who gave spirit to both. The Genoese, during
that interval [March], reduced Montobbin, took
Jerome Fiefco peifoner, and putting him to
drath, together with his chief adherents, ex-
tinguifhed all remains of the confpiracv. Several
of the Imperial cities in Germany, despairing of
timely fllifiance from France, submitted to the
emperor. Even the landgrave seemed disposed
to abandon the eledor, and to bring mattets to
a speedy accomodation, on such terms as he
could obtain. In the mean time, Charles waited
with impatience the issue of a distemper, which
was to decide whether he muff relinquish all

H I3 other

other schemes, in order to prepare for resisting
a combination of the greater part of Europe
againil him, or whether he might proceed to
invade Saxony, without interruption or fear of
danger.

The good fortune, so remarkable propitious

to his family, that some hitoi ians have callrd it
the Star of the House ofAitria, did not desert
him on this occalion. Francis died at Ram-
bouillet, on the last day of March, in the fifty-
third year of his age, and the thirty-third of his
reign. During twenty-eight years of that time,
an avowed rivalfhip fublifted between him and
the emperor, which involved not only their own
dominions, but the greater part of Europe, in
wars, which were prosecuted with more violent
animosity, and drawn out to a greater length,
than had been known in any former period.
Many circumRiances contributed to this. Their
animosity was founded in opposition of interefit,
heightened by personal emulation, and exafpe-
rated not only by mutual injuries, but by reci-
procal insults. .At the fame time, whatever
advantage one seemed to possess towards gaining
the ascendant, was wonderfully balanced by fume
favourable circumifance peculiar to the other.
The emperor's dominions were of greater ex-
tent, the French king's lay more compaB1;
Francis governed his kingdom with abfolnte
power; that of Charles was limited, but he sup·
plied the want of authority by address: the
troops of the former were more impetuous and
enterprising; those of the latter better difci.
plined, and more patient of fatigue. The ta-
lents and abilitics of the two monarchs were as

diffkrent

different as the advantages which they poffeffed,
and contributed no less to prolong the contest
between them. Francis took his resolutions fud-
denly, prosecuted them at first with warmth, and
puflhd them into execution with a mout adven-
turous courage; but being destitute of the per-
severance necessary to surmount diffculties, he
often abandoned his defigons, or relaxed the rigour
of purfoit, from impatience, and sometimes from
levity. Charles deliberated long, and determined
with coolness; but having once fixed his plan,
he adhered to it with inflexible obstinacy, and
neither danger nor discouragement could turn
him aside from the execution of it. Ti'e fuc-
cess of their enterprises was suitable to the di-
verfity of their charaAers, and was uniformly
influenced by it. Francis, by his impetuous
adivity, often disconcerted the emperor's best-
laid schemes ; Charles, by a more cilm but fleady
prosecution of his designs, checked the rapidity
of his rival's career, and baffled or repulftd his
mouf vigorous efforts. The former, at tile open-
ing of a war or of a campaign, broke in upon
his enemy with the violence of a torrent, and
carried all before him ; the latter, waiting until
he saw the force of his rival begin to abate, le.
covered in the end not only all that he had lot,
but made new acquisitions. Few ofthe French
monarch's attempts towards conqueRt, whatever
promising afpe& they might wear at fird, were
conduced to an happy issue; many of the em-
peror's enterprises, even after they appear-
ed desperate and impradicable, terminated
in the most prosperous manner. Francis 'was
dlaZled with the splendour of an urdeitaking; Charke

to his advantage.

The degree, however, of their comparative

merit and reputation has not been fixed either
by a ftrit scrutiny into their abilities for govern-
ment, or by an impartial consideration of the
greatness and success of their undertakings; and
Francis is one of those monarchs who occupies a
higher rank in the temple of Fame, than either
his talents or performances entitle him to hold.
This pre-eminence he owed to many different
circumfiances. The superiority which Charles
acquired by the viaory of Pavia, and which from
that period he preserved through the remainder of
his reign, was so manifest, that Francis's struggle
againlt his exorbitant and growing dominion was
viewed by molt of the other powers, not only with
the partiality which naturally arises for those who
gallantly maintain an unequal contet, but with
the favour due to one who was refilling a com-
mon enemy, and endeavouring to set bounds to a
mona ch equally formidable to them all. The
charaters of pric;es, too, especially among their
contemporaries, dep nd not only upon their ta-
lents for governmenlt, but upon their qtialities as
men. Francis, notihinFahrding the many errers
conspicuous in ii' fortign policy and don;eftic
adminifratio., va, neverthclcis humane, bene-
scent, genarols. le poffiricd dignity witiout
pride; afflility free rr-om meanncfs; and
courtfy exeinpt from deceit. All who had ac-
cess to him, and no man of merit was ever denied
that pririlege, refpedled a.;d loved him. Capti-
vated wvidh his personal queiities, his fulbjres for-
got his deserts as a mnruarch, and admiring him

as the molt accomplished and amiable gentleman
in his dominions, they hardly murmured at acts
of male-adminislration, which, in a prince of ilfs
engaging dispositions, would have been deemed
unpardonable. This admirati n, however, muit
have been temporary only, and would ha'·e died
away, with the courtiers who beikowed it ; the
illusion arising from his private virtues mult have
ceased, and poilteity would have judged of hisi
public conducr with its ufiual impartiality; but
another circumitance prevented this, and his name
hath been transmitted to polterity with increaf-
ing reputation. Science and the arts had, at
that time, made little progress in France. They
were jult beginning to advance beyond the
limits of Italy, where they had revived, and which
had hitherto been their only feat. Francis took
them immediately under his proteAion, and vied
with Leo himself, in the zeal and munificence
with which he encouraged them. He invited
learned men to his court, he conversed with them
familiarly, he employed them in business, he raised
them to offices of dignity, and honoured them
with his confidence. That order of men, not
more prone to complain when denied the refped
to which they conceive themselves entitled, than
apt to be pleased when treated with the diitinc-
tion which they consider as their due, thought
they could not exceed in goratitude to such abene-
fator, and firained their invention, and employ-
ed all their ingenuity in panegyric. Succeeding
authors, warmrd with their deferiptions of Fran-
cis's bounty, adoptedi their encomiums, aid even
added to them. The appellation of Father of
Letters bellowed upon Francis, hath rendered his

memory

to have regarded it as a fort of impiety to un-
cover his infirmities, or to point out his defecds.
Thus Francis, notwithfitanding his inferior abili.
ties, and want of success, hath more than equalkd
the fame of Charles. The good qualities which
he poffeffed as a man, have entitled him to greater
admiration and piaife than have been berfowed
upon the extensive genius and fortunate arts ofa
more capable, but less amiable rival.

By his death a considerable change was made

in the date of Europe. Charles, grown old in
the arts of government and command, had now
to contend only with younger monarchs, who
could not be regarded as worthy to enter the
lifts with him, who had flood so many encoun-
ters with Henry VIII. and Francis I. and come
off with honour in all those different firuggles.
]3y this event, he was eased of all disquietude,
and was happy to find that he might begin with
safety those operations against the elEtor of
Saxony, which he had hitherto been obliged to
fuipend. He knew the abilities of Henry II.
who had just mounted the throne of France, to
be greatly inferior to those of his father, and
foreiaw that he would be so much occupied for
some time in displacing the late king's ministers,
wvhom he hated, and in gratifying the ambitious
demands of his own favourires, that he had no.
thing to dread, either from his personal efforts,
or rnom any confederacy which this unexperienced
prince could form.

But as it was uncertain how long such an in-

terval of security might continue, Charles deter-
mined inflantly to improve it: and ~as soon as

he

[April 13] from Egra on the borders of Bohe-
mis. But the departure of the papal troops,
together with the retreat of the Flemings, had
so much diminished his army, that sixteen thou-
sant men were all he could affcmble. With this
inconsiderable body he set out on an expedition,
the event of which was to decide what degree
ofauthority he should possess from that period
in Germany: but .as this little army conflited
chiefly of the veteran Spanish and Italian bands,
he did not, in truiting to them, commit much
to the decision of chance; and elen with so
frall a force he had reason to entertain the molt
sanguine hopes of success. The ele~ror had
kried an army greatly superior in number; but
neither the experience and discipline of his
troops, nor the abilities of his officers, were to
be compared with those of 'the emperor. The
eledor, besides, had already been guilty of an
error, which deprived him of all the advantage
which he might have derived from his superiority
in number, and was alone fufficient to have occa-
honed his ruin. Initead of keeping his forces
united, he detached one great body towards the
frontiers of Bohemia, in order to facilitate his
junclion with the malecontents of that kingdom,
and cantoned a considerable part of what re-
mained in different places of Saxony, where he
expeaed the emperor would make the firdt im-
prdfion, vainly imagining that open towns, with
small garrisons, might be rendered tenable againit
an enemy.

The emperor entered the southern frontier of

Saxony, and attacked Altorf upon the Eldter.

The

tor had taken was immediately seen, the troops
posted in that town forrendering without refill-
ance; and those in all the other places betwetn
that and the Elbe, either initated their example,
or fled as the Imperiaiiits approached. Charles,
that they might not recover from the panic wish
which they seemed to be feruck, advanced with-
out losing a moment. The eleaeor, who had fixed
his head-quarters at Meiflen, continued in his
wonted feate of Iludation and uncertainty. He
even became more undetermined, in proportion
as the danger drew rear, aud calld for prompt
and decisive resolutions. Somecimes he afted as
if he had resolved to defend the banks of the
flbc, and to hszard a battle with the enemy, as
fooni as the detachments which lie had called in
were able to join him. At other times, he
abandoned thia as rafli and perilous, seeming to
adopt the more prudent counsels of those who
adviled him to endeavour at protrading the war,
and for tlhit end to retire under the fc-rtications
of Wittembeeg, where the Imperiahifes could not
attack uim without maniifet diladvantage, aed
Shere he might wait, iiifaftv- , for the iuccuers
whichl he expeded from Mccklenburgb, Pane-
ra-ia, and the protelbs':t cities on the Baltic.
Without fixing upon either of these plans, he
broke down the bridge at \Iciffen, and marched
along the east bank of the Elbe to IIuhhiberg.
There he deliberated anew, and, after muchi hdi-
tation, adopted one of those niddle schemes,
which are ais ;ms acceptable to feeble minds in-
capable of deciding. He left a detachrnent at
Musbhiaerg to oppose the Imperialists, if they

ihould

vancing a few miles with his main body, en-
camped there in expetation of the event, accord-
ing to which he proposed to regulate his sub-
fnquent motions.

Charles, meanwhile, pushing forward incessant-

ly, arrived the evening of the twenty-third of
April on the banks of the Elbe, opposite to
Muhlberg. The river, at that place, was three
hundred paces in breadth, above four feet in
depth, its current rapid, and the bank poffeffed
by the Saxons was higher than that which he
occupied. Undismayed, however, by all these
obifacles, he called together his general officers,
and, without afkcing their opinions, communicated
to them his intention of attempting next morning
to force his passage over the river, and to at-
tack the enemy wherever he could come up with
them. They all expressed their astonishment at
such a bold resolution; and even the duke of
Alva, though naturally daring and impetuous,
and Maurice of Saxony, notwihiftanding his im-
patience to crush his rival the eleitor, remon-
firated earnedily against it. But the emperor,
confiding in his own judgment or good fortune,
paid no regard to their arguments, and gave the
orders necessary for executing his design.

Early in the morning a body of Spanilh and

Italian foot marched towards the river, and be-
gan an incessant fire upon the enemy. The long
heavy muskets used in that age, did execution
on the opposite bank, and many of the soldiers,
hurried on by a martial ardour in order to get
nearer the enemy, ruffed into the diream, and,
advancing breadt-high, fired with a more certain

VOL. III. I I asi,

aim, and with greater effea. Under cover of
their fire, a bridge of boats was begun to be laid
for the infantry ; and a peasant having undertaken
to condud the cavalry through the river by a
ford with which he was well acquainted, they
also were put in motion. The Saxons polled in
Muhlberg endeavoured to obltrua tiicfe opera-
tions, by a brilk fire from a battery which they
had ereaed; but as a thick fog covered all the
low grounds upon the river, they could not take
ain with any certainty, and the Imperialilts
fuifered very little ; at the fame time the Saxons
being much galled by the Spaniards and Italiani,
they set on fire some boats which had been colled.

ed near the village, and prepared to retire. The

Imperialfls preceiving this, ten Spanish soldiers
inifantly fiript themselves, and holding their
foords with their teeth, swam across the river,
put to flight fiuch of the Saxons as ventured to
oppose them, saved from the flames as many hoats
as were fuflicient to complete their own bridge,
ansd by this spirited and fuccesfaul adion, en-
couraged their companions no less than they
intimidated the enemy.

By this time the cavalry, each trooper having

a foot soldier behind him, began to enter the
river, the light horse marching in the front, folb
lowed by the men at arms, whom the emperor
led in person, mounted on a Spanish horse, dressed
in a fiumptuous habit, and carrying a javelin in
his hand. Such a numerous body itruggling
through a great river, in which, according to
the diredlions of their guide, they were obliged
to make several turns, sometimes treading on a
firm bottom, fomnetimes swimming, presented to

their

tacle equally magniicent and iiiteretting d* Their
courage, at lait, surmounted every obidacle, no
man betraying ally iymptom of fear, when the
emperor Ihared in the danger no kfs than the
meanelt soldier. The moment that they reachi d
the oppoilte fide, Charles, tvithout waitinS the
arrival of the reft of the infantry, advamced to-
wards the Saxons with the troops which had
palled along with him, who, flufhcd with their
good fortune, and dcfpifiig an enemy who had
negleaed to oppose them, when it might have
been done with such advantage, ma-d no account
of their superior numbers, and marched on as to
a certain vitory.

During all these operations, which neceflfrily

coufumed much time, the dclAor remained i.i-
ative in his campp; and from an infatuation
which appears to be so amazing, that the kit
informed hidtorians impute it to the treacherous
arts of his generals, who deceived him by faide
intelligence, he would not believe that the dmpe-
ror had pafied the river, or could be so near at
hand e. Being convinced, at lad, of his ilita
midake, by the concurring tedtimony of eve-
witnelfes, he gave orders for retreadiug towards
Wittemherg. But a German army, encumbered,
as oual, with baggage and artillery, could not
be put fieddenly in motion. They had jeid be-
gun to march whesn tue light troops of the
enemy came in vieiv, and the leeor law an cn-
gageinent to be unavoidable. As lie was no less

d Avila, ii;, a. e Came:vr. ap. Freher. iii. 493.

Struv. Corp. Hllt. Germ. 1047. 1049.

1i2 bold

bold in aftlion than irresolute in council, he made
the disposition for battle with the greatest presence
of mind, and in the mofI proper manner, taking
advantage of a great forest to cover his wings,
so as to prevent his being surrounded by the
enemy's cavalry, which were far more numerous
than his own. The emperor, likewise, ranged
his men in order as they came up, and riding
along the ranks, exhorted them with few but
efficacious words to do their duty. It was with
a very different spirit that the two armies ad.
vanced to the charge. As the day, which had
hitherto been dark and cloudy, happened to
clear up at that moment, this accidental circum.
fiance made an impreflion on the different parties
corresponding to the tone of their minds; the
Saxons. surprised and dilheartened, felt pain at
being exposed fully to the view of the enemy;
the Imperialists, being now secure that the pro.
teftant forces could not efeape from them, re-
joiced at the return of fiun-fhine, as a certain
presage of viaory. The shock of battle would
Dot have been long doubtful, if the personal
courage which the eletor displayed, together
with the aaivity which he exerted from the mo.
snent that the approach of the enemy rendered
an engagement certain, and cut off all possibility
of hesitation, had not revived in some degree the
spirit of his troops. They repulsed the Hun.
garian light-horfe who began the attack, and
received with firmness the men at arms who next
advanced to the charge ; but as these were the
flower of the Imperial army, were commanded by
experienced officers, and fought under the em.
peror's eye, the Saxons soon began to give way,

and

ThrlffPg.d

. >. //

~~

J.

~7/~/3i j/

and the light troops rallying at the fame time and
falling on their flanks, the flight became general.
A small body of chosen foldicrs, among whom
the eleaor had fought in person, itill continued
to defend themferles, and endeavoured to save
their maffer by retiring into the forelt; but beug
surrounded on every fide, the eledtor wounded in
the face, exhauited with fatigue, and perceiving
all refiltance to be vain, surrendered himself a
prisoner. He was condudAed immediately to-
wards the emperor, whom he found jult returned
from the pursuit, itanding on the field of battle
in the full exultation of success, and receiving
the congratulations of his officers, upon this
complete viciory obtained by his valour and con.
duet. Even in fuich an unfortunate and bum-
bling situation, the eleaor's behaviour was equally
magnanimous and decent. Sensible of hIs con-
dition, he approached hsis conqueror without any
of the sullenness or pride which would have been
improper in a captive ; and conscious of his own
dignity, he defeended to no mean fubmillion,
unbecoming the high fRation which he hckd
among the German princes. " The fortune of
war," said he, '' has made me your prifolner,
must gracious Emperor, and I hope to be treat-
ed" --h ere, Charles harshly interrupted hin:
" And am I then, at alat, acknoolhedged to be
emperor ? Charles of Ghent was the only title
you lately allowed me. You fsall be treated as
you deferve." At these words he turned from
him abruptly with an haughty air. To this
cruel repulse, the king of the Romans added
reproaches in his own name, uling expressions hilt
moue unuenerous and insulting. The eleftor

I13 I d3

mnade no reply; but, with an unaltered counte.
Dance, which discovered neither astonishment nor
dejedion, accompanied the Spanish soldiers ap.
pointed to guard him'.

This decisive viaory cost the Imperialists only

fifty men. Twelve hundred of the Saxons were
killed, chiefly in the pursuit, and a greater num-
ber taken prisoners. About four hundred kept
in a body, and escaped to Wittemberg, together
with the eledoral prince, who had likewise been
wounded in the aaion. After resting two days
in the field of battle, partly to refresh his army,
and partly to receive the deputies of the adjacent
towns, which were impatient to secure his pro-
tedion by submitting to his will, the emperor
began to move towards Wittemberg, that he
might terminate the war at once, by the reduc-
tion of that city. The unfortunate cleaor was
carried along in a fort of triumph, and exposed
every where, as a captive, to his own fubjedis;
a fpe&acle extremely affliaing to them, who both
honoured and loved him; though the insult was
so far from fobduing his firm spirit, that it did
not even ruffle the wonted tranquillity and com-
pofure of his mind.

As Wittemberg, the residence, in that age, of

the eledoral branch of the Saxon family, was one
of the ifrongeft cities in Germany, and could not
be taken, if properly defended, without great diffi-
culty, the emperor marched thither with the ut-
molt dispatch, hoping that while the consternation

f Sieid. HiR 426. Thuan. 36. Hortensfus de Bel!o

German. ap. Scari. vol ii. 49S Dfcript. l'ugns Mul-
berg. ibid. p. 509. P. Heuter. Rer. Auitr. lIb. xii. c. 15.
P. aoca occa-

habitants might imitate the example of their
countrymen, and submit to his power, as soon as
he appeared before their walls. But Sybilla of
Cleves, the eleaor's wife, a woman no less dif-
tinguifhed by her abilities than her virtue, initead
of abandoning herself to tears and lamentations
upon her hufband's misfortune, endeavoured by
her example as well as exhortations, to animate
the citizens. She inspired them with such refo-
lution, that, when summoned to surrender, they
returned a vigorous answer, warning the empe-
ror to behave towards their sovereign with the
refpe& due to his rank, as they were determined
to treat Albert of Brandenburg, who was itill a
prisoner, precisely in the fame manner that he
treated the elcor. The spirit of the inhabitants,
no less than the fitrength of the city, seemed now
to render a siege in form necessary. After such
a signal viaory, it would have been disgraceful
not to have undertaken it, though at the fame
time the emperor was deifitute of every thing re-
quifite for carrying it on. But Maurice removed
all difficulties by engaging to furnish provisions,
artillery, ammunition, pioneers, and whatever else
should be needed. Trussing to this, Charles
gave orders to open the trenches before the town.
It quickly appeared, that Maurice's eagerness to
redluc:e the capital of those dominions, which he
expeAed as his reward for taking arms against
his kinsman, and deserting the protefitant cause,
had led him to promise what exceeded his power
to perform. A battering train was, indeed, car-
ried safely down the Elbe from Dresden to
Wittemberg; but as Maurice had not fufucient

force

force to preserve a secure communication between
his own territories and the camp of the besiegers,
count Mansfeldt, who commanded a body of
eledoral troops, intercepted and deldroyrd a
convoy of provilions and military fiorcs, and dif-
perfed a band of pioneers deitined for the ferrice
of the Imperialidts. This put a flop to tile pro-
grefs of the siege, and convinced the emperor,
that as he could not rely on Maurice's promoifre,
recourse ought to be had to some more exprdi-
tiou' as well as more certain method of getting
polfeflion of tise town.

The unfortunate eletor was inl his hands,

and Charles was ungenerous and hard-hearted
enough to take advantage of this, in order to
make an experiment whether he might not bring
about his detign, by working upon the teadeincis
of a wife for her husband, or upon the piety of
children towards their parent. With this view,
he fimumoned Sybilia a fecnd time to open the
gates, letting her know that if (he again refused
to comply, the eleEtor (Lould answer with hi4
head for her obitinacy. To convince her that
this was not an empty threat, he brought his
prisoner to an immediate trial. The proceedings
against him were as irregular as the firatagem
was barbarous. Inflead of confueitig tihe itates
of the empire, or renitting the cause to any
court, which, according to the German conftitu-
tion, might have legally taken cognizance of the
elkcdor's crime, lie fubjedted the greatetR prince
in the empire to the jurifdidion of a court-mar-
tial, composed of Spanilh and Italian officers, and
in which the unrelenting duke of Alva, a Et
instrument for any a& of violcnce, presided

[May

[MayxoJ.This firange tribunal founded itscharge
upon the ban of the empire which had been
iflued against the prisoner by the sole authority
of the emperor, and was destitute of every legal
formality which could render it valid. But the
court-martial, presuming the eledor to be thereby
manifestly conviaed of treason and rebellion,
condemned him to fuffer death by being be-
headed. This decree was intimated to the
eledor while he was amusing himself in playing
at chefs with Ernest of Brunswick his fellow-
prisoner. He paused for a moment, though
without discovering any symptom either of fur-
prise or terror; and after taking notice of the
irregularity as well as injustice of the emperor's
proceedings: " It is easy, continued he, to com-
prehend his scheme. I must die, because Wit.
temberg will not surrender; and I (hall lay down
my life with pleasure, if, by that sacrifice, I can
preserve the dignity of my house, and transmit
to my posterity the inheritance which belongs to
them. Would to God, that this sentence may
not affe& my wife and children more than it
intimidates me and that they, for the fake of
adding a few days to a life already too long, may
not renounce honours and territories which they
were born to possess Si" He then turned to
his antagonist, whom he challenged to continue
the game. He played with his usual attention
and Ingenuity, and having beat Ernest, expressed
all the fatisfaiion which is commonly felt on
gaining such viAories. After this, he withdrew
to his own apartment, that he might employ the

g Thuan. 1. 142. reft

reit of his time in such religious exercises as w~ere
proper in his situation h*

It was not with the fame indifference, or com-

pofure, that the account of the elkdtor's danger
was received in Wittemberg. Sybilla, who had
supported with fuich undaunted fortitude her
hutband's misfortunes, while the imagined that
they could reach no farther than to dimnilnfl his
power or territories, felt all her resolution fvil as
soon as his life was threatened. Solicitous to fate
that, the defpiled ever)' other conlideration; and
was willing to make any facrifhce, in ordrr to
appease an incensed conqueror. At the fame
time, the duke of Cleves, the eledor of Branden-
burg, and Maurice, to none of whom Charles
had communicated the true motives of his violent
proceedings againdi the eledor, interceded warm-
ly with him to spare his life. The firdt was
prompted to do so merely by compaflion for his
fider, and regard for his brother-in-law. The
two others dreaded the univer fal reproach that
they would incur, if, after having boasted so
often of the ample security which the emperor
had promised them with refpedt to their religion,
the firnd effed of their union wvith him thould be
the public execution of a prince, who was judily
held in reverence as the mod zealous protedor of
the proteitant cause. Maurice, in particular,
foresaw that he mud become the objed of de-
teilation to the Saxons, and could never hope to
govern them with tranquillity, if lie were con-
iidercd by them as accessary to the death of his
nearedt kinsman, in order that he might obtain
voffelion of his dominious.

b Strudi Ccsyus, zojo.

While

cited Charles, with the molt eameft importunity,
not to execute the sentence; Sybilla, and his
children, conjured the ele~or, by letters as well
as messengers, to feruple at no conceflion that
would extricate him out of the present danger,
and deliver them from their fears and anguish on
his account. The emperor, perceiving that the
expedient which he had tried began to produce
the effea that he intended, fell by degrees from
his former rigour, and allowed himself to soften
into promises of clemency and forgiveness, if the
eleaor would shew himself worthy of his favour,
by fibmitting to reasonable terms. The eleior,
on whom the consideration of what he might
fuffer himself had made no imprefiion, was
melted by the tears of a wife whom he loved,
and could not resist the intreaties of his family.
In compliance with their repeated folicitations,
he agreed to articles of accommodation [May 19],
which he would otherwise have rejeaed with
disdain. The chief of them were, that he should
resign the eleaoral dignity, as well for himself
as for his posterity, into the emperor's hands,
to be disposed of entirely at his pleasure ; that he
should initantly put the Imperial troops in pof-
session of the cities of WYittemberg and Gotha;
that he Ihould set Albert of Brandenburg at
liberty without ransom; that he Ihould submit
to the decrees of the Imperial chamber, and
acquiesce in whatever reformation the emperor
ihould make in the conflitucion of that court;
that he (hould renounce all leagues against the
emperor or king of the Romans, and enter into
no alliance for the future, in which they were

not

not comprehended. In return for these impor.
tant concessions, the emperor not only promised
to spare his life, but to fettle on him and his
poiterity the city of Gotha and its territories,
together with an annual pension of fifty thou-
sand forins, payable out of the revenues of the
cleAorate; and likewise to grant him a fum in
ready money to be applied towards the discharge
of his debts. Even these articles of grace were
clogged with the mortifying condition of his re-
maining the emperor's priloner during the reft of
his life'. To the whole, Charles had fubjoined,
that he should submit to the decrees of the pope
and council with regard to the controverted
points in religion; but the eledor, though he
had been persuaded to sacrifice all the obje6ls
which men commonly hold to be the dearest and
most valuable, was inflexible with regard to this
point; and neither threats nor intreaties could
prevail to make him renounce what he deemed
to be truth, or persuade him to a& in opposition
to the diaates of his conscience.

As soon as the Saxon garrison marched out of

Wittemberg, the emperor fulfilled his engage-
ments to Maurice; and in reward for his merit
in having deserted the protefitant cause, and
having contributed with such success towards
the dissolution of the Smalkaldic league, he gave
him poffeffion of that city, together with all the
other towns in the eleaorate. It was not with-
out reluEtance, however, that he made such a
sacrifice; the extraordinary success of his arms

I Sleid. 427. Thuan. 1. 142. Du Mont Corps Di-

plon. iv. p. '1. 332 had

had begun to operate in its usual manner, upon
his ambitious mind, suggesting new and vast pro-
jedts for the aggrandizcment of his family, to-
wards the accomplishment of which the retaining
of Saxony would have been of the utmoil con.
sequence. But as this scheme was not then ripe
for execution, he durst not yet venture to dif-
close it; nor would it have been either safe or
prudent to offend Maurice at that jundure, by
foch a manifest violation of all the promises,
which had seduced him to abandon his natural
allies.

The landgrave, Maurice's father-in-law, was

fill in arms ; and though now left alone to main-
tain the protestant cause, was neither a feeble nor
contemptible enemy. His duminions were of
considerable extent; his fubjeds animated with
zeal for the reformation; and if he could have
held the Imperialists at bay for a {hort time, he
had much to hope from a party whose strength
was still unbroken, whose union as well as vigour
might return, and which had reason to depend,
with certainty, on being effeitially supported by
the king of France. The landgrave thought not of
any thing so bold or adventurous; but being seized
with the fame confiernation which had taken·
poffetfion of his associates, he was intent only on
the means of procuring favourable terms from
the emperor, whom he viewed as a conqueror,
to whose will there was a necessity of submitting.
Maurice encouraged this tame and pacific spirit,
by magnifying, on the one hand, the emperor's
power; by boasting, on the other, of his own
interest with his vidorious ally; and by repre-
fenting the advantageous conditions which he

VOL. 1m.t Ki could

could not fail of obtaining by his intercelion for
a friend, wlhom he was so solicitous to save.
Somntimes the landgrave was induced to place
fuclh unbounded confidence in his promises, tlhat
he was impatient to bring matters to a final ac-
commodation. On other occasions, the empe.
ror's exorbitant ambiticn, refirained neither by
the scruples ofdecency, nor the maxims of jir,jic,
together with the recent and shocking proof
which he had given of this in his treatment of the
elecior of Saxony, came so full into his thoughts,
and made such a lively impression on them, that
he broke off abruptly the negotiations which he
had begun; feemiug to be convinced that it was
more prudent to depend for safety on his own
arms, than to confide in Charles's generosity.
But this bold resolution, which dcfpair had fog-
gefted to an impatient spirit, fretted by difap-
pointments, was not of long continuance. Upon
a more deliberate fiurvey of the enemy's power,
as well as his own weakness, his doubts and fears
returned upon him, and together with them the
spirit of negotiating, and the delire of accommo-
dation.

Maurice and the eleaor of Brandenburg

ated as mediators between him and the emperor;
and after all that the former had vaunted of his
influence, the conditions p1rescribed to the land.
grave were extremely rigorous. The articles
with regard to his renouncing the league of
Smaikalde, acknowledging the emperor's autho-
rity, and submitting to the decrees of the Im-
perial chamber, were the fame which had been
imposed on the eleEtor of Saxony. Besides
these, he was required to fursender his person

and

pardon on his knees; to pay an huI.nred aod
fifty thousand crowns towards defrraiiing the cx-
pences of the war; to demolish the tortifeations
of all the towns in his dominions except one;
to oblige the garrison which he placed in it to
take an oath of fidelity to the emperor; to allow
a free passage through his territories to the Im-
perial troops as often as it (hall be demanded;
to deliver up all his artillery and ammunition to
the emperor; to set at liberty, without ransom,
Henry of Brunswick, together with the other
prisoners whom he had taken during the war;
and neither to take arms himself, nor to permit
any of his fubjeAs to serve againit the emperor
or his allies for the future C.

The landgrave ratified thele articles, though

with the utmoit reluaiance, as they contained no
itpulation with regard to the manner in which
he was to be treated, and left him entirely at the
emperor's mercy. Neceflity, howeser, compelled
him to give his assent to them. Chasrlcs, who
had assumed the haughty and imperious tone of a
conqueror, ever since the reduaion of Saxony,
indiled on unconditional submission, and would
permit nothing to be addcd to the terms which
he had prescribed, that could in any degree limit
the fulness of his power, or refitnin him from be-
having as he saw meet towards a prince whom he
regardcd as absolutely at his disposal. But
though he would not vouchfafc to negotiate
with the laridgrave on such a footimg of equality,
a> to fuffer any article to be infected among those

k Skid. 430. Thuan, 1. iv. 146.

K K 2 which

considered as a formal itipulation for the security
and freedom of his person ; he, or his ministers in
his name, gave the elecor of Brandenburg and
Maurice such full fatisfadion with regard to
this point, that they assured the landgrave, that
Charles would behave to him in the fame way as
he had done to the duke of Wurtemberg, and
would allow him, whenever he had made his sub-
mission, to return to his own territories. Upon
finding the landgrave to be itill poffeffed with his
former suspicions of the emperor's intentions, and
unwilling to trust verbal or ambiguous declara-
tions, in a matter of Luch essential concern as his
own liberty, they lent him a bond signed by them
both, containing the molt solemn obligations, that
if any violence whatsoever was offered to his per-
son, during his interview with the emperor, they
would initantly surrender themselves to his sons,
and remain in their hands to be treated by them
in the fame manner as the emperor lhould treat
him .

This, together with the indispensable obligation
of performing what was contained in the articles
of which he had accepted, removed his doubts
and scruples, or made it necessary to get over
them. He repaired, for that purpose, to the
Imperial camp at Hall in Saxony, where a cir-
cumftance occurred which revived his suspicions
and increased his fears. Just as he was about to
enter the chamber of presence, in order to make
his public submission to the emperor, a copy of
the articles which he had approved of was put

I Du Mont Corps Diplom. iv. p. ii. 336. mnto

anew. Upon perusing them, he perceived that
the Imperial minijiers had added two new arti-
cles; one importing, that if any difpIute floiild
arise concerning the meaning of the former con.
ditions, the emperor (hoold have thr ri hie of
putting what interpretation upon them he
thought most reafenable ; the other, that the
landgrave was bound to submit implicitly to the
decisions of the council of Trent. Thia unwor.
thy artifice, calculated to surprise him into an
approbation of articles, to which he had not the
moit distant idea of ahfenting, by propoliog them
to him at a time when his mind was engrolzed
and difquieted with the thoughts of that hlumili-
ating ceremony which he had to perform, filled
the landgrave with indignation, and made him
break out into all those violent exprrflions of
rase to which his temper was prone. With fume
didiculty, the elec! or of Brandenburg and lhina-
rice prevailed at length on the emperor's mini-
fIers to drop the former article as unjult, and to
explain the latter in fiuch a manner, that he
could agree to it, without openly renouncing the
proteflant religion.

This obhfacle being surmounted, the landgrave

was impatient to finidh a ceremony which, how
mortitying soever, had been declared necelfary to-
wards his obtaining pardon. The emperor was
seated on a magnificent throne, with all the en-
signs of his digiiity, surrounded by a numerous
train of the princs of the empire, among whom
was Henry of Brunswick, lately the iandgrave's
p1ifoner, and now, by a fiudden reverse of fortune,
a fpecator of his humiliation. The landgrave

KK3 133

was introduced with great solemnity, and ad-
vancing towards the throne, fell upon his knees.
His chancellor, who walked behind him, imme*
diately read, by his mailer's command, a paper
which contained an humble confeffion of the
crime whereof he had been guilty; an acknow-
ledgment that he had merited on that account
the must severe punishment; an absolute refigna-
tion of himself and his dominions to be disposed of
at the emperor's pleasure; a fubmifive petition
for pardon, his hopes of which were founded en-
tirely on the emperor's clemency; and it con-
cluded with promises of behaving, for the future,
like a fubjeA whose principles of loyalty and obe-
dience would be confirmed, and would even de-
rive new force from the sentiments of gratitude
which muff hereafter fill and animate his heart.
While the chancellor was reading this abjea de-
claration, the eyes of all the fpedators were fixvd
on the unfortunate landgrave; few could behold
a prince, fa powerful as well as high-fpirited,
suing for mercy in the poffure of a supplicant,
without being touched with commiseration, and
perceiving serious reflexions arise in their minds
upon the instability and emptiness of human
grandeur. The emperor viewed the whole tranf-
adion with an haughty unfeeling composure;
and preserving a profound silence himself, made
a sign to one of his secretaries to read his answer;
thle tenor of which was, That though he might
have justly infliaed on him the grievous puniih.
ment which his crimes deserved, yet, prompted
by his own generosity, moved by the folicitations
of several princes in the behalf of the landgrave,
and influenced by his penitential acknowledg-

ments,

Po~m PyILL

a~A/1 L

r 1

r by B

the rigour of justice, and would fubje& him to
no penalty that was not specified in the articles
which he had already subscribed. The moment
the fecrerary had flnithed, Charles turned away
abruptly, without deigning to give the unhappy
suppliant any sign of compassion or reconcilce
ment. He did not even desire him to rife from
his knees; which the landgrave having ventured
to do unbidden, advanced towards the emperor
with an intention to kiss his hand, flattering
himself, that his guilt being now fully expiatedl,
he might presume to take that liberty. But the
ele~tor of Brandenburg, perceiving that this fa-
miliarity would be offenfive to the emperor, inter-
posed, and desired the landgrave to go along
with him and Maurice to the duke of Alva's
apartments in the castle.

He was received and entertained by that noble-

man with the refpe61 and courtesy due to such
a guest. But after fiupper, while he was en-
gaged in play, the duke took the eledor and
Maurice aside, and communicated to them the
emperor's orders, that the landgrave muff re-
main a prisoner in that place under the custody
of a Spanish guard. As they had not hitherto
entertained the most diiant suspicion of the em-
peror's fsncerity or rectitude of intention, their
surprise was excessive, and their indignation not
inferior to it, on discovering how greatly they
had been deceived themselves, and how infa-
moufly abused, in having been made the injiru-
ments of deceiving and ruining their friend.
They had recourse to complaints, to arguments, and

and to intreaties, in order to save themselves from
that disgrace, and to extricate him out of the
wretched ftuation into which he had been be-
trayed by too great confidence in them. But
the duke of Aixva remained inflexible, and plead.
ed the necefity of executing the emperor's com-
mands. By this time it grew late, and the land-
grave, who knew nothing of what had passed,
nor dreaded the snare in which he was entangled,
prepared for departing, when the fatal orders
vwere intimated to him. He was ifruck dumb at
first with aftonibhment, but after being silent a
few moments, he broke out into all the violent
expressions which horror, at injuRice accompa.

eied with fraud, naturally foggeib. He com-
plained, he expoftulated, he exclaimed; fume-
times inveighing againit the emperor's artifices
as unworthy of a great and generous prince;
sometimes censuring the credulity of his friends
in trolling to Charles's insidious promises;
sometime; charging them with meanness in sloop-
iug to lend their affifance towards the execution
of such a perfidious and dishonourable fheme;
and in the end he required them to remember
their engagements to his children, and instantly
to fulfil them. They, after giving way for a
little to the torrent of his palion, fulemnly
asserted their own innocence and upright inten-
tion in the whole tranfadion, and encouraged
him to hope, that as soon as they saw the
emperor, they would obtain redress of an
injury, which affeAed their own honour, no
less than it did his liberty. At the fame
time, in order to ifothe his rage and impa-
tience, Maurice remained with him during

the

fined .

Next morning, the elef~or and Maurice ap.

plied jointly to the emperor, representing the in.
famy to which they would be exposed through.
out Germany, if the landgrave were detained
in custody; that they would not have advised,
nor would he himself have consented to an intcr-
view, if they had fufpeded that the lufs of his
liberty was to be the consequence of his fubmif-
lion; that they were bound to procure his re.
lease, having plighted their faith to that effecK,
and engaged their own persons as furetics for
his. Charles lifiened to their earnelt remon.
firances with the utmost coolness. As he now
flood no longer in need of their services, they
had the mortification to find that their former
obsequiousness was forgotten, and little regard
paid to their intercession. He was ignorant, he
told them, of their particular or private tranf-
aaions with the landgrave, nor was his condua
to be regulated by any engagements into which
they had thought fit to enter; though he knew
well what he himself had promised, which was
not that the landgrave should be exempt from all
refiraint, but that he should not be kept a pri.
foner during life #. Having said this with a pe.

remptory

mSleid. 433. Thuan. 1. iv. 147. Struv. Corp. Hlift.

Germ. ii. io5z.

* According to several hillorians of great name, the em-

pelor, in his treaty with the landgrave, fipulated that he
would not detain him in any prison. But in executing the
deed, which was written in the German tongue, the Imperial
aninitlers fraudulently fubfiituted the word emzoiger, inflead of
eioiger, and thus the treaty, in place of a promise that he

fhoul4

remptory and decisive tone, he put an end to the
conference; and they feeing no probability, at
that time, of making anry imprehion upon the
emperor, who seemed to have taken this refolu-
tion deliberately, and to be obitinately bent on
adhering to it, were obliged to acquaint the un-
fortunate prisoner with the ill frccefs of their
endeavours in his behalf. The difappointmract
threw him into a new and more violent transport
of rage, so that to prevent his proceeding to Ion.e
desperate extremity, the eledtor and Maurice
promised that they would not quit the emperor,
uatil, by the frequency and fervour of their in-
terceilions, they had extorted his consent to set
him free. They accordingly renewed their soli-
citations a few days afterwards, but fourd
Charles more haughty and intradtable than
before, and were warned that if they touched
again upon a fubjed so difagrenable, and wkh
regard to which he had determined to hear
nothing farther, he would inlantly give orders

fhou!d not be detained in any prison, contained only an en-
gagement that he (hould not be detained in peep rual im.
prifonment. But authors, eminent for hifforical kr.owledge
and critical accuracy, have called in question the truth of
hists common tiory. The silence of Sleidan with regard to
it, as well as its not being mentioned in the various memo-
rials which he has publihacd concerning the landgrave's imt
prifonment, greatly favour this opinion. But as fcveral books
which contain the information necefiary towards difcufirg
this point with accuracy, are written in the German language,
which I do not underilbnd, I cannot pretend to inquire into
this matter with the fame precilion wherewith I have endea-
voured to Settle tome other controverted fasts which have
occurred in the course oftihis hiltary. See Strav. Corp. ro1z.
Moihcins's Eccles. Riit. vol. ii. p. ifi;, z62. Engl. edition.

to

hurting the landgrave by an oicious or ill-timed
real to se~rve him, they not only defifed, but
left the court, and, as they did not choose to
inmet the firfl falies of the landgrave's rage
upon his learnirg the cause of their departure,
thev informed him of it by a letter, wherein
they cxhorted him to fulfil all that he had pro-
mifed to the emperor, as the mo1t certain means
of procuring a speedy rekafe.

Whatever violent emotions therir n'nande ne

his cause in this manner occafoned, the land.
grave's impatience to recover liherty made hiji
follow their advice. Hie paid the rim which had
been imposed on him, (,rdercl 1 is fortrfcds to
be razed, and renounced all aliauces which could
give ofence. This prompt compliance with the
will of the conqueror produced no effect. He
was fill guarded with the fame igilant severity;
and heing carried about, together with the de-
graded eleror of Saxony, wherever thse emperor
went, their disgrace and his triuroph was each day
renewed. The fortitude as wedl as equanmmitr,
with which the eleaor bore thcfe repeated in-
fults, were not more remarkable than the land-
grave's fretfulnefs and impatience. His adive
impetuous mind could ill brook reifraint; and
refletion upon the ihamefol artifices, by whsich
he had been decoyrd into that diruation, as well
as iedignation at the injuitice with which he was
flill detained in it, drove him often to the wildeit
excefes of paflion.

The people of the different cities, to whom

Charles thus wantonly exposed those illuflrious
prisoners as a public fpedacle, were sensibly

touched

manic body, and murmured loudly at this in-
decent treatment of two of its greatest princes.
They had soon other causes of complaint,
and fisch as affeArd them more nearly. Charles
proceeded to add oppression to insult, and arro-
gating to himself all the rights of a conqueror,
exercised them with the utmost rigour. He
ordered his troops to seize the artillery and
military flores belonging to such as had been
members of the Smalkaldic league, and having
colleaed upwards of five hundred pieces of can-
non, a great number in that age, he sent part
of them into the Low-Countries, part into
Italy, and part into Spain, in order to spread by
this means the fame of his fuccels, and that they
might serve as monuments of his having fiubdued
a nation hitherto deemed invincible. He then
levied, by his sole authority, large sums of mo-
ney, as well upon those who had served him with
fidelity during the war, as upon such as had
been in arms againit him; upon the former, as
their contingent towards a war, which, having
been undertaken, as he pretended, for the
common benefit, ought to be carried on at the
common charge; upon the latter, as a fine by
way of punishment for their rebellion. By tihee
exaaions, he amassed above one million fix hun-
dred thousand crowns, a fum which appeared
prodigious in the sixteenth century. But so
general was the coniternation which had seized
the Germans upon his rapid success, and such
their dread of his viAorious troops, that all im-
plicitly obeyed his commands; though, at the
fame time, these extraordinary firetches of power

3 greatly

greatly alarmed a people jealous of their privi-
leges, and habituated, during several ages, to
confider the Imperial authority as neither ex-
tensive nor formidable. This discontent and re-
fentment, how induitrioufly soever they con-
cealed them, became universal; and the more
these passions were reifrained and kept down fur
the present, the more likely were they to burnt
out soon with additional violence.

While Charles gave law to the Germans like

a conquered people, Ferdinand treated his sub-
jeas in Bohemia with still greater rigour. That
kingdom poffeffed privileges and immunities as
extensive as those of any nation in which the
feudal inititutions were established. The prero-
gative of their kings was extremely limited, and
the crown itself eledive. Ferdinand, whcn raised
to the throne, had confirmed their liberties with
every solemnity preferibed by their excelfive fuli-
citude for the fecunity of a conffitution of govern-
ment to which they were extremely attached.
He soon began, however, to be weary of a jurif-
diaion so much circumferibed, and to delpife a
feeptre which he could not transmit to his pofte-
rity; and notwithitanding all his former engage-
ments, he attempted to overturn the conflitution
from its foundations ; that, initead of an eledive
kingdom, he might render it hereditary. But
the Bohemians were too high spirited tamely to
relinquilh privileges which they had long enjoyed.
At the fame time, many of them having embraced
the do&rines of the reformers, the feeds of which
John Huss and Jerome of Prague had planted in
their country about the beginning of the preced-
ing century, the desire of acquiring religious

voL. II). L L liberty

civil rights; and these two kindred passions
heightening, as usual, each other's force, pre-
cipitated them immediately into violent measures.
They had not only refused to serve their fore-
reign againd the confederates of Smalkalde, but
having entered into a close alliance with the eledtor
of Saxony, they had bound themselves, by a
solemn association, to defend their ancient con-
flitution ; and to perfifi, until they should obtain
luch additional privileges as they thought necef-
fury towards perfeding the present model of their
government, or rendering it more permanent.
i'hey chose Caspar Phlug, a nobleman of diitinc-
tioO, to be their general; and raised an army of
thirty thousand men to enforce their petitions.
But either from the weakness of their leader, or
from the diffenflions in a great unwieldy body,
which, having united hastily, was not thoroughly
compaEted, or from some other unknown cause,
the subsequent operations of the Bohemians bore
no proportion to the zeal and ardour with which
they took their first resolutions. They fuffered
themifelves to be amused so long with negotia-
tions and overtures of different kinds, that before
they could enter Saxony, the battle of Muhlberg
was fought, the eletor deprived of his dignity
and territories, the landgrave confined to close
custody, and the league of Smalkalde entirely
diflipated. The fame dread of the emperor's
power which had seized the red of the Germans,
ieached them. As soon as their sovereign ap.
proached with a body of Imperial troops,. they
instantly dispersed, thinking of nothing but how
to atone for their padt guilt, and to acquire some

hope

hope of forgiveness by a prompt submission. But
Ferdinand, who entered his dominions full of
that implacable resentment which inflamnes mo-
narchs whose authority has been dcfpifed, was
not to be mollified by the late repentance and
involuntary return of rebellious fubjeds to their
duty. He even heard, unmoved, the intreaties
and tears of the citizens of Prague, who appeared
before him in the po{ture of fuppliants, and im-
plored for mercy. The sentence which he pro-
nounced against them was rigorous to extremity;
he abolished many of their privileges, he abridged
others, and new modelled the conititution accord-
ing to his pleasure. He condcmned to drath
many of those who had been most active in form-
ing the late association against him, and puniihed
still a greater number with confiscation of their
goods, or perpetual banishment. He obliged all
his fubjedts, of every condition, to give up their
arms to be deposited in forts where he planted
garrisons; and after disarming his people, he
loaded them with new and exorbitant taxes.
Thus, by an ill-condu&ed and unfuccefsful effort
to extend their privileges, the Bohemians not
only enlarged the sphere of the royal prerogative,
when they intended to have circumfcibed it, but
they almost annihilated those liberties which they
aimed at establishing on a broader and more secure
foundation ".

The emperor, having now humbled, and, as

he imagined, subdued the independent and itub-
born spirit of the Germans by the terror of arms

a Seid. 4083 419. 434. Thuan. i. iv. z29. 550. Struv.

Corp. ii.

L L2 and

and the rigour of punishment, held a diet at
Augfbnrg, in order to compose finally the con-
troverlies with regard to religion, which had so
long dijturbed the empire. He durst not, how-
ever, trust the determination of a matter so inte-
testing to the free fuffrage of the Germans,
broken as their minds now were to subjection.
He entered the city at the head of his Spanih
troops, and assigned them quarters there. The
reft of his soldiers he cantoned in the adjacent
villages; so that the members of the diet, while
they carried on their deliberations, were surround-
ed by the fame army which had overcome their
countrymen. Immediately after his public en-
try, Charles gave a proof of the violence with
which he intended to proceed. He took pof.
session by force of the cathedral, together with
one of the principal churches; and his priefits
having, by various ceremonies, purified them from
the pollution with which they supposed the un-
hallowed ministrations of the proteitants to have
defiled them, they re-efitablifhed with great pomp
the rites of the Romish worship o,

The concourse of members to this diet was

extraordinary; the importance of the affairs con-
cerning which it was to deliberate, added to the
fear of giving offence to the emperor by an ab-
fence which lay open to mifconfitruion, brought
together almost all the princes, nobles, and re-
prefentatives of cities who had a right to fit in
that assembly. The emperor, in the speech with
which he opened the meeting, called their atten-
tion immediately to that point, which seemed

o Sleid. 435, 437. chiefly

effedts of the religious diffenlions which had arisen
in Germany, and taken notice of his own un-
wearied endeavours to procure a general council,
which alone could provide a remedy adequate to
those evils, he exhorted them to recognise its
authority, and to acquiesce in the decilions of an
assembly to which they had originally appealed,
as having the sole right ofjudgiment in the cafe.

But the council, to which Charles withed them

to refer all their controversies, had, by this time,
undergone a violent change. The fear and jea-
lonfy, with which the emperor's firt successes
against the confederates of Smalkalde had in-
spired the pope, continued to increase. Not
fatislied with attempting to retard the progrels
of the Imperial arms, by the sudden recall of
his troops, Paul began to confider the em-
peror as an enemy, the weight of whose power
he muR soon feel, and against whcm he could
not be too haity in taking precautions. H-le
fooefawv that the immediate eikf{ of the em-
peror's acquiring absolute power in Germany,
would be to render him entirely master of all the
decisions of the council, if it should continue to
meet in Trent. It was dangerous to allow a
monarch, so ambitious, to get tha command of
this formidahle engine, which he might employ
at pleasure to limit or ove turn the papal au-
thority. As the only method of preventing this,
he determined to remove the council to some
city more immediately under his own jurifdiaitoni
and at a greater ditance from the terror of the
emperor's arms, or the reach of his influence.
An incident fortunately occurred, which gave

LL&3 this

One or two of the fathers of the council, toge-
ther with some of their domeftics, happening to
die suddenly, the phyiicians, deceived by the
symptoms, or suborned by the pope's legates,
pronounced the distemper to be infeAious and
pestilential. Some of the prelates, firuck with
a panic, retired; others were impatient to be
gone; and after a short consultation, the council
was translated to Bologna [March s ], a city
subject to the pope. All the bishops in the Im-
peinal interest warmly opposed this resolution, as
taken without necessity, and founded on false or
frivolous pretexts. All the Spanish prelates, and
most of the Neapolitan, by the emperor's express
command, remained at Trent; the reft, to the
number of thirty-four, accompanying the legates
to Bologna. Thus a schism commenced in that
very assembly, which had been called to heal the
divilions of Christendom; the fathers of Bologna
inveighed against those who flaid at Trent, as
contumacious and regardless of the pope's au-
thority; while the other accused them of being
so far intimidated by the fears of imaginary
danger, as to remove to a place where their con-
fultations could prove of no service towards re-
establishing peace and order in Germany P.

The emperor, at the fame time, employed all

his interest to procure the return of the council
to Trent. But Paul, who highly applauded his
own sagacity in having taken a ifep which put it
out of Charles's power to acquire the direaion
of that assembly, paid no regard to a request, the

P F. Paul, Z48, &c.

objea

objea of which was so extremely obvious. The
summer was confimed in fruitless negotiations
with refpe& to this point, the importunity of the
one and obitinacy of the other daily increasing.
At last an event happened which widened the
breach irreparably, and rendered the pope utterly
averse from listening to any proposal that came
from the emperor. Charles, as has been already
observed, had so violently exasperated Peter
Lewis Farnese, the pope's son, by refusing to
grant him the inveffiture of Parma and Placentia,
that he had watched ever since that time with
all the vigilance of resentment for an opportunity
of revenging that injury. He had endeavoured
to precipitate the pope into open hostilities against
the emperor, and had earnestly solicited the king
of France to invade Italy. His hatred and re-
fentment extended to all those whom he knew
that the emperor favoured; he did every ill
office in his power to Gonzaga, governor of
Milan, and had encouraged Fiefco in his attempt
upon the life of Andrew Doria, because both
Gonzaga and Doria poffeffed a great degree of
the emperor's efiteem and confidence. His male-
volence and secret intrigues were not unknown
to the emperor, who could not be more de-
firous to take vengeance on him, than Gonzaga
and Doria were to be employed as his infiru-
ments in infliaing it. Farnese, by the profli-
gacy of his life, and by enormities of every kind,
equal to those committed by the worit tyrants
who have disgraced human nature, had rendered
himfelffo odious, that it was thought any violence
whatever might be lawfully attempted againit
him. Gonzaga and Doria soon found among

h s

even deemed it meritorious, to lend their hands
in such a service. As Farnese, animated with
the jealousy which ufiually poffeffes petty fove-
reigns, had employed all the cruelty and fraud,
whereby they endeavour to supply their defea
of power, in order to humble and extirpate the
nobility fubjea to his government, five noblemen
of the greatest diflindion in Placentia combined
to avenge the injuries which they themselves had
fuffered, as well as those which he had offered to
their order. They formed their plan in con-
jundion with Gonzaga; but it remains uncer-
tain whether he originally suggested the scheme
to them, or only approved of what they proposed,
and co-operated in carrying it on. They con.
certed all the previous ifeps with fiuch foresight,
condufted their intrigues with fsich secrecy, and
displayed such courage in the execution of their
design, that it may be ranked among the most
audacious deeds of that nature mentioned in
hiftor'. One body of the conspirators fiurprifed,
at mid-day [Sept. so], the gates of the citadel
of Plecentia where Farnese relided, overpowered
his guards, and murdered him. Another party
of them made themselves mafers of the town,
and called upon their fellow-citizcns to take
arms, in order to recover their liberty. The
multitude ran towards the citadel, from which
three great guns, a signal concerted with
Gonzaga, had been fired ; and before they
could guess the cause or the authors of the tu-
mult, they saw the lifeless body of the tyrant
hanging by the heels from one of the windows
of the citadel. But so universally deteflable had

he

of concern at such a fad reverse of fortune, or
discovered the least indignation at this ignomi-
nious treatment of a sovereign prince. The ex-
ultation at the success of the conspiracy was
general, and all applauded the aaors in it, as the
deliverers of their country. The body was
tumbled into the ditch that surrounded the cita-
del, and exposed to the insults of the rabble;
the reft of the citizens returned to their usual
occupations, as if nothing extraordinary had

happened. Before next morning, a body of troops arriving
from the frontiers of the Milanese, where they
had been posted in expedation of the event, took
pofieffion of the city in the emperor's name, and
reinstated the inhabitants in the poffefflion of their
ancient privileges. Parma, which the Imperial-
ifts attempted likewise to surprise, was saved by
the vigilance and fidelity of the officers whom
Farnese had intrufted with the command of the
garrison. The death of a son whom, notwith.
standing his infamous vices, Paul loved with an
cxcefs of parental teudernefs, overwhelmed him
with the deepest affliAion; and the loss of a city
of such consequence as Placentia, greatly em-
bittered his foriow. He accused Gonzaga, in
open consistory, of having committed a cruel
murder, in order to prepare the way for an unjust
tfurpation, and immediately demandedof the em-
peror fatisfadion for both; for the former, by
the punishment of Gonzaga; for the latter, by
the restitution of Placentia to his grandson
Odavia, its rightful owner. But Charles, who,
rather than quit a prize of such value, was willing,

not

not only to expose himfeilf to the imputation of
being accessary to the crime which had given an
opportunity of seizing it, but to bear the in-
famy of defrauding his own fon-in-law of the
inheritance which belonged to him, eluded all
his folicitations, and determined to keep pof-
feflion of the city, together with its terri-
tories q.

This resolution, flowing from an ambition so

rapacious, as to be refirained by no consideration
either of decency or juflice, transported the pope
so far beyond his usual moderation and prudence,
that he was eager to take arms again{t the em-
peror, in order to be avenged on the murderers of
his son, and to recover the inheritance wrefied
from his family. Conscious, however, of his
own inability to contend with foch an enemy, he
waimly solicited the French king and the re-
public of Venice to join in an offenfive league
against Charles. But Henry was intent at that time
on other objecls. His ancient allies the Scots,
having been defeated by the Englilh in one of
the greatest battles ever fought between these
two rival nations, he was about to fend a nume-
rous body of veteran troops into that country,
as well to preserve it from being conquered, as
to gain the acquisition of a new kingdom to
the French monarchy, by marrying his son the
Dauphin to the young queen of Scotland. An
undertaking accompanied with such manifest ad-
vantages, the success of which appeared to be so
certain, was not be relinquished for the remote

9 F. Paul, 257. Pallavic. 41, 42. Thuan. iv. x56.

Mern. de Ribier, 59. 67. Natulis Comitis Hi~tor. lib. iii.
p. 64. prorpeQt

profpe& of benefit from an alliance depending
upon the precarious life of a pope of fourscore,
who had nothing at heart but the gratification of
his own private resentment. Initead, therefore,
of rushing headlong into the alliance proposed,
Henry amused the pope with such general pro-
sessions and promises, as might keep him from
any thoughts of endeavouring to accommodate
his differences with the emperor, but at the fame
time he avoided any such engagement as might
occasion an immediate rupture with Charles, or
precipitate him into a war for which he was not
prepared. The Venetians, though much alarmed
at feeing Placentia in the hands of the Imperial-
ifts, imitated the wary condua of the French
king, as it nearly resembled the spirit which
usually regulated their own condua r.

But, though the pope found that it was not

in his power to kindle immediately the flames of
war, he did not forget the injuries which he
was obliged for the present to endure; relent-
ment fettled deeper in his mind, and became more
rancorous in proportion as he felt the difficulty
of gratifying it. It was while these sentiments
of enmity were in full force, and the desire of
vengeance at its height, that the diet of Augf-
burg, by the emperor's command, petitioned the
pope, In the name of the whole Germanic body,
to enjoin the prelates who had retired to Bologna
to return again to Trent, and to renew their
deliberations in that place. Charles had been at
great pains in bringing the members to join in

Mem. deRibier, ii. 63. 71. 78. 85. 95. rauta liltor.

di Vene, 199. 203. Thuan. iv. i60.

this

variety of sentiments among the protestants with
refpedit to the submission which he had required
to the decrees of the council, some of them being
altogether intradable, while others were ready
to acknowledge its right of jurifdidion upon
certain conditions, he employed all his address in
order to gain or to divide them. He threatened
and overawed the eleaor Palatine, a weak prince,
and afraid that the emperor might inflmA on him
the punishment to which lie had made himself
liable by the afif'tance that he had given to the
confederates of Smalkalde. The hope of pro.
curing liberty for the landgrave, together with
the formal confirmation of his own eledoral
dige it) ,o' ercameMaurice's fcruples,or prevented
him from oppolhng what he knew would be
agreeable to the emperor. The eledor of Bran.
dciiburg, less influenced by religious zeal than any
prince of that age, was easily induced to imitate
their example, in assenting to all that the em-
peror requircd. The deputies of the cities re-
mained itill to be brought over. They were
more tenacious of their principles, and though
every thing that could operate either on their
hopes or fears was tried, the utmof that they
would promise was, to acknowledge the jurif-
diaion of the council, if effedual provision were
made for securing to the divines of all parties
free access to that assembly, with entire liberty
of debate; and if all points in controversy were
decided according to scripture and the usage of
the primitive church. But when the memorial
containing this declaration was prelented to the
emperor, he ventured to put in pradice a very

extraor-

extraordinary artifice. Without reading the
paper, or taking any notice of the conditions on
which they had indiied, he seemed to take it
for granted that they had complied with his
demand, and gave thanks to tihe deputies for
their full arid unreserved fubmilfion to the decrees
of the council [O8. 9]. The d&puties, though
astonished at what they had heard, did not at-
tempt to set him right, both parties being better
plcafed that the matter should remain under this
dlate of ambiguity, than to push for an explan-
ation, which mnit have occasioned a difoute, and
would have led, perhaps, to a rupture .

Having obtained this seeming fubmifflon from

the members of the diet to the authority of the
council, Charles employed that as an argrment
to enforce their petition for its return to Trent.
But the pope, from the fatisfafion which he
felt in mortifying the emperor, as well as from
his own aversion to what was demanded, refolv-
ed, without hesitation, that his petition f'nonld
not be granted; though, in ordur to avoid the
imputation of being in3uenced wholly by refant-
ment, he had the address to throw it upon the
fathers at Bologna, to put a direA negative upon
the request. With this view he referred to their
consideration the petition of the diet [Dec. 20],
and they, ready to confirm by their assent what-
ever the legates were pleased to diftate, declared
that the council could not, confitently with its
dignity, return to Trent, unless the prelates who,
by remaining there, had discovered a schismatic
spirit, would firit repair to Bologna, and join

' F. Paul, 259. Sleid. 440. Thuon. tom. i. 155.
YOL. ,II. M5 thei

their brethren; and that, even after their junc.
tion, the council could not renew its consultations
with any profpe& of benefit to the church, if
the Germans did not prove their intention of
obeying its future decrees to be sincere, by yield-
ing immediate obedience to those which it had
already passed t.

This answer was communicated to the empe-

ror by the pope, who at the fame time exhorted
him to comply with demands which appeared to
be so reasonable. But Charles was better ac-
quainted with the duplicity of the pope's charac-
ter than to be deceived by such a gross artifice;
he knew that the prelates of Bologna durit utter
no sentiment but what Paulinfpired; and, there-
fore, overlooking them as mere tools in the hand
of another, he considered their reply as a full
discovery of the pope's intentions. As he could
no longer hope to acquire filsch an ascendant in
the council as to render it fubtervient to his own
plan, he saw it to be necessary that Paul should
not have it in his power to turn againit him the
authority of so venerable an assembly. In order
to prevent this, he sent two Spanilh lawyers to
Bologna [Jan. 16, x54S], who, in the presence
of the legates, protefied, That the translation of
the council to that place had been unnecessary,
and founded on false or frivolous pretexts; that
while it continued to meet there, it ought to be
deemed an unlawful and schismatical conventicle;
that all its decisions ought of course to be held
as null and invalid; and that jince the pope,
together with the corrupt ecclefiaftics who de-

e F. Paul, 250. Pailav. ii. 49.

pended

pended on him, had abandoned the care of the
church, the emperor, as its proteAor, would
employ all the power which God had committed
to him, in order to preserve it from those cala-
mities with which it was threatened. A few
days after [Jan. 23], the Imperial ambassador at
Rome demanded an audience of the pope, and in
presence of all the cardinals, as well as foreign
ministers, protefited againfl the proceedings of the
prelates at Bologna, in terms equally harsh and
difrefpeaful U.

It was not long before Charles proceeded to

carry these threats, which greatly alarmed both
the pope and council at Bologna, into execution.
He let the diet know the ill success of his en-
deavours to procure a favourable answer to their
petition, and that the pope, equally regardless
of their entreaties, and of his services to the
church, had refuied to gratify them by allowing
the council to meet again at Trent ; that, though
all hope of holding this assembly in a place,
where they might look for freedom of debate
and judgment, was not to be given up, the pro.
fpea of it was, at present, diflant and uncertain;
that, in the mean time, Germany was torn in
pieces by religious dissensions, the purity of the
faith corrupted, and the minds of the people dif-
quieted with a multiplicity of new opinions and
controversies formerlyunknown amongChriftians;
that, moved by the duty which he owed to them
as their sovereign, and to the church as its pro-
teaor, he had employed some divines of known

u F. Paul, 264. Pallav. Sr. Sleid. 446. Goldafci

Conatit. Imperial. i. 562.

i M1 2 abilities

doarine, to which all should conform, until a
council, such as they wilhed for, could be con-
vocated. This system was compiled by Pflug,
Helding, and Agricola, of whom the two for-
mer were dignitaries in the Romish church, but
remaikable for their pacific and healing fpirkt;
the laRh was a protcrant divine, fufpccted, not
without reason, of having been gained by bribes
and pinmifes, to betray or mislead his party on
this occasion. The articles presented to thediet
of Ratitbon in the year one thousand five hun-
dr d and forty-one, in order to reconcile the con-
tending parties, served as a model for the pre-
feet work. But as the emperor's situation was
much changed fnce that time, and he found it
no luoger necelfary to manage the protestants
with the fame delicacy as at that junlure, the
concllions in their favour were not now lo nu-
merous, nor did they extend to points of so much
confquence. The treatise contained a complete
fytlem of theology, conformable in almost every
article to the tenets of the Romish church,
thou0h exprefed, for the mail part, in the
foftr&l words, or in fcriptiral phrases, or in terms
of frudied ambiguity. Every dodirine, however,
peculiar to popery, was retained, and the ob-
servation of all the rites, which the protefiants
condemned as inventions of men introduced into
the worship of God, was enjciued. With regard
to two points only, some relaxation in the rigour
of opinion as well as some latitude in pro!ice
were admitted. Such ecckliaftics as had mar-
ried, and would not put away their wives, were
allowed, neverthelels, to perform all the funotions

had been accuflomed to partake of the cup, as
well as of the bread in the sacrament of the
Lord's supper, were fitll indulgcd in the privilege
of receiving both. Even these were declared to
be concessions for the fake of peace, and granted
only for a season, in compliance with the weak-
ness or prejudices of their countrymen X.

This system of dofrine, known afterwards by

the name of the Interim, because it contained
temporary regulations, which were to continue
no longer in force than until a free general
council could be held, the emperor prefenred to
the diet [May 55], with a pompous declaration
of his sincere intention to re-establish tranquillity
and order in the church, as well as of his hopes
that their adopting these regulations would con-
tribute greatly to bring about that desirable
event. It was read in presence of the diet, ac-
cording to form. As soon as it was finifhxed,
the archbishop of Mentz, president of the elec.
toral college, rose up hastily, and, having thanked
the emperor for his unwearied and pious en-
deavours in order to restore peace to the church,
he, in name of the diet, signified their approba-
tion of the fyfitem of doarine which had been
read, together with their resolution of conform-
ing to it in every particular. The whole afiem-
bly was amazed at a declaration so unprecedented
and unconititutional, as well as at the eleaor's
presumption in pretending to deliver the sense of
the diet, upon a point which had not hitherto

x F.Pau', 270. Pallav. 11. 60. Sleld. 451* 457· StrUv.

Corp. 05). Goldaft. Conifit. Imper. i. 5IS.

?M M3 been

been the fubjea of consultation or debate. Pot
not one member had the courage to contrad:ct
what the eledor had fail ; some being overaw' 4
by fear, others remaining ilent through con-
plailance. The emperor held the archiifil op's
declaratdon to be a full coniitutional ratifcation
of the Interim, and prepnred to enforce the uUb
fereance of it, as a dec-ce of the empire Y.

Durino thi> diet, the wife and children of d.c

landgrave, warmtx seconded by Maurice of Sax.-
one, endeavourel to interest the mcmbers iin
behalf of that unhappy prince, who dill lanouibh.
ed in coefnement. But Charles, who did net
choose to he brought under the necessity of re-
jeding any request that came from fiuch a re-
fpeftable body, in order to preveut their repre-
fEnt.tions, laid before the dict an account of his
trahc-ihons with the landgiave, together with
the mrotives which had at firit induced him to
tdetain that prince in cuilocy, and which ren-
dered it prudent, as be alleged, to keep him dtill
ander r-2-aint. It was no ealf matter to give
any good reaon for an ation, incapable of being
jvtliOed. But be thought the most frivolous
pretexts might he produced in an afem'ly the
members of which were willing to be deceived,
and afraid of nothing so mnuch as of discovering
that they saw his conduiA in its true colours.
His account of his own conduat was accordingly
admitted to be fully fatisfhaory, and after fume
feeble entreaties that he would extend his cle-
mency to his unfortunate prisoner, the landgrave's
concerns were no rnore mentioned Z.

y Sieid. 460. F. Paul, z73. Pallav. 63. z SIcid. 441.

In

mpreffion which this infrleible rigour might
make, Charles, as a proof that his gratitude was
no less permanent and unchangeable than his
relentment, invested Maurice in the cleAoral
dignity, with all the legal formalities. The
ceremony was performed, with extraordinary
pomp, in an open court, so near the apartment
iii which the degraded eletor was kept a pri-
foner, that he could view it from his windows.
Even this insult did not ruffle his usual tranquil-
lity; and turning his eyes that way, he beheld
a profperons rival receiving those ensigns of dig-
nity of which he had been diripped, without
uttering one sentiment unbecoming the forti.
tude that he had preserved amidif all his cala-
mities a

Immediately after the diffolotion of the diet,

the emperor ordered the Interim to be published
in the German as well as Latin blngudge. It
met with the usual reception of conciliating
schemes, when proposed to men heated with
disputation; both parties declaimed aoainft it
with equal violence. The proteflants condemned
it as a faitem containing the groffd errors of
popery, disguised with so little art, that it could
impose only on the most ignorant, or on those
who, by wilfully flutting their eyes, favoured
the deception. The papifts inveighed againit it,
as a work in which some doArines of the church
were impiously given up, others meanly con-
cealed, and all of them delivered in terms calcu.

a Thuan. HiR. jb. v. 576. Strav. Corp. 0554* In-

veftitura Mauritii, a Mammerano Lutemburgo deifripta, ap.

Scardium, ii. lot.

lated

firuA the ignorant, or to reclaim such as were
enemies to the truth. While the Lutheran di-
vines fiercely attacked it on one hand, the gene-
ral of the Dominicans with no less vehemence
impugned it on the other. But at Rome, as
soon as the contents of the Interim came to be
known, the indignation of the courtiers and eccle-
fiaftics rose to the greatest height. They ex.
claimed against the emperor's profane encroach.
ment on the sacerdotal funAion, in presuming,
with the concurrence of an afiembly of laymen,
to define articles of faith, and to regulate modes
of worihip. They compared this rash deed to
that of Uzziah, who, with an unhallowed hand,
had touched the ark of God; or to the bold
attempts of those emperors, who had rendered
their memory detestable, by endeavouring to
model the Christian church according to their
plcafure. They even affeAed to find out a re-
semblance between the emperor's conduat and
that of Henry VIII. and expressed their fear
of his imitating the example of that apostate,
by ufurping the title as well as jurifdiation be-
longing to the head of the church. All, there.
fore, contended with one voice, that as the
foundations of ecclesiastical authority were now
{haken, and the whole fabric ready to be over-
turned by a new enemy, some powerful method
of defence must be provided, and a vigorous
resistance must be made, in the beginning, before
he grew too formidable to be opposed.

The pope, whole judgment was improved by

longer experience in great tranfaAions, as welL
as by a more exteniyve observation of human

affairs,

affairs, viewed the matter with more acute dif-
cernment, and derived comfort from the very
circumfiance which filled them with apprehen-
sion. He was astonished that a prince of such
superior sagacity as the emperor, should be so
intoaicated with a single viaory, as to imagine
that he might give law to mankind, and dccide
even in those matters, with regard to which
they are most impatient of dominion. He saw that
by joining any one of the contending parties in
Germany, Charles might have had it in his power
to have oppressed the other, but that the pre-
fumption of success had now inspired him with
the vain thought of his being able to domineer
over both. He foretold that a fyflem which all
attacked, and none defended, could not be of
long duration; and that, for this reason, there
was no need of his interpohiug in order to
hasten its fall; for as soon as the powerful
band which now upheld it was withdrawn, it
would fink of its own accord, and be forgotten
for ever b

The emperor, fond of his own plan, adhered

to his resolution of carrying it into full execu-
tion. But though the eleAor Palatine, the
ele~tor of Brandenburg, and Maurice, influenced
by the fame considerations as formerly, seemed
ready to yield implicit obedience to whatever he
should enjoin, he met not every where with a
like obsequious submission. John marquis of
Brandenburg Anfpach, although he had taken
part with great zeal in the war againit the con-
federates of Smalkalde, refused to renounce

b Seid. 463. F. Faul, 275. 277. Pallav. ii. 64.

dofrines

dolrines which he held to be sacred; and re-
minding the emperor of the repeated promiles
which he had given his protellant allies, of allow-
ing them the free exercise of their religion, he
claimed, in consequence of these, to be exempted
from receiving the Interim. Some other princes,
also, ventured to mention the fame scruples, and
to plead the fame indulgence. But on this, as
on other trying occasions, the firmness of the
eleaor of Saxony was most distinguished, and
merited the highest praise. Charles, well know-
ing the authority of his example with all the
protefiant party, laboured, with the utmost
earneftnels, to gain his approbation of the In-
terim, and by employing sometimes promises of
setting him at liberty, sometimes threats of
treating him with greater harlhnefs, attempted
alternately to work upon his hopes and his fears.
But he was alike regardless of both. After
having declared his fixed belief in the dodrines
of the reformation, " I cannot now," said he,
" in my old age, abandon the principles for which
I early contended ; nor, in order to procure
freedom during a few declining years, will I be-
tray that good cause, on account of which I have
fuffered so much, and am frill willing to fuffer.
Better for me to enjoy, in this solitude, the
esteem of virtuous men, together with the ap-
probation of my own conscience, than to return
into the world, with the imputation and guilt of
apoitacy, to disgrace and embitter the remainder
of my days." By this magnanimous resolution,
he set his countrymen a pattern of conduft, so
very different from that which the emperor
wished him to have exhibited to them, that it

drew

drew upon him fresh marks of his displeasure.
The rigour of his confinement was increased;
the number of his servants abridged; the Lu-
theran clergymen, who had hitherto been per-
mitted to attend him, were difiniffed; and even
the books of devotion, which had been his chief
consolation during a tedious imprisonment, were
taken from him C. The landgrave of Hesse, his
companion in misfortune, did not maintain the
fame conitancy. His patience and fortitude were
both so much exhausted by the length of his
confinement, that, willing to purchase freedom
at any price, he wrote to the emperor, offering
not only to approve of the Interim, but to yield
an unreserved submission to his will in every
other particular. But Charles, who knew that
whatever course the landgrave might hold, nei-
ther his example nor authority would prevail
on his children or fubjeAs to receive the Interim,
paid no regard to his offers. He was kept con-
fined as fitri67ly as lever; and while he fuffered
the cruel mortification of having his condu& set
in contrast to that of the eledor, he derived
not the smallest benefit from the mean itep which
exposed him to much deserved censure d*

But it was in the Imperial cities that Charles

met with the most violent opposition to the In-
terim. These small commonwealths, the citizens
of which were accustomed to liberty and inde-
pendence, had embraced the doArines of the
reformation when they were first published, with
remarkable eagerness; the bold spirit of innova-
tion being peculiarly suited to the genius of free

c Sleid. 462. d Ibid.

govern-

government. Among them, the proteflant
teachers had made the gieateft number of prose-
lytes. The most eminent divines of the party
were fettled in them as pastors. By having the
direaion of the schools and other seminaries of
learning, they had trained up disciples, who were
as well inllruted in the articles of their faith,
as they were zealous to defend them. Such
persons were not to be guided by example, or
swayed by authority; hut having been taught
to employ their own underifanding in examining
and deciding with refpe& to the points in con-
troverfy, they thought that they were both quaii-
fied and entitled to judge for themselves. As
soon as the contents of the Interim were known,
they, with one voice, joined in refusing to admit
it. Augiburg, Ulm, Strafburg, Conitance, Bre-
men, Magdeburg, together x ith many other
towns of less note, presented remonfirances to
the emperor, setting forth the irregular and un-
coniittutional manner in which the Interim had
been enaaed, and beseeching him not to offer
foch violence to their confcinces, as to require
their assent to a form of doarine and worship,
which appeared to them repugnant to the express
precepts of the divine law. But Charles having
prevailed on so many princes of the empire to ap.
prove of his new model, was not much moved
by the representations of those cities, which,
how formidable soever they might have proved,
if they could have been formed into one body,
lay so remote from each other, that it was easy
to oppress them separately, before it was possible
for them to unite.

In

it to be requisite that his meafiures Ihould be
vigorous, and executed with fucel rapidity as to
allow no time fur concertiug any common plan
of oppnfition. Havino laid down this maxim as
the rule of his proceedings, his fir1 attempt was
upon the city of Aujburg, which, though over-
awed by the pretlence of the Spanish troops, he
knew to be as much dilfaitisfird with the Interim
as any in the empire. He ordered one body
of these troops to £eize the gates ; he poikcd the
reil in different quarters of the city; and affem-
bhing all the bhurgefs in the town-hall [Aug. 31,
he, by Iis sole abtolute authority, phblilhed a
decree abolilhing their pretent form of govern-
ment, dissolving all their corporations and frater-
nitics, and nomninating a frnall number of per-
sons, in whom he veited for the future all she
powers of government. Each of the pe tfons,
thus chotln, took an oath to observe the In-
tel-nrf. An a&t of power so unprecedentvd as
well as arbitrary, wvlhich excludod the body of
the inhabitants from any ihlare in the government
of their own community, and fubjeted them to
men who had no other merit than their servile
devotion to the emperor's will, gave general dii-
gult; but as they durif not venture upon resist-
ance, they were obliged to submit in ihlence e.
From Augfhorg, in which he left a garrison, he
proceeded to Uho, rnd new-modelling its govern-
ment with the fane violent hand, he seized such
of their paflors as refuted to fubtcribe the Interim,
committed them to prison, and at his departure

* Skid. 469.

VOL. Ixl. N N carried

this severity he not only secured the reception of
the Intcrim in two of the most powerful cities,
but gave warning to the reft what such as con-
tinued refraatory had to expeA. The effed of
the example was as great as he could have wish-
ed ; and many towns, in order to save themselves
from the like treatment, found it necefliary to
comply with what he enjoined. This obedience,
extorted by the rigour of authority, produced
no change in the fentimnents of the Germans,
and extended no farther than to make them con-
form so far to what he required, as was barely
fufficient to screen them from punishment. The
proteflant preachers accompanied those religious
rites, thle oblfervation of which the Interim pre.
fcribed, with such an explication of their ten-
dencv, as served rather to confirm than to re-
move the scruples of their hearers with regard
to them. The people, many of whom had
grown up to mature years since the establishment
of the reformed religion, and had never known
any other form of public worship, beheld the
pompous pageantry of the popish service with
contempt or horror; and in most places the
Romith ecclefiaftics who returned to take pof.
fefion of their churches, could hardly be pro-
teated from insult, or their miniitrations from
interruption. Thus, notwithifanding the appa-
rent compliance of so many cities, the inhabit-
ants being accuitomed to freedom, submitted
with reluc'ance to the power which now op-
pressed them. Their underifanding as well as

I Sleid. 42.

inclination

inclination revolted againit the do~trines and
ceremonies imposed on them; and though, for
the present, they concealed their disgust and re-
fentment, it was evident that these paflions could
not always be kept under reifraint, but would
break out at last in effeds proportional to their
violence g.

Charles, however, highly pleased with having

bent the frubborn spirit of the Germans to such
general fubmiflion, departed for the Low-Coun-
tries, fully determined to compel the cities, which
still flood out, to receive the Interim. He car-
ried his two prisoners, the ele6or of Saxony and
landgrave of Hesse, along with him, either be-
cause he durit not leave them behind him in Ger-
many, or because he wished to give his country.
men the Flemings this illuirious proof of the
success of his arms, and the extent of his power.
Before Charles arrived at Brussels [Sept. 57],
he was informed that the pope's legates at
Bologna had dismissed the council by an indefi-
nite prorogation, and that the prelates assembled
there had returned to their refpeaive countries.
Necessity had driven the pope into this measure.
By the secession of those who had voted against
the translation, together with the departure of
others, who grew weary of continuing in a place
where they were not fuffered to proceed to bufd-
ness, so few and such inconsiderable members re-
mained, that the pompous appellation of a Gene-
ral Couiicil could not, with decency, be beflowed
any longer upon them. Paul had no choice but
to dissolve an alfembly which was become the ob-

£ Mem. de Ribier, ii. 2 IS. Sleid. 491.

NNz jea

jeci of contempt, and exhibited to all Chrilten-
dom a moit glaring proof of the impotence of
the Romiih sec. Lut unavoidable as the measure
was, it lay open to be unfavourably interpreted,
and had the appearance of withdrawing the re-
rmedy, at the very time when those for whole
recovery it was providid, were prcvailed on to
acknowledge its virtue, and to make trial of its
efficacy. Charles did not fail to put this con-
Itrudion on the condua of the pope; and by an
artful comparison of his own efforts to suppress
herely, with Paul's scandalous inattention to a
point so essential, he endeavored to render the
pontiff odious to all zealous catholics. At the
fame time he commanded the prelates of his sac-
tion to remain at Trent, that the council might
itill appear to have a being, and might be
ready, whenever it was thought expedient, to
resume its deliberations for the good of the
church h.

The motive of Charles's journey to the Low.

Countries, beside gratifying his favourite palfion
of travelling from one part of his dominions to
another, was to receive Philip his only son, who
was now in the twenty-firff year of his age, and
whom he had called thither, not only that he
might be recognized by the dtates of the Nether-
lands as heir-apparent, but in order to facilitate
the execution of a val2 scheme, the objed of
which, and the reception it met with, Ihall be
hereafter explained. Philip having left the go-
vernment of Spain to Maximilian, Ferdinand's
dldedt son, to whom the emperor had given the

b Pallasy. p. i. 72.

princess

princess Mary his daughter in marriage, em-
barked for Italy, attended by a numerous retinue
of Spanish noblesi. The squadron which es-
corted him, was commanded by Andrew Doria,
who, notwithitanding his advanced age, infilted
on the honour of performing, in person, the
fame duty to the son, which he had often dif-
charged towards the father. He landed safely
at Genoa [Nov. 25]; from thence he went to
Milan, and proceeding through Germany, arrived
at the Imperial court in Brussels [April I, 1549].
The states of Brabant, in the firlt place, and
those of the other provinces in their order, ac-
knowledged his right of succession in common
form, and he took the customary oath to preserve
all their privileges inviolate k. In all the towns
of the Low-Countries through which Philip
passed, he was received with extraordinary pomp.
Nothing that could either express the refpeft of
the people, or contribute to his amusement, was
negleAed; pageants, tournaments, and public
fpedacles of every kind, were exhibited with
that expensive magnificence which commercial
nations are fond of displaying, when, on any
occasion, they depart from their usual maxims of
frugality. But amidit these feenes of fcftivity
and pleasure, Philip's natural severity of temper
was discernible. Youth itself could not render
him agreeable, nor his being a candidate for
power form him to courtesy. He mainstained a
haughty reserve in his behaviour, and discovered
luch manifeit partiality towards his Spanish at-

I Ochoa, Carolea, 36a.
k -l-arai Annal. Brabant. 65h.

tendants,

ence to the manners of their country, as
highly difgunted the Flemings, and gave rife
to that antipathy, which afterwards occasioned
a revolution fatal to him in that part of his do-
minions1

Charles was long detained in the Netherlands

by a violent attack of the gout, which returned
upon him so frequently, and with such increasing
violence, that it had broken, to a great degree,
the vigour of his conititution. He neverthelkfs
did not slacken his endeavours to enforce the In-
terim. The inhabitants of Strafburg, after a
long ifruggle, found it necessary to yield obedi-
ence; those of Conifance, who had taken arms
in their own defence, were compelled not only
to conform to the Interim, but to renounce their
privileges as a free city, to do homage to Ferdi-
nand as archduke of Aufkria, and as his vassals,
to admit an Auffrian governor and garrison m.
Magdeburg, Bremen, Hamburg, and Lubeck,
were the only Imperial cities of note that itill
continued refradory.

' Mem. de Ribier, ii. 29. L'Evefque Mem. de Card.

Granvele, i. zx. m Sled. 474. 49'.

END OF THE THIRD VOLUME.
