Edinr Augt [?] 1764

[. . .] I have attempted 4 or 5 times to write to you, But this poor Church has for some time past been in such Danger, that I could never find time for it. She has imployed all my Thoughts & Care for these 12 months past. The Enemy had kindled such a flame that the old burning bush was like to have been consumed altogether. I know it will give you pleasure to hear, that my Endeavours to preserve her, have been crownd wt Successe. She begins to shine furth wt her antient Lustre, & will very soon be, not only fair as the Sun, but to all her Enemies, terrible as an Army wt Banners. Ever since you left us all your Brn in the Regency have been in a state of Persecution; but God be thanked, the Tables are changed. It is in our Power now to persecute, which like orthodox Churchmen we shall not fail to do wt the outmost Rigor.

I beg you will notify this Resolution of ours to the Archbishop of Paris & the other Leaders of the Gallican Church. This will tend much to remove their prejudices against an Union wt our Church which we suppose is already in great forwardness in consequence of your Labours among them; of which we hear every day most favourable accounts.

The Regency here are of opinion, that you ought not to be too rigorous in your Terms of Accomodation. Proceed on the plan of Compromise. E. G. Tell them, if they will give up the Worship of Images, they shall be left at full Liberty to persecute. If they will part wt four or five Sacraments we will give up as many Commands. And wt respect to the Sacrament of Matrimony particularly, if they will renounce that, the Clergy by way of Indemnification shall be allowed to commit Adultery as often as they see it for their Edification or Amusement. From these few hints, you will easily percieve, in what manner we wish this Treaty of Union between the two Churches may be carried on . . . .

If they insist on having a Long Creed or Confession of Faith, consisting of many articles, I have no objection to it, provided that each of those articles be expressed so as not to be understood, and will affoord sufficient Matter of altercation among the Learned.

You know that my admonitions heretofore have done you much good. You often stood in need of them, and I am sorry to observe from some Passages in your Letters to the Brethrn here, you stand very much in need of them at present. I clearly perceive, tho' you dont seem to have the least apprehension of it yourself, that you are in great danger of being seduced to the Commission of the Sin of Uncleannesse. An inordinate Love of the fair Sex, as I have often told you with Tears, is one of those Sins, that always, even from your earliest Years, did most easily beset you. This is your weak Side, Satan has at last discovered it, & on this unguarded Quarter, he is now making his assault. He makes love to you, by assuming the most ensnaring of all Forms, viz That of a fine Lady. Believe me, all those fine Ladys of Wit & Beauty, you speak of with so much Rapture, are all Devils. I dont say, that they have that antient visible Symbol of the demoniacal presence, by which Satan was discovered in former times, viz the Cloven foot; The Devil is grown a great deal more cunning than he was in the Days of our Forefathers, and therefore that this diabolical Mark, may be the better concealed, he has placed it more out of Sight; but tho' it is not now so easily seen as it was, yet it may be as easily felt, if you make diligent Search for it. I beseech you consider seriously, what Dishonour it will reflect on your Character as an apostle sent from the purest Church on Earth to convert the idolatrous Papists, if it shall hereafter appear that during the Course of your Mission, you have been carrying on a criminal Correspondence with French Succuba's. The great Reformer Luther has written very learnedly on this Subject in his Book called Table Talk. I desire you to peruse the Chapter on Incubus & Succuba [. . .] .
