A TRUE ACCOUNT OF THE Behaviour and Conduct OF ARCHIBALD STEWART, Esq; LATE Lord PROVOST of Edinburgh. In a LETTER to a FRIEND. Non potuit mea mens, quin esset grata, teneri. Sit, precor, off icio non gravis ira pio. OVID. 

PREFACE. THE following Letter being thought to contain several Circumstances very material to the Justification of an innocent Man, it was attempted to print it in Edinburgh; but that City is kept under such proper Discipline, and all the Printers so terrified with the Severity of a certain Magistrate (to whom that Innocence might give Offence) that no Printer durst venture to publish it. Poor City! once insulted by the Rebels, and now reduced to Subjection, even by those, who ought to protect her. This puts me in mind of  a  Fable  of  Æsop.  An  old  Lion,  when  sick  and  infirm,  lay  in  his  Den,  exposed to the Outrages of all the Beasts of the Forest. The Tiger tore him with his Fangs: The Boar gored him with his Tusks: The Bull pierced him with his Horns. Even the Ass kicked the generous and helpless Beast; who now, in his last Agonies, could not forbear lamenting his hard Fate, to be thus trampled upon by so ignoble and base a Foe. Fortes indigne tuli Mihi insultare : te, naturæ dedecus, Quod ferre certe cogor bis videor mori. A TRUE ACCOUNT OF THE BEHAVIOUR and CONDUCT OF ARCHIBALD STEWART, Esq; LATE Lord PROVOST of Edinburgh. 1 SIR, YOU inform me that you had great Curiosity to be acquainted with all Provo s t Ste wa r t’s  St o r y,   and  the  Circumstances  of  his  Conduct  in  Edinburgh, when that City was taken by the Rebels in 1745: And that hav­ing  got  Copies  of  the  Informations  for  and  against  him,  you  had  been  frightened from the Perusal of them by the Sight of two such long Law Papers, which, you imagined, must be full of Citations and technical Terms, and abstract Reasonings, of which you are wholly ignorant. But allow me to tell you, your Delicacy is very ill founded. I shall say nothing of the Information against him; and I doubt not, but, as it was drawn by a Lawyer of known Capacity, it is as good as the Subject would admit of. But the Information for him is really an extream good Paper, and worthy

of your Perusal. And could you doubt of it, when you know the Impor­tance of the Cause, the Expectations of the Publick, and above all, when you saw, at the Foot, the Gentleman’s Name who composed it?* 2 You desire me to give you an Abstract of the Stor y, in more familiar Terms, and in a Form, which would give you less Trouble to comprehend it. I must  own, I would not indulge your Laziness so far, at the Expence of my own, were it not that I had great Obligations to Mr. Stewart, as well as a  great personal Regard for him; and am desirous of putting his Cause in a just Light to you, who had once been so far seduced by Calumny and vulgar Reports, as to have entertained some Doubts of his Innocence. 3 Your former Prejudices are not at all surprizing. Whatever general Contempt we may entertain for popular Rumours, ’tis difficult, when they come full upon us, not to lend, at first, some Attention to them; and they fortify themselves with so many Stories, and such numerous Circumstances, that it becomes difficult, at last, not to give even some Credit to them. But here is Mr. Stewart’s Advantage, which he has now happily attained, after suf­fe  ring  the  greatest  Hardships,  and  after  the  most  tedious  Delays:  He  is  placed before a Court of Judicature. His Calumniators must cease their fu­rious Obloquy and loose Accusations, and hearken to the more sober Voice of his Prosecutors. These have reduced their Charge to Article and Propo­sition, which they are engaged to prove and defend. He has had an Oppor­tunity to answer; and his Answer is so good, so solid, so convincing, that the good-natured Mob begin to retract their Calumnies; and even the furi­ous Zealots confess with Regret, that he has been so cunning and saga­cious,  as  to  screen  himself  from  all  legal  Proof  and  Punishment:  The  ut­most Confession, surely, you will ever expect from them. 4 As often as I heard this Subject handled in Conversation (and nothing else  almost  was  talk’d  of  for  some  time)  I  desired  only  every  zealous  Declaimer  to  consider  the  Force  of  the  Garrison  which  the  Provost  com­manded, and the Strength of the Place he was to defend. These are surely very  obvious  Considerations,  and  yet  few  People  ever  entred  into  them,  otherwise it were impossible for such ridiculous Calumnies to have made such strong and durable Impressions. Let us run over them a little, in or­der to set the Matter in a just Light. This may lead us into some general, as well as particular Topics, that may not be uninstructive or unentertaining. 5 The great Difference betwixt the State of this Island at present, and what it was a few Centuries ago, is obvious to every one. At that time, the whole Defence  of  both  Kingdoms  was  trusted  to  the  People;  who,  tho’  they  re­ceived no Pay, yet never neglected the Use of Arms; tho’ disperst in their own Houses, yet lived under a regular military Subordination to their Supe­riors and Chieftains; and tho’ obliged to labour for their Subsistance, con­sidered, all of them, their civil Occupations as a Drudgery they submited to from mere Necessity, but regarded their military Atchievements as the only Source of Honour and Glory. What Actions of desperate Valour have been performed by such Troops, and what well-disputed Fields they have fought, is known to every one that has the least Acquaintance with the History of this or of any other Nation. And the Behaviour of the present Highlander, who preserves but a small Part of these antient Institutions, may set the Mat­ter still more strongly before us. 6 The Highlanders are altogether as ignorant of Discipline as the Low-Country  Ploughmen,  and  know  as  little  the  Nature  of  Encampments,  Marches,  Ranks,  Evolutions,  Firing,  and  all  the  other  Parts  of  military  Exercise, which preserve Order in an Army, and render it so formidable. They advance to Battle in a confused Heap, which some People have been pleased to call a Column: They can use no Weapon but the Broad-Sword,  which  gives  not  one  Wound  in  ten  that  is  mortal,  and  obliges  each Combatant to occupy double the Ground that would suffice, did he employ the Pushing-Sword or the Bayonet. And they become weaker by their Victories; while they disperse to their Homes, in order to secure the Plunder  they  have  acquired:  But  still,  as  long  as  they  retain  a  devoted  Obedience to t heir Chieftain, who is their Officer, and value themselves upon military Courage above all Endowments, they can never justly be regarded as a contemptible Enemy. 7  When  Men  have  fallen  into  a  more  civilized  Life,  and  have  been  al­lowed to addict themselves entirely to the Cultivation of Arts and Manu­factures, the Habit of their Mind, still more than that of their Body, soon renders them entirely unfit for the Use of Arms, and gives a different Di­rection  to  their  Ambition.  Every  Man  is  then  desirous  to  excel  his  Neighbour in Riches or Address, and laugh at the Imputation of Cow­ardice or Effeminacy. But the barbarous Highlander, living chiefly by Pas­turage, has Leisure to cultivate the Ideas of military Honour; and hear­ing of nought else but the noble Exploits of his Tribe or Clan, and the re­nowned Heroes of his Lineage, he soon fancies that he himself is born a Hero as well as a Gentleman. The Songs recited at their Festivals, the Fables transmitted from their Ancestors, the continual Strain of their Conversa­tion; all this nourishes their martial Spirit, and renders them, from their Cradle, compleat Soldiers in every thing but the Knowledge of Discipline. 8 In the antient Civil Wars of Scotland, we find that the Highland Fami­lies were always of little Weight on either Side, and that the Battles were decided entirely by the Douglasses, Carrs, Humes, and the other Low-Country  Borderers;  who,  preserving  the  same  Manners  and  Institutions  with  their Countrymen in the Mountains, had acquired a superior Address and Bravery, by their frequent Skirmishes and Battles with the English. 9  We  also  find,  that  when  all  the  Highlanders  joined  to  all  the  Lowlanders, much more numerous and brave than they, invaded England, under the legal Authority of their Prince or Sovereign, that Nation were so far from being alarmed at the Storm, that it scarce sufficed to rouse them from their Indolence and Repose. The Militia of the Northern Coun­ties was commonly strong enough to repel the Invaders; and the Inhab­itants  of  London,  when  Battles  were   fought  in  Northumberland,  or  the  Bishoprick of Durham (for our Ancestors seldom advanced farther) heard of  these  Combats  with  as  great  Security,  as  now  they  read  of  the  Wars  betwixt  the  Persians  and  the  Indians.  ’Twas  only  when  an  ambitious  Prince,  like  Edward the  First  or  Third,  undertook  the  Conquest  of  Scotland, that the whole Force of England was mustered up against us. 10 But now, (how can we think of it without Shame and Indignation?) when not above a fifth Part of these miserable Highlanders (who are no braver than their Ancestors) rose in Rebellion, they trampled down the whole  Low-Countries,  who  were  generally  averse  to   t heir  Cause,  and  whose  Ancestors  could  have  dissipated  twenty  times  the  Force  of  such  Barbarians: They advanced into the middle of England, without meeting any Resistance: They threw a prodigious Alarm into the Capital itself, the greatest City in the Universe; they shook and rent the whole Fabrick of the Government, and the whole System of Credit on which it was built. And tho’ there were three regular Armies in England, each of them much more numerous than they, they retreated back into their own Country; and still maintained their Ground. Nor can any reasonable Man doubt, that  if  these  Armies  had  been  removed,  eight  Millions  of  People  must  have been subdued and reduced to Slavery by five Thousand, the brav­est, but still the most wor thless amongst them. 11 I shall never forget the Conversation on these Events, I had at that time with a Swiss Gentleman, that could not sufficiently admire how so great a People, who really are Lords of the Ocean, and who boast of hold­ing in their Hand the Ballance of Power in Europe, could be so impotent and defenceless against so mean a Foe, Let those Highlanders, says he, have invaded  my  Country,  and  the  Militia  of  three  Swiss  Parishes  would  have  re­pelled, what the whole Force of your three Kingdoms is scarce able to master. And if we allow only a Battalion to a Parish (which seems reasonable in so populous a Country, and where every Man is disciplined) we shall find that this Boast contains no Exaggeration, but a serious, and, to us, a very melancholy Truth. 
Since then, the Disposition and Discipline of this Age and Nation is such;  what  reasonable  Man  could  be  surprized  to  hear,  that  the  Rebels  had become Masters of Edinburgh, while it was not defended, but deserted by its timid Inhabitants. Methinks, we should at first have expected that Event as firmly as that they would enter Kelso, Penrith, or any defenceless open Village that lay upon their Road, I might add London to the Num­ber, and suppose only, that the Rebels had advanced from Derby, and that Lord Stair, instead of encamping on Finchley Common, had led his Army down to Exeter or Plymouth. Would my Lord Mayor, who commands near a  Million*  of  People,  have  ventured  to  give  them  the  smallest  Opposi­tion; or, like a Drawcansir, have stood alone in their way, armed with his  Mace  and  great  Cap  of  Maintenance?  For  I  take  it  for  granted,  that  every Mortal, Citizen and Courtier, Laity and Clergy, Man and Woman, old and young, would have deserted him. 13 I wish his Majesty would be pleased to honour me with the Command of either of the Highland Battalions, and that I had some honest Jesuitical Clergyman to lay my Scruples; I should think it a very easy Exploit to march them from Dover to Inverness, rob the Bank of England in my way, and carry my  Spoils,  without  Interruption,  thro’  the  whole  Nation;  provided  the  Army were disposed to continue mere Spectators of my Prowess. 14 To tell the Truth, one of the Persons whom I should be the most sorry to meet with on my Road, would be Mr. Stewart. For by all that I can learn of his Conduct, he acted the Par t of so vigilant, active, and even brave a Magistrate (so far as he was tried) that he might create me some Trouble: But still, if his Force was no greater than what it was during the last Re­bellion, he would not be able to give me any great Interruption. 15 Let us enumerate that Force, in order to judge the better of it, and determine whether it was likely to resist the Rebels. We shall surely find a List of Heroes equal to those of which Homer has given us a Catalogue, if not in his Illiad, at least in his Batrachomyomachia, or Battle of the Frogs and Mice. 16 There were of the Town Guards ninety six Men, augmented at that time to  126.  These  are  rather  elderly  Men,  but  pretty  well  disciplined;  and  indeed, the only real Force the Provost was Master of. The rest were, in a Word, undisciplined Britons, which implies just as formidable an Idea as undisci­plined Romans, or undisciplined Indians. They were nominally divided into the  Trained-Bands,  the  Edinburgh Regiment,  and  the  Volunteers.  But  this  Division was really what the Schoolmen call a Distinction without a Differ­ence. For with regard to military Prowess they were much the same. 
As to the Trained-Bands,* in what Condition that formidable Body may be in at present, or might have been in, at the time of the Rebellion, I cannot tell; but I remember, when I was a Boy, I had a very con­temptible Idea of their Courage. For as they were usually drawn out on Bir th Days, and marched up through the main Street, it was ver y com­mon for any of them, that was bolder than usual, and would give himself Airs  before  his  Wife  or  Mistress,  to  fire  his  Piece,  in  the  Street,  without  any Authority or Command from his Officers. But I always observed, that they shut their Eyes, before they ventured on this military Exploit; and I, who had at that time been accustomed to fire at Rooks and Magpyes, was very much diverted with their Timorousness.† However,   I question not,  but  there  are  many   ver y  honest  substantial  Tradesmen  amongst  them, and as long as that is granted, I suppose they will allow any one to make as merry as he pleases with t heir military Character. 18 His Majesty’s Warrant to raise the Edinburgh Regiment was not deliv­ered to the Provost, till the 9th of September, seven Days before the Rebels entered the Town. The oldest enlisted, therefore, were now Veteran Troops of seven days standing: The youngest not less than a Quarter of an Hour. Their Number might amount to about 300. I am told, that their Appear­ance resembled very much that of Falstaff’s Tatterdemallion Company, which his Friend supposed he had levied by unloading the Gibbets and pressing the dead Bodies. But the merry Knight defended his Company, by saying, Tut, mortal Men, mortal Men, good enough to toss, Food for Pow­der.  Tho’  it  is  my  humble  Opinion,  that  had  the  Mortality  of  the  Regi­ment  abovementioned  depended  on  their  being  Food  for  Powder,  they  would  have  deserved  the  Epithet  of  the  immortal  Body,  as  much  as  the  King  of  Persia’s  Guards,  who,  as  Herodotus  tells  us,  were  dignified  with  that Appellation. But not to be too hard upon our Countrymen, I shall allow, that notwithstanding their Poverty, they would have behaved as well as the Million Regiment of London, so called from the Property of the Soldiers, which, it seems, amounted to that Sum. 19  The  Volunteers,  who  come  next,  to  the  Number  of  400,  and  close  the  Rear,  the  Post  of  Honour  in  all  Retreats,  will,  perhaps,  expect  to  be  treated with greater Gravity and Respect: And no doubt they deserve it, were  it  only  for  their  well  meant  Endeavours  in  Defence  of  their  King  and Country. As to their Discipline and Experience, it was much the same with that of the others. I need not add their Courage: For these are Points almost inseparable. Religious Zeal makes a mighty Addition to Discipline; but is of no Moment when alone. Cromwell’s Enthusiasts conquered all the Nobility and Gentry of England; and at the Battle of Dunkirk struck the French  and  Spaniards  with  Admiration,  even  under  a  Turenne  and  a  Condé. But their Brethren at Bothwell-Bridge fled before they came within Sight of the Enemy. Which of these Examples our Volunteers were most likely to imitate, I leave to their own Conscience to determine. A Friend of mine, who has a poetical Genius, has made a Description of their March from the Lawn-Market, to the West-Port, when they went out to meet the Rebels; and has invented a ver y magnificent Simile to illustrate it. He compares it to the Course of the Rhine, which rolling pompously its Waves through  fertile  Fields,  instead  of  augmenting  in  its  Course,  is  continu­ally drawn off by a thousand Canals, and, at last, becomes a small Rivu­let, which loses itself in the Sand before it reaches the Ocean. 20  Such  were  the  Forces  over  whom  the  Provost  had  some  Authority.  His Auxiliaries were two Regiments of Dragoons, under Mr. Fowke, then a Brigadier General, now happily a Major General, in his Majesty’s Ser­vice. Of what Importance these were to the Defence of the Town, shall be considered afterwards. 21 I remember Cardinal de Retz says, that a great Prince made very merry with the new levied Troops of Paris, during the Civil Wars; and when he mentioned the Defence that might be expected from the City against the King’s Troops, usually called it, La guerre des pots de chambre, The War of the Chamberpots. As it is well known, that a Chamberpot is a very formidable  Machine  in  Edinburgh,  I  wonder  it  has  not  been  comprized  amongst  Provost  Stewart’s  Forces;  at  least,  amongst  his  Auxiliaries,  in  Conjunction with the rest above mentioned. 22 Having thus given a faithful Account of the Garrison, let us now bestow  some  Considerations  on  the  Place,  the  Defence  of  which  was  ex­pected from Mr. Stewart, and which he is supposed to have lost by Negli­gence or bad Intentions. A weak or no Garrison, in a Place weakly for ti­fied, or not for tified at all, must be the Consummation of all Weakness. We are forbid by Philosophy to seek for more Causes than are requisite to explain  any  Phænomenon.  And  I  think  it  will  fairly  be  allowed,  that  if  these two Circumstances are admitted, ’twill be quite superfluous to have recourse  to  a  third,  viz.  a  weak  or  a  treacherous  Governor,  in  order  to  account for the Surrender of the Place. 23 You know,  that the City of Edinburgh is surrounded for the greatest part, by a plain Wall about twenty Foot high, where highest, and about 
two and a half or three Foot  thick, where thickest. It is not, in many Places, flanked by any Bastions: It has not Strength or Thickness enough to  bear  Cannon.  The  Besieged  would  not  even  have  room  to  handle  or  charge their Pieces; but must be set up aloft as Marks to the Enemy, who can annoy them infinitely more, and receive less Harm from them, than if both stood in an open Field. 24 You know, t hat this Wall, tho’ near two Miles in Length, surrounds not   the  whole  Town,  but  is  supplied  on  the  North  by  a  Lake,  which  is  fordable in many Places. 25 You know, that this Wall, for a very considerable Space, is overlooked by Houses, which stand within five or six Paces of it, and which it was impossible to destroy because of their Number and Value. 26 The Town is supplied with Water entirely by Pipes. Its Bread is even, strictly speaking, its daily Bread. For the Bakers never have by them more Flower than serves them a Day, but bring it continually from their Milns on the Water of Leith, as Occasion requires. 27 Besides, as happens in all Civil Wars, there were so many disaffected Persons  in  Town,  that  had  it  been  held  out  but  for  three  Hours  (which  indeed was impossible) it was justly feared, that it would have been set on fire from within, in order to facilitate the Entry of the Rebels; nay, it was easily possible for the Rebels themselves to set fire to it from without, and force it, by that means, to a speedy Surrender. 28 It is obvious to every one, however ignorant of military Affairs, that any  Governor  who  incloses  himself  in  such  a  Place,  fights  with  Disad­vantage, and has infinitely better Chance for Success, if he fairly opens his Gates, and marches for th to combat his Enemy in an equal Battle. For not to insist on the other Disadvantages above mentioned, the Circuit of these Walls is too large to be guarded by any moderate Garrison; the En­emy  can  draw  them  together  to  any  one  Place  by  a  false  Alarm,  in  the  Night,  or  even  in  the  Day;  while  he  breaks  in  at  a  distant  Place,  that  is  weakly  defended,  and  the  Garrison,  entangled  among  the  Houses  and  Garden-Walls, must be cut in Pieces, almost without Resistance. 29  This  Measure  therefore,  of  meeting  the  Rebels  before  they  reached  Edinburgh, was ver y prudently resolved on by General Guest, on the 16th of September, when Intelligence was brought, that the Highlanders were approaching;  and  he  ordered  Brigadier  Fowke to  advance  with  his  Dra­goons to the Colt-Bridge for that Purpose; he also desired Mr. Stewart to join what Infantry he could to sustain the Dragoons. The Provost ordered upon this Duty all the Town Guard, and all the Edinburgh Regiment that were fit for Service. He had no Power to order the Volunteers out of Town:
He only consented, that, as many as pleased, should be allowed to march out. But, it seems, they had as little Inclination to go, as he had Power to order  them;  a  few  of  them  made  a  faint  Effort;  but,  ’tis  said,  met  with  Opposition from some of the zealously affected, who represented to them the  infinite  Value  of  their  Lives,  in  comparison  of  those  Ruffians,  the  Highlanders. This Opposition they were never able to overcome. 30 Brigadier Fowke (whose Conduct in this whole Affair is too remarkable to be forgot*) tho’ he had only two Regiments of Dragoons, and a very few Infantry, was still a formidable Enemy to the Rebels. For, as much as regu­lar  veteran  Infantry  are  superior  to  Cavalry,  as  much  are  Cavalry,  espe­cially in an open Field, superior to an irregular Infantry, such as the Highlanders;  who  cannot  keep  their  Ranks,  wherein  consists  all  the  Force  of  Foot; who cannot fire regularly in Platoons; who know not the Use of the Bayonet, and whose sole Weapon is their Broad-Sword, in which a Horseman, by his ver y Situation, has an infinite Advantage above them. Or if it were too sanguine to hope for a Victory from such a Force as the Brigadier commanded, a leisurely and a regular Retreat might a  least have been made, tho’ he had advanced within a Musket Shot of the Enemy. 31 But before the Rebels came within Sight of the King’s Forces, before they  came  within  three  Miles  distance  of  them,  Orders  were  issued  to  the Dragoons to wheel; which they immediately did, with the greatest Order and Regularity imaginable. As ’tis known, nothing is more beauti­ful than the Evolutions and Motions of Cavalry, the Spectators stood in Expectation what fine warlike Manœuvre this might terminate in; when new  Orders  were  immediately  issued  to   retreat.  They  immediately  retreated,  and  began  to  march  in  the  usual  Pace  of  Cavalry.  Orders  were  repeated, every Furlong, to quicken their Pace; and both Precept and Example  concurring,  they  quickened  it  so  well,  that  before  they  reached  Edinburgh,  they  had  come  to  a  pretty  smart  Gallop.  They  passed,  in  an  inexpressible  Hurry   and  Confusion,  through  the  narrow  Lanes  at  Barefoot’s  Parks,  in  the  Sight  of  all  the  North  Par t  of  the  Town,  to  the  infinite Joy of the Disaffected, and equal Grief and Consternation of all the other Inhabitants. They r ushed like a Torrent down to Leith; where they  endeavoured  to  draw  Breath:  But  some  unlucky  Boy  (I  suppose  a  
Jacobite  in  his  Heart)  calling  to  them  that  the  Highlanders  were  ap­proaching, they immediately took to their Heels again, and galloped to Prestonpans about six Miles further. Here in a literal Sense, Timor addidit alas, their Fear added Wings; I mean to the Rebels. For otherwise, they could  not  possibly  imagine,  that  these  for midable  Enemies  could  be  within several Miles of them. But at Prestonpans the same Alarm was re­n e wed, T he  Philistines  be  upon  thee,  Sa mpson  ,   th e y   ga lloped  t o  Northberwick;  and  being  now  about  twenty  Miles  on  the  other  Side  of  Edinburgh, they thought they might safely dismount from their Horses, and look out for Victuals. Accordingly, like the ancient Grecian Heroes, each of them began to kill and dress his Provisions. Egit amor dapis atque pugnæ, they were actuated by the Desire of Supper and a  Battle. The Sheep and Turkies of Northberwick paid for this warlike Disposition. But behold ! the Uncertainty of human Happiness; when the Mutton was just ready to be put upon Table, they heard, or thought they heard, the same Cr y  of  the  Highlanders.  Their  Fear  proved  stronger  than  their  Hunger;  they again got on Horseback, but were informed time enough of the Falseness of the Alarm, to prevent the spoiling of their Meal. 32  By  such  Rudiments  as  these  the  Dragoons  were  trained;  till  at  last  they became so perfect in their Lesson, that at the Battle of Preston, they could practise it of themselves; tho’ even there the same good Example was not wanting. 33 I have seen an Italian Opera called Cæsare in Egitto, or Cæsar in Egypt; where in the first Scene Cæsar is introduced in a great Hurry, giving Orders to his Soldiers, Fugge, fugge: a’llo scampo. Fly, fly: to your Heels. This is a Proof, that the Commander at the Colt-Bridge is not the first Heroe that gave such Orders to his Troops. 34 ’Twas in Consideration of such  great Example, I suppose, that he  has  been  so  honourably  acquitted*,  and  since  promoted;  while  Mr.  Stewart has been imprisoned for fourteen Months, forced to give a Recog­nizance of 15000 l. for his Appearance, and three times, in a manner, brought upon his Trial. So true  the old Proverb, That it is safer for one Man to steal a Horse, than for another to look over a Hedge. 35 But Mr.  Stewart asserts, ver y justly, that he neither stole the Horse, nor look’d over the Hedge. He neither incurred any real Guilt, nor gave the smallest  Foundation for any such Suspicion; the only adviseable Ex­pedient for saving the Town was tried; and failing, with such multiplied Circumstances of Terror and Consternation, it left him, if possible, in a worse  Situation  than  before,  by   t hat  Discouragement,  with  which  it  
imprest every one. The Volunteers, before that time, had thought fit of themselves to give up their Arms to the Castle; the Edinburgh Regiment had also given up their Arms: The Burghers or Trained-Bands, deserted by  t he  regular  Forces,  refused  to  expose  their  Lives,  when  they  understood,  by  repeated  Threatnings  from  the  Rebels,  that  every  Man,  who  made any Resistance, should be put to Death. In short an universal Panic, and that not  groundless, had seized the People. ’Tis what the bravest and best disciplined Forces have been subject to, and what is, with great Difficulty, cured, by the most expert Commanders. But ’tis unavoidable in every undisciplined Multitude, and is there perfectly incurable. 36 What tho’ some faint Glimpse of Hope was afforded, by  t he Intel­ligence received, towards the Evening of this fatal Day,  t hat Sir John Cope  with  his  Army  had  been  seen  at  Sea,  off  Dunbar.  This  Succour  was too distant to relieve  t hem from an Enemy, who was at their Gates. And the Minds of Men were now unbent, and had, with great Reason, abandoned  all  Thoughts  of  Defence,  which  they  could  not  resume  again, in such immediate Danger, and without any probable or pos­sible View of Success. 37  In  this  Confusion,  when  nobody  did  his  Duty,  when  nobody  but  Mr. Stewart seemed to  t hink he had now any Duty to do, the Town, al­ways ungarrisoned, always unfortified, now in an universal Consterna­tion, perhaps divided within itself, was entered without Resistance by t he Rebels. 38 I should think it an Affront on your Understanding to shew you more particularly how unavoidable this Event is to be esteemed; and therefore having put this main Point in a just Light, I shall touch, tho’ briefly, on the other Articles of Accusation. They are, I own, like the Provost’s Forces, pretty  numerous;  but  surely  the  most  disorderly,  undisciplined  Rabble  that ever were led into the Field. They are rather the Subject of Ridicule than of any serious Opposition. For Instance, 39 The Lord Justice Clerk, several of the Judges, along with the King’s Council,  gave  it  unanimously  as  their  Opinion,  that  the  levying  of  a  Regiment, without his Majesty’s Warrant, was illegal: His Majesty, when applied  to,  confirmed  that  Doubt  by   granting  that  Warrant:  And  the  plain Words of the Statute requires  such an Authority; yet  the rais­ing a Doubt upon this Head is deemed a Crime; tho’ that Doubt, or any ot her  Doubt,  were  it  ever  so  ill  grounded,  must  be  allowed  intirely  innocent*. 
The Provost also is said to have raised a Doubt about the Legality of inlisting  the  Volunteers.  And  indeed,  this  Case  is  so  much  alike,  or  so  much  the  same  with  the  other,  of  raising  a  Regiment,  that  no  wonder  such a Scruple did arise. But he took Care, immediately, to consult the Lord Advocate; and he also took Care, immediately,  to acquiesce in his Lordship’s Judgment. Yet this is one Article of Charge against him*. 41 The Town-Council intrusted the Inspection and Care of the Work to a  Committee  under  another  Person:  The  Works  projected  were  all  fin­ished before the Arrival of the Rebels. Are you not surprized he must an­swer for them, as if they were unfinished; or, as if they had chiefly been put under his Direction†? 42 Some Zealots had proposed to set up Marks of Distinction, from mere Suspicion  on  several  Citizens,  who  behaved  themselves  peaceably.  The  Provost rejected so impr udent, so pernicious a Measure. Is he therefore criminal‡? 43 He offered Pay and Victuals to some Volunteers, that came from the Country; need I repeat the Question, if this Proposal renders him criminal§? 44  A  Gentleman,  Mr.  Alves,  travelling  on  the  Road  towards  Edinburgh, passes the Rebels; and the Duke of Perth gives him a threatning Message to deliver to  the Provost: The Provost does not immediately commit him; both because it did not appear, that he was any way guilty, in relating to the Chief Magistrate, a Story in which he had been involuntarily engaged; and because there was Danger of spreading the Stor y the faster, and in­timidating the Inhabitants, by such a Commitment. Hearing a few Hours afterwards,  that  the  Gentleman  had  been  so  imprudent  as  to  tell  his  Message to others, he immediately committed him. You are not surprized, I suppose, after what you have read above, to find, that this is an Article of Accusation**. 45  He  is  also  charged  with  receiving  a  Petition  from  the  Inhabitants,  keeping  a  Meeting  with t hem,  and  hearing  a  Letter  read  from  the  Pretender’s  Son.  The  receiving  the  Petition  was  innocent,  and  also  un­avoidable, unless he had shut himself up in his Closet. The calling a Meet­ing  of  the  Inhabitants  at  such  a  Juncture,  would  also  have  been  inno­cent.  But  he  called  no  such  Meeting.  The  Inhabitants,  under  Terror  of  the  approaching  Danger,  pressed  in  upon  him  wherever  he  went,  and  
would have their Complaints and Remonstrances heard; and the Provost, so far from consenting to read the Letter, openly and strongly opposed it, and left  the Company to avoid hearing it*. All these Facts are public and notorious. 46  On  the  15th  of  September,  the  Provost  was  called  in  the  Evening  to  Lord Justice Clerk’s, where Lord Advocate, General Guest, Brigadier Fowke, and several other Officers, were present. A Proposal was there made, that the  Dragoons  should  be  brought  into  Town,  with  a  View  to  give  them  some Rest and Refreshment, and have their Horses fed in the Streets. But upon Reflection it appeared, that the Avenues of the Town might be taken possession of by the Rebels, and the Streets barricadoed, the Houses lined, and the Dragoons by that means fall into the Hands of the Enemy. This Proposal, therefore, was most justly rejected. Next Day, after the near Approach of the Rebels, after the Flight of the Dragoons, after the uni­versal Consternation of all Ranks, Mr. Stewart refused to sign any Order to these Dragoons, over whom he had no Authority, to return and enter into  the  Town;  tho’  he  promised  them  all  Kind  of  good  Reception  and  Entertainment, if they thought proper to come. When I find the Refusal to sign such an Order, stated as an Article of Accusation against the Pro­vost,  I  cannot  think  but  the  Accuser,  foreseeing  the  Circumstances  of  Merit, which the Accused would plead, laid immediate Claim to them as his  own  Right;  like  a  prudent  General,  who  takes  Possession  of  those  Eminences or strong Grounds, that may be of Service to the Enemy. This Observation is, indeed, applicable to almost all the Articles; there is scarce any of them but might be cited as a Proof of Mr. Stewart’s Vigilance, Pru­dence, Activity, or Moderation. 47 If the Volunteers, in the Hurr y of so active a Day, as the 16th of Sep­tember, waited some time for Orders, without receiving any; this is also made an Article of Charge†. 48 The 10th Article is of the same Force with all the rest; tho’ I shall not tire either you or myself, by narrating or refuting it. I shall only add a few Words,  with  regard  to  the  Eleventh  Article,  which  charges  him  with  al­lowing the City Arms to fall into the Hands of the Rebels; because some People think there is a Foundation for this Charge, tho’ they frankly al­low all the rest to be frivolous, and even ridiculous. 49 First,  Without  mentioning  the  Insignificancy  of  these  Arms,  Mr.  Stewart pleads, with regard to  this Article, and with regard to all Articles, t hat  have  been,  or  may  ever  be  charged  against  him,  that,  tho’  Chief  
Magistrate, and President of the Town-Council, he was really but one Member, and had but one Vote. The supreme Command was in the Council. They were criminal, if there be any Crime. It is not, nor can it be pretended, that he, in this or any other Instance, opposed, or over-ruled, or contradicted their Determination. 50 Secondly, There had several Messages come from the Rebels, threatning Destruction, if the City either resisted or secreted their Arms. It is a Question whether the Magistrates, for the saving of a few rusty Arms, ought in Prudence  to  have  r un  the  Risque  of  having  these  Threats  executed,  con­sidering the known Barbarity of the Clans, and the then unknown Mod­eration of their Chieftains. But it is no Question, however the Magistrates had  determined,  that  the  People  would  not  have  consented;  and  conse­quently, that the secreting these Arms was absolutely impracticable. 51 Thirdly, Mr. Stewart showed all along a particular Attention to keep Arms  out  of  the  Hands  of  the  Rebels.  When  it  was  proposed,  after  the  News arrived of Sir John Cope’s being seen off Dunbar, to desire back again from  the  Castle,  the  Arms  which  the  Volunteers  and  the  Edinburgh Regiment  had  carried  thither;  the  Provost,  apprehensive  of  the  Conse­quences, rejected the Proposal; till he should see, as he said, a better Dis­position  in  the  Inhabitants,  to  make  use  of  Arms.  And  he  even  sent  a  Message to General Guest in the Castle, informing him of the Consterna­tion of the Town, and the little Authority which t he Magistrates had, to force the Trained-Bands to deliver up their Arms; and desiring, at the same time, the General to send down a Par ty to carr y up the Arms, or use some other Expedient to that Purpose. 52 Fourthly, It is proper to consider, in this Case, the Uncertainty of the Situation to which the Magistrates and Council were reduced, during the last and most distressing Scene of this unlucky Affair: Sometimes terrified with  the  immediate  Approach  of  the  Rebels;  at  at    ot her  times,  incouraged with some Prospect of Relief; even towards the End of this Pe­riod there were some Hopes of the Return of the Dragoons. Nor was that Expectation quite over in the Meeting of the Council; until they heard the Rebels had entered the Town. Had the Dragoons returned to the City, and  animated  the  People  in  its  Defence,  the  Charge  against  the  Provost  then,  would  have  been  inverted,  Why  did  he  send  up  the  Arms  to  the  Castle?  Why  did  he  carry  them  out  of  the  way,  when  they  might  be  in­stantly wanted for the Defence of the Town, and the near Approach of the Rebels made a Moment’s Delay of great Consequence? And the Citation might have been adduced, which has been misapplied in the present Case, Quod  puncto  sæpe  temporis  maximarum  rerum  occasiones  amittuntur,  That  Success in the greatest Affairs, frequently depends on a Moment. 
But, Fifthly, what if Mr. Stewart should say (which indeed he has here no  manner  of  Occasion  for)  that  he  was  in  the  wrong,  and  that  in  the  general Hurry and Consternation, it was difficult not to forget something. Would any Man lay this as a criminal Accusation against him. I grant, in War, it is never allowed a General to say, Non cogitavi, I did not think of it. Marlborough  or  Eugene might be ashamed of such an Excuse: But the Provost was bred to a different Profession. And I dare affirm, that even these great Generals, had they been ingenuous, might, twenty times in their Lives, have made use of this Apology. 54 The Twelf th, and last Article is, if possible, still more extraordinary than all the rest. It makes the Provost the Scape Goat, and charges him with the Sins of the whole People; because the People want Charity, and judge  him  criminal,  therefore  he  must  really  be  so.  You  may  read,  indeed, in your Machiavel, that, by a ver y peculiar and very absurd Law in the Republick of Florence, wherever the popular Opinion condemned a Man, it was lawful for a certain Magistrate, called the Gonfalioneré,  im­mediately  to  put  him  to  death,  without  any  Trial  or  Form  of  Process.  I  have  no  Intention  to  deny,  that  Mr.  Stewart  would  have  fared  ver y  ill,  had he been in Florence two Years ago; and had the present Provost been Gonfalionere  .  Tho’  now  I  believe  he  would  have  no  Reluctance  to  submit himself to a popular Tribunal. The People’s Voice is odd, It is, and it is not the Voice of God. 55 But tho’ popular Clamours are not here, as in Florence, authorized by Law, it is plain, that, in Practice, at least in Mr. Stewart’s Case, they draw very terrible Consequences after them. He was sensible of the Disadvan­tage he lay under; yet this would not discourage him from attending his Duty in Parliament. He put himself into the Hands of his Enemies; for such the Ministry had become; nor need we be in the least surprized at it. He suffered a severe Confinement for some time; and tho’ this was by Degrees remitted, yet still it continued a Confinement for fourteen Months, very grievous to any Man, and very prejudicial to a Man of Business. 56 I have been certainly informed, that, ver y often when the Ministry, in prosecution of their usual Lenity, was  resolved to give Mr. Stewart his Liberty, their Hands were continually stopped by a fresh Cargo of Lies and Calumnies imported to them from Scotland; and which it required some time to examine and discuss. 57 Bu when, at last, he got his Liberty, and had the Prospect of a fair Trial, this happy Time, which should put a Period to all his Sufferings, was  continually  protracted,  in  the  most  unaccountable  Manner  in  the  
World. At the first Diet in March, he was put off till June, and afterwards till August. When every Thing was then ready for a Trial, the Prosecutor deserted the Diet, and Mr. Stewart, as well as the Public, imagined, that all was over, and that his Enemies, conscious of his Innocence, were to free  him  from  all  farther  Prosecution.  But  he  is  again,  it  seems,  to  be  brought on his Trial, with additional Expence, and Vexation and Trouble. How long this may yet last is uncertain; and ’tis evident any Man might be  ruined  by  t he  Continuation  and  Repetition  of  such  a  Practice:  For  which, it seems, our Law provides no Remedy. 58  All  these  vexatious  Measures  gave  the  more  Indignation,  when  we  consider  against  whom,  and  by  whom,  they  are  exercised.  You  are  per­fectly well acquainted with Mr. Stewart, and know him to be a good Mag­istrate, a good Friend, a good Companion, a fair Dealer: A Man in every Action of his Life, full of Humanity, Justice and Moderation. 59  The  Government  too,  is  surely  the  fullest  of  Mildness,  Equity  and  Justice in the World. The present Instance is, I believe, the only one, in near sixty Years, of an innocent Man, that has ever lain under the least Oppression. If our Government is faulty in any thing, ’tis rather in the opposite Extreme; and the present Times show sufficient Examples of it. 60 The Town of Edinburgh was lost; a most unexpected, and most unac­countable  Event  surely!  But  what  was  it  when  the  Battle  of  Falkirk  was  lost; when a numerous, a veteran and a brave Army fled before a Handful of Highlanders whom they had scarce seen? I never heard that the Au­thor of that Calamity has been punished, or even questioned, or has met with the smallest Discouragement; I mean, from the higher Powers. For I was ver y well diverted, t’other Day,  by the Account of a Sarcasm, he met with from a private Hand, which was the severest in the World. 61 When the Army fled to Linlithgow, they immediately quartered themselves about in all the Houses, and even in the Palace, where there dwelt, at that time, a Lady noted for Wit and Beauty; who observing their disorderly Proceedings, was apprehensive they would fire the Palace. She immediately went to remonstrate to a certain great General, and was received pro solitâ suâ humanitate, with his usual Humanity. Finding her Remonstrances vain, she took her Leave in these Words, To take care, says she, of the King’s House, is your Concern: For my Part, I can run from Fire   as fast   as any of you. So spoke the Cherub, and her grave Rebuke, Severe in youthful Beauty, added Grace Invincible. Abash’d the Devil stood, &c.&c. 62  It  would  be  cruel  to  mention  the  unfortunate  Knight;  and,  I  believe,  since  we  live  in  an  acquitting  Age,  every  Body  is  glad  he  was  acquitted.  I  
have  heard,  that  all  the  Winter  after  the  Battle  of  Preston,  he  was  carried  about London in his Chair, with the Curtains drawn, to escape the Derision of the Mob; till the News of the Battle of Falkirk arriv ed, and then he pulled back the Curtains, and showed his Face and his red Ribbon to all the World. Thus the Reputation which the Hero of the Colt-Bridge was the chief Cause of depriving him of, the Hero of Falkirk, in a great Measure, rest  ored to him. Sæpe, premente Deo, fert Deus alter opem. 63 I need not insist on the Mayor of Carlisle, Mr. Pattison (not Paterson) who defended so gloriously a fortified Town against the Rebels. 64  I  shall  only  say,  If  all  these  Enormities  pass  unpunished,  and  Mr.  Stewart alone  the Victim, there are some People, to make Use of the Allusion of a witty Author, that resemble ver y much the Monster in Rabelais, that could swallow a Windmill ever y Morning to Breakfast, and was at last choaked with a Pound of Fresh-Butter hot from an Oven. I am, &c. October 20, 1747. POSTSCRIPT. 1 I INTENDED to have sent this by . . . . . . . . . but not being able to meet him  before  he  left  this  Country,  I  was  obliged  to  keep  it  by  me  till  this  time, when I hear, to my great Satisfaction, that Mr. Stewart has been ac­quitted by the Jury Nemine contradicente, and that all the Facts contained in his Information, and in the foregoing Letter, were proved with an Evi­dence and Conviction, even beyond what he himself imagined. The Trial was the longest and most solemn that ever was known in this Country; and the Judges were even obliged, by Necessity, to break through an es­tablished Custom and Law, and adjourned the Court, on Account of the absolute  Impossibility  of  supporting,  without  Interr uption,  the  Fa­tigues  of  so  long  a  Trial.  Mr.  Ste wart  intended  to  have  abridged  their  Trouble, by resting his Defence intirely on the Pursuer’s Evidence, without adducing a single Witness of his own: But he was overruled in this by his  Council,  who  approved  of  the  Confidence  arising  from  Innocence,  but  still  insisted  upon  having  two  Witnesses  adduced,  for  all  the  prin­ciple Facts, upon which he grounded his Defence. 2 Several of the Jury had been Volunteers during the Rebellion, and all of them were particularly distinguished by their warm Zeal for the Gov­ernment. As some People had been foolish enough to make  this Trial a Party Business, all Mr. Stewart’s Friends were alarmed, when they saw the
Names  of  the  Jury.  For  tho’  they  were  sensible  of  the  Probity  of  these  Gentlemen, yet they dreaded their Prejudices, and were afraid, that Truth and Innocence would not obtain so full a Triumph (as they did afterwards) over Passion and Party-Zeal. 3 I can assure you the King’s Advocate did not want Keenness in this Affair, to give the mildest Appellation to his Conduct. And here I must inform you, that what I heard of his Speech suggested to me a Remark, which  I  had  often  made,  to  the  Honour  of  our  Age  and  Nation,  in  one  Particular,  above  the  antient  Times  of  Greece  and  Rome.  Mr.  Grant  was  very copious in insisting on the Suspicions this Country lay under with Regard to Jacobitism, the apparent Diffidence the Ministry had shewn to trust us with the Trials of the Rebels, the strong Conviction every one in England  had  of  Mr.  Stewart’s  Guilt,  and  the  great  Scandal  his  Acquital  would bring on the Country; to which he added, that a very slight Pun­ishment was intended, a few Days Imprisonment, and a small Fine, which one so rich as Mr. Stewart could easily bear. But though you know that such extraneous and popular Topicks as these, are ver y usual in all the Poems and Epilogues of Cicero, and even of Demosthenes; yet I can assure you this Imitation of the antient Orators was not at all approv’d of, either by the Jury or the Bystanders. 4  You  will  be  ver y  much  surprized,  I  suppose,  to  hear,  that  many  of  the Whigs have betrayed such a furious Zeal on this Occasion, that they are mortified, or rather indeed inraged to the last Degree, that an inno­cent Man has been found innocent: And this has given Occasion to t he opposite  Par ty,   to  make  his  Acquital  a  Matter  of  infinite  Triumph  and  Rejoicing; as much almost as the Defeat of Val, or the Surprizal of Bergen­op-zoom, or any other publick Calamity, that has ever befallen us. Whatever opposes or disappoints the Government will always be, without Dis­tinction, a great Satisfaction to them. 5 But I shall further explain to you the great Difference betwixt a po­litical  and  a  religious  Whig,  in  order  to  account  for  these  odd  Transac­tions. The Idea I form of a political Whig is, that of a Man of Sense and Moderation, a Lover of Laws and Liberty, whose chief Regard to particu­lar Princes and Families, is founded on a Regard to the publick Good: The Leaders of this Party amongst us, are Men of great Wor th; the Presi­dent,  for  instance,  and  Lord  Justice  Clerk,  especially  the  Former.  I  say,  especially the Former: for tho’ ’tis certain the Conduct of the Justice Clerk was  altogether commendable, as far as the Circumstances and Situations,  in  which  he  was  placed,  would  admit;  yet  that  of  the  Presi­dent has been so singularly good and great, as to be the Subject of Admi­ration, and even of Envy, if Virtue could ever excite that Passion. 
The religious Whigs are a very different Set of Mortals, and in my Opin­ion, are  much worse than the religious Tories; as the political Tories are inferior to the political Whigs. I know not how it happens, but it seems to me, that a Zeal for Bishops, and for the Book of Common-Prayer, tho’ equally groundless, has never been able, when mixt up with Party Notions, to form so virulent and exalted a Poison in human Breasts, as the opposite Principles. Dissimulation, Hypocrisy Violence, Calumny, Selfishness are, generally speaking, the true and legitimate Offspring of this kind of Zeal. 7 This Species of Whigs, whatever they may imagine, form but the Fag-end of the Party, and are, at the Bottom, very heartily despised by their own Leaders. Once on a time, indeed, the Breech got ove r the Head; when Cromwel, Ireton, Warriston, &c. ruled our Councils and Armies; and then there was fine Work indeed. But ever since, though their Assistance has  been  taken  at  Elections,  and  they  have  been  allowed,  in  Return,  to  rail  and  make  a  Noise  as  much  as  they  please,  they  have  had  but  little  Influence on our publick Determinations; and long may it continue so. 8 These are Mr. Stewart’s greatest, and indeed, only Enemies. The po­litical Whigs  are,  many  of  them,  his  personal  Friends;  and  all  of  them,  are  extremely  pleased  with  his  Acquital,  because  they  believe,  what  is,  indeed,  undeniable,  that  it  was  founded  on  his  Innocence.  I  am  chari­table  enough  to  suppose,  that  the  Joy  of  many  of  the  Tories  flowed  from the same Motive. And as to those, if there were any such, who had a different Motive, he will not, I believe, give them any Thanks for a Con­cern, which is more likely to hurt than to serve him. Novem. 4, 1747. FINIS.

